Userid: SD_PLKGB schema tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/XML Fileid: ...ents and Settings\plkgb\Desktop\My Forms\Publication 334\11p334.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication
334Tax Guide for Catalog Number 11063P
Department Small Business
of the For use inTreasury
preparing(For Individuals Who UseInternal
Revenue
2011Service Schedule C or C-EZ)
Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet IRS.gov
www.irs.gov/efile
Dec 21, 2011

Page 2 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in addition to your regular job or business may be
self-employment.Contents
Independent contractor.  People such as doctors, den-Introduction ............................. . 2
tists, veterinarians, lawyers, accountants, contractors,
What's New for 2011 ....................... . 3 subcontractors, public stenographers, or auctioneers who
are in an independent trade, business, or profession inWhat's New for 2012 ....................... . 4 which they offer their services to the general public are
generally independent contractors. However, whether theyReminders ............................... . 4
are independent contractors or employees depends on the
Photographs of Missing Children ............ . 4 facts in each case. The general rule is that an individual is
an independent contractor if the payer has the right to1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes ........ . 5 control or to direct only the result of the work and not how it
will be done. The earnings of a person who is working as2. Accounting Periods and Methods ......... . 11
an independent contractor are subject to self-employment
3. Dispositions of Business Property ........ . 16 tax. For more information on determining whether you are
an employee or independent contractor, see Publication4. General Business Credits ............... . 18 15-A, Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide.
5. Business Income ...................... . 20 Statutory employee. A statutory employee has a
checkmark in box 13 of his or her Form W-2, Wage and6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold ........ . 27
Tax Statement. Statutory employees use Schedule C or
7. Figuring Gross Profit ................... . 29 C-EZ to report their wages and expenses.
8. Business Expenses .................... . 31 Limited liability company (LLC). A limited liability com-
pany (LLC) is an entity formed under state law by filing9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss .............. . 40 articles of organization. Generally, a single-member LLC is
disregarded as an entity separate from its owner and10. Self-Employment (SE) Tax ............... . 41
reports its income and deductions on its owner's federal
11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer .............. . 45 income tax return. An owner who is an individual may use
Schedule C or C-EZ.12. How To Get More Information ............ . 47
Husband and wife business. If you and your spouseIndex ................................... . 51 jointly own and operate an unincorporated business and
share in the profits and losses, you are partners in a
partnership, whether or not you have a formal partnership
Introduction agreement. Do not use Schedule C or C-EZ. Instead, file
Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership Income. For moreThe purpose of this publication is to provide general infor- information, see Publication 541, Partnerships.mation about the federal tax laws that apply to small ExceptionÐCommunity income.  If you and yourbusiness owners who are sole proprietors and to statutory spouse wholly own an unincorporated business as com-employees. This publication has information on business munity property under the community property laws of aincome, expenses, and tax credits that may help you file state, foreign country, or U.S. possession, you can treatyour income tax return. the business either as a sole proprietorship or a partner-
ship. The only states with community property laws areAre you self-employed? You are self-employed if you
Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mex-carry on a trade or business as a sole proprietor or an
ico, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin. A change in yourindependent contractor.
reporting position will be treated as a conversion of the
entity.Sole proprietor. A sole proprietor is someone who owns
ExceptionÐQualified joint venture.  If you and youran unincorporated business by himself or herself. How-
spouse each materially participate as the only members ofever, if you are the sole member of a domestic limited
a jointly owned and operated business, and you file a jointliability company (LLC), you are not a sole proprietor if you
return for the tax year, you can make a joint election to beelect to treat the LLC as a corporation.
treated as a qualified joint venture instead of a partnership
Trade or business.  A trade or business is generally an for the tax year. Making this election will allow you to avoid
activity carried on to make a profit. The facts and circum- the complexity of Form 1065 but still give each spouse
stances of each case determine whether or not an activity credit for social security earnings on which retirement
is a trade or business. You do not need to actually make a benefits are based. For an explanation of ``material partici-
profit to be in a trade or business as long as you have a pation,'' see the Instructions for Schedule C, line G.
profit motive. You do need to make ongoing efforts to To make this election, you must divide all items of
further the interests of your business. income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit attributable to the
You do not have to carry on regular full-time business business between you and your spouse in accordance with
activities to be self-employed. Having a part-time business your respective interests in the venture. Each of you must
Page 2 Publication 334 (2011)

Page 3 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
file a separate Schedule C or C-EZ and a separate Sched- Ordering forms and publications. Visit 
ule SE. For more information, see Qualified Joint Venture www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and publica-
in the Instructions for Schedule SE. tions, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the address below
and receive a response within 10 days after your request isThis publication does not cover the topics listed in the received.following table.
Internal Revenue Service
IF you need information about: THEN you should 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
see: Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
Corporations ................ . Publication 542
Farming ................... . Publication 225 Tax questions. If you have a tax question, check the
Fishermen (Capital Construction information available on IRS.gov or call 1-800-829-1040.
Fund) ..................... . Publication 595 We cannot answer tax questions sent to either of the
Partnerships ................ . Publication 541 above addresses.
Passive activities ............. . Publication 925
Recordkeeping .............. . Publication 583
Rental ..................... . Publication 527 What's New for 2011
S corporations ............... . Instructions for
Form 1120S The following are some of the tax changes for 2011. For
information on other changes, go to IRS.gov.
What you need to know. Table A provides a list of ques- Tax rates. For tax years beginning in 2011, the socialtions you need to answer to help you meet your federal tax security part of the self-employment tax decreases fromobligations. After each question is the location in this publi- 12.4% to 10.4%. The Medicare part of the tax remains atcation where you will find the related discussion. 2.9%. As a result, the self-employment tax is reduced from
15.3% to 13.3%.IRS mission. Provide America's taxpayers top quality
service by helping them understand and meet their tax
Maximum net earnings. The maximum netresponsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity
self-employment earnings subject to the social securityand fairness to all.
part of the self-employment tax remains $106,800 for
Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com- 2011. There is no maximum limit on earnings subject to the
ments about this publication and your suggestions for Medicare part.
future editions.
You can write to us at the following address: Self-employed health insurance deduction. For tax
years beginning after 2010, you cannot deduct any
self-employed health insurance deduction you report onInternal Revenue Service Form 1040, line 29, from self-employment earnings. SeeBusiness Forms and Publications Branch the Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526 Standard mileage rate. For 2011, the standard mileageWashington, DC 20224 rate for the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel
truck for each mile of business use is:We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
would be helpful if you would include your daytime phone • 51 cents per mile for the period January 1 through
number, including the area code, in your correspondence. June 30, and
You can email us at taxforms@irs.gov. Please put ªPub- • 55.5 cents per mile for the period July 1 throughlications Commentº on the subject line. You can also send December 31.us comments from www.irs.gov/formspubs, select ªCom-
ment on Tax Forms and Publicationsº under ªInformation Also, you can use the standard mileage rate for business
about.º use after 2010 for a car you use for hire (such as a taxi).
Although we cannot respond individually to each com- For more information, see Car and Truck Expenses  in
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will chapter 8.
consider your comments as we revise our tax products.
Publication 334 (2011) Page 3

Page 4 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note. The following is a list of questions you may need to answer so you can fill out your federal income tax return.
Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication.)
 What must I know  Where to find the answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them? See chapter 1.
What forms must I file? See chapter 1.
What must I do if I have employees? See Employment Taxes in chapter 1.
Do I have to start my tax year in January, or can I start it in any other See Accounting Periods in chapter 2.
month?
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses? See Accounting Methods in chapter 2.
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return? See chapter 5.
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return? See Business Expenses in chapter 8.
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses? See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8.
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it? See chapter 9.
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year? See chapter 3.
What are my rights as a taxpayer? See chapter 11.
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters? See chapter 12.
Future developments. The IRS has created a page on required to file Form 8886 but do not do so. You may also
IRS.gov for information about Publication 334 at have to pay interest and penalties on any reportable trans-
www.irs.gov/pub334. Information about any future devel- action understatements. Reportable transactions include:
opments affecting Publication 334 (such as legislation en-
1. Transactions the same as or substantially similar toacted after we release it) will be posted on that page.
tax avoidance transactions identified by the IRS,
2. Transactions offered to you under conditions of confi-
dentiality for which you paid an advisor a minimumWhat's New for 2012
fee,
The following are some of the tax changes for 2012. For 3. Transactions for which you have, or a related partyinformation on other changes, go to IRS.gov. has, contractual protection against disallowance of
the tax benefits,Self-employment tax. The maximum net
self-employment earnings subject to the social security 4. Transactions that result in losses of at least $2 mil-
part of the self-employment tax is $110,100 for 2012. lion in any single tax year ($50,000 if from certain
foreign currency transactions) or $4 million in any
Standard mileage rate. For 2012, the standard mileage combination of tax years, and
rate for the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel
5. Transactions the same or substantially similar to onetruck for each mile of business use is 55.5 cents per mile.
of the types of transactions the IRS has identified as
a transaction of interest.
For more information, see the Instructions for Form 8886.Reminders
Accounting methods. Certain small business taxpayers
may be eligible to adopt or change to the cash method of Photographs of Missing
accounting and may not be required to account for invento-
Childrenries. For more information, see Inventories in chapter 2.
The Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theReportable transactions. You must file Form 8886, Re-
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Photo-portable Transaction Disclosure Statement, to report cer-
tain transactions. You may have to pay a penalty if you are graphs of missing children selected by the Center may
Page 4 Publication 334 (2011)

Page 5 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
appear in this publication on pages that would otherwise To apply for an SSN, use Form SS-5, Application for a
be blank. You can help bring these children home by Social Security Card. This form is available at Social Se-
looking at the photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST curity Administration (SSA) offices or by calling
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. 1-800-772-1213. It is also available from the SSA website
at www.socialsecurity.gov. 
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). The
IRS will issue an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident
alien and you do not have and are not eligible to get an
1. SSN. In general, if you need to obtain an ITIN, you must
attach Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer
Identification Number, with your signed, original, com-
Filing and Paying pleted tax return and any other required documentation
and mail them to the following address.Business Taxes
Internal Revenue Service
ITIN OperationIntroduction P.O. Box 149342
This chapter explains the business taxes you may have to Austin, TX 78714-9342
pay and the forms you may have to file. It also discusses
taxpayer identification numbers. The exceptions are covered in detail in the instructions
Table 1-1 lists the benefits of filing electronically. for Form W-7. If you must include another person's SSN
Table 1-2 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay, on your return and that person does not have and cannot
their due dates, and the forms you use to report them. get an SSN, enter that person's ITIN. The application is
Table 1-3 provides checklists that highlight the typical also available in Spanish. The form is available at
forms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out IRS.gov or you can call 1-800-829-3676 to order the
of business. form.
You may want to get Publication 509, Tax Calen- An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle the
dars. It has tax calendars that tell you when to file holder to social security benefits or change the
returns and make tax payments. holder's employment or immigration status.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Employer identification number (EIN). You must alsoUseful Items have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number ifYou may want to see: you do either of the following.
Publication • Pay wages to one or more employees.
❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax • File pension or excise tax returns.
Form (and Instructions) If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSN
on your Schedule C or C-EZ.❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return You can apply for an EIN:
❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals • Online by clicking on the EIN link at
❏ Sch C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business www.irs.gov/businesses/small. The EIN is issued im-
mediately once the application information is vali-❏ Sch C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit From Business dated.
❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment Tax • By telephone at 1-800-829-4933 from 7:00 a.m. to
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica- 10:00 p.m. in your local time zone.
tions and forms. • By mailing or faxing Form SS-4, Application for Em-
ployer Identification Number.
Identification Numbers New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either the
form or the ownership of your business changes. For more
This section explains three types of taxpayer identification information, see Publication 1635, Understanding Your
numbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how to EIN.
get them.
When you need identification numbers of other per-
Social security number (SSN). Generally, use your SSN sons. In operating your business, you will probably make
as your taxpayer identification number. You must put this certain payments you must report on information returns.
number on each of your individual income tax forms, such These payments are discussed under Information Re-
as Form 1040 and its schedules. turns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient of
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 5

Page 6 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
these payments (the payee) a statement showing the total IRS e-file (Electronic Filing)amount paid during the year. You must include the payee's
identification number and your identification number on the
returns and statements.
Employee. If you have employees, you must get an
SSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN of You may be able to file your tax returns electronically usingeach employee exactly as they are shown on the em- an IRS e-file option. Table 1-1 lists the benefits of IRSployee's social security card. If the employee's name is not e-file. IRS e-file uses automation to replace most of thecorrect as shown on the card, the employee should re- manual steps needed to process paper returns. As a re-quest a new card from the SSA. This may occur if the sult, the processing of e-file returns is faster and moreemployee's name was changed due to marriage or di- accurate than the processing of paper returns. As with avorce. paper return, you are responsible for making sure your
Form W-4, Employee's Withholding Allowance Certifi- return contains accurate information and is filed on time.
cate, is completed by each employee so the correct federal Using e-file does not affect your chances of an IRS
income tax can be withheld from their pay. examination of your return.
If your employee does not have an SSN, he or she You can file most commonly used business forms using
should file Form SS-5 with the SSA. IRS e-file. For more information, visit IRS.gov.
Other payee. If you make payments to someone who is Electronic signatures. Paperless filing is easier than you
not your employee and you must report the payments on think and it's available to most taxpayers who file electroni-
an information return, get that person's SSN. If you must callyÐincluding those first-time filers who were 16 or older
report payments to an organization, such as a corporation at the end of 2011. If you file electronically using tax
or partnership, you must get its EIN. preparation software or a tax professional, you will partici-
To get the payee's SSN or EIN, use Form W-9, Request pate in the Self-Select PIN (personal identification number)
for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification. program. If you are married filing jointly, you and your
spouse will each need to create a PIN and enter theseA payee who does not provide you with an identification
PINs as your electronic signatures.number may be subject to backup withholding. For infor-
 To create a PIN, you must know your adjusted grossmation on backup withholding, see the Form W-9 instruc-
income (AGI) from your originally filed 2010 income taxtions and the General Instructions for Certain Information
return (not from an amended return, Form 1040X, or anyReturns.
math error notice from the IRS). You will also need to
provide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure your DOB is
accurate and matches the information on record with theIncome Tax Social Security Administration before you e-file. To do this,
check your annual Social Security Statement.This part explains whether you have to file an income tax With a Self-Select PIN, there is nothing to sign andreturn and when you file it. It also explains how you pay the nothing to mail Ðnot even your Forms W-2. For moretax. details on the Self-Select PIN program, visit IRS.gov.
State returns. In most states, you can file an electronicDo I Have To File state return simultaneously with your federal return. Foran Income Tax Return? more information, check with your local IRS office, state
tax agency, tax professional, or IRS.gov.You have to file an income tax return for 2011 if your net
earnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If your Refunds. You can have your refund check mailed to you,
net earnings from self-employment were less than $400, or you can have your refund deposited directly to your
you still have to file an income tax return if you meet any checking or savings account.
other filing requirement listed in the Form 1040 instruc- With e-file, your refund will be issued in half the time as
tions. when filing on paper. Most refunds are issued within 3
weeks. If you choose Direct Deposit, you can receive your
refund in as few as 10 days.How Do I File?
Offset against debts. As with a paper return, you mayFile your income tax return on Form 1040  and attach not get all of your refund if you owe certain past-dueSchedule C or Schedule C-EZ.  Enter the net profit or loss amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a student loan, orfrom Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ on page 1 of Form child support. You will be notified if the refund you claimed1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit or loss from has been offset against your debts.your business. If you operated more than one business as
a sole proprietorship, you must attach a separate Schedule Refund inquiries. You can check the status of your re-
C for each business. You can use the simpler Schedule fund if it has been at least 3 weeks from the date you filed
C-EZ if you operated only one business as a sole proprie- your return. Be sure to have a copy of your tax return
torship, you did not have a net loss, and you meet the other available because you will need to know the filing status,
requirements listed in Part I of the schedule. the first social security number shown on the return, and
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the exact whole-dollar amount of the refund. To check on computer, you can e-file your return from your home any
your refund, do one of the following. time of the day or night. Sign your return electronically
using a self-selected PIN to complete the process. There is• Go to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Refund. no signature form to submit or Forms W-2 to send in.
• Call 1-800-829-4477 for automated refund informa-
tion, and follow the recorded instructions. Free Internet filing options. More taxpayers can now
prepare and e-file their individual income tax returns free• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours shown in your using commercial tax preparation software accessibleform instructions. through IRS.gov or www.usa.gov. The IRS is partnering
with the tax software industry to offer free preparation and
Balance due. If you owe tax, you must pay it by April 17, filing services to a significant number of taxpayers. Secur-
2012, to avoid late-payment penalties and interest. You ity and privacy certificate programs will assure tax data is
can make your payment electronically by scheduling an safe and secure. To see if you qualify for these services,
electronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savings visit the Free Internet Filing Homepage at IRS.gov.
account or by credit card. If you cannot use the free services, you can buy tax
preparation software at various electronics stores or com-
puter and office supply stores. You can also downloadUsing an Authorized IRS e-file Provider software from the Internet or prepare and file your return
completely online by using tax preparation software avail-Many tax professionals can electronically file paperless
able on the Internet.returns for their clients. You have two options.
1. You can prepare your return, take it to an authorized
Filing Through Employers and FinancialIRS e-file provider, and have the provider transmit it
Institutionselectronically to the IRS.
2. You can have an authorized IRS e-file provider pre- Some businesses offer free e-file to their employees,
pare your return and transmit it for you electronically. members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask your
employer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as anYou will be asked to complete Form 8879, IRS e-file
employee, member, or customer benefit.Signature Authorization, to authorize the provider to enter
your self-selected PIN on your return.
Depending on the provider and the specific services Free Help With Your Returnrequested, a fee may be charged. To find an authorized
IRS e-file provider near you, go to IRS.gov or look for an Free help in preparing your return is available nationwide
ªAuthorized IRS e-file Providerº sign. from IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income Tax
Assistance (VITA) program is designed to help low-income
taxpayers, and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)Using Your Personal Computer program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 or older
with their tax returns. Some locations offer free electronicA computer with Internet access is all you need to file your
filing.tax return using IRS e-file. When you use your personal
Table 1-1. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is significantly reduced.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic signatures • Create your own personal identification number (PIN) and file a completely
paperless return through your tax preparation software or tax professional. There is
nothing to mail.
Proof of acceptance • You receive an electronic acknowledgment within 48 hours that the IRS has
accepted your return for processing.
Fast refunds • You get your refund faster with Direct DepositÐin as few as 10 days.
Free Internet filing options • Use IRS.gov to access commercial tax preparation and e-file services available at
no cost to eligible taxpayers.
Electronic payment • Convenient, safe, and secure electronic payment options are available. E-file and
options pay your taxes in a single step. Schedule an electronic funds withdrawal from your
checking or savings account (up to and including April 17, 2012) or pay by credit
card.
Federal/State filing • Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together and double the benefits
you get from e-file.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

Page 8 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalty for underpayment of tax. If you did not payWhen Is My Tax Return Due? enough income tax and self-employment tax for 2011 by
withholding or by making estimated tax payments, youForm 1040 for calendar year 2011 is due by April 17, 2012.
may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The IRSIf you use a fiscal year (explained in chapter 2), your return
will figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or youis due by the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of your
can use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax byfiscal year. If you file late, you may have to pay penalties
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to pay aand interest.
penalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more infor- If you cannot file your return on time, use Form 4868, mation, see Publication 505.Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S.
Individual Income Tax Return, to request an automatic
6-month extension. For calendar year taxpayers, this will
extend the tax filing due date until October 15. Filing an Self-Employment (SE) Tax
extension does not extend the time to pay your taxes, only
Self-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security andthe time to file the tax return.
Medicare tax primarily for individuals who work for them-
selves. It is similar to the social security and MedicareHow Do I Pay Income Tax? taxes withheld from the pay of most wage earners.
Federal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You must pay it If you earned income as a statutory employee,
as you earn or receive income during the year. An em- you do not pay SE tax on that income.
ployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her pay.
CAUTION
!
If you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do not Social security coverage. Social security benefits arepay enough tax that way, you might have to pay estimated available to self-employed persons just as they are totax. You generally have to make estimated tax payments if wage earners. Your payments of SE tax contribute to youryou expect to owe taxes, including self-employment tax coverage under the social security system. Social security(discussed later), of $1,000 or more when you file your coverage provides you with retirement benefits, disabilityreturn. Use Form 1040-ES to figure and pay the tax. If you benefits, survivor benefits, and hospital insurance (Medi-do not have to make estimated tax payments, you can pay care) benefits.any tax due when you file your return. For more information
By not reporting all of your self-employment in-on estimated tax, see Publication 505, Tax Withholding
come, you could cause your social security bene-and Estimated Tax.
fits to be lower when you retire.
CAUTION
!
What are my payment options? You can pay your esti-
How to become insured under social security. Youmated tax electronically using various options. If you pay
must be insured under the social security system beforeelectronically, there is no need to mail in Form 1040-ES
you begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-payment vouchers. These options include:
sured if you have the required number of credits (also
1. Paying electronically through the Electronic Federal called quarters of coverage), discussed next.
Tax Payment System (EFTPS). Earning credits in 2011 and 2012. For 2011, you re-
2. Paying by authorizing an electronic funds withdrawal ceived one credit, up to a maximum of four credits, for each
$1,120 ($1,130 for 2012) of income subject to social secur-when you file Form 1040 electronically.
ity taxes. Therefore, for 2011, if you had income3. Paying by credit or debit card over the phone or by (self-employment and wages) of $4,480 that was subject toInternet. social security taxes, you receive four credits ($4,480 ÷
$1,120).Other options include crediting an overpayment from your
2011 return to your 2012 estimated tax, or mailing a check For an explanation of the number of credits you must
or money order with a Form 1040-ES payment voucher. have to be insured and the benefits available to you and
your family under the social security program, consult your
EFTPS nearest Social Security Administration (SSA) office.
Making false statements to get or to increase1. To enroll in EFTPS, go to www.eftps.gov or call
social security benefits may subject you to penal-1-800-555-4477.
ties.
CAUTION
!2. When you request a new EIN and you will have a tax
The Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit forobligation, you are automatically enrolled in EFTPS.
posting self-employment income. Generally, the SSA3. Benefits of EFTPS: will give you credit only for self-employment income re-
ported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3 months, and 15a. The chance of an error in making your payments days after the tax year you earned the income. If you fileis reduced. your tax return or report a change in your self-employment
b. You receive immediate confirmation of every income after this time limit, the SSA may change its rec-
transaction. ords, but only to remove or reduce the amount. The SSA
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
will not change its records to increase your If you incorrectly classify an employee as an
self-employment income. independent contractor, you may be held liable
for employment taxes for that worker plus a pen-
CAUTION
!
alty.Who must pay self-employment tax. You must pay SE
tax and file Schedule SE (Form 1040) if either of the An independent contractor is someone who is
following applies. self-employed. You do not generally have to withhold or
pay any taxes on payments made to an independent con-1. Your net earnings from self-employment (excluding tractor. church employee income) were $400 or more.
2. You had church employee income of $108.28 or
more. Excise Taxes
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are This section identifies some of the excise taxes you may
and even if you are already receiving social se- have to pay and the forms you have to file if you do any of
curity or Medicare benefits.
CAUTION
! the following.
SE tax rate. For 2011, the SE tax rate on net earnings is • Manufacture or sell certain products.13.3% (10.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
• Operate certain kinds of businesses.
Maximum earnings subject to SE tax. Only the first • Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or prod-
$106,800 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings ucts.
in 2011 is subject to any combination of the 10.4% social
• Receive payment for certain services.security part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad
retirement (tier 1) tax. For more information on excise taxes, see Publication 510,
All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 2011 Excise Taxes.
are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare part
of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement (tier 1) Form 720. The federal excise taxes reported on Form
tax. 720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-
If wages and tips you receive as an employee are eral broad categories of taxes, including the following.
subject to either social security or railroad retirement (tier • Environmental taxes on the sale or use of1) tax, or both, and total at least $106,800, do not pay the ozone-depleting chemicals and imported products10.4% social security part of the SE tax on any of your net containing or manufactured with these chemicals.earnings. However, you must pay the 2.9% Medicare part
of the SE tax on all your net earnings. • Communications and air transportation taxes.
Deduct the employer-equivalent portion of your • Fuel taxes.
SE tax as an adjustment to income on line 27 of • Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,Form 1040. 
TIP and tractors.
• Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a varietyMore information. For information on methods of calcu-
of different articles.lating SE tax, see Chapter 10, Self-Employment Tax.
• Tax on indoor tanning services.
Employment Taxes Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on the use of
certain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high-If you have employees, you will need to file forms to report ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable grossemployment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow- weight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on Forming items. 2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For more
information, see the Instructions for Form 2290.• Social security and Medicare taxes.
• Federal income tax withholding. Depositing excise taxes. If you have to file a quarterly
excise tax return on Form 720, you may have to deposit• Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax. your excise taxes before the return is due. For details on
For more information, see Publication 15 (Circular E), depositing excise taxes, see the Instructions for Form 720.
Employer's Tax Guide. That publication explains your tax
responsibilities as an employer.
To help you determine whether the people working for Information Returns
you are your employees, see Publication 15-A, Employer's
Supplemental Tax Guide. That publication has information If you make or receive payments in your business, you
to help you determine whether an individual is an indepen- may have to report them to the IRS on information returns.
dent contractor or an employee. The IRS compares the payments shown on the information
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

Page 10 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-2. Which Forms Must I File?
IF you are liable for: THEN use Form: DUE by:1
Income tax 1040 and Schedule C or C-EZ2 15th day of 4th month after end of 
tax year.
Self-employment tax Schedule SE File with Form 1040.
Estimated tax 1040-ES 15th day of 4th, 6th, and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year.
Social security and Medicare taxes 941 or 944 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
and income tax withholding January 313.
See Publication 15.
Providing information on social W-2 (to employee) January 313.
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding W-2 and W-3 (to the Social Security Last day of February (March 31 if
Administration) filing electronically)3.
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax 940 January 313.
April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability for
unpaid tax is more than $500.
Filing information returns for See Information Returns Forms 1099±to the recipient by
payments to nonemployees and January 31 and to the IRS by
transactions with other persons February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically).
Other formsÐsee the General
Instructions for Certain Information
Returns.
Excise tax See Excise Taxes See the instructions to the forms.
1 If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, file by the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. For
more information, see Publication 509, Tax Calendars.
2 File a separate schedule for each business.
3 See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
returns with each person's income tax return to see if the • Royalty payments of $10 or more.
payments were included in income. You must give a copy • Payments to certain crew members by operators ofof each information return you are required to file to the fishing boats.recipient or payer. In addition to the forms described be-
You also use Form 1099-MISC to report your sales oflow, you may have to use other returns to report certain
$5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for resalekinds of payments or transactions. For more details on
anywhere other than in a permanent retail establishment.information returns and when you have to file them, see
the General Instructions for Certain Information Returns.
Form W-2. You must file Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-
ment, to report payments to your employees, such asForm 1099-MISC. Use Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
wages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income,Income, to report certain payments you make in your
social security, and Medicare taxes. You can file Form W-2business. These payments include the following items.
online. For more information about Form W-2, see the• Payments of $600 or more for services performed Instructions for Forms W-2 and W-3.for your business by people not treated as your em-
ployees, such as fees to subcontractors, attorneys, Penalties. The law provides for the following penalties ifaccountants, or directors. you do not file Form 1099-MISC or Form W-2 or do not
• Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rents correctly report the information. For more information, see
paid to real estate agents. the General Instructions for Certain Information Returns.
• Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not for • Failure to file information returns. This penalty ap-
services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows. plies if you do not file information returns by the due
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 11 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Going Out of Business Checklists
(Note. The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out of
business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms.)
IF you are liable for: THEN you may need to:
Income tax M File Schedule C or C-EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go
out of business.
M File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or
exchange property used in your business or in which the business use of
certain section 179 or listed property drops to 50% or less.
M File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-employment tax M File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment taxes M File Form 941 (or Form 944) for the calendar quarter in which you make final
wage payments. Note. Do not forget to check the box and enter the date
final wages were paid on line 17 of Form 941 or line 15 of Form 944.
M File Form 940 for the calendar year in which final wages were paid. Note. Do
not forget to check box d, Final: Business closed or stopped paying wages,
under Type of Return.
Information returns M Provide Forms W-2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you
make final wage payments. Note. These forms are generally due by the due
date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
M File Form W-3 to file Forms W-2. Note. These forms are generally due within
1 month after the due date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
M Provide Forms 1099-MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least
$600 for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in
which you go out of business.
M File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099-MISC.
date, do not include all required information, or re- (personal check). For more information, see Publication
port incorrect information. 1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Re-
ceived in a Trade or Business).• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. This
penalty applies if you do not furnish a required state- Penalties. There are civil and criminal penalties, includ-
ment to a payee by the required date, do not include ing up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, filing (or
all required information, or report incorrect informa- causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 8300, or
tion. structuring a transaction to evade reporting requirements.
Waiver of penalties. These penalties will not apply if
you can show that the failure was due to reasonable cause
and not willful neglect.
In addition, there is no penalty for failure to include all
required information, or for including incorrect information, 2.on a de minimis (small) number of information returns if
you correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returns
are due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater of
Accounting Periods10 or 1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you are
required to file for the year.)
and Methods
Form 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of Cash
Payments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business,
if you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac- Introductiontion, or two or more related business transactions. Cash
You must figure your taxable income and file an income taxincludes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in-
return for an annual accounting period called a tax year.cludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier's and
Also, you must consistently use an accounting method thattraveler's checks and money orders. Cash does not in-
clude a check drawn on an individual's personal account clearly shows your income and expenses for the tax year.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 11

Page 12 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Change in tax year. Generally, you must file Form 1128,Useful Items
Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax Year, toYou may want to see:
request IRS approval to change your tax year. See the
Instructions for Form 1128 for exceptions. If you qualify forPublication
an automatic approval request, a user fee is not required. If❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods you do not qualify for automatic approval, a ruling must be
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica- requested. See the instructions for Form 1128 for informa-
tions and forms. tion about user fees if you are requesting a ruling.
Accounting Periods Accounting Methods
When preparing a statement of income and expenses An accounting method is a set of rules used to determine
(generally your income tax return), you must use your when and how income and expenses are reported. Your
books and records for a specific interval of time called an accounting method includes not only the overall method of
accounting period. The annual accounting period for your accounting you use, but also the accounting treatment you
income tax return is called a tax year. You can use one of use for any material item.
the following tax years. You choose an accounting method for your business
when you file your first income tax return that includes a• A calendar tax year.
Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want to• A fiscal tax year. change your accounting method, you must generally get
Unless you have a required tax year, you adopt a tax year IRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.
by filing your first income tax return using that tax year. A
required tax year is a tax year required under the Internal Kinds of methods. Generally, you can use any of the
Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regulations. following accounting methods.
• Cash method.Calendar tax year. A calendar tax year is 12 consecutive
months beginning January 1 and ending December 31. • An accrual method.
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the • Special methods of accounting for certain items offollowing apply. income and expenses.
• You do not keep books. • Combination method using elements of two or more
• You have no annual accounting period. of the above.
• Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscal You must use the same accounting method to figureyear. your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, you
• Your use of the calendar tax year is required under must use an accounting method that clearly shows your
the Internal Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regu- income.
lations.
Business and personal items. You can account for busi-
If you filed your first income tax return using the calendar ness and personal items under different accounting meth-
tax year and you later begin business as a sole proprietor, ods. For example, you can figure your business income
you must continue to use the calendar tax year unless you under an accrual method, even if you use the cash methodget IRS approval to change it or are otherwise allowed to to figure personal items.change it without IRS approval. For more information, see
Change in tax year, later. Two or more businesses. If you have two or more sepa-If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintain rate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-your books and records and report your income and ex- counting method for each if the method clearly reflects thepenses for the period from January 1 through December income of each business. They are separate and distinct31 of each year. only if you maintain complete and separate books and
records for each business.Fiscal tax year. A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutive
months ending on the last day of any month except De-
cember. A 52-53-week tax year is a fiscal tax year that Cash Method
varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on the
Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven-last day of a month.
tory use the cash method because they find it easier toIf you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain your
keep cash method records. However, if an inventory isbooks and records and report your income and expenses
necessary to account for your income, you must generallyusing the same tax year.
use an accrual method of accounting for sales andFor more information on a fiscal tax year, including a
purchases. For more information, see Inventories, later.52-53-week tax year, see Publication 538.
Page 12 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 13 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Income Expenses
Under the cash method, include in your gross income all Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses in
the tax year in which you actually pay them. This includesitems of income you actually or constructively receive
business expenses for which you contest liability. How-during your tax year. If you receive property or services,
ever, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid inyou must include their fair market value in income.
advance or you may be required to capitalize certain costs,
as explained later under Uniform Capitalization Rules.Example. On December 30, 2010, Mrs. Sycamore sent
you a check for interior decorating services you provided to Expenses paid in advance. You can deduct an expenseher. You received the check on January 2, 2011. You must you pay in advance only in the year to which it applies.include the amount of the check in income for 2011.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and youConstructive receipt. You have constructive receipt of pay $1,000 in 2011 for a business insurance policy effec-income when an amount is credited to your account or tive for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 inmade available to you without restriction. You do not need 2011 and $500 in 2012.to have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be
your agent and receive income for you, you are treated as Accrual Methodhaving received it when your agent received it.
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generallyExample. Interest is credited to your bank account in report income in the year earned and deduct or capitalizeDecember 2011. You do not withdraw it or enter it into your expenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrualpassbook until 2012. You must include it in your gross method of accounting is to match income and expenses inincome for 2011. the correct year.
Delaying receipt of income. You cannot hold checks
or postpone taking possession of similar property from one IncomeÐGeneral Ruletax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. You
must report the income in the year the property is received Under an accrual method, you generally include an
or made available to you without restriction. amount in your gross income for the tax year in which all
events that fix your right to receive the income have oc-
Example. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was en- curred and you can determine the amount with reasonable
titled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De- accuracy.
cember 2011. She was told in December that her payment
was available. At her request, she was not paid until Example. You are a calendar year accrual method tax-
January 2012. She must include this payment in her 2011 payer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2011. You
income because it was constructively received in 2011. billed the customer in the first week of January 2012, but
you did not receive payment until February 2012. You mustChecks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the tax include the amount received for the computer in your 2011year is constructive receipt of income in that year, even if income.you cannot cash or deposit the check until the following
year.
IncomeÐSpecial Rules
Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-
The following are special rules that apply to advance pay-cember 31, 2011, from a patient. She could not deposit the
ments, estimating income, and changing a paymentcheck in her business account until January 3, 2012. She
schedule for services.must include this fee in her income for 2011.
Debts paid by another person or canceled. If your Estimated income. If you include a reasonably estimated
debts are paid by another person or are canceled by your amount in gross income, and later determine the exact
amount is different, take the difference into account in thecreditors, you may have to report part or all of this debt
tax year in which you make the determination.relief as income. If you receive income in this way, you
constructively receive the income when the debt is can- Change in payment schedule for services. If you per-celed or paid. For more information, see Canceled Debt form services for a basic rate specified in a contract, youunder Kinds of Income in chapter 5. must accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you agree
to receive payments at a lower rate until you complete theRepayment of income. If you include an amount in in- services and then receive the difference.come and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it,
you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in which Advance payments for services. Generally, you report
you make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, a an advance payment for services to be performed in a later
special rule applies. For details about the special rule, see tax year as income in the year you receive the payment.
Repayments in chapter 11 of Publication 535, Business However, if you receive an advance payment for services
Expenses. you agree to perform by the end of the next tax year, you
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 13

Page 14 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can elect to postpone including the advance payment in December 2011. You receive the supplies and the bill in
income until the next tax year. However, you cannot post- December, but you pay the bill in January 2012. You can
pone including any payment beyond that tax year. deduct the expense in 2011 because all events that fix the
For more information, see Advance Payment for Serv- fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liability
ices under Accrual Method in Publication 538. That publi- could be reasonably determined, and economic perform-
cation also explains special rules for reporting the following ance occurred in that year.
types of income. Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring expense.
In that case, you can deduct them in 2011 even if the• Advance payments for service agreements. supplies are not delivered until 2012 (when economic
• Prepaid rent. performance occurs).
Keeping inventories. When the production, purchase, or
Advance payments for sales. Special rules apply to in- sale of merchandise is an income-producing factor in your
cluding income from advance payments on agreements for business, you must generally take inventories into account
future sales or other dispositions of goods you hold prima- at the beginning and the end of your tax year. If you must
rily for sale to your customers in the ordinary course of your account for an inventory, you must generally use an ac-
business. If the advance payments are for contracts involv- crual method of accounting for your purchases and sales.
ing both the sale and service of goods, it may be necessary For more information, see Inventories, later.
to treat them as two agreements. An agreement includes a
Special rule for related persons. You cannot deductgift certificate that can be redeemed for goods. Treat
business expenses and interest owed to a related personamounts that are due and payable as amounts you re-
who uses the cash method of accounting until you makeceived.
the payment and the corresponding amount is includible inYou generally include an advance payment in income
the related person's gross income. Determine the relation-for the tax year in which you receive it. However, you can
ship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for which theuse an alternative method. For information about the alter-
expense or interest would otherwise be deductible. If anative method, see Publication 538.
deduction is not allowed under this rule, the rule will con-
tinue to apply even if your relationship with the person
Expenses ends before the expense or interest is includible in the
gross income of that person.Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally Related persons include members of your immediatededuct or capitalize a business expense when both the family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole orfollowing apply. half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For
a list of other related persons, see section 267 of the1. The all-events test has been met. The test has been Internal Revenue Code.met when:
a. All events have occurred that fix the fact of liabil- Combination Method
ity, and
You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual,b. The liability can be determined with reasonable and special methods of accounting if the combinationaccuracy. clearly shows your income and expenses and you use it
consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.2. Economic performance has occurred.
• If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-
Economic performance. You generally cannot deduct or come, you must generally use an accrual method for
capitalize a business expense until economic performance purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories, 
occurs. If your expense is for property or services provided later.) You can use the cash method for all other
to you, or for your use of property, economic performance items of income and expenses.
occurs as the property or services are provided or as the • If you use the cash method for figuring your income,property is used. If your expense is for property or services you must use the cash method for reporting youryou provide to others, economic performance occurs as expenses.you provide the property or services. An exception allows
certain recurring items to be treated as incurred during a • If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex-
tax year even though economic performance has not oc- penses, you must use an accrual method for figuring
curred. For more information on economic performance, your income.
see Economic Performance under Accrual Method in Pub- • If you use a combination method that includes thelication 538. cash method, treat that combination method as the
cash method.Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use an
accrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies in
Page 14 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 15 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Materials and supplies that are not incidental. If youInventories account for inventoriable items as materials and supplies
that are not incidental, you will deduct the cost of the itemsGenerally, if you produce, purchase, or sell merchandise in
you would otherwise include in inventory in the year youyour business, you must keep an inventory and use the
sell the items, or the year you pay for them, whichever isaccrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise.
later. If you are a producer, you can use any reasonableHowever, the following taxpayers can use the cash method
method to estimate the raw material in your work in pro-of accounting even if they produce, purchase, or sell mer-
cess and finished goods on hand at the end of the year tochandise. These taxpayers can also account for inventori-
determine the raw material used to produce finished goodsable items as materials and supplies that are not incidental
that were sold during the year.(discussed later).
Changing accounting method. If you are a qualifying1. A qualifying taxpayer under Revenue Procedure
taxpayer or qualifying small business taxpayer and want to2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2.
change to the cash method or to account for inventoriable2. A qualifying small business taxpayer under Revenue items as non-incidental materials and supplies, you mustProcedure 2002-28 in Internal Revenue Bulletin file Form 3115 , Application for Change in Accounting2002-18. Method. See Change in Accounting Method, later.
Qualifying taxpayer. You are a qualifying taxpayer if: More information.  For more information about the quali-
fying taxpayer exception, see Revenue Procedure• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior 2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. For moretax year ending on or after December 17, 1998, is $1 information about the qualifying small business taxpayermillion or less. (Your average annual gross receipts exception, see Revenue Procedure 2002-28 in Internalfor a tax year is figured by adding the gross receipts Revenue Bulletin 2002-18.for that tax year and the 2 preceding tax years and
dividing by 3.) Items included in inventory. If you are required to ac-
count for inventories, include the following items when• Your business is not a tax shelter, as defined under
accounting for your inventory.section 448(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
• Merchandise or stock in trade.
Qualifying small business taxpayer. You are a qualify- • Raw materials.
ing small business taxpayer if:
• Work in process.
• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior
• Finished products.tax year ending on or after December 31, 2000, is
more than $1 million but not more than $10 million. • Supplies that physically become a part of the item
(Your average annual gross receipts for a tax year is intended for sale.
figured by adding the gross receipts for that tax year
and the 2 preceding tax years and dividing the total
Valuing inventory. You must value your inventory at theby 3.)
beginning and end of each tax year to determine your cost
• You are not prohibited from using the cash method of goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine the
under section 448 of the Internal Revenue Code. value of your inventory, you need a method for identifying
the items in your inventory and a method for valuing these• Your principal business activity is an eligible busi-
items.ness (described in Publication 538 and Revenue
Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for allProcedure 2002-28).
kinds of businesses. The method you use to value your
inventory must conform to generally accepted accounting
Business not owned or not in existence for 3 years. If principles for similar businesses and must clearly reflect
you did not own your business for all of the 3-tax-year income. Your inventory practices must be consistent from
period used in figuring your average annual gross receipts, year to year.
include the period of any predecessor. If your business has
not been in existence for the 3-tax-year period, base your More information. For more information about invento-
average on the period it has existed including any short tax ries, see Publication 538.
years, annualizing the short tax year's gross receipts.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 15

Page 16 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
another method. A change in your accounting methodUniform Capitalization Rules
includes a change in:
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalize 1. Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac-the direct costs and part of the indirect costs for production crual method, andor resale activities. Include these costs in the basis of
property you produce or acquire for resale, rather than 2. Your treatment of any material item.
claiming them as a current deduction. You recover the To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application forcosts through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goods Change in Accounting Method. You can get IRS approvalsold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop- to change an accounting method under either the auto-erty. matic change procedures or the advance consent request
procedures. You may have to pay a user fee. For moreActivities subject to the uniform capitalization rules.
information, see the form instructions. You may be subject to the uniform capitalization rules if
you do any of the following, unless the property is pro-
duced for your use other than in a business or an activity Automatic change procedures. Certain taxpayers can
carried on for profit. presume to have IRS approval to change their method of
accounting. The approval is granted for the tax year for• Produce real or tangible personal property. For this which the taxpayer requests a change (year of change), ifpurpose, tangible personal property includes a film,
the taxpayer complies with the provisions of the automaticsound recording, video tape, book, or similar prop-
change procedures. No user fee is required for an applica-erty.
tion filed under an automatic change procedure generally
• Acquire property for resale. covered in Revenue Procedure 2002-9.
Generally, you must use Form 3115 to request an auto-Exceptions. These rules do not apply to the following matic change. For more information, see the Instructionsproperty. for Form 3115.
1. Personal property you acquire for resale if your aver-
age annual gross receipts are $10 million or less.
2. Property you produce if you meet either of the follow-
ing conditions.
3.a. Your indirect costs of producing the property are
$200,000 or less.
b. You use the cash method of accounting and do Dispositions of not account for inventories. For more information,
see Inventories, earlier. Business Property
Special Methods Introduction
There are special methods of accounting for certain items If you dispose of business property, you may have a gain
of income or expense. These include the following. or loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in some
cases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a loss that• Amortization, discussed in chapter 8 of Publication is not deductible. This chapter discusses whether you have535, Business Expenses. a disposition, how to figure the gain or loss, and where to
• Bad debts, discussed in chapter 10 of Publication report the gain or loss.
535.
• Depletion, discussed in chapter 9 of Publication 535. Useful Items
You may want to see:• Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How To
Depreciate Property.
Publication• Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In-
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assetsstallment Sales.
Form (and Instructions)
Change in ❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property
Accounting Method ❏ Sch D (Form 1040) Capital Gains and Losses
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica-Once you have set up your accounting method, you must
tions and forms.generally get IRS approval before you can change to
Page 16 Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 17 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is treated
as being sold separately for determining the treatment ofWhat Is a Disposition gain or loss.
of Property? Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of a
business must report to the IRS the allocation of the sales
A disposition of property includes the following transac- price among the business assets. Use Form 8594, Asset
tions. Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060, to provide this
information. The buyer and seller should each attach Form• You sell property for cash or other property. 8594 to their federal income tax return for the year in which
• You exchange property for other property. the sale occurred. 
For more information about the sale of a business, see• You receive money as a tenant for the cancellation
chapter 2 of Publication 544.of a lease.
• You receive money for granting the exclusive use of
a copyright throughout its life in a particular medium.
How Do I Figure• You transfer property to satisfy a debt.
a Gain or Loss?• You abandon property.
• Your bank or other financial institution forecloses on
your mortgage or repossesses your property. Table 3-1. How To Figure a Gain or Loss
• Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, and IF your... THEN you have a...you receive property or money in payment.
Adjusted basis is more than the• Your property is condemned, or disposed of under amount realized Loss.the threat of condemnation, and you receive prop-
erty or money in payment. Amount realized is more than
the adjusted basis Gain.For details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property,
see Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. For
Basis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair marketdetails about other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publica-
value, and amount recognized are defined next. You needtion 544.
to know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.
Nontaxable exchanges. Certain exchanges of property
are not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange is Basis. The cost or purchase price of property is usually its
not recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your gain basis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or other
or loss will not be recognized until you sell or otherwise disposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift,
dispose of the property you receive. inheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you must
use a basis other than its cost. For more information aboutLike-kind exchanges. A like-kind exchange is the ex-
basis, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets.change of property for the same kind of property. It is the
most common type of nontaxable exchange. To be a
like-kind exchange, the property traded and the property Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of property is your
received must be both of the following. original cost or other basis plus certain additions, and
minus certain deductions such as depreciation and casu-• Business or investment property. alty losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of trans-
• Like property. ferring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses,
are added to the adjusted basis of the property.
Report the exchange of like-kind property on Form
8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information about Amount realized. The amount you realize from a disposi-like-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 in Publication 544. tion is the total of all money you receive plus the fair market
value of all property or services you receive. The amountInstallment sales. An installment sale is a sale of prop- you realize also includes any of your liabilities that wereerty where you receive at least one payment after the tax assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which theyear of the sale. If you finance the buyer's purchase of your property you transferred is subject, such as real estateproperty, instead of having the buyer get a loan or mort- taxes or a mortgage.gage from a third party, you probably have an installment
sale.
Fair market value. Fair market value is the price at whichFor more information about installment sales, see Publi-
the property would change hands between a buyer and acation 537, Installment Sales.
seller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having rea-
sonable knowledge of all necessary facts.Sale of a business. The sale of a business usually is not
a sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the business
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property Page 17

Page 18 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Amount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from a Dispositions of business property and depreciable
disposition of property is usually a recognized gain or loss property. Use Form 4797. If you have taxable gain, you
for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included in may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 
gross income. Recognized losses are deductible from
Like-kind exchanges. Use Form 8824 , Like-Kind Ex-gross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer-
changes. You may also have to use Form 4797 andtain exchanges of property is not recognized. See 
Schedule D (Form 1040). Nontaxable exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a
loss from the disposition of property held for personal use. Installment sales. Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-
come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and ScheduleIs My Gain or Loss D (Form 1040). 
Ordinary or Capital?
Casualties and thefts. Use Form 4684, Casualties and
You must classify your gains and losses as either ordinary Thefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. 
or capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure your
Condemned property. Use Form 4797 . You may alsonet capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capital
have to use Schedule D (Form 1040).gain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the most
part, everything you own and use for personal purposes or
investment is a capital asset.
Certain property you use in your business is not a
capital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this
property is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you held
4.the property longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat
the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains and
losses are called section 1231 gains and losses.
General BusinessFor more information about ordinary and capital gains
and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication 544.
Credits
Is My Capital Gain or Loss
Short Term or Long Term? Introduction
If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determine Your general business credit for the year consists of your
whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or loss carryforward of business credits from prior years plus the
is long or short term depends on how long you own the total of your current year business credits. In addition, your
property before you dispose of it. The time you own prop- general business credit for the current year may be in-
erty before disposing of it is called the holding period. creased later by the carryback of business credits from
later years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax.
Table 3-2. Do I Have a Short-Term or
Long-Term Gain or Loss? Useful Items
You may want to see:IF you hold the
property... THEN you have a... Form (and Instructions)
1 year or less Short-term capital gain or loss.
❏ 3800 General Business Credit
More than 1 year Long-term capital gain or loss.
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐIndividuals
For more information about short-term and long-term See chapter 12  for information about getting publica-
capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 544. tions and forms.
Where Do I Report Business Credits
Gains and Losses? All of the following credits are part of the general business
credit. The form you use to figure each credit is shown inReport gains and losses from the following dispositions on parentheses. You will also have to complete Form 3800.the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explain
how to fill them out. Agricultural chemicals security credit (Form 8931).
This credit applies to qualified agricultural chemical secur-
ity expenses paid or incurred by eligible agricultural busi-
nesses. For more information, see Form 8931.
Page 18 Chapter 4 General Business Credits

Page 19 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Alcohol and cellulosic biofuel fuels credit (Form 6478). health insurance coverage you provide to certain employ-
This credit consists of the alcohol mixture credit, alcohol ees. For more information, see Form 8941.
credit, small ethanol producer credit, and cellulosic biofuel Credit for small employer pension plan startup costsproducer credit. For more information, see Form 6478. (Form 8881). This credit applies to pension plan startup
costs of a new qualified defined benefit or defined contribu-Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property credit (Form
tion plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simpli-8911). This credit applies to the cost of any qualified fuel
fied employee pension. For more information, seevehicle refueling property you placed in service. For more
Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Businessinformation, see Form 8911.
(SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).
Alternative motor vehicle credit (Form 8910). This
Disabled access credit (Form 8826). This credit is acredit consists of the following credits for certain vehicles
nonrefundable tax credit for an eligible small business thatyou placed in service. For more information, see Form
pays or incurs expenses to provide access to persons who8910.
have disabilities. You must pay or incur the expenses to
• Qualified fuel cell motor vehicle credit. enable your business to comply with the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990. For more information, see Form• Advanced lean burn technology motor vehicle credit.
8826.
• Qualified hybrid motor vehicle credit. 
Distilled spirits credit (Form 8906). This credit is avail-• Qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle credit. able to distillers and importers of distilled spirits and eligi-
ble wholesalers of distilled spirits. For more information,• Qualified plug-in electric drive motor vehicle conver-
see Form 8906.sion credit.
Empowerment zone and renewal community employ-
ment credit (Form 8844). You may qualify for this credit ifBiodiesel and renewable diesel fuels credit (Form
you have employees and are engaged in a business in an8864). This credit applies to certain fuel sold or used in
empowerment zone for which the credit is available. Foryour business. For more information, see Form 8864.
more information, see Form 8844.
Carbon dioxide sequestration credit (Form 8933). This
Energy efficient appliance credit (Form 8909). Thiscredit is for carbon dioxide which is captured at a qualified
credit is available for manufacturers of eligible appliances.facility and disposed of in a secure geological storage or
For more information, see Form 8909.used in a qualified enhanced oil or natural gas recovery
project. For more information, see Form 8933. Energy efficient home credit (Form 8908). This credit is
available for eligible contractors of certain homes sold forCredit for employer social security and Medicare taxes use as a residence. For more information, see Form 8908.paid on certain employee tips (Form 8846). This credit
is generally equal to your (employer's) portion of social Indian employment credit (Form 8845). This credit ap-
security and Medicare taxes paid on tips received by em- plies to qualified wages and health insurance costs you
ployees of your food and beverage establishment where paid or incurred for qualified employees. For more informa-
tipping is customary. The credit applies regardless of tion, see Form 8845.
whether the food is consumed on or off your business
Investment credit (Form 3468). The investment credit ispremises. For more information, see Form 8846.
the total of the following credits. For more information, see
Credit for employer differential wage payments (Form Form 3468.
8932). This credit provides certain small businesses with • Rehabilitation credit.an incentive to continue to pay wages to an employee
performing services on active duty in the uniformed serv- • Energy credit.
ices of the United States for a period of more than 30 days. • Qualifying advanced coal project credit.For more information, see Form 8932.
• Qualifying gasification project credit.Credit for employer-provided childcare facilities and
• Qualifying advanced energy project credit.services (Form 8882). This credit applies to the qualified
expenses you paid for employee childcare and qualified • Qualifying therapeutic discovery project credit.expenses you paid for childcare resource and referral
services. For more information, see Form 8882.
Low sulfur diesel fuel production credit (Form 8896).
Credit for increasing research activities (Form 6765). This credit is for the production of low sulfur diesel fuel by a
This credit is designed to encourage businesses to in- qualified small business. For more information, see Form
crease the amounts they spend on research and experi- 8896.
mental activities, including energy research. For more
Low-income housing credit (Form 8586). This creditinformation, see Form 6765.
generally applies to each new qualified low-income build-
Credit for small employer health insurance premiums ing placed in service after 1986. For more information, see
(Form 8941). This credit applies to the cost of certain Form 8586.
Chapter 4 General Business Credits Page 19

Page 20 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mine rescue team training credit (Form 8923). This
credit applies to training program costs you pay or incur for
5.certain mine rescue team employees. For more informa-
tion, see Form 8923.
Business IncomeNew hire retention credit (Form 5884-B). This credit
may apply if you hired an employee after February 3, 2010,
and before January 1, 2011, and the employee works for
you for at least 52 consecutive weeks. For more informa- Introduction
tion, see Form 5884-B. This chapter primarily explains business income and how
to account for it on your tax return, what items are notNew markets credit (Form 8874). This credit is for quali-
considered income, and gives guidelines for selected oc-fied equity investments made in qualified community de-
cupations.velopment entities. For more information, see Form 8874.
If there is a connection between any income you receive
Nonconventional source fuel credit (Form 8907). This and your business, the income is business income. A
credit is for qualified coke and coke gas you produced and connection exists if it is clear that the payment of income
sold to an unrelated person during the tax year. For more would not have been made if you did not have the busi-
information, see Form 8907. ness.
You can have business income even if you are notOrphan drug credit (Form 8820). This credit applies to involved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. Incomequalified expenses incurred in testing certain drugs for rare from work you do on the side in addition to your regular jobdiseases and conditions. For more information, see Form can be business income.8820. You report most business income, such as income from
selling your products or services, on Schedule C or C-EZ.Qualified plug-in electric drive motor vehicle credit
But you report the income from the sale of business as-(Form 8936). This credit is for new qualified plug-in elec-
sets, such as land and office buildings, on other formstric drive motor vehicles placed in service during the tax
instead of Schedule C or C-EZ. For information on sellingyear. For more information, including information on what
business assets, see chapter 3.is considered as a qualified plug-in electric drive motor
vehicle, see Form 8936. Nonemployee compensation. Business income
includes amounts you received in your businessQualified plug-in electric vehicle credit (Form 8834, that were properly shown on Forms 1099-MISC.
TIPPart I only). This portion of the credit is for certain quali- This includes amounts reported as nonemployee compen-fied plug-in electric vehicles. See Form 8834 for more sation in box 7 of the form. You can find more informationinformation, including information on what is considered as in the instructions on the back of the Form 1099-MISC youa qualified plug-in electric vehicle. received. 
Qualified railroad track maintenance credit (Form
8900). This credit applies with respect to qualified railroad
track maintenance expenditures paid or incurred during Kinds of Incomethe tax year. For more information, see Form 8900.
You must report on your tax return all income you receiveRenewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coal
from your business unless it is excluded by law. In mostproduction credit (Form 8835). This credit is for the sale
cases, your business income will be in the form of cash,of electricity, refined coal, or Indian coal produced in the
checks, and credit card charges. But business income canUnited States or U.S. possessions from qualified energy
be in other forms, such as property or services. These andresources at a qualified facility. For more information, see
other types of income are explained next.Form 8835.
If you are a U.S. citizen who has business incomeWork opportunity credit (Form 5884). This credit pro- from sources outside the United States (foreignvides businesses with an incentive to hire individuals from income), you must report that income on your tax
CAUTION
!targeted groups that have a particularly high unemploy- return unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law. If youment rate or other special employment needs. For more live outside the United States, you may be able to excludeinformation, see Form 5884. part or all of your foreign-source business income. For
details, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens
and Resident Aliens Abroad.
How To Claim the Credit
To claim a general business credit, you will first have to get
the forms you need to claim your current year business
credits.
In addition to the credit form, you also need to file Form
3800.
Page 20 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 21 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Members contact each other directly and request serv-Bartering for Property or Services
ices to be performed. You are not required to provide
services unless requested by another member, but youBartering is an exchange of property or services. You must
can use as many of the offered services as you wishinclude in your gross receipts, at the time received, the fair
without paying a fee.market value of property or services you receive in ex-
change for something else. If you exchange services with You must include the fair market value of any services
another person and you both have agreed ahead of time you receive from club members in your gross receipts
on the value of the services, that value will be accepted as when you receive them even if you have not provided any
the fair market value unless the value can be shown to be services to club members.
otherwise.
Information returns. If you are involved in a bartering
Example 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You per- transaction, you may have to file either of the following
form legal services for a client, a small corporation. In forms.
payment for your services, you receive shares of stock in
• Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-the corporation. You must include the fair market value of
change Transactions. the shares in income.
• Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. 
Example 2. You are an artist and create a work of art to
For information about these forms, see the General In-compensate your landlord for the rent-free use of your
structions for Certain Information Returns.apartment. You must include the fair rental value of the
apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in-
clude the fair market value of the work of art in his or her Real Estate Rentsrental income.
If you are a real estate dealer who receives income fromExample 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Both renting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc.,you and a house painter are members of a barter club, an who provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests,organization that each year gives its members a directory report the rental income and expenses on Schedule C orof members and the services each member provides. C-EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer or the kind ofMembers get in touch with other members directly and owner described in the preceding sentence, report thebargain for the value of the services to be performed. rental income and expenses on Schedule E. For moreIn return for accounting services you provided for the information, see Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-house painter's business, the house painter painted your erty (Including Rental of Vacation Homes).home. You must include in gross receipts the fair market
value of the services you received from the house painter. Real estate dealer. You are a real estate dealer if you areThe house painter must include the fair market value of engaged in the business of selling real estate to customersyour accounting services in his or her gross receipts. with the purpose of making a profit from those sales. Rent
you receive from real estate held for sale to customers isExample 4. You are a member of a barter club that subject to SE tax. However, rent you receive from realuses credit units to credit or debit members' accounts for estate held for speculation or investment is not subject togoods or services provided or received. As soon as units SE tax.are credited to your account, you can use them to buy
goods or services or sell or transfer the units to other Trailer park owner. Rental income from a trailer park ismembers. subject to SE tax if you are a self-employed trailer parkYou must include the value of credit units you received owner who provides trailer lots and facilities and substan-in your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units are tial services for the convenience of your tenants.credited to your account.  You generally are considered to provide substantialThe dollar value of units received for services by an services for tenants if they are primarily for the tenants'employee of the club, who can use the units in the same convenience and normally are not provided to maintain themanner as other members, must be included in the em- lots in a condition for occupancy. Services are substantial ifployee's gross income for the tax year in which received. It the compensation for the services makes up a materialis wages subject to social security and Medicare taxes part of the tenants' rental payments.(FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), and income Examples of services that are not normally provided fortax withholding. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em- the tenants' convenience include supervising and main-ployer's Tax Guide. taining a recreational hall provided by the park, distributing
a monthly newsletter to tenants, operating a laundry facil-Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and use ity, and helping tenants buy or sell their trailers.the cash method of accounting. You join a barter club and
Examples of services that are normally provided toagree to provide plumbing services to any member for a
maintain the lots in a condition for tenant occupancy in-specified number of hours. Each member has access to a
clude city sewerage, electrical connections, and roadways.directory that lists the members of the club and the serv-
ices available.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

Page 22 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Hotels, boarding houses, and apartments. Rental in- method of accounting, you must include in gross income
come you receive for the use or occupancy of hotels, interest accrued up to the time the loan became uncollecti-
boarding houses, or apartment houses is subject to SE tax ble. If the accrued interest later becomes uncollectible, you
if you provide services for the occupants. may be able to take a bad debt deduction. See Bad Debts
Generally, you are considered to provide services for in chapter 8.
the occupants if the services are primarily for their conve- Unstated interest. If little or no interest is charged onnience and are not services normally provided with the an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of eachrental of rooms for occupancy only. An example of a payment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest andservice that is not normally provided for the convenience of Original Issue Discount (OID)  in Publication 537, Install-the occupants is maid service. However, providing heat ment Sales.and light, cleaning stairways and lobbies, and collecting
trash are services normally provided for the occupants' Dividends. Generally, dividends are business income to
convenience. dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu-
tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in-Prepaid rent. Advance payments received under a lease come. If you hold stock as a personal investmentthat does not put any restriction on their use or enjoyment separately from your business activity, the dividends fromare income in the year you receive them. This is true no the stock are nonbusiness income.matter what accounting method or period you use. If you receive dividends from business insurance premi-
ums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all orLease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee for
part of the dividend as business income on your return. Togranting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in your
find out how much you have to report, see gross receipts in the year received.
Recovery of items previously deducted  under Other In-
Lease cancellation payments. Report payments you re- come, later.
ceive from your lessee for canceling a lease in your gross
receipts in the year received. Canceled Debt
Payments to third parties. If your lessee makes pay-
The following explains the general rule for including can-ments to someone else under an agreement to pay your
celed debt in income and the exceptions to the generaldebts or obligations, include the payments in your gross
rule.receipts when the lessee makes the payments. A common
example of this kind of income is a lessee's payment of
your property taxes on leased real property. General Rule
Settlement payments. Payments you receive in settle- Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other thanment of a lessee's obligation to restore the leased property as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceledto its original condition are income in the amount that the amount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report thepayments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold im- canceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurredprovements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon- the debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt,nected by the lessee. report the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.
Personal Property Rents
Exceptions
If you are in the business of renting personal property
The following discussion covers some exceptions to the(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental
general rule for canceled debt.amount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule C
or C-EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments described in the Price reduced after purchase. If you owe a debt to thepreceding Real Estate Rents discussion can also be re- seller for property you bought and the seller reduces theceived for renting personal property. If you receive any of amount you owe, you generally do not have income fromthose payments, include them in your gross receipts as the reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treatexplained in that discussion. the amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-
ment and reduce your basis in the property.
Interest and Dividend Income
Deductible debt. You do not realize income from a can-
Interest and dividends may be considered business in- celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt would
come. have led to a deduction.
Interest. Interest received on notes receivable that you Example. You get accounting services for your busi-have accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi- ness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi-ness income. Interest received on loans is business in- ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Yourcome if you are in the business of lending money. accountant forgives part of the amount you owe for the
Uncollectible loans. If a loan payable to you becomes accounting services. How you treat the canceled debt
uncollectible during the tax year and you use an accrual depends on your method of accounting.
Page 22 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 23 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Cash method Ð You do not include the canceled 3. It was incurred or assumed at either of the following
debt in income because payment of the debt would times.
have been deductible as a business expense.
a. Before January 1, 1993.
• Accrual method Ð You include the canceled debt in
b. After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumedincome because the expense was deductible when
to acquire, construct, or substantially improve theyou incurred the debt.
real property.
For information on the cash and accrual methods of
4. It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.accounting, see chapter 2.
Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-
ing of debt described in (3) earlier, but only to the extent itExclusions
does not exceed the debt being refinanced.
Do not include canceled debt in income in the following You cannot exclude more than either of the following
situations. However, you may be required to file Form 982, amounts.
Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of Indebted-
1. The excess (if any) of:ness. For more information, see Form 982.  
a. The outstanding principal of qualified real property1. The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy case
under title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank- business debt (immediately before the cancella-
ruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. tion), over
2. The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent. b. The fair market value (immediately before the
You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent you cancellation) of the business real property that is
are insolvent. See Publication 908. security for the debt, reduced by the outstanding
principal amount of any other qualified real prop-3. The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to a erty business debt secured by this property imme-qualified person. See chapter 3 in Publication 225,
diately before the cancellation.Farmer's Tax Guide.
4. The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi- 2. The total adjusted bases of depreciable real property
ness debt. This situation is explained later. held by you immediately before the cancellation.
These adjusted bases are determined after any basis5. The canceled debt is qualified principal residence
reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy, insol-indebtedness which is discharged after 2006 and
vency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take intobefore 2013. See Form 982.
account depreciable real property acquired in con-If a canceled debt is excluded from income because it templation of the cancellation.takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa-
tions 2 through 6 do not apply. If it takes place when you Election. To make this election, complete Form 982are insolvent, the exclusions in situations 3 and 4 do not and attach it to your income tax return for the tax year inapply to the extent you are insolvent. which the cancellation occurs. You must file your return by
the due date (including extensions). If you timely filed yourDebt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes any return for the year without making the election, you can stilldebt for which you are liable or which attaches to property
make the election by filing an amended return within 6you hold.
months of the due date of the return (excluding exten-
sions). For more information, see When To File in the formQualified real property business debt. You can elect to
instructions.exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of qualified
real property business debt. If you make the election, you
must reduce the basis of your depreciable real property by Other Income
the amount excluded. Make this reduction at the beginning
of your tax year following the tax year in which the cancel- The following discussion explains how to treat other types
lation occurs. However, if you dispose of the property of business income you may receive.
before that time, you must reduce its basis immediately
before the disposition. Restricted property. Restricted property is property that
Cancellation of qualified real property business has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receive
debt. Qualified real property business debt is debt (other restricted stock or other property for services performed,
than qualified farm debt) that meets all the following condi- the fair market value of the property in excess of your cost
tions. is included in your income on Schedule C or C-EZ when
the restriction is lifted. However, you can choose to be1. It was incurred or assumed in connection with real taxed in the year you receive the property. For moreproperty used in a trade or business. information on including restricted property in income, see
Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.2. It was secured by such real property.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 23

Page 24 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gains and losses. Do not report on Schedule C or C-EZ will not report as income any part of the $300 he may
a gain or loss from the disposition of property that is neither recover in any future year.
stock in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers. Exception for depreciation. This rule does not applyInstead, you must report these gains and losses on other to depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rulesforms. For more information, see chapter 3. explained next.
Promissory notes. Report promissory notes and other Recapture of depreciation. In the following situations,evidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange of you have to recapture the depreciation deduction. Thisproperty that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale to means you include in income part or all of the depreciationcustomers on Schedule C or C-EZ. In general, you report you deducted in previous years.them at their stated principal amount (minus any unstated
Listed property. If your business use of listed propertyinterest) when you receive them.
(explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50% or
Lost income payments. If you reduce or stop your busi- less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the property
ness activities, report on Schedule C or C-EZ any payment in service, you may have to recapture part of the deprecia-
you receive for the lost income of your business from tion deduction. You do this by including in income on
insurance or other sources. Report it on Schedule C or Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in previ-
C-EZ even if your business is inactive when you receive ous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of Business
the payment. Property, to figure the amount to include on Schedule C.
For more information, see What is the Business-Use Re-
Damages. You must include in gross income compensa- quirement? in chapter 5 of Publication 946, How To Depre-
tion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of the ciate Property. That chapter explains how to determine
following injuries connected with your business. whether property is used more than 50% in your business.
• Patent infringement. Section 179 property. If you take a section 179 deduc-
tion (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty.
asset and before the end of the asset's recovery period the
• Antitrust injury. percentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you must
recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do this by
Economic injury. You may be entitled to a deduction including in income on Schedule C part of the deduction
against the income if it compensates you for actual eco- you took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount to
nomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the following include on Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 to
amounts. find out when you recapture the deduction.
• The amount you receive or accrue for damages in Sale or exchange of depreciable property. If you sell
the tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incur or exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may have
in the tax year to recover that amount. to treat all or part of the gain due to depreciation as
ordinary income. You figure the income due to deprecia-• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de-
tion recapture in Part III of Form 4797. For more informa-ducted.
tion, see chapter 4 in Publication 544, Sales and Other
Dispositions of Assets.Punitive damages. You must also include punitive
damages in income.
Kickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them in Items That Are Not Income
your income on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, do not
include them if you properly treat them as a reduction of a In some cases the property or money you receive is not
related expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost of income.
goods sold.
Appreciation. Increases in value of your property are not
Recovery of items previously deducted. If you recover income until you realize the increases through a sale or
a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year, other taxable disposition.
include the recovery in income on Schedule C or C-EZ.
Consignments. Consignments of merchandise to othersHowever, if all or part of the deduction in earlier years did
to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandisenot reduce your tax, you can exclude the part that did not
remains with you, the consignor, even after the consigneereduce your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery from
possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goodsincome, you must include with your return a computation
on consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con-showing how you figured the exclusion.
signee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you have
Example. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross in- shipped out on consignment is included in your inventory
come of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and other until it is sold.
allowable deductions of $7,700. He also had 2 personal Do not include merchandise you receive on consign-
exemptions for a total of $7,400. He would not pay income ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commission
tax even if he did not deduct the bad debt. Therefore, he on merchandise consigned to you in your income when
Page 24 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 25 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit or
commission, depending upon the method of accounting Guidelines for Selected
you use.
OccupationsConstruction allowances. If you enter into a lease after
August 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con- This section provides information to determine whetherstruction allowance you receive (in cash or as a rent your earnings should be reported on Schedule C (Formreduction) from your landlord if you receive it under both 1040) or C-EZ (Form 1040).the following conditions.
• Under a short-term lease of retail space. Direct seller. You must report all income you receive as a
direct seller on Schedule C or C-EZ. This includes any of• For the purpose of constructing or improving quali-
the following.fied long-term real property for use in your business
at that retail space. • Income from salesÐpayments you receive from
customers for products they buy from you.
Amount you can exclude. You can exclude the con-
• Commissions, bonuses, or percentages you receivestruction allowance to the extent it does not exceed the
for sales and the sales of others who work underamount you spent for construction or improvements.
you.Short-term lease. A short-term lease is a lease (or
• Prizes, awards, and gifts you receive from your sell-other agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space for
ing business.15 years or less. The following rules apply in determining
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. You must report this income regardless of whether it is
reported to you on an information return.• Take into account options to renew when figuring
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do not You are a direct seller if you meet all the followingtake into account any option to renew at fair market conditions.value determined at the time of renewal.
1. You are engaged in one of the following trades or• Two or more successive leases that are part of the
businesses.same transaction (or a series of related transactions)
for the same or substantially similar retail space are a. Selling or soliciting the sale of consumer productstreated as one lease. either in a home or other place that is not a per-
manent retail establishment, or to any buyer on aRetail space. Retail space is real property leased, oc- buy-sell basis or a deposit-commission basis forcupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your resale in a home or other place of business that isbusiness of selling tangible personal property or services
not a permanent retail establishment.to the general public.
b. Delivering or distributing newspapers or shoppingQualified long-term real property. Qualified long-term
news (including any services directly related toreal property is nonresidential real property that is part of,
that trade or business).or otherwise present at, your retail space and that reverts
to the landlord when the lease ends.
2. Substantially all your pay (whether paid in cash or
Exchange of like-kind property. If you exchange your not) for services described above is directly related
business property or property you hold for investment to sales or other output (including performance of
solely for property of a like kind to be used in your business services) rather than to the number of hours worked.or to be held for investment, no gain or loss is recognized.
3. Your services are performed under a written contractThis means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is not
between you and the person for whom you performdeductible. A common type of nontaxable exchange is the
the services, and the contract provides that you willtrade-in of a business automobile for another business
not be treated as an employee for federal tax pur-automobile. For more information, see Form 8824.
poses.Leasehold improvements. If a tenant erects buildings or
makes improvements to your property, the increase in the
Executor or administrator. If you administer a deceasedvalue of the property due to the improvements is not
person's estate, your fees are reported on Schedule C orincome to you. However, if the facts indicate that the
improvements are a payment of rent to you, then the C-EZ if you are one of the following:
increase in value would be income.
1. A professional fiduciary.
Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is not
2. A nonprofessional fiduciary (personal representative)income.
and both of the following apply.
Sales tax. State and local sales taxes imposed on the
a. The estate includes an active trade or business inbuyer, which you were required to collect and pay over to
which you actively participate.state or local governments, are not income.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 25

Page 26 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. Your fees are related to the operation of that trade • Substantially all your pay for these services directly
or business. relates to your sales or other output rather than to
the number of hours you work.
3. A nonprofessional fiduciary of a single estate that • You perform the services under a written contractrequires extensive managerial activities on your part that says you will not be treated as an employee forfor a long period of time, provided these activities are federal tax purposes.enough to be considered a trade or business.
 If the fees do not meet the above requirements, report This rule applies whether or not you hire others to help
them on line 21 of Form 1040. you make deliveries. It also applies whether you buy the
papers from the publisher or are paid based on the numberFishing crew member.  If you are a member of the crew of papers you deliver.that catches fish or other water life, your earnings are
reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if you meet all the require- Newspaper or magazine vendor. If you are 18 or olderments shown in chapter 10 under Fishing crew member. and you sell newspapers or magazines, your earnings are
reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all the following condi-Insurance agent, former. Termination payments you re- tions apply.ceive as a former self-employed insurance agent from an
insurance company because of services you performed for • You sell newspapers or magazines to ultimate con-
that company are not reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all sumers.
the following conditions are met. • You sell them at a fixed price.
• You received payments after your agreement to per- • Your earnings are based on the difference betweenform services for the company ended. the sales price and your cost of goods sold.
• You did not perform any services for the company
after your service agreement ended and before the This rule applies whether or not you are guaranteed a
end of the year in which you received the payment. minimum amount of earnings. It also applies whether or
not you receive credit for unsold newspapers or magazines• You entered into a covenant not to compete against
you return to your supplier.the company for at least a 1-year period beginning
on the date your service agreement ended.
Notary public. Fees you receive for services you perform
• The amount of the payments depended primarily on as a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ.
policies sold by you or credited to your account dur- These payments are not subject to self-employment taxing the last year of your service agreement or the (see the instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).extent to which those policies remain in force for
some period after your service agreement ended, or Public official. Public officials generally do not reportboth. what they earn for serving in public office on Schedule C or
C-EZ. This rule applies to payments received by an elected• The amount of the payment did not depend to any
tax collector from state funds on the basis of a fixedextent on length of service or overall earnings from
percentage of the taxes collected. Public office includesservices performed for the company (regardless of
any elective or appointive office of the United States or itswhether eligibility for the payments depended on
length of service). possessions, the District of Columbia, a state or its political
subdivisions, or a wholly owned instrumentality of any of
these.Insurance agent, retired. Income paid by an insurance
Public officials of state or local governments report theircompany to a retired self-employed insurance agent based
fees on Schedule C or C-EZ if they are paid solely on a feeon a percentage of commissions received before retire-
basis and if their services are eligible for, but not coveredment is reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. Also, renewal
by, social security under a federal-state agreement.commissions and deferred commissions for sales made
before retirement are generally reported on Schedule C or
Real estate agent or direct seller. If you are a licensedC-EZ.
real estate agent or a direct seller, your earnings areHowever, renewal commissions paid to the survivor of reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if both the following apply.an insurance agent are not reported on Schedule C or
C-EZ. • Substantially all your pay for services as a real es-
tate agent or direct seller directly relates to yourNewspaper carrier or distributor. You are a direct seller sales or other output rather than to the number ofand your earnings are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if hours you work.all the following conditions apply.
• You perform the services under a written contract• You are in the business of delivering or distributing that says you will not be treated as an employee fornewspapers or shopping news (including directly re- federal tax purposes.lated services such as soliciting customers and col-
lecting receipts).
Page 26 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 27 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Securities dealer. If you are a dealer in options or com- Trade discounts. These are reductions from list or cata-
modities, your gains and losses from dealing or trading in log prices and usually are not written into the invoice or
section 1256 contracts (regulated futures contracts, for- charged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on
eign currency contracts, nonequity options, dealer equity your books of account. Instead, use only the net amount as
options, and dealer securities futures contracts) or prop- the cost of the merchandise purchased. For more informa-
erty related to those contracts (such as stock used to tion, see Trade discounts in chapter 6.
hedge options) are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. For Payment placed in escrow. If the buyer of your propertymore information, see sections 1256 and 1402(i). places part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you do
not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually orSecurities trader. You are a trader in securities if you are
constructively receive it. However, upon completion of theengaged in the business of buying and selling securities for
terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you willyour own account. As a trader in securities, your gain or
have taxable income, even if you do not accept the moneyloss from the disposition of securities is not reported on
until the next year.Schedule C or C-EZ. However, see Securities dealer ,
earlier, for an exception that applies to section 1256 con- Sales returns and allowances. Credits you allow cus-tracts. For more information about securities traders, see tomers for returned merchandise and any other al-Publication 550, Investment Income and Expenses. lowances you make on sales are deductions from gross
sales in figuring net sales.
Advance payments. Special rules dealing with an ac-Accounting for Your Income
crual method of accounting for payments received in ad-
vance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.Accounting for your income for income tax purposes differs
at times from accounting for financial purposes. This sec- Insurance proceeds. If you receive insurance or anothertion discusses some of the more common differences that type of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you mustmay affect business transactions. subtract it from the loss when you figure your deduction.Figure your business income on the basis of a tax year You cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty orand according to your regular method of accounting (see theft loss.chapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income-producing For information on casualty or theft losses, see Publica-factor in your business, you usually have to use inventories tion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.to clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate are not
allowed to use inventories. For more information on inven-
tories, see chapter 2.
Income paid to a third party. All income you earn is
taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income 6.paid to a third party.
Example. You rent out your property and the rental How To Figure
agreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son.
The amount paid to your son is gross income to you. Cost of Goods Sold
Cash discounts. These are amounts the seller permits
you to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment. IntroductionFor income tax purposes, you can use either of the follow-
ing two methods to account for cash discounts. If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost of
goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. How-
1. Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line ever, to determine these costs, you must value your inven-
36, Purchases Less Cost of Items Withdrawn for tory at the beginning and end of each tax year.
Personal Use in chapter 6). This chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer,
wholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-2. Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac-
ness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income.count.
This chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-
You must use the chosen method every year for all your ness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter,
purchase discounts. or painter. However, if you work in a personal service
If you use the second method, the credit balance in the business and also sell or charge for the materials and
account at the end of your tax year is business income. supplies normally used in your business, this chapter ap-
Under this method, you do not reduce the cost of goods plies to you.
sold by the cash discounts you received. When valuing
If you must account for an inventory in your busi-your closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice price
ness, you must generally use an accrual methodof merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year by the
of accounting for your purchases and sales. Foraverage or estimated discounts received on the merchan-
CAUTION
!
more information, see chapter 2.dise.
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 27

Page 28 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property from inventory to a church. It had a fair market
value of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 2010Figuring Cost of Goods Sold
properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisition of
the property, and in 2010, you properly deducted $50 ofon Schedule C, Lines 35 
administrative and other expenses attributable to the prop-
Through 42 erty as business expenses. The charitable contribution
allowed for 2011 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is the
Figure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35 through amount that would be ordinary income if you had sold the
42 of Schedule C. These lines are reproduced below and contributed inventory at fair market value on the date of theare explained in the discussion that follows. gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining gross
income for 2011 must not include the $400. You remove35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last
year's closing inventory, attach explanation ....... . that amount from opening inventory for 2011.
36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal
use .................................. . Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-
uted property in 2011 at a cost of $400, you would include37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to
yourself ............................... . the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goods
38 Materials and supplies ..................... . sold for 2011 and deduct the $50 of administrative and
other expenses attributable to the property for that year.39 Other costs ............................. .
You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-40 Add lines 35 through 39 .................... .
duction for the contributed property.41 Inventory at end of year .................... .
42 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40.
Line 36Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4 ........ .
Purchases Less Cost of Items
Withdrawn for Personal UseLine 35
Inventory at Beginning of Year If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise you
bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, thisIf you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost of includes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased formerchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that you manufacture into a finished product.will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro-
ducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work in Trade discounts. The differences between the statedprocess, finished goods, and materials and supplies used prices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them arein manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2). called trade discounts. You must use the prices you payOpening inventory usually will be identical to the closing (not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purchases.inventory of the year before. You must explain any differ- Do not show the discount amount separately as an item inence in a schedule attached to your return. gross income.
An automobile dealer must record the cost of a car inDonation of inventory. If you contribute inventory (prop- inventory reduced by any manufacturer's rebate that rep-erty that you sell in the course of your business), the
resents a trade discount.amount you can claim as a contribution deduction is the
smaller of its fair market value on the day you contributed it
Cash discounts. Cash discounts are amounts your sup-or its basis. The basis of donated inventory is any cost
pliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices forincurred for the inventory in an earlier year that you would
prompt payments. There are two methods of accountingotherwise include in your opening inventory for the year of
for cash discounts. You can either credit them to a sepa-the contribution. You must remove the amount of your
rate discount account or deduct them from total purchasescontribution deduction from your opening inventory. It is
for the year. Whichever method you use, you must benot part of the cost of goods sold.
consistent. If you want to change your method of figuringIf the cost of donated inventory is not included in your
inventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application foropening inventory, the inventory's basis is zero and you
Change in Accounting Method. For more information, seecannot claim a charitable contribution deduction. Treat the
Change in Accounting Method in chapter 2.inventory's cost as you would ordinarily treat it under your
If you credit cash discounts to a separate account, youmethod of accounting. For example, include the purchase
must include this credit balance in your business income atprice of inventory bought and donated in the same year in
the end of the tax year. If you use this method, do notthe cost of goods sold for that year.
reduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts.A special rule applies to certain donations of food inven-
tory. See Food Inventory  in Publication 526, Charitable
Purchase returns and allowances. You must deduct allContributions.
returns and allowances from your total purchases during
the year.Example 1. You are a calendar year taxpayer who uses
an accrual method of accounting. In 2011 you contributed
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 29 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Merchandise withdrawn from sale. If you withdraw mer- Line 39
chandise for your personal or family use, you must exclude Other Coststhis cost from the total amount of merchandise you bought
for sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or sales ac- Examples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing or
count with the cost of merchandise you withdraw for per- mining process that you charge to your cost of goods sold
sonal use. You must also charge the amount to your are as follows.
drawing account. Containers. Containers and packages that are an integralA drawing account is a separate account you should part of the product manufactured are a part of your cost of
keep to record the business income you withdraw to pay goods sold. If they are not an integral part of the manufac-
for personal and family expenses. As stated above, you tured product, their costs are shipping or selling expenses.
also use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per- Freight-in. Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on rawsonal or family use. This account is also known as a materials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-ªwithdrawals accountº or ªpersonal account.º dise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods sold.
Overhead expenses. Overhead expenses include ex-Line 37
penses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-Cost of Labor ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. The
overhead expenses you have as direct and necessaryLabor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold expenses of the manufacturing operation are included inonly in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer- your cost of goods sold.chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do not
have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of
Line 40goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs prop-
Add Lines 35 through 39erly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both the
direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw material The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of theinto a finished, saleable product. goods available for sale during the year.
Direct labor. Direct labor costs are the wages you pay to Line 41those employees who spend all their time working directly
Inventory at End of Yearon the product being manufactured. They also include a
part of the wages you pay to employees who work directly Subtract the value of your closing inventory (including, ason the product part time if you can determine that part of appropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materialstheir wages. and supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) from
line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known as
Indirect labor. Indirect labor costs are the wages you pay closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory will
to employees who perform a general factory function that usually become the beginning inventory of your next tax
year.does not have any immediate or direct connection with
making the saleable product, but that is a necessary part of
the manufacturing process. Line 42
Cost of Goods Sold
Other labor. Other labor costs not properly chargeable to
When you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at thethe cost of goods sold can be deducted as selling or
end of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale,administrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of labor
the remainder is your cost of goods sold during the taxcosts properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold are
year.the direct or indirect labor costs and certain other costs
treated as overhead expenses properly charged to the
manufacturing process, as discussed later under Line 39
Other Costs.
Line 38 7.
Materials and Supplies
Figuring Gross ProfitMaterials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals,
used in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of goods
sold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing process Introductionare treated as deferred charges. You deduct them as a
business expense when you use them. Business ex- After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-
penses are discussed in chapter 8. ness (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold (chapter 6),
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit Page 29

Page 30 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter- If you collect state and local sales taxes imposed on you
mine gross profit before you can deduct any business as the seller of goods or services from the buyer, you must
expenses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8. include the amount collected in gross receipts.
If you are required to collect state and local taxes im-If you are filing Schedule C-EZ, your gross profit is your
posed on the buyer and turn them over to state or localgross receipts plus certain other amounts, explained later
governments, you generally do not include these amountsunder Additions to Gross Profit.
in income.
Businesses that sell products. If you are filing Schedule
Inventory at beginning of year. Compare this figure withC, figure your gross profit by first figuring your net receipts.
last year's ending inventory. The two amounts shouldFigure net receipts (line 3) on Schedule C by subtracting
usually be the same.any returns and allowances (line 2) from gross receipts
(line 1d). Returns and allowances include cash or credit Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per-refunds you make to customers, rebates, and other al- sonal use (use them yourself, provide them to your family,lowances off the actual sales price. or give them as personal gifts, etc.) be sure to removeNext, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from net them from the cost of goods sold. For details on how toreceipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from your adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise withdrawnbusiness. from sale in chapter 6.
Businesses that sell services. You do not have to figure Inventory at end of year. Check to make sure your pro-
the cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not an cedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-
income-producing factor for your business. Your gross dures should ensure all items have been included in
profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receipts inventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.
minus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Most Use inventory forms and adding machine tapes as the
professions and businesses that sell services rather than only evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are avail-
products can figure gross profit directly from net receipts in able at office supply stores. These forms have columns for
this way. recording the description, quantity, unit price, and value of
each inventory item. Each page has space to record whoIllustration. This illustration of the gross profit section of made the physical count, who priced the items, who madethe income statement of a retail business shows how gross the extensions, and who proofread the calculations. Theseprofit is figured. forms will help satisfy you that the total inventory is accu-
rate. They will also provide you with a permanent record toIncome Statement support its validity.Year Ended December 31, 2011 Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.
Gross receipts .............................. . $400,000
Minus: Returns and allowances .................. . 14,940
Net receipts ............................... . $385,060
Minus: Cost of goods sold ...................... . 288,140 Testing Gross
Gross profit ............................... . $96,920
Profit AccuracyThe cost of goods sold for this business is figured as
follows: If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can check
the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide grossInventory at beginning of year .................. . $37,845
Plus: Purchases ................... . $285,900 profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measures
Minus: Items withdrawn for personal use ... . 2,650 283,250 the average spread between the merchandise cost ofGoods available for sale ...................... . $321,095
goods sold and the selling price.Minus: Inventory at end of year ................. . 32,955
Cost of goods sold ......................... . $288,140 Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy.
Little or no difference between these two percentages
shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large
difference between these percentages may show that you
Items To Check did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, or
other items of cost. You should determine the reason for
Consider the following items before figuring your gross the difference.
profit. Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On the
average, he marks up his merchandise so that he willGross receipts. At the end of each business day, make
realize a gross profit of 331/3% on its sales. The net receiptssure your records balance with your actual cash and credit
(gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown onreceipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use cash
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold isregisters to keep track of receipts. You should also use a
$200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank account
($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year'sfor your business.
results, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receipts
Sales tax collected. Check to make sure your records ($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per-
show the correct sales tax collected. centage of 331/3%.
Page 30 Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit

Page 31 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A business bad debt is generally one that comes from
operating your trade or business. You may be able toAdditions to Gross Profit
deduct business bad debts as an expense on your busi-
If your business has income from a source other than its ness tax return.
regular business operations, enter the income on line 6 of
Schedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is gross Business bad debt. A business bad debt is a loss frombusiness income. If you use Schedule C-EZ, include the the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the following.income on line 1 of the schedule. Some examples include
income from an interest-bearing checking account, income 1. Created or acquired in your business.
from scrap sales, income from certain fuel tax credits and
2. Closely related to your business when it becamerefunds, and amounts recovered from bad debts.
partly or totally worthless.
A debt is closely related to your business if your primary
motive for incurring the debt is a business reason.
Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit sales
to customers. They can also be the result of loans to8.
suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and
services customers have not paid for are shown in yourBusiness Expenses books as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. If
you are unable to collect any part of these accounts or
notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a business badIntroduction debt.
You can deduct the costs of operating your business. You can take a bad debt deduction for theseThese costs are known as business expenses. These are accounts and notes receivable only if the amountcosts you do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of you were owed was included in your gross in-
CAUTION
!goods sold but can deduct in the current year. come either for the year the deduction is claimed or for aTo be deductible, a business expense must be both prior year.ordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of business. A neces- Accrual method. If you use an accrual method of ac-
sary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for your counting, you normally report income as you earn it. You
business. An expense does not have to be indispensable can take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiva-
to be considered necessary. ble if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-For more information about the general rules for deduct- come.ing business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publication 535,
Cash method. If you use the cash method of account-Business Expenses.
ing, you normally report income when you receive pay-If you have an expense that is partly for business ment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amountsand partly personal, separate the personal part owed to you that you have not received and cannot collectfrom the business part. The personal part is not
CAUTION
! if you never included those amounts in income.deductible.
More information. For more information about businessUseful Items bad debts, see chapter 10 in Publication 535.You may want to see:
Nonbusiness bad debts. All other bad debts are non-Publication
business bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car tal losses on Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040). ForExpenses more information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Publica-
❏ 535 Business Expenses tion 550, Investment Income and Expenses.
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica-
Car and Truck Expensestions and forms.
If you use your car or truck in your business, you may be
able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining yourBad Debts vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other costs of local
transportation and traveling away from home overnight onIf someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have business.a bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts, business bad
debts and nonbusiness bad debts.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You may qualify for a tax credit for qualified Methods for Deductingplug-in electric vehicles, qualified plug-in electric Car and Truck Expensesdrive motor vehicles, and alternative motor vehi-
TIP
cles you place in service during the year. Alternative motor For local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck,vehicles include qualified fuel cell motor vehicles, ad- you generally can use one of the following methods tovanced lean burn technology motor vehicles, qualified hy- figure your expenses.brid motor vehicles, and qualified alternative fuel motor
vehicles. See Form 8834 (Part I only), Form 8936, and • Standard mileage rate.
Form 8910 for more information. • Actual expenses.Local transportation expenses. Local transportation ex-
penses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all the
Standard mileage rate. You may be able to use thefollowing.
standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs of• Getting from one workplace to another in the course operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for businessof your business or profession when you are travel- purposes. For 2011, the standard mileage rate is:ing within the city or general area that is your tax
• 51 cents per mile for the period January 1 throughhome. Tax home is defined later.
June 30, and• Visiting clients or customers.
• 55.5 cents per mile for the period July 1 through• Going to a business meeting away from your regular December 31.workplace.
• Getting from your home to a temporary workplace If you choose to use the standard mileage rate forwhen you have one or more regular places of work. a year, you cannot deduct your actual expensesThese temporary workplaces can be either within the for that year except for business-related parking
CAUTION
!area of your tax home or outside that area. fees and tolls.
Local business transportation does not include expenses
Choosing the standard mileage rate. If you want toyou have while traveling away from home overnight. Those
use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own,expenses are deductible as travel expenses and are dis-
you must choose to use it in the first year the car iscussed later under Travel, Meals, and Entertainment.
available for use in your business. In later years, you canHowever, if you use your car while traveling away from
choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actualhome overnight, use the rules in this section to figure your
expenses.car expense deduction. 
If you use the standard mileage rate for a car you lease,Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-
you must choose to use it for the entire lease periodness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.
(including renewals).It includes the entire city or general area in which your
business or work is located. Standard mileage rate not allowed. You cannot use
the standard mileage rate if you:Example. You operate a printing business out of rented
office space. You use your van to deliver completed jobs to 1. Operate five or more cars at the same time,
your customers. You can deduct the cost of round-trip 2. Claimed a depreciation deduction using any methodtransportation between your customers and your print other than straight line, for example, ACRS orshop.
MACRS,
You cannot deduct the costs of driving your car or
3. Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,truck between your home and your main or regu-
lar workplace. These costs are personal commut- 4. Claimed the special depreciation allowance on the
CAUTION
!
ing expenses. car,
Office in the home. Your workplace can be your home 5. Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased, or
if you have an office in your home that qualifies as your 6. Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-principal place of business. For more information, see bursement.Business Use of Your Home, later.
Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using the stan-Example. You are a graphics designer. You operate dard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-relatedyour business out of your home. Your home qualifies as parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park youryour principal place of business. You occasionally have to car at your place of work are nondeductible commutingdrive to your clients to deliver your completed work. You
expenses.)can deduct the cost of the round-trip transportation be-
tween your home and your clients.
Page 32 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Actual expenses. If you do not choose to use the stan- • It must be used in business or held to produce in-
come. You never can depreciate inventory (ex-dard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actual
plained in chapter 2) because it is not held for use incar or truck expenses.
your business.If you qualify to use both methods, figure your
• It must have a useful life that extends substantiallydeduction both ways to see which gives you a
beyond the year it is placed in service.larger deduction.
TIP
• It must have a determinable useful life, which meansActual car expenses include the costs of the following
that it must be something that wears out, decays,items.
gets used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value
Depreciation Lease payments Registration from natural causes. You never can depreciate theGarage rent Licenses Repairs cost of land because land does not wear out, be-Gas Oil Tires
come obsolete, or get used up.Insurance Parking fees Tolls
• It must not be excepted property. This includes prop-If you use your vehicle for both business and personal erty placed in service and disposed of in the samepurposes, you must divide your expenses between busi- year.ness and personal use. You can divide your expenses
based on the miles driven for each purpose.
Repairs.  You cannot depreciate repairs and replace-
ments that do not increase the value of your property,Example. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop.
make it more useful, or lengthen its useful life. You canYou drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000
deduct these amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 ofmiles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000
Schedule C-EZ.miles were for personal use (including commuting miles).
You can claim only 80% (16,000 ÷  20,000) of the cost of Depreciation method. The method for depreciating mostoperating your van as a business expense. business and investment property placed in service after
1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
More information. For more information about the rules System (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in Publi-
for claiming car and truck expenses, see Publication 463. cation 946.
Section 179 deduction. You can elect to deduct a limitedReimbursing Your Employees amount of the cost of certain depreciable property in the
for Expenses year you place the property in service. This deduction is
known as the ªsection 179 deduction.º The maximumYou generally can deduct the amount you reimburse your amount you can elect to deduct during 2011 is generallyemployees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse- $500,000 (higher limits apply to certain property).
ment you deduct and the manner in which you deduct it This limit is generally reduced by the amount by which
depend in part on whether you reimburse the expenses the cost of the property placed in service during the tax
under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. For year exceeds $2 million. The total amount of depreciation
details, see chapter 11 in Publication 535. That chapter (including the section 179 deduction) you can take for a
explains accountable and nonaccountable plans and tells passenger automobile you use in your business and first
you whether to report the reimbursement on your em- place in service in 2011 is $3,060 ($11,060 if you take the
ployee's Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. special depreciation allowance for qualified passenger au-
tomobiles placed in service in 2011). Special rules apply to
trucks and vans. For more information, see Publication
946. It explains what property qualifies for the deduction,Depreciation what limits apply to the deduction, and when and how to
recapture the deduction.If property you acquire to use in your business is expected
Your section 179 election for the cost of any sportto last more than 1 year, you generally cannot deduct the
utility vehicle (SUV) and certain other vehicles isentire cost as a business expense in the year you acquire
limited to $25,000. For more information, see theit. You must spread the cost over more than 1 tax year and
CAUTION
!
Instructions for Form 4562 or Publication 946.deduct part of it each year on Schedule C. This method of
deducting the cost of business property is called deprecia-
Listed property. You must follow special rules and re-tion.
cordkeeping requirements when depreciating listed prop-The discussion here is brief. You will find more informa- erty. Listed property is any of the following.tion about depreciation in Publication 946.
• Most passenger automobiles.
What property can be depreciated? You can depreciate • Most other property used for transportation.
property if it meets all the following requirements. • Any property of a type generally used for entertain-
• It must be property you own. ment, recreation, or amusement.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Certain computers and related peripheral equipment. • Vacation pay.
For more information about listed property, see Publica- Fringe benefits. A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the
tion 946. performance of services. The following are examples of
fringe benefits.Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-
tion, if you are claiming any of the following. • Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs.
• Depreciation on property placed in service during the • Meals and lodging.
current tax year. • The use of a car.
• A section 179 deduction. • Flights on airplanes.
• Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of • Discounts on property or services.when it was placed in service).
• Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs.
If you have to use Form 4562, you must file • Tickets to entertainment or sporting events.
Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ.
Employee benefit programs include the following.
CAUTION
!
• Accident and health plans.
• Adoption assistance.
Employees' Pay • Cafeteria plans.
You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give • Dependent care assistance.
your employees for the services they perform for your
• Educational assistance.business. The pay may be in cash, property, or services.
To be deductible, your employees' pay must be an • Group-term life insurance coverage.
ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or
• Welfare benefit funds.incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet both
the following tests.
You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you
• The pay must be reasonable. provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost
falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car or• The pay must be for services performed.
other property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease as aChapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines these rent or lease expense. If you own the property, includerequirements. your deduction for its cost or other basis as a section 179
deduction or a depreciation deduction.You cannot deduct your own salary or any personal
withdrawals you make from your business. As a sole pro- You may be able to exclude all or part of the fringeprietor, you are not an employee of the business. benefits you provide from your employees'
wages. For more information about fringe bene-If you had employees during the year, you must
TIP
fits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication 15-B,use Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ.
Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.
CAUTION
!
Kinds of pay. Some of the ways you may provide pay to
your employees are listed below. For an explanation of
each of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535. Insurance
• Awards. You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the follow-
• Bonuses. ing kinds of insurance related to your business. 
• Education expenses. 1. Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.
• Fringe benefits (discussed later). 2. Credit insurance that covers losses from business
bad debts.• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee
to repay if they are for personal services actually 3. Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-performed. ployees, including long-term care insurance.
• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for 4. Liability insurance.services.
5. Malpractice insurance that covers your personal lia-• Reimbursements for employee business expenses. bility for professional negligence resulting in injury or
• Sick pay. damage to patients or clients.
Page 34 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6. Workers' compensation insurance set by state law 4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policy
that covers any claims for bodily injuries or on your life or on the life of another person with a
job-related diseases suffered by employees in your financial interest in your business to get or protect a
business, regardless of fault. business loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as a
business expense. Nor can you deduct the premiums7. Contributions to a state unemployment insurance as interest on business loans or as an expense offund are deductible as taxes if they are considered financing loans. In the event of death, the proceedstaxes under state law. of the policy are not taxed as income even if they are
8. Overhead insurance that pays for business overhead used to liquidate the debt.
expenses you have during long periods of disability
caused by your injury or sickness.
Self-employed health insurance deduction. You may
9. Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehicles be able to deduct the amount you paid for medical and
used in your business for liability, damages, and dental insurance and qualified long-term care insurance
other losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for per- for you and your family.sonal use, deduct only the part of the insurance pre-
How to figure the deduction. Generally, you can usemium that applies to the business use of the vehicle.
the worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure yourIf you use the standard mileage rate to figure your
deduction. However, if any of the following apply, you mustcar expenses, you cannot deduct any car insurance
use the worksheet in chapter 6 of Publication 535.premiums.
• You have more than one source of income subject to10. Life insurance covering your employees if you are
self-employment tax.not directly or indirectly the beneficiary under the
contract. • You file Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ (relating to
foreign earned income).11. Business interruption insurance that pays for lost
profits if your business is shut down due to a fire or • You are using amounts paid for qualified long-termother cause. care insurance to figure the deduction.
Nondeductible premiums. You cannot deduct premiums
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance,on the following kinds of insurance.
even if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to any
1. Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deduct expense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create an
amounts credited to a reserve set up for asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond the
self-insurance. This applies even if you cannot get end of the current tax year.
business insurance coverage for certain business
risks. However, your actual losses may be deducti- Example. In 2011, you signed a 3-year insurance con-
ble. For more information, see Publication 547, Cas- tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2011, 2012,
ualties, Disasters, and Thefts. and 2013 when you signed the contract, you can only
deduct the premium for 2011 on your 2011 tax return. You2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for a can deduct in 2012 and 2013 the premium allocable topolicy that pays for your lost earnings due to sick- those years.ness or disability. However, see item (8) in the previ-
ous list. More information. For more information about deducting
3. Certain life insurance and annuities. insurance, see chapter 6 in Publication 535.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, you
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insurance
Interestpolicy covering you, an employee, or any person
with a financial interest in your business if you are
You can generally deduct as a business expense all inter-directly or indirectly a beneficiary of the policy.
est you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts relatedYou are included among possible beneficiaries of
to your business. Interest relates to your business if youthe policy if the policy owner is obligated to repay
use the proceeds of the loan for a business expense. Ita loan from you using the proceeds of the policy.
does not matter what type of property secures the loan.A person has a financial interest in your business
You can deduct interest on a debt only if you meet all of theif the person is an owner or part owner of the
following requirements.business or has lent money to the business.
• You are legally liable for that debt.b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen-
erally cannot deduct the premiums on any life • Both you and the lender intend that the debt beinsurance policy, endowment contract, or annuity repaid.contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
• You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-ciary. The disallowance applies without regard to
tionship.whom the policy covers.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the interest • SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ-
you paid on personal loans. If a loan is part business and ees) plans.
part personal, you must divide the interest between the • Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans).personal part and the business part.
SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and yourExample. In 2011, you paid $600 interest on a car loan. employees a tax favored way to save for retirement. YouDuring 2011, you used the car 60% for business and 40% can deduct contributions you make to the plan for yourfor personal purposes. You are claiming actual expenses employees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a soleon the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% ×  $600) for proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make to the2011 on Schedule C or C-EZ. The remaining interest of plan for yourself on line 28 of Form 1040. You can also$240 is a nondeductible personal expense. deduct trustees' fees if contributions to the plan do not
cover them. Earnings on the contributions are generally taxMore information. For more information about deducting free until you or your employees receive distributions frominterest, see chapter 4 in Publication 535. That chapter the plan. You may also be able to claim a tax credit of 50%explains the following items. of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs if you begin a
• Interest you can deduct. new qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plan
(including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-• Interest you cannot deduct. ployee pension.
• How to allocate interest between personal and busi- Under certain plans, employees can have you contrib-
ness use. ute limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan. These
amounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax free• When to deduct interest. until your employees receive distributions from the plan.
• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (This For more information on retirement plans for small busi-
is generally a loan on which no interest is charged or ness, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small
on which interest is charged at a rate below the Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).
applicable federal rate.) Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs), discusses other tax favored ways
to save for retirement.
TIP
Legal and Professional Fees
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged by Rent Expenseaccountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses
directly related to operating your business are deductible Rent is any amount you pay for the use of property you doon Schedule C or C-EZ. However, you usually cannot not own. In general, you can deduct rent as a businessdeduct legal fees you pay to acquire business assets. Add expense only if the rent is for property you use in yourthem to the basis of the property. business. If you have or will receive equity in or title to theIf the fees include payments for work of a personal property, you cannot deduct the rent.nature (such as making a will), you can take a business
deduction only for the part of the fee related to your Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental deduction
business. The personal part of legal fees for producing or for unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-
collecting taxable income, doing or keeping your job, or for bleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Rent
tax advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if paid to a related person is reasonable if it is the same
you itemize deductions. For more information, see Publi- amount you would pay to a stranger for use of the same
cation 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. property. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-
ured as a percentage of gross receipts.Tax preparation fees. You can deduct on Schedule C Related persons include members of your immediateor C-EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax return family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole orrelating to your business as a sole proprietor or statutory half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. Foremployee. You can deduct the remaining cost on Schedule a list of the other related persons, see section 267 of theA (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Internal Revenue Code.You can also deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the amount
you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficiencies for Rent on your home. If you rent your home and use part of
your business as a sole proprietor or statutory employee. it as your place of business, you may be able to deduct the
rent you pay for that part. You must meet the requirements
for business use of your home. For more information, see
Business Use of Your Home, later.Pension Plans
Rent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid in your busi-You can set up and maintain the following small business ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you payretirement plans for yourself and your employees. rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount that
• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans. applies to your use of the rented property during the tax
Page 36 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 37 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only over • Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method of
the period to which it applies. accounting and choose to accrue real estate tax
related to a definite period ratably over that period.More information. For more information about rent, see
chapter 3 in Publication 535.
Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or on
the purchase or use of property as part of the cost of the
service or property. If the service or the cost or use of theTaxes property is a deductible business expense, you can deduct
the tax as part of that service or cost. If the property isYou can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ various federal,
merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of thestate, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable to your
cost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, addbusiness.
the sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For information
Income taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ a on the basis of property, see Publication 551, Basis of
state tax on gross income (as distinguished from net in- Assets.
come) directly attributable to your business. You can de- Do not deduct state and local sales taxes im-duct other state and local income taxes on Schedule A posed on the buyer that you must collect and pay(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deduct over to the state or local government. Do not
CAUTION
!federal income tax. include these taxes in gross receipts or sales.
Employment taxes. You can deduct the social security,
Medicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes you Excise taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ all
paid out of your own funds as an employer. Employment excise taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses of
taxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can also carrying on your business. Excise taxes are discussed
deduct payments you made as an employer to a state briefly in chapter 1.
unemployment compensation fund or to a state disability
benefit fund. Deduct these payments as taxes. Fuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and other
motor fuels you use in your business are usually includedSelf-employment tax. You can deduct the em- as part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes asployer-equivalent portion of your self-employment tax on a separate item.line 27 of Form 1040. Self-employment tax is discussed in
You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federalchapters 1 and 10.
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. For
Personal property tax. You can deduct on Schedule C or more information, see Publication 510, Excise Taxes.
C-EZ any tax imposed by a state or local government on
personal property used in your business.
You can also deduct registration fees for the right to use Travel, Meals,property within a state or local area.
and EntertainmentExample. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000
business miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had to This section briefly explains the kinds of travel and enter-pay $25 for their annual state license tags and $20 for their tainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule C orcity registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city per- C-EZ.sonal property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They are
claiming their actual car expenses. Because they used the Travel expenses. These are the ordinary and necessarycar 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of the $280, or expenses of traveling away from home for your business.$196, as a business expense. You are traveling away from home if both the following
conditions are met.Real estate taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or
C-EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business 1. Your duties require you to be away from the generalproperty. Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local, area of your tax home (defined later) substantiallyor foreign taxes on real estate levied for the general public longer than an ordinary day's work.welfare. The taxing authority must base the taxes on the
assessed value of the real estate and charge them uni- 2. You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demands
formly against all property under its jurisdiction. of your work while away from home.
For more information about real estate taxes, see chap-
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-ter 5 in Publication 535. That chapter explains special rules
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.for deducting the following items.
It includes the entire city or general area in which your
• Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks, business is located. See Publication 463 for more informa-
streets, water mains, and sewer lines. tion.
The following is a brief discussion of the expenses you• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell property
can deduct.during the year.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 8-1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
(Note. The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details about these
rules, see Publication 463.)
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client, customer, or employee
if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the associated test.
Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide entertainment,
amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a customer or client.
• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your field of business,
trade, or profession.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not necessarily
required, for your business.
Tests to be met Directly-related test
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment period, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other specific
business benefit.
Associated test
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business discussion.
Other rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if you are claiming
the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the circumstances.
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
Transportation. You can deduct the cost of travel by Telephone. You can deduct the cost of business calls
while on your business trip, including business communi-airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
cation by fax machine or other communication devices.business destination.
Tips. You can deduct the tips you pay for any expenseTaxi, commuter bus, and limousine. You can deduct
in this list.fares for these and other types of transportation between
the airport or station and your hotel, or between the hotel More information. For more information about travel
and your work location away from home. expenses, see Publication 463.
Baggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost of Entertainment expenses. You may be able to deductsending baggage and sample or display material between business-related entertainment expenses for entertainingyour regular and temporary work locations. a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you can
deduct only 50% of these expenses.Car or truck. You can deduct the costs of operating and
The following are examples of entertainment expenses.maintaining your vehicle when traveling away from home
on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stan- • Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs, the-dard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car and Truck aters, or sporting events.Expenses), as well as business-related tolls and parking. If
• Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to businessyou rent a car while away from home on business, you can
customers or their families.deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules listedMeals and lodging. You can deduct the cost of meals
in Table 8-1. For details about these rules, see Publicationand lodging if your business trip is overnight or long 463.enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
perform your duties. In most cases, you can deduct only Reimbursing your employees for expenses. You gen-50% of your meal expenses. erally can deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-
Cleaning. You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning and ees for travel and entertainment expenses. The
laundry while on your business trip. reimbursement you deduct and the manner in which you
Page 38 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 39 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse the Regular use. To qualify under the regular use test, you
expenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable must use a specific area of your home for business on a
plan. For details, see chapter 11 in Publication 535. That continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your business
chapter explains accountable and nonaccountable plans use of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if you
and tells you whether to report the reimbursement on your do not use that area for any other purpose.
employee's Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
Principal place of business. You can have more than
one business location, including your home, for a single
trade or business. To qualify to deduct the expenses for
Business Use the business use of your home under the principal place of
business test, your home must be your principal place ofof Your Home business for that business. To determine your principal
place of business, you must consider all the facts andTo deduct expenses related to the part of your home used circumstances.for business, you must meet specific requirements. Even Your home office will qualify as your principal place ofthen, your deduction may be limited. business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet theTo qualify to claim expenses for business use of your following requirements.home, you must meet the following tests.
• You use it exclusively and regularly for administra-
1. Your use of the business part of your home must be: tive or management activities of your business.
• You have no other fixed location where you conducta. Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclusive
substantial administrative or management activitiesuse, later),
of your business.b. Regular,
Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively and regu-c. For your business, and
larly for your business, but your home office does not
qualify as your principal place of business based on the2. The business part of your home must be one of the
previous rules, you determine your principal place of busi-following:
ness based on the following factors.
a. Your principal place of business (defined later), • The relative importance of the activities performed at
b. A place where you meet or deal with patients, each location.
clients, or customers in the normal course of your • If the relative importance factor does not determinebusiness, or your principal place of business, you can also con-
c. A separate structure (not attached to your home) sider the time spent at each location.
you use in connection with your business.
If, after considering your business locations, your home
cannot be identified as your principal place of business,Exclusive use. To qualify under the exclusive use test, you cannot deduct home office expenses. However, foryou must use a specific area of your home only for your other ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, seetrade or business. The area used for business can be a Publication 587.room or other separately identifiable space. The space
does not need to be marked off by a permanent partition. Deduction limit. If your gross income from the business
use of your home equals or exceeds your total businessYou do not meet the requirements of the exclusive use
expenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all yourtest if you use the area in question both for business and
business expenses related to the use of your home. If yourfor personal purposes.
gross income from the business use is less than your total
business expenses, your deduction for certain expensesExample. You are an attorney and use a den in your
for the business use of your home is limited.home to write legal briefs and prepare clients' tax returns.
Your deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses,Your family also uses the den for recreation. The den is not
such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depreci-used exclusively in your profession, so you cannot claim a
ation taken last), allocable to the business is limited to thebusiness deduction for its use.
gross income from the business use of your home minusExceptions to exclusive use. You do not have to meet the sum of the following.the exclusive use test if you use part of your home in either
of the following ways. 1. The business part of expenses you could deduct
even if you did not use your home for business (such1. For the storage of inventory or product samples. as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualty
2. As a daycare facility. and theft losses that are allowable as itemized de-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)).For an explanation of these exceptions, see Publication
587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use by Day- 2. The business expenses that relate to the business
care Providers). activity in the home (for example, business phone,
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 39

Page 40 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
supplies, and depreciation on equipment), but not to • Lobbying expenses.
the use of the home itself. • Penalties and fines you pay to a governmental
Do not include in (2) above your deduction for one-half of agency or instrumentality because you broke the
your self-employment tax. law.
Use Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Your • Personal, living, and family expenses.Home, to figure your deduction. 
• Political contributions.
More information. For more information on deducting • Repairs that add to the value of your property orexpenses for the business use of your home, see Publica- significantly increase its life.tion 587.
Other Expenses
You Can Deduct 9.
You may also be able to deduct the following expenses.
See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deduct
Figuring Net Profitthem.
• Advertising. or Loss
• Bank fees.
• Donations to business organizations. Introduction
• Education expenses. After figuring your business income and expenses, you are
ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your business.• Energy efficient commercial buildings deduction ex-
You do this by subtracting business expenses from busi-penses.
ness income. If your expenses are less than your income,• Environmental cleanup costs. the difference is net profit and becomes part of your in-
come on page 1 of Form 1040. If your expenses are more• Impairment-related expenses.
than your income, the difference is a net loss. You usually• Interview expense allowances. can deduct it from gross income on page 1 of Form 1040.
But in some situations your loss is limited. This chapter• Licenses and regulatory fees.
briefly explains two of those situations. Other situations• Moving machinery. that may limit your loss are explained in the Instructions for
Schedule C, line G and line 32.• Outplacement services.
If you have more than one business, you must• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance or
figure your net profit or loss for each business onnonperformance of a contract.
a separate Schedule C.
CAUTION
!• Repairs that keep your property in a normal efficient
operating condition.
• Repayments of income.
Net Operating Losses (NOLs)• Subscriptions to trade or professional publications.
If your deductions for the year are more than your income• Supplies and materials.
for the year (line 41 of your Form 1040 is a negative
• Utilities. number), you may have a net operating loss (NOL). You
can use an NOL by deducting it from your income in
another year or years.
Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOLExpenses You Cannot Deduct include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from the
following.You usually cannot deduct the following as business ex-
penses. For more information, see Publication 535. • Your trade or business.
• Bribes and kickbacks. • Your work as an employee (unreimbursed employee
business expenses).• Charitable contributions.
• A casualty or theft.• Demolition expenses or losses.
• Moving expenses.• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sport-
ing, airline, and hotel clubs. • Rental property.
Page 40 Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or Loss

Page 41 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A loss from operating a business is the most common If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-
reason for an NOL. ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at
For details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net Oper- least $106,800, do not pay the 10.4% social security part of
ating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts. It the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must
explains how to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claim pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net
an NOL deduction, and how to figure an NOL carryover. earnings.
Special Rules and ExceptionsNot-for-Profit Activities
Aliens. Generally, resident aliens must payIf you do not carry on your business to make a profit, there self-employment tax under the same rules that apply tois a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use a U.S. citizens. Nonresident aliens are not subject to SE taxloss from the activity to offset other income. Activities you unless an international social security agreement in effectdo as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, come determines that they are covered under the U.S. socialunder this limit. security system. However, residents of the Virgin Islands,For details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter 1 Puerto Rico, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northernin Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter ex- Mariana Islands, or American Samoa are subject toplains how to determine whether your activity is carried on self-employment tax, as they are considered U.S. re-to make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss you sidents for self-employment tax purposes. For more infor-can deduct. mation on aliens, see Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for
Aliens.
Child employed by parent. You are not subject to SE tax
if you are under age 18 and you are working for your father
or mother.10.
Church employee.  If you work for a church or a qualified
Self-Employment (SE) church-controlled organization (other than as a minister or
member of a religious order) that elected an exemption
Tax from social security and Medicare taxes, you are subject to
SE tax if you receive $108.28 or more in wages from the
church or organization. For more information, see Publica-The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are
tion 517, Social Security and Other Information for Mem-and even if you are already receiving social se-
bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers.curity and Medicare benefits.
CAUTION
!
Fishing crew member. If you are a member of the crew
on a boat that catches fish or other water life, your earnings
are subject to SE tax if all the following conditions apply.Who Must Pay SE Tax?
1. You do not get any pay for the work except yourGenerally, you must pay SE tax and file Schedule SE
share of the catch or a share of the proceeds from(Form 1040) if your net earnings from self-employment
the sale of the catch, unless the pay meets all thewere $400 or more. Use Schedule SE to figure net earn-
following conditions.ings from self-employment.
a. The pay is not more than $100 per trip.Sole proprietor or independent contractor. If you are
self-employed as a sole proprietor or independent contrac- b. The pay is received only if there is a minimum
tor, you generally use Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040) to catch.
figure your earnings subject to SE tax. c. The pay is solely for additional duties (such as
mate, engineer, or cook) for which additional cashSE tax rate.  For 2011, the SE tax rate on net earnings is
pay is traditional in the fishing industry.13.3% (10.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
2. You get a share of the catch or a share of the pro-Maximum earnings subject to self-employment tax.
ceeds from the sale of the catch.Only the first $106,800 of your combined wages, tips, and
net earnings in 2011 is subject to any combination of the 3. Your share depends on the amount of the catch.10.4% social security part of SE tax, social security tax, or
4. The boat's operating crew normally numbers fewerrailroad retirement (tier 1) tax.
than 10 individuals. (An operating crew is consideredAll of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in
as normally made up of fewer than 10 if the average2011 are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare
size of the crew on trips made during the last fourpart of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement
calendar quarters is fewer than 10.)(tier 1) tax.
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 41

Page 42 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Notary public. Fees you receive for services you perform Gain or Loss
as a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ but
Do not include in earnings subject to SE tax a gain or lossare not subject to self-employment tax (see the Instruc-
from the disposition of property that is neither stock in tradetions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).
nor held primarily for sale to customers. It does not matter
whether the disposition is a sale, exchange, or an involun-State or local government employee. You are subject to tary conversion.SE tax if you are an employee of a state or local govern-
ment, are paid solely on a fee basis, and your services are
not covered under a federal-state social security agree- Lost Income Payments
ment.
If you are self-employed and reduce or stop your business
activities, any payment you receive from insurance or otherForeign government or international organization em- sources for the lost business income is included in earn-ployee. You are subject to SE tax if both the following ings subject to SE tax. If you are not working when youconditions are true. receive the payment, it still relates to your business and is
included in earnings subject to SE tax, even though your1. You are a U.S. citizen employed in the United States,
business is temporarily inactive.Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Common-
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the Virgin
Islands by: Figuring Earnings Subject to SE Tax
a. A foreign government,
Methods for Figuring Net Earningsb. A wholly-owned agency of a foreign government,
or There are three ways to figure your net earnings from
self-employment.c. An international organization.
1. The regular method.2. Your employer is not required to withhold social se-
curity and Medicare taxes from your wages. 2. The nonfarm optional method.
3. The farm optional method.
U.S. citizen or resident alien residing abroad.  If you You must use the regular method unless you are eligible
are a self-employed U.S. citizen or resident alien living to use one or both of the optional methods.
outside the United States, in most cases you must pay SE
tax. Do not reduce your foreign earnings from Why use an optional method?  You may want to use theself-employment by your foreign earned income exclusion. optional methods (discussed later) when you have a loss
Exception.  The United States has social security or a small net profit and any one of the following applies.
agreements with many countries to eliminate double taxa- • You want to receive credit for social security benefittion under two social security systems. Under these agree- coverage.ments, you generally must only pay social security and
Medicare taxes to the country in which you live. The coun- • You incurred child or dependent care expenses for
try to which you must pay the tax will issue a certificate which you could claim a credit. (An optional method
which serves as proof of exemption from social security tax may increase your earned income, which could in-
in the other country. crease your credit.)
For more information, see the Instructions for Schedule • You are entitled to the earned income credit. (AnSE (Form 1040). optional method may increase your earned income,
which could increase your credit.)
More Than One Business • You are entitled to the additional child tax credit. (An
optional method may increase your earned income,If you have earnings subject to SE tax from more than one which could increase your credit.)trade, business, or profession, you must combine the net
profit (or loss) from each to determine your total earnings
Effects of using an optional method. Using an optionalsubject to SE tax. A loss from one business reduces your
method could increase your SE tax. Paying more SE taxprofit from another business.
could result in your getting higher benefits when you retire.
If you use either or both optional methods, you mustCommunity Property Income figure and pay the SE tax due under these methods even if
you would have had a smaller tax or no tax using theIf any of the income from a trade or business, other than a
regular method.partnership, is community property income under state
law, it is included in the earnings subject to SE tax of the The optional methods may be used only to figure your
spouse carrying on the trade or business. SE tax. To figure your income tax, include your actual
Page 42 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 43 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
earnings in gross income, regardless of which method you Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings
use to determine SE tax.
If you meet the three tests explained earlier, use the
following table to figure your net earnings from
Regular Method self-employment under the nonfarm optional method.
Multiply your total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% Table 10-1. Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings(.9235) to get your net earnings under the regular method.
See Short Schedule SE, line 4, or Long Schedule SE, line IF your gross nonfarm THEN your net earnings4a. income is ... are equal to ...Net earnings figured using the regular method are also
$6,720 or less Two-thirds of your grosscalled actual net earnings.
nonfarm income.
More than $6,720 $4,480Nonfarm Optional Method
Use the nonfarm optional method only for earnings that do Actual net earnings. Your actual net earnings arenot come from farming. You may use this method if you 92.35% of your total earnings subject to SE tax (that is,meet all the following tests. multiply total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% (.9235)
to get actual net earnings). Actual net earnings are1. You are self-employed on a regular basis. This equivalent to net earnings figured using the regularmeans that your actual net earnings from method.self-employment were $400 or more in at least 2 of
the 3 tax years before the one for which you use this Optional net earnings less than actual net earnings.
method. The net earnings can be from either farm or You cannot use this method to report an amount less than
nonfarm earnings or both. your actual net earnings from self-employment.
2. You have used this method less than 5 years. (There Gross nonfarm income of $6,720 or less. The followingis a 5-year lifetime limit.) The years do not have to be examples illustrate how to figure net earnings when grossone after another. nonfarm income is $6,720 or less.
3. Your net nonfarm profits were:
Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,851 and
a. Less than $4,851, and less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. Ann
Green runs a craft business. Her actual net earnings fromb. Less than 72.189% of your gross nonfarm in- self-employment were $800 in 2009 and $900 in 2010. Shecome. meets the test for being self-employed on a regular basis.
She has used the nonfarm optional method less than 5
Net nonfarm profits. Net nonfarm profit generally is the years. Her gross income and net profit in 2011 are as
total of the amounts from: follows:
• Line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040), Gross nonfarm income .................. . $5,400
Net nonfarm profit ...................... . $1,200• Line 3, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040),
Ann's actual net earnings for 2011 are $1,108 ($1,200 ×• Box 14, code A, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from
.9235). Because her net profit is less than $4,851 and lessnonfarm partnerships), and
than 72.189% of her gross income, she can use the non-• Box 9, code J1, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B). farm optional method to figure net earnings of $3,600 (2/3 ×
$5,400). Because these net earnings are higher than herHowever, you may need to adjust the amount reported actual net earnings, she can report net earnings of $3,600on Schedule K-1 if you are a general partner or if it is a loss. for 2011.
Gross nonfarm income. Your gross nonfarm income
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,851 butgenerally is the total of the amounts from:
not less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. As-• Line 7, Schedule C (Form 1040), sume that in Example 1 Ann's gross income is $1,000 and
her net profit is $800. She must use the regular method to• Line 1, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040),
figure her net earnings. She cannot use the nonfarm op-• Box 14, code C, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from tional method because her net profit is not less thannonfarm partnerships), and 72.189% of her gross income.
• Box 9, code J2, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B).
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 43

Page 44 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business. As-  To figure your net earnings using both optional meth-
sume that in Example 1 Ann has a net loss of $700. She ods, you must:
can use the nonfarm optional method and report $3,600 (2/3
• Figure your farm and nonfarm net earnings sepa-×  $5,400) as her net earnings. rately under each method. Do not combine farm
earnings with nonfarm earnings to figure your netExample 4. Nonfarm net earnings less than $400. earnings under either method.Assume that in Example 1 Ann has gross income of $525
and a net profit of $175. In this situation, she would not pay • Add the net earnings figured under each method to
any SE tax under either the regular method or the nonfarm arrive at your total net earnings from
optional method because her net earnings under both self-employment.
methods are less than $400. You can report less than your total actual farm and non-
Gross nonfarm income of more than $6,720. The fol- farm net earnings but not less than actual nonfarm net
lowing examples illustrate how to figure net earnings when earnings. If you use both optional methods, you can report
gross nonfarm income is more than $6,720. no more than $4,480 as your combined net earnings from
self-employment.
Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,851 and
less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. John Example. You are a self-employed farmer. You also
White runs an appliance repair shop. His actual net earn- operate a retail grocery store. Your gross income, actual
ings from self-employment were $10,500 in 2009 and net earnings from self-employment, and optional farm and
$9,500 in 2010. He meets the test for being self-employed optional nonfarm net earnings from self-employment are
on a regular basis. He has used the nonfarm optional shown in Table 10-2.
method less than 5 years. His gross income and net profit
in 2011 are as follows: Table 10-2. ExampleÐFarm and Nonfarm
Earnings
Gross nonfarm income .................. . $12,000
Net nonfarm profit ...................... . $1,200 Income and
Earnings Farm NonfarmJohn's actual net earnings for 2011 are $1,108 ($1,200
×  .9235). Because his net profit is less than $4,851 and Gross income $3,000 $6,000
less than 72.189% of his gross income, he can use the Actual net earnings  $900  $500nonfarm optional method to figure net earnings of $4,480.
Because these net earnings are higher than his actual net Optional net
earnings, he can report net earnings of $4,480 for 2011. earnings (2/3 of gross
income)  $2,000 $4,000
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit not less than $4,851.
Assume that in Example 1 John's net profit is $5,400. He Table 10-3 shows four methods or combinations of
must use the regular method. He cannot use the nonfarm methods you can use to figure net earnings from
optional method because his net nonfarm profit is not less self-employment using the farm and nonfarm gross in-
than $4,851. come and actual net earnings shown in Table 10-2.
• Method 1. Using the regular method for both farmExample 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business. As- and nonfarm income.sume that in Example 1 John has a net loss of $700. He
can use the nonfarm optional method and report $4,480 as • Method 2. Using the optional method for farm in-
his net earnings from self-employment. come and the regular method for nonfarm income.
• Method 3. Using the regular method for farm income
Farm Optional Method and the optional method for nonfarm income.
• Method 4. Using the optional method for both farmUse the farm optional method only for earnings from a
and nonfarm income.farming business. See Publication 225 for information
about this method. Note. Actual net earnings is the same as net earnings
figured using the regular method.
Using Both Optional Methods
If you have both farm and nonfarm earnings, you may be
able to use both optional methods to determine your net
earnings from self-employment.
Page 44 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 45 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
self-employment, but file a separate Schedule C, C-EZ, orTable 10-3. ExampleÐNet Earnings
F for each business.
Net Example. You are the sole proprietor of two separateEarnings 1 2 3 4 businesses. You operate a restaurant that made a net
profit of $25,000. You also have a cabinetmaking businessActual that had a net loss of $500. You must file a Schedule C for farm $ 900 $ 900 the restaurant showing your net profit of $25,000 and
another Schedule C for the cabinetmaking business show-Optional ing your net loss of $500. You file Schedule SE showing farm $ 2,000 $ 2,000 total earnings subject to SE tax of $24,500.
Actual
nonfarm $ 500 $ 500
Optional
nonfarm $4,000 $4,000
11.
Amount
you can
Your Rightsreport: $1,400 $2,500 $4,900 $4,480*
as a Taxpayer
*Limited to $4,480 because you used both optional methods.
The first part of this chapter explains some of your most
important rights as a taxpayer. The second part explainsFiscal Year Filer
the examination, appeal, collection, and refund processes.
If you use a tax year other than the calendar year, you must
use the tax rate and maximum earnings limit in effect at the
beginning of your tax year. Even if the tax rate or maximum Declaration ofearnings limit changes during your tax year, continue to
use the same rate and limit throughout your tax year. Taxpayer Rights
Protection of your rights. IRS employees will explain
Reporting Self-Employment and protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout your
contact with us.Tax
Privacy and confidentiality. The IRS will not disclose toUse Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure and report your SE anyone the information you give us, except as authorizedtax. Then enter the SE tax on line 56 of Form 1040 and by law. You have the right to know why we are asking youattach Schedule SE to Form 1040. for information, how we will use it, and what happens if youMost taxpayers can use Section AÐShort Schedule SE do not provide requested information.to figure their SE tax. However, certain taxpayers must use
Section BÐLong Schedule SE. Professional and courteous service. If you believe that
an IRS employee has not treated you in a professional,If you have to pay SE tax, you must file Form
fair, and courteous manner, you should tell that em-1040 (with Schedule SE attached) even if you do
ployee's supervisor. If the supervisor's response is notnot otherwise have to file a federal income tax
CAUTION
!
satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for yourreturn.
area or the center where you file your return.Joint return. Even if you file a joint return, you cannot file
a joint Schedule SE. This is true whether one spouse or
Representation. You can either represent yourself or,both spouses have earnings subject to SE tax. If both of
with proper written authorization, have someone else rep-you have earnings subject to SE tax, each of you must
resent you in your place. Your representative must be acomplete a separate Schedule SE. However, if one spouse
person allowed to practice before the IRS, such as anuses the Short Schedule SE and the other spouse has to
attorney, certified public accountant, or enrolled agent. Ifuse the Long Schedule SE, both can use the same form.
you are in an interview and ask to consult such a person,Attach both schedules to the joint return.
then we must stop and reschedule the interview in most
cases.More than one business. If you have more than one
trade or business, you must combine the net profit (or loss) You can have someone accompany you at an interview.
from each business to figure your SE tax. A loss from one You can make sound recordings of any meetings with our
business will reduce your profit from another business. File examination, appeal, or collection personnel, provided you
one Schedule SE showing the earnings from tell us in writing 10 days before the meeting.
Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Page 45

Page 46 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Payment of only the correct amount of tax. You are you mail us the requested information or provide an expla-
responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax due nation, we may or may not agree with you, and we will
under the law Ðno more, no less. If you cannot pay all of explain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi-
your tax when it is due, you may be able to make monthly tate to write to us about anything you do not understand.
installment payments. By interview. If we notify you that we will conduct your
examination through a personal interview, or you requestHelp with unresolved tax problems. The Taxpayer Ad- such an interview, you have the right to ask that thevocate Service can help you if you have tried unsuccess- examination take place at a reasonable time and place thatfully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your local Taxpayer is convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examinerAdvocate can offer you special help if you have a signifi- proposes any changes to your return, he or she will explaincant hardship as a result of a tax problem. For more the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with theseinformation, call toll free 1-877-777-4778 (1-800-829-4059 changes, you can meet with the examiner's supervisor.for TTY/TDD) or write to the Taxpayer Advocate at the IRS
office that last contacted you. Repeat examinations. If we examined your return for
the same items in either of the 2 previous years andAppeals and judicial review. If you disagree with us proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact usabout the amount of your tax liability or certain collection as soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinueactions, you have the right to ask the Appeals Office to the examination.review your case. You can also ask a court to review your
Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner's pro-case.
posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals Office
Relief from certain penalties and interest. The IRS will of the IRS. Most differences can be settled without expen-
waive penalties when allowed by law if you can show you sive and time-consuming court trials. Your appeal rights
acted reasonably and in good faith or relied on the incor- are explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your Appeal
rect advice of an IRS employee. We will waive interest that Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don't Agree,
is the result of certain errors or delays caused by an IRS and Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
employee. Rights, and Claims for Refund.
If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagree
with its findings, you may be able to take your case to the
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S.Examinations, Appeals, District Court where you live. If you take your case to court,
the IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if youCollections, and Refunds
kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper-
ated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If theExaminations (audits). We accept most taxpayers' re- court agrees with you on most issues in your case andturns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it for finds that our position was largely unjustified, you may beexamination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest. able to recover some of your administrative and litigationThe inquiry or examination may or may not result in more costs. You will not be eligible to recover these costs unlesstax. We may close your case without change; or, you may you tried to resolve your case administratively, includingreceive a refund. going through the appeals system, and you gave us theThe process of selecting a return for examination usu- information necessary to resolve the case.ally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computer
Collections. Publication 594, The IRS Collection Pro-programs to identify returns that may have incorrect
cess, explains your rights and responsibilities regardingamounts. These programs may be based on information
payment of federal taxes. It describes:returns, such as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies of past
examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli- • What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what toance projects. Second, we use information from outside do if you get a tax bill and what to do if you thinksources that indicates that a return may have incorrect your bill is wrong. It also covers making installmentamounts. These sources may include newspapers, public payments, delaying collection action, and submittingrecords, and individuals. If we determine that the informa- an offer in compromise.tion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a
• IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing areturn for examination.
lien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, andPublication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
release of property.Rights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and
procedures that we follow in examinations. The following
Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail insections give an overview of how we conduct examina-
Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.tions.
By mail. We handle many examinations and inquiries Innocent spouse relief. Generally, both you and your
by mail. We will send you a letter with either a request for spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for paying
more information or a reason why we believe a change to the full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on your
your return may be needed. You can respond by mail or joint return. To seek relief from any liability related to your
you can request a personal interview with an examiner. If spouse (or former spouse), you must file a claim on Form
Page 46 Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer

Page 47 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief. Form 8857 Internet. You can access the IRS website at
generally must be filed within 2 years from the IRS's first IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to:
attempt to collect the tax from you after July 22, 1998, such
as by applying your refund from one year to the joint
• Check the status of your 2011 refund. Go to IRS.govliability. For more information, see Publication 971, Inno-
cent Spouse Relief, Form 8857, and the Instructions for and click on Where's My Refund. Wait at least 72
Form 8857. hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt of your
e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper
Refunds. You can file a claim for refund if you think you return. If you filed Form 8379 with your return, wait
paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim within 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed electronically). Have3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2 your 2011 tax return available so you can provideyears from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later. your social security number, your filing status, andThe law generally provides for interest on your refund if it is the exact whole dollar amount of your refund.not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return or
• E-file your return. Find out about commercial taxclaim for refund. Publication 556, Examination of Returns,
preparation and e-file services available free to eligi-Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, has more informa-
ble taxpayers.tion on refunds.
If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, you • Download forms, including talking tax forms, instruc-must file within 3 years from the date the return was due tions, and publications.(including extensions) to get that refund.
• Order IRS products online.
• Research your tax questions online.
• Search publications online by topic or keyword.
• Use the online Internal Revenue Code, regulations,12.
or other official guidance.
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published inHow To Get the last few years.
More Information • Figure your withholding allowances using the with-
holding calculator online at www.irs.gov/individuals.
This section describes the help the IRS and other federal • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by using ouragencies offer to taxpayers who operate their own busi- Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) Assistant availablenesses. online at www.irs.gov/individuals.
• Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
email.Internal Revenue Service
• Get information on starting and operating a small
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free business.publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa-
tion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method
that is best for you, you will have quick and easy access to Phone. Many services are available by phone. tax help.
Free help with your return. Free help in preparing your
return is available nationwide from IRS-certified volun- • Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Callteers. The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) pro-
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676) to order cur-gram is designed to help low-moderate income taxpayers
rent-year forms, instructions, and publications, andand the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) program is
prior-year forms and instructions. You should receivedesigned to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their
your order within 10 days.tax returns. Most VITA and TCE sites offer free electronic
filing and all volunteers will let you know about credits and • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your taxdeductions you may be entitled to claim. To find the near- questions at 1-800-829-1040.est VITA or TCE site, visit IRS.gov or call 1-800-906-9887
• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face helpor 1-800-829-1040.
solving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax-As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the Tax-Aide
payer Assistance Centers. An employee can explaincounseling program. To find the nearest AARP Tax-Aide
IRS letters, request adjustments to your account, orsite, call 1-888-227-7669 or visit AARP's website at
help you set up a payment plan. Call your localwww.aarp.org/money/taxaide.
Taxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. ToFor more information on these programs, go to IRS.gov
and enter keyword ªVITAº in the upper right-hand corner. find the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 47

Page 48 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
look in the phone book under United States Govern- are more comfortable talking with someone in per-
son, visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Centerment, Internal Revenue Service.
where you can spread out your records and talk with• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/ an IRS representative face-to-face. No appointmentTDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax is necessaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you can callquestions or to order forms and publications. your local Center and leave a message requesting
an appointment to resolve a tax account issue. A• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen to
representative will call you back within 2 businesspre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.
days to schedule an in-person appointment at your• Refund information. You can check the status of convenience. If you have an ongoing, complex taxyour refund on the new IRS phone app. Download account problem or a special need, such as a disa-the free IRS2Go app by visiting the iTunes app store bility, an appointment can be requested. All otheror the Android Marketplace. IRS2Go is a new way to issues will be handled without an appointment. Toprovide you with information and tools. To check the find the number of your local office, go to
status of your refund by phone, call 1-800-829-4477 www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phone book
(automated refund information 24 hours a day, 7 under United States Government, Internal Revenue
days a week). Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS Service.
acknowledges receipt of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4
weeks after mailing a paper return. If you filed Form Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if tions, and publications to the address below. Youyou filed electronically). Have your 2011 tax return should receive a response within 10 days after
available so you can provide your social security your request is received.number, your filing status, and the exact whole dollar
amount of your refund. If you check the status of Internal Revenue Service
your refund and are not given the date it will be 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
issued, please wait until the next week before check- Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
ing back.
Taxpayer Advocate Service. The Taxpayer Advocate• Other refund information. To check the status of a Service (TAS) is your voice at the IRS. Our job is to ensureprior-year refund or amended return refund, call that every taxpayer is treated fairly, and that you know and1-800-829-1040. understand your rights. We offer free help to guide you
through the often-confusing process of resolving taxEvaluating the quality of our telephone services. To problems that you haven't been able to solve on your own.ensure IRS representatives give accurate, courteous, and Remember, the worst thing you can do is nothing at all.professional answers, we use several methods to evaluate TAS can help if you can't resolve your problem with thethe quality of our telephone services. One method is for a IRS and:second IRS representative to listen in on or record random
telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to complete • Your problem is causing financial difficulties for you,
a short survey at the end of the call. your family, or your business.
• You face (or your business is facing) an immediateWalk-in. Many products and services are avail-
threat of adverse action.able on a walk-in basis.
• You have tried repeatedly to contact the IRS but no
one has responded, or the IRS has not responded to• Products. You can walk in to many post offices,
you by the date promised.libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,
instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li-
If you qualify for our help, we'll do everything we can tobraries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county
get your problem resolved. You will be assigned to onegovernment offices, credit unions, and office supply
advocate who will be with you at every turn. We havestores have a collection of products available to print offices in every state, the District of Columbia, and Puertofrom a CD or photocopy from reproducible proofs. Rico. Although TAS is independent within the IRS, ourAlso, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter- advocates know how to work with the IRS to get yournal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue problems resolved. And our services are always free.Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re- As a taxpayer, you have rights that the IRS must abidesearch purposes. by in its dealings with you. Our tax toolkit at
• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer www.TaxpayerAdvocate.irs.gov can help you understand
Assistance Center every business day for personal, these rights.
face-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRS If you think TAS might be able to help you, call your local
letters, request adjustments to your tax account, or advocate, whose number is in your phone book and on our
help you set up a payment plan. If you need to website at www.irs.gov/advocate. You can also call our
resolve a tax problem, have questions about how the toll-free number at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD
tax law applies to your individual tax return, or you 1-800-829-4059.
Page 48 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 49 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
TAS also handles large-scale or systemic problems that Purchase the DVD from National Technical Information
Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no han-affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of these broad
dling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVDissues, please report it to us through our Systemic Advo-
for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee).cacy Management System at www.irs.gov/advocate.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). Low Income
Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are independent from the IRS.
Small Business AdministrationSome clinics serve individuals whose income is below a
certain level and who need to resolve a tax problem. These
The Small Business Administration (SBA) offers trainingclinics provide professional representation before the IRS and educational programs, counseling services, financialor in court on audits, appeals, tax collection disputes, and programs, and contract assistance for small business own-other issues for free or for a small fee. Some clinics can ers. The SBA also has publications and videos on a varietyprovide information about taxpayer rights and responsibili- of business topics. The following briefly describes assis-ties in many different languages for individuals who speak tance provided by the SBA.English as a second language. For more information and
to find a clinic near you, see the LITC page on www.irs.gov/ Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs).advocate or IRS Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer SBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical serv-Clinic List . This publication is also available by calling ices to current and prospective small business owners who
1-800-829-3676 or at your local IRS office. cannot afford the services of a private consultant. Help is
available when beginning, improving, or expanding a small
business.Free tax services. Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free
Tax Services, is your guide to IRS services and resources.
Business Information Centers (BICs). BICs offer aLearn about free tax information from the IRS, including
small business reference library, management videopublications, services, and education and assistance pro-
tapes, and computer technology to help plan a business.grams. The publication also has an index of over 100
BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individuals whoTeleTax topics (recorded tax information) you can listen to are in business or are interested in starting a business canon the telephone. The majority of the information and use BICs as often as they wish at no charge.services listed in this publication are available to you free
of charge. If there is a fee associated with a resource or Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE).service, it is listed in the publication. SCORE provides small business counseling and training
Accessible versions of IRS published products are to current and prospective small business owners. SCORE
available on request in a variety of alternative formats for is made up of current and former business people who
people with disabilities. offer their expertise and knowledge to help people start,
manage, and expand a small business. SCORE also offersDVD for tax products. You can order Publication a variety of small business workshops.1796, IRS Tax Products DVD, and obtain:
Internet. You can visit the SBA website at
www.sba.gov. While visiting the SBA website,
• Current-year forms, instructions, and publications. you can find a variety of information of interest to
small business owners.• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.
Phone.  Call the SBA Answer Desk at• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.
1-800-U-ASK-SBA (1-800-827-5722) for general• Tax law frequently asked questions. information about programs available to assist
small business owners.• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys-
tem. Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small Business
• Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the U.S. Code. Development Center or Business Information
Center to request assistance with your small
• Links to other Internet based Tax Research materi- business. To find the location nearest you, visit the SBAals. website or call the SBA Answer Desk.
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Other Federal Agencies• Toll-free and email technical support.
• Two releases during the year. Other federal agencies also publish publications and pam-
± The first release will ship the beginning of January phlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-
2012. able from the Superintendent of Documents at the
± The final release will ship the beginning of March Government Printing Office. You can get information and
2012. order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 49

Page 50 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internet. You can visit the GPO website at Phone. Call the GPO toll-free at 1-866-512-1800
www.access.gpo.gov. or at 202-512-1800 from the Washington, DC,
area.
Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.
Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Office
P.O. Box 979050
St. Louis, MO 63917-9000
Page 50 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 51 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Charitable contributions ....... . 40 Qualified plug-in electric driveA
motor vehicle ............ . 19, 20Child employed by parent ...... . 41Accounting method:
Qualified plug-in electricClaim for refund ................ . 47Accrual .................... . 13, 31
vehicle ...................... . 20Automatic procedures ......... . 16 Collection of tax ................ . 46
Qualified railroad trackCash ....................... . 12, 31 Combination method of maintenance ................ . 20Change in ..................... . 16 accounting .................... . 14 Refined coal ................... . 20Combination ................... . 14 Comments on publication ....... . 3 Renewable electricity .......... . 20Special ........................ . 16 Condemned property ........... . 18 Research activities ............ . 19Accounting periods ............ . 12 Consignments .................. . 24 Small employer health insuranceAccrual method: Construction allowances ....... . 25 premiums ................... . 19Income - general rule .......... . 13 Cost of goods sold ............. . 27 Small employer pension planIncome - special rules ......... . 13 Credit: startup costs ................ . 19Of accounting .................. . 13 Advanced lean burn technology Taxes paid on certain employeeAdjusted basis .................. . 17 motor vehicle ................ . 19 tips .......................... . 19Administrator ................... . 25 Agricultural chemicals Work opportunity .............. . 20Agricultural chemicals security security ...................... . 18credit .......................... . 18 Alcohol and cellulosic biofuel DAlcohol and cellulosic biofuel fuels fuels ......................... . 19
credit .......................... . 19 Damages ........................ . 24Alternative fuel vehicle refueling
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling Debt:property ..................... . 19
property credit ................ . 19 Bad ............................ . 31Alternative motor vehicle ...... . 19
Canceled ...................... . 22Alternative motor vehicle Biodiesel fuels ................. . 19
credit .......................... . 19 Qualified real propertyCarbon dioxide business .................... . 23Appeal rights ................... . 46 sequestration ................ . 19 Refund offset against ........... . 6Appreciation .................... . 24 Diesel fuels, renewable ........ . 19
Definitions:Audits ........................... . 46 Disabled access ............... . 19 Accounting methods ........... . 12Automobile  (See Car expenses) Distilled spirits ................. . 19 Accounting periods ............ . 12Employer differential wage Barter .......................... . 21payments .................... . 19B Basis .......................... . 17Employer-providedBad debts ....................... . 31 Business bad debt ............. . 31childcare .................... . 19Barter income ................... . 21 Calendar tax year .............. . 12Empowerment zoneBasis of property ............... . 17 Cash discount ............. . 27, 28employment ................. . 19Biodiesel and renewable diesel Disposition of property ......... . 17Energy efficient appliance ..... . 19fuels credit .................... . 19 Drawing account ............... . 29Energy efficient home ......... . 19Bribes ........................... . 40 Entertainment expenses ....... . 38How to claim ................... . 20Business expenses ............. . 31 Fair market value .............. . 17Indian coal ..................... . 20 Fiscal tax year ................. . 12Business income ............... . 20 Indian employment ............ . 19 Fringe benefit .................. . 34Business use of your home .... . 39 Investment ..................... . 19 Local transportation
Low sulfur diesel fuel expenses .................... . 32C production ................... . 19 Necessary expense............ . 31Canceled debt .................. . 22 Low-income housing ........... . 19 Net operating loss ............. . 40Cancellation of qualified real Mine rescue team training ..... . 20 Nonbusiness bad debt ......... . 31property business debt ...... . 23 New hire retention ............. . 20 Ordinary expense .............. . 31Capital gain or loss ............. . 18 New markets .................. . 20 Principal place of business .... . 39
Car expenses ............... . 31, 32 Nonconventional source Qualified long-term real
Carbon dioxide sequestration fuel .......................... . 20 property ..................... . 25
credit .......................... . 19 Orphan drug ................... . 20 Qualified real property business
Cash discount .............. . 27, 28 Qualified alternative fuel motor debt ......................... . 23
Cash method: vehicle ...................... . 19 Rent ........................... . 36
Expenses ...................... . 13 Qualified fuel cell motor Restricted property ............ . 23
Income ........................ . 13 vehicle ...................... . 19 Retail space ................... . 25
Self-employment (SE) tax ...... . 8Changing accounting Qualified hybrid motor
method ........................ . 15 vehicle ...................... . 19 Sole proprietor .................. . 2
Publication 334 (2011) Page 51

Page 52 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Definitions: (Cont.) Meals .......................... . 37 8829 (business in home) ...... . 40
Tax home ...................... . 32 Nondeductible ................. . 40 8834 (qualified plug-in electric
Trade discount ............. . 27, 28 vehicle) ...................... . 20Other .......................... . 40
Travel expenses ............... . 37 8835 (renewable electricity, coalPension plans ................. . 36
credit) ....................... . 20Rent ........................... . 36Depreciation:
8844 (empowerment zoneTaxes .......................... . 37Deduction...................... . 33
credit) ....................... . 19Travel .......................... . 37Listed property ................. . 33
8845 (Indian employment) ..... . 19Truck .......................... . 31Depreciation, recapture ........ . 24
8846 (credit for social security onDirect seller ................. . 25, 26
tip income) .................. . 19Disabled access credit ......... . 19 F 8857 (innocent spouse) ........ . 47Disposition of property: Fair market value ............... . 17 8864 (biodiesel/renewable dieselBusiness property ............. . 16 Filing business taxes ............ . 5 credit) ....................... . 19Installment sale ............ . 17, 18 Fishing crew member ...... . 26, 41 8874 (new markets credit) ..... . 20Like-kind exchange .... . 17, 18, 25 Form: 8879 (self-selected PIN) ........ . 7Nontaxable exchange ......... . 17 720 (excise tax return) .......... . 9 8881 (pension plan startup costsSale of a business ............. . 17 940 (unemployment tax) ....... . 10 credit) ....................... . 19Distilled spirits credit ........... . 19 941 (quarterly employment 8882 (employer-provided childcareDividend income ................ . 22 tax) .......................... . 10 credit) ....................... . 19Donation of inventory .......... . 28 944 (annual employment 8886 (transaction statement) ... . 4Drawing account ................ . 29 tax) .......................... . 10 8896 (low sulfur diesel fuel
Due date of return ............... . 8 982 (discharge of production credit) ............ . 19
indebtedness) ............... . 23 8900 (railroad track maintenance
1040 (tax return) ............ . 6, 10 credit) ....................... . 20E 1040-ES (estimated tax) .... . 8, 10 8906 (distilled spirits credit) .... . 19Economic injury ................ . 24 1040-V (voucher) ............... . 7 8907 (nonconventional fuele-file .............................. . 6 1099-B (barter) ................ . 21 credit) ....................... . 20EFTPS ............................ . 8 1099-MISC 8908 (energy efficient home
Electronic filing .................. . 6 (miscellaneous) ......... . 10, 21 credit) ....................... . 19
Employee ........................ . 6 1128 (change tax year) ........ . 12 8909 (appliance credit) ........ . 19
Employee benefit programs .... . 34 2210 (underpayment of estimated 8910 (alternative vehicle
Employees' pay ................. . 34 tax) ........................... . 8 credit) ................... . 19, 32
2290 (excise tax for heavy 8911 (alternative fuel refuelingEmployer identification number
trucks) ........................ . 9 property credit) .............. . 19(EIN) ............................ . 5
3115 (change accounting 8923 (mine rescue teamEmployment taxes:
method) ..................... . 16 training) ..................... . 20About ........................... . 9
3468 (investment credit) ....... . 19 8931 (agricultural chemicalsDeduction for .................. . 37
3800 (general business security) ..................... . 18Empowerment zone employment
credit) ....................... . 18 8932 (employer differential wagecredit .......................... . 19
4562 (depreciation) ............ . 34 payments) ................... . 19Energy efficient appliance 4684 (casualty and theft) ...... . 18 8933 (carbon dioxide sequestrationcredit .......................... . 19 4797 (sale of business credit) ....................... . 19Energy efficient home credit ... . 19 property) ................ . 18, 24 8936 (qualified plug-in electric driveEntertainment expenses  (See 4868 (extension) ................ . 8 motor vehicle) ............... . 20Travel expenses) 5884 (work opportunity 8941 (small employer healthEscrow, payments placed in ... . 27 credit) ....................... . 20 insurance premiums) ........ . 19Estimated tax .................... . 8 5884-B (new hire retention) .... . 20 Final ........................... . 11
Examinations (audits) .......... . 46 6251 (alternative minimum Information returns ............ . 10
Excise taxes: tax) .......................... . 18 Schedule C (sole proprietor) .... . 6,
About ........................... . 9 6252 (installment sale) ......... . 18 10
Deduction for .................. . 37 6478 (alcohol and cellulosic biofuel Schedule C-EZ (sole
Executor ........................ . 25 fuels) ........................ . 19 proprietor) .................... . 6
6765 (research credit) ......... . 19Expenses ....................... . 31 Schedule SE (self-employment
8300 (cash payments overBad debts...................... . 31 tax) ....................... . 9, 10
$10,000) .................... . 11Car ............................ . 31 SS-4 (application for EIN) ....... . 5
8586 (low-income housing) .... . 19Depreciation ................... . 33 SS-5 (application for SSN) ...... . 5
8594 (asset acquisition) ....... . 17Employees' pay ................ . 34 W-2 (report wages) ............ . 10
8820 (orphan drug credit) ...... . 20Entertainment.................. . 37 W-3 (transmittal of W-2) ....... . 10
8824 (like-kind exchange) .... . 17,Home, business use ........... . 39 W-4 (employee withholding) .... . 6
18Insurance ...................... . 34 W-7 (application for ITIN) ....... . 5
8826 (disabled accessInterest ........................ . 35 W-9 (request for TIN) ........... . 6
credit) ....................... . 19Legal and professional fees ... . 36 When to file .................... . 10
Page 52 Publication 334 (2011)

Page 53 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form: (Cont.) Installment sales ................ . 17 Nonbusiness bad debt ......... . 31
Which to file ................... . 10 Insurance: Nonconventional source fuel
Fringe benefits .................. . 34 Expense ....................... . 34 credit .......................... . 20
Nondeductible premiums ...... . 35Fuel taxes ....................... . 37 Nondeductible insurance
Prepayment ................... . 35 premiums ..................... . 35
Proceeds ...................... . 27 NonemployeeG Self-employed health .......... . 35 compensation ................ . 20Gains and losses ............... . 24 Insurance agent: Nontaxable exchanges ......... . 17General business credits ....... . 18 Former......................... . 26 Not income:Gross profit: Retired......................... . 26 Appreciation ................... . 24Accuracy ...................... . 30 Interest: Consignments ................. . 24Additions to .................... . 31 Expenses ...................... . 35 Constructions allowances ...... . 25Guidelines for selected Income ........................ . 22 Exchange of like-kindoccupations  (See also Inventories ...................... . 15 property ..................... . 25Occupations, selected) ........ . 25 Investment credit ............... . 19 Leasehold improvements ...... . 25
Loans .......................... . 25
H Sales tax ...................... . 25K
Health insurance, deduction for Notary public ............... . 26, 42Kickbacks ................... . 24, 40self-employed ................ . 35 Not-for-profit activities ......... . 41
Home, business use of ......... . 39 LHotels, boarding houses, and OLease bonus .................... . 22apartments ................... . 22 Occupations, selected:Lease cancellationHusband and wife business ..... . 2 payments ..................... . 22 Administrator .................. . 25
Direct seller ................ . 25, 26Legal fees ....................... . 36
I Executor ....................... . 25Like-kind exchanges ....... . 17, 25
Identification numbers .......... . 5 Fishing crew member .......... . 26Limited liability company ....... . 2
Insurance agent, former ....... . 26Income  (See also Not Listed property ................. . 24 Insurance agent, retired ....... . 26income) ........................ . 24 Lobbying expense .............. . 40Accounting for your ............ . 27 Newspaper carrier orLocal transportationBarter .......................... . 21 distributor ................... . 26expenses ..................... . 32Business ....................... . 20 Newspaper or magazineLodging ......................... . 38Damages ...................... . 24 vendor ....................... . 26Long-term capital gain orGains and losses .............. . 24 Notary public .................. . 26loss ........................... . 18Kickbacks...................... . 24 Public official .................. . 26
Lost income payments ......... . 24Kinds of income ............... . 20 Real estate agent .............. . 26
Low sulfur diesel fuel productionLost income payments ......... . 24 Securities dealer ............... . 27
credit .......................... . 19Other .......................... . 23 Securities trader ............... . 27
Low-income housing credit .... . 19Paid to a third party ............ . 27 Office in the home  (See also
Personal property rent ......... . 22 Business use of your home) ... . 32
Promissory notes .............. . 24 Optional methods, usingM
Recapture of depreciation ..... . 24 both ........................... . 44Meals  (See Travel expenses)Recovery of items previously Ordinary gain or loss ........... . 18Methods for figuring netdeducted .................... . 24 Orphan drug credit ............. . 20earnings ...................... . 42Rental ..................... . 21, 22 Mileage rate for vehicles ....... . 32Restricted property ............ . 23 Mine rescue team training PIncome tax: credit .......................... . 20About ........................... . 6 Parking fees .................... . 32More information  (See Tax help)Deduction for .................. . 37 Partners, husband and wife ..... . 2Motor vehicle, alternativeHow to pay ..................... . 8 Pay, kinds of .................... . 34credit .......................... . 19Underpayment penalty .......... . 8 Paying:
Income tax return, who must Business taxes ................. . 5
file .............................. . 6 N Income tax ...................... . 8
Independent contractor ... . 2, 9, 41 Net operating losses ........... . 40 Payments to third parties ...... . 22
Indian employment credit ...... . 19 Net profit or loss ................ . 40 Penalties and fines ............. . 40
Individual taxpayer identification New hire retention credit ....... . 20 Penalty:
number (ITIN) .................. . 5 New markets credit ............. . 20 Failure to file Form 8300 ....... . 11
Information returns .............. . 9 Newspaper carrier or Failure to file information
Information, How to get distributor .................... . 26 returns ...................... . 10
more .......................... . 47 Newspaper or magazine Failure to furnish correct payee
Innocent spouse relief .......... . 46 vendor ........................ . 26 statements .................. . 10
Publication 334 (2011) Page 53

Page 54 of 54 of Publication 334 6:14 - 21-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalty: (Cont.) Schedule C ....................... . 6 Social security coverage ........ . 8
Underpayment of tax ........... . 8 Schedule C-EZ ................... . 6 Social security number (SSN) ... . 5
Waiver of ...................... . 11 Schedule SE (Form 1040) ....... . 9 Sole proprietor ............... . 2, 41
Pension plans ................... . 36 Schedule SE, filing Sport utility vehicle ............. . 33
Personal property tax .......... . 37 requirement ................... . 45 Standard mileage rate .......... . 32
Prepaid expense: SE tax: For 2011 ........................ . 3
Extends useful life ............. . 35 About ........................... . 8 Statutory employee .............. . 2
Rent ........................... . 36 Aliens .......................... . 41 Suggestions for publication .... . 3
Professional fees ............... . 36 Child employed by parent ...... . 41 SUV .............................. . 33
Church employee .............. . 41Promissory notes ............... . 24
Community property income ... . 42Public official ................... . 26 TDeduction for .................. . 37Punitive damages............... . 24 Tax home ................... . 32, 37Earning credits ................. . 8
Tax preparation fees............ . 36Effects of using an optionalQ Tax refund:method ...................... . 42Qualified plug-in electric drive Claim for ....................... . 47Farm optional method ......... . 44motor vehicle credit .......... . 20 Offset against debts ............ . 6Fiscal year filer ................ . 45
Qualified plug-in electric vehicle Tax return:Fishing crew member .......... . 41
credit .......................... . 20 How to file ...................... . 6Gain or loss .................... . 42
Qualified railroad track Who must file ................... . 6Government employee ........ . 42
maintenance credit ........... . 20 Tax year ......................... . 12Joint return .................... . 45
Qualified real property business Calendar ....................... . 12Lost income payments ......... . 42
debt ........................... . 23 Change in ..................... . 12Maximum earnings:
Fiscal .......................... . 12For 2011 ................ . 3, 4, 9
Subject to ................... . 41 Taxes:R
Methods for figuring net Deduction for .................. . 37Real estate:
earnings ..................... . 42 Employment ................ . 9, 37Agent .......................... . 26
More than one business ... . 42, 45 Excise ...................... . 9, 37Dealer ......................... . 21
Nonfarm optional method ...... . 43 Fuel............................ . 37Rent ........................... . 21
Notary public .................. . 42 Income ..................... . 6, 37Taxes .......................... . 37
Optional methods: Paid on certain employeeRecovery of items previously Farm ........................ . 44 tips .......................... . 19deducted ...................... . 24 Nonfarm ..................... . 43 Personal property .............. . 37Refund: Rate ........................... . 41 Real estate .................... . 37Inquiries ........................ . 6 Regular method ............... . 43 Sales .......................... . 37Offsets against debts ........... . 6 Residing abroad ............... . 42 Self-employment............ . 8, 37Related persons: Special rules and Taxpayer Advocate ............. . 48Unreasonable rent ............. . 36 exceptions ................... . 41 Taxpayer rights ................. . 45Renewable electricity, refined coal, Tax rate ........................ . 9 Third parties, Payments to ..... . 22and Indian coal production Time limit for posting income ... . 8 Tolls ............................. . 32credit .......................... . 20 Who must pay ................. . 41 Trade discount .............. . 27, 28Rent expense ................... . 36 Why use an optional Trade or business ............... . 2Rental income .................. . 21 method ...................... . 42 Trailer park owner .............. . 21Repayment of income .......... . 13 Section 179: Transportation expenses ....... . 32Reportable transaction disclosure Deduction...................... . 33
Travel expenses ................ . 37statement ...................... . 4 Property ....................... . 24
Reporting self-employment Securities:
tax ............................. . 45 UDealer ......................... . 27
Research credit ................. . 19 Trader ......................... . 27 Underpayment of tax penalty ... . 8
Restricted property ............. . 23 Self-employed health insurance Uniform capitalization rules .... . 16
deduction ..................... . 35Retirement plans  (See Pension
plans) Self-employment tax  (See SE tax) W
Settlement payments ........... . 22 Wages ........................... . 34
Short-term capital gain orS Work opportunity credit ........ . 20
loss ........................... . 18Salaries ......................... . 34
■Signature, electronic ............ . 6Sale of a business .............. . 17
Small BusinessSale of property  (See also
Administration ................ . 49Disposition of property) ........ . 17
Small employer health insuranceSales of assets ................. . 16
premiums credit .............. . 19Sales tax ........................ . 37
Page 54 Publication 334 (2011)