Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P525.cvt (14-Nov-2002) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 ContentsCat. No. 15047d
Important Changes for 2002......... 1Department
of the Important Reminders.............. 2Taxable andTreasury
Introduction..................... 2Internal
Revenue Nontaxable Employee Compensation ........... 3Service
Miscellaneous Compensation....... 3
Fringe Benefits................ 4Income Retirement Plan Contributions...... 7
Stock Options................. 9
Restricted Property.............. 10
For use in preparing Special Rules for Certain
Employees ................... 11
Clergy ...................... 112002 Returns Members of Religious Orders....... 11
Foreign Employer............... 12
Military...................... 12
Volunteers................... 12
Business and Investment Income..... 13
Rents From Personal Property...... 13
Royalties.................... 13
Partnership Income............. 13
S Corporation Income............ 13
Sickness and Injury Benefits......... 14
Disability Pensions.............. 14
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts................. 14
Workers’ Compensation.......... 15
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits.................. 15
Miscellaneous Income ............. 15
Bartering.................... 15
Canceled Debts................ 16
Life Insurance Proceeds.......... 17
Recoveries................... 18
Survivor Benefits............... 23
Unemployment Benefits.......... 23
Welfare and Other Public
Assistance Benefits.......... 24
Other Income................. 24
Repayments .................... 29
How To Get Tax Help.............. 29
Index.......................... 31
Important Changes for
2002
Retirement planning services.If your em-
ployer has a qualified retirement plan, qualified
retirement planning services provided for you (or
your spouse) by your employer are not included
in your income. For more information, see Re-
tirement Planning Services under Fringe Bene-
fits.

Page 2 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Elective deferrals.The limit on the amount of died as a result of the September 11 attacks or must include the amount in your income for that
your wages you can elect to defer into certain tax year. If the check was mailed so that it couldanthrax attacks. For more information, see Pub-
retirement plans (such as section 401(k) plans) not possibly reach you until after the end of thelication 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Terrorist
will increase each year from 2002 through 2006. tax year, and you could not otherwise get theAttacks.
If you are age 50 or older, you will also be able to funds before the end of the year, you include the
Payments received by Holocaust victims.make additional catch-up elective deferrals. amount in your income for the next tax year.
You can exclude from income certain restitutionSee Elective Deferrals in the discussion on re- Income received by an agent for you is in-payments received after December 31, 1999, astirement plan contributions under Employee come you constructively received in the year therestitution to a Holocaust victim (or an heir of aCompensation. agent received it. If you agree by contract that aHolocaust victim). For more information, seethird party is to receive income for you, you mustEmployer-provided educational assistance.Holocaust victims restitution under Other In- include the amount in income when the thirdYou can exclude from your income up to $5,250come , later. party receives it.of employer-provided educational assistance.
This benefit now includes graduate-level as wellForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen orExample. You and your employer agreeas undergraduate-level courses. For more infor-resident alien, you must report income fromthat part of your salary is to be paid directly tomation, see chapter 9 in Publication 970, Tax sources outside the United States (foreign in-your former spouse. You must include thatBenefits for Education. come) on your tax return unless it is exempt byamount in income when your former spouseU.S. law. This is true whether you reside insidereceives it.Adoption assistance.The exclusion from in-or outside the United States and whether or notcome of certain amounts paid or reimbursed byyou receive a Form W–2, Wage and Tax State-your employer for qualifying adoption expenses Prepaid income. Prepaid income, such asment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. Thisunder an adoption assistance program has been compensation for future services, is generallyapplies to earned income (such as wages andmade permanent. The maximum amount you included in your income in the year you receivetips) as well as unearned income (such as inter-can exclude has been increased. For more infor- it. However, if you use an accrual method ofest, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents,mation, see Publication 968, Tax Benefits for accounting, you can defer prepaid income youand royalties).Adoption. receive for services to be performed before theIf you reside outside the United States, youend of the next tax year. In this case, you includeQualified tuition program (QTP).Beginning may be able to exclude part or all of your foreignthe payment in your income as you earn it byin 2002: source earned income. For details, see Publica-performing the services.tion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi-• Qualified state tuition programs (QSTPs)dent Aliens Abroad. Comments and suggestions. We welcomeare renamed qualified tuition programs
your comments about this publication and your(QTPs). Photographs of missing children.The Inter-
suggestions for future editions.nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the• A distribution from a QTP established and You can e-mail us while visiting our web siteNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-maintained by a state (or an agency or at www.irs.gov.dren. Photographs of missing children selectedinstrumentality of the state) can be ex-
by the Center may appear in this publication on You can write to us at the following address:cluded from your income if the amount dis-
pages that would otherwise be blank. You cantributed is used for qualified higher
help bring these children home by looking at theInternal Revenue Serviceeducation expenses.
photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST Tax Forms and Publications• You can make contributions to a QTP es-(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child. W:CAR:MP:FPtablished and maintained by one or more 1111 Constitution Ave. NWeligible educational institutions. However, Washington, DC 20224earnings on the account will be taxable if
withdrawn before January 1, 2004. Introduction We respond to many letters by telephone.For more information on QTPs, see chapter 6 inYou can receive income in the form of money,Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-Publication 970. property, or services. This publication discussesclude your daytime phone number, including the
many kinds of income and explains whetherarea code, in your correspondence.Payment for services.Generally, you must
they are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis-include in income the part of any scholarship,
cussions on employee wages and fringe bene-fellowship, or tuition reduction that represents Useful Items
payment for past, present, or future teaching,fits, and income from bartering, partnerships, SYou may want to see:
research, or other services. This applies even ifcorporations, and royalties. It also includes infor-
all candidates for a degree must perform themation on disability pensions, life insurance pro-Publication
services to receive the degree. ceeds, and welfare and other public assistance❏ 520 Scholarships and Fellowshipsbenefits. Check the index for the location of aHowever, beginning in 2002, do not include
specific subject. ❏ 523 Selling Your Homein income the part of any scholarship, fellowship,
or tuition reduction representing payment forGenerally, income is taxable unless it is spe-❏ 527 Residential Rental Propertyteaching, research, or other services if you re-cifically exempted by law. Income that is taxable (Including Rental of Vacationceive the amount under the National Healthmust be reported on your return and is subject to Homes)Service Corps Scholarship Program or the tax. Income that is nontaxable may have to be
Armed Forces Health Professions Scholarship ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesshown on your tax return but is not taxable.
and Financial Assistance Program. (Including Capital Gains and
Losses)Constructively received income.You are
generally taxed on income that is available to❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, and
you, regardless of whether it is actually in your Administrators
possession.Important Reminders ❏ 564 Mutual Fund DistributionsA valid check that you received or that was
made available to you before the end of the tax❏ 575 Pension and Annuity IncomeTerrorist attacks.You can exclude from in-
year is considered income constructively re-come certain disaster assistance, disability, and ❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalentceived in that year, even if you do not cash thedeath payments received as a result of a terror- Railroad Retirement Benefitscheck or deposit it to your account until the nextist or military action outside or within the United
year. For example, if the postal service tries to See How To Get Tax Help, near the end ofStates. You also can exclude certain debt can-
deliver a check to you on the last day of the tax this publication, for information about gettingcellations made after September 10, 2001, and
year but you are not at home to receive it, you these publications.before January 1, 2002, because an individual
Page 2

Page 3 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
W–2. These include prizes such as vacation cluded in your income. Do not include that part
trips for meeting sales goals. If the prize oragain in your income. Include the rest of theEmployee
award you receive is goods or services, youpayment in your income in the year of payment.
must include the fair market value of the goodsIf your employer gives you an unsecuredCompensation
or services in your income. However, if yournote as payment for your services, payments on
employer merely promises to pay you a bonus orGenerally, you must include in gross income the note that are credited toward the principal
award at some future time, it is not taxable untileverything you receive in payment for personal amount of the note are compensation income
you receive it or it is made available to you.services. In addition to wages, salaries, commis- when you receive them.
sions, fees, and tips, this includes other forms ofEmployee achievement award. If you re- Severance pay. Amounts you receive as sev-compensation such as fringe benefits and stockceive tangible personal property (other thanerance pay are taxable. A lump-sum paymentoptions. cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) asfor cancellation of your employment contractYou should receive a Form W–2, Wage and an award for length-of-service or safety achieve-must be included in your income in the tax yearTax Statement, from your employer showing thement, you generally can exclude its value fromyou receive it.pay you received for your services. Include youryour income. However, the amount you can ex-pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or onclude is limited to your employer’s cost andAccrued leave payment. If you are a fed-line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not re-cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardseral employee and receive a lump-sum paymentceive a Form W–2. that are not qualified plan awards) for all suchfor accrued annual leave when you retire or
awards you receive during the year. Your em-resign, this amount will be included as wages onChild-care providers.If you provide child
ployer can tell you whether your award is ayour Form W–2.care, either in the child’s home or in your home
qualified plan award. Your employer must makeIf you resign from one agency and are reem-or other place of business, the pay you receive
the award as part of a meaningful presentation,must be included in your income. If you are not ployed by another agency, you may have to
under conditions and circumstances that do notan employee, you are probably self-employed repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-
create a significant likelihood of it being dis-and must include payments for your services on ment to the second agency. You can reduce
guised pay.Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From gross wages by the amount you repaid in the
However, the exclusion does not apply to theBusiness, or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040), Net same tax year in which you received it. Attach to
following awards.Profit From Business. You generally are not an your tax return a copy of the receipt or statement
employee unless you are subject to the will and given to you by the agency you repaid to explain• A length-of-service award if you received it
control of the person who employs you as to the difference between the wages on your returnfor less than 5 years of service or if you
what you are to do and how you are to do it. and the wages on your Forms W–2.received another length-of-service award
during the year or the previous 4 years.Baby-sitting.If you baby-sit for relatives or Outplacement services. If you choose to
neighborhood children, whether on a regular accept a reduced amount of severance pay so• A safety achievement award if you are a
basis or only periodically, the rules for child-care that you can receive outplacement servicesmanager, administrator, clerical employee,
providers apply to you. (such as training in resum´e writing and interviewor other professional employee or if more
techniques), you must include the unreducedthan 10% of eligible employees previously
amount of the severance pay in income.received safety achievement awards dur-Miscellaneous
ing the year. However, you can deduct the value of theseCompensation
outplacement services (up to the difference be-
tween the severance pay included in incomeThis section discusses many types of employeeExample. Ben Green received three em- and the amount actually received) as a miscella-compensation. The subjects are arranged in al-ployee achievement awards during the year: aneous deduction (subject to the 2% limit) onphabetical order. nonqualified plan award of a watch valued atSchedule A (Form 1040).$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereoAdvance commissions and other earnings.
valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued atIf you receive advance commissions or other Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-amounts for services to be performed in the while you are sick or injured is part of your salaryfied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, eachfuture and you are a cash method taxpayer, you or wages. In addition, you must include in youraward by itself would be excluded from income.must include these amounts in your income in income sick pay benefits received from any ofHowever, because the $1,750 total value of thethe year you receive them. the following payers.awards is more than $1,600, Ben must includeIf you repay unearned commissions or other
$150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income. • A welfare fund.amounts in the same year you receive them,
reduce the amount included in your income byGovernment cost-of-living allowances. • A state sickness or disability fund.the repayment. If you repay them in a later taxCost-of-living allowances generally are included• An association of employers or employ-year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-in your income. However, they are not includedees.ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),in your income if you are a federal civilian em-
or you may be able to take a credit for that year.ployee or a federal court employee who is sta-• An insurance company, if your employerSee Repayments, later. tioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the Unitedpaid for the plan.
States.Allowances and reimbursements. If you re- However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-Allowances and differentials that increaseceive travel, transportation, or other business dent or health insurance policy, the benefits youyour basic pay as an incentive for taking a lessexpense allowances or reimbursements from receive under the policy are not taxable. Fordesirable post of duty are part of your compen-your employer, get Publication 463, Travel, En- more information, see Other Sickness and Injurysation and must be included in income. Fortertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you are Benefits under Sickness and Injury Benefits,example, your compensation includes Foreignreimbursed for moving expenses, get Publica- later.Post, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropicaltion 521, Moving Expenses. differentials. For more information, get Publica-Social security and Medicare taxes paid byBack pay awards. Include in income amountstion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employeesemployer. If you and your employer have anyou are awarded in a settlement or judgment forStationed Abroad. agreement that your employer pays your socialback pay. These include payments made to you security and Medicare taxes without deductingNote received for services.If your employerfor damages, unpaid life insurance premiums, them from your gross wages, you must reportgives you a secured note as payment for yourand unpaid health insurance premiums. They the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wagesservices, you must include the fair market valueshould be reported to you by your employer on on your tax return. The payment is also treated(usually the discount value) of the note in yourForm W–2. as wages for figuring your social security andincome for the year you receive it. When you
Medicare taxes and your social security andBonuses and awards.  Bonuses or awards later receive payments on the note, a propor-
Medicare benefits. However, these paymentsyou receive for outstanding work are included in tionate part of each payment is the recovery of
are not treated as social security and Medicareyour income and should be shown on your Form the fair market value that you previously in-
Page 3

Page 4 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
wages if you are a household worker or a farm must use the same period for all employees whoDe Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
worker. receive a particular benefit.
If your employer provides you with a product or
You must use the same accounting periodStock appreciation rights.Do not include a service and the cost of it is so small that it would
that you use to report the benefit to claim anstock appreciation right granted by your em- be unreasonable for the employer to account for
employee business deduction (for use of a car,ployer in income until you exercise (use) the it, the value is not included in your income.
for example).right. When you use the right, you are entitled to Generally, the value of benefits such as dis-
a cash payment equal to the fair market value of counts at company cafeterias, cab fares homeForm W–2. Your employer reports your taxa-the corporation’s stock on the date of use, minus when working overtime, and company picnicsble fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, otherthe fair market value on the date the right was are not included in your income. Also see Em-compensation) of Form W–2. The total value ofgranted. You include the cash payment in in- ployee Discounts, later.your fringe benefits may also be noted in box 12.come in the year you use the right. The value of your fringe benefits may be addedHoliday gifts.If your employer gives you ato your other compensation on one Form W–2,Work-training programs.If you are enrolled turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value ator you may receive a separate Form W–2 show-in a state or local work-training program under Christmas or other holidays, do not include theing just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, pay- value of the gift in your income. However, if yourwith a notation in box 12.ments you receive from the sponsor as compen- employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or a
sation for services are taxable wages. similar item that you can easily exchange for
cash, you include the value of that gift as extraAccident or Health PlanFringe Benefits salary or wages regardless of the amount in-
volved.Generally, the value of accident or health planFringe benefits you receive in connection withcoverage provided to you by your employer isthe performance of your services are included innot included in your income. Benefits you re-your income as compensation unless you pay
Dependent Care Benefitsceive from the plan are generally taxable, asfair market value for them or they are specificallyexplained, later, under Sickness and Injury Ben-If your employer provides dependent care bene-excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-efits. fits under a qualified plan, you may be able toance of services (for example, under a covenant
exclude these benefits from your income. De-not to compete) is treated as the performance ofLong-term care coverage. Contributions bypendent care benefits include:services for purposes of these rules. your employer to provide coverage for long-termSee Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in thiscare services generally are not included in your• Amounts your employer pays directly todiscussion, for information on how to determineincome. However, contributions made through aeither you or your care provider for thethe amount to include in income. flexible spending or similar arrangement (suchcare of your qualifying person while you
as a cafeteria plan) must be included in yourwork, andRecipient of fringe benefit.You are the re- income. This amount will be reported as wagescipient of a fringe benefit if you perform the • The fair market value of care in a day-carein box 1 of your Form W–2.services for which the fringe benefit is provided. facility provided or sponsored by your em-You are considered to be the recipient even if it ployer.Archer MSA contributions.Contributions byis given to another person, such as a member ofyour employer to your Archer MSA (previouslyyour family. An example is a car your employer The amount you can exclude is limited to thecalled a medical savings account) are not in-gives to your spouse for services you perform. lesser of:cluded in your income. Their total will be re-The car is considered to have been provided toported in box 12 of Form W–2 with code R. You• The total amount of dependent care bene-you and not to your spouse. must report this amount on Form 8853, Archer fits you received during the year,You do not have to be an employee of theMSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance Con-provider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. If • The total amount of qualified expensestracts. Attach the form to your return.you are a partner, director, or independent con- you incurred during the year,tractor, you can also be the recipient of a fringe
• Your earned income,benefit. Adoption Assistance
• Your spouse’s earned income, orProvider of benefit.Your employer or an- You may be able to exclude from your incomeother person for whom you perform services is • $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-the provider of a fringe benefit regardless of rately).ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-whether that person actually provides the fringenection with your adoption of an eligible child.benefit to you. The provider can be a client or Your employer must show the total amount ofSee Publication 968, Tax Benefits for Adoption,customer of an independent contractor. dependent care benefits provided to you duringfor more information.
the year under a qualified plan in box 10 of yourAdoption benefits are reported by your em-Accounting period. You must use the same Form W–2. Your employer also will include anyployer in box 12 of Form W–2 with code T. Theyaccounting period your employer uses to report dependent care benefits over $5,000 in youralso are included as social security and Medi-your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em- wages shown in box 1 of your Form W–2.care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they areployer has the option to report taxable noncash To claim the exclusion, you must completenot included as wages in box 1. To determinefringe benefits by using either of the following either Part III of Form 2441, Child and Depen-the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you mustrules. dent Care Expenses, or Part III of Schedule 2complete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-
• The general rule: benefits are reported for (Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care Ex-tion Expenses. Attach the form to your return.
a full calendar year (January 1 – Decem- penses for Form 1040A Filers. (You cannot use
ber 31). Form 1040EZ.)
Athletic Facilities See the instructions for Form 2441 or Sched-• The special accounting period rule: bene-
ule 2 (Form 1040A) for more information.fits provided during the last 2 months ofIf your employer provides you with the free orthe calendar year (or any shorter period)low-cost use of an employer-owned gym orare treated as paid during the followingother athletic club at your workplace, the value isEducational Assistancecalendar year. For example, each yearnot included in your compensation. The gymyour employer reports the value of bene- You can exclude from your income up to $5,250must be used primarily by employees, theirfits provided during the last 2 months of of qualified employer-provided educational as-spouses, and their dependent children.the prior year and the first 10 months of sistance. The exclusion applies to undergradu-If your employer pays for a fitness programthe current year. ate and graduate-level courses. For moreprovided to you at an off-site resort hotel or
information, get Publication 508, Tax BenefitsYour employer does not have to use the same athletic club, the value of the program is in-
for Work-Related Education.accounting period for each fringe benefit, but cluded in your compensation.
Page 4

Page 5 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Accidental death benefits.Insurance that Example. You are 51 years old and work forEmployee Discounts
employers A and B. Both employers provideprovides accidental or other death benefits but
If your employer sells you property or services at group-term life insurance coverage for you fordoes not provide general death benefits (travel
a discount, you may be able to exclude the the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 withinsurance, for example) is not group-term life
amount of the discount from your income. The employer A and $45,000 with employer B. Youinsurance.
exclusion applies to discounts on property or pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-
services offered to customers in the ordinary ployer B group plan. You figure the amount toFormer employer. If your former employercourse of the line of business in which you work. include in your income as follows.provides more than $50,000 of group-term lifeHowever, it does not apply to discounts on realinsurance coverage during the year, the amountproperty or property commonly held for invest- Employer A coverage (in thousands) . . $ 35included in your income is reported as wages inment (such as stocks or bonds). The exclusion is Employer B coverage (in thousands) . . + 45box 1 of Form W–2. Also, it is shown separatelylimited to the price charged nonemployee cus- Total coverage (in thousands)...... $  8 0in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show thetomers multiplied by the following percentage. Minus: Exclusion (in thousands)..... − 50amount of uncollected social security and Medi-Excess amount (in thousands)...... $  3 0care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes• For a discount on property, your Multiply by cost per $1,000 per month,M and N. You must pay these taxes with youremployer’s gross profit percentage (gross age 51 (from table).............. × .23profit divided by gross sales) on all prop- income tax return. Include them in your total taxCost of excess insurance for 1 month $ 6.90
erty sold during the employer’s previouson line 61, Form 1040, and enter “UT” and theMultiply by number of full months
tax year. (Ask your employer for this per-amount of the taxes on the dotted line next tocoverage at this cost............ × 12
centage.) line 61. Cost of excess insurance for tax year $82.80
Minus: Premiums you paid........ −49.80• For a discount on services, 20%. Cost to include in income as wages$33.00Two or more employers. Your exclusion for
employer-provided group-term life insuranceThe total amount to include in income for theFinancial Counseling Fees coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 ofcost of excess group-term life insurance is $33.coverage, whether the insurance is provided byNeither employer provided over $50,000 insur-Financial counseling fees paid for you by youra single employer or multiple employers. If twoance coverage, so the wages shown on youremployer are included in your income and mustor more employers provide insurance coverageForms W–2 do not include any part of that $33.be reported as part of wages. If the fees are forthat totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-You must add it to the wages shown on yourtax or investment counseling, they can be de-ported as wages on your Forms W–2 will not beForms W–2 and include the total on your return.ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel-correct. You must figure how much to include inlaneous deduction (subject to the 2% limit).your income. Reduce the amount you figure byEntire cost excluded.You are not taxed onQualified retirement planning services paidany amount reported with code C in box 12 ofthe cost of group-term life insurance if any of thefor you by your employer under a qualified planyour Forms W–2, add the result to the wagesfollowing circumstances apply.are not included in your income. For more infor-reported in box 1, and report the total on yourmation, see Retirement Planning Services, return. 1) You are permanently and totally disabledlater. and have ended your employment.Figuring the taxable cost.You figure the
taxable cost for each month of coverage by2) Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-
Group-Term Life Insurance multiplying the number of thousands of dollars oficy for the entire period the insurance is in
insurance coverage for the month (figured to theforce during the tax year.Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 of nearest tenth), less 50, by the cost from the3) A charitable organization to which contri-group-term life insurance coverage provided tofollowing table. Use your age on the last day ofbutions are deductible is the only benefi-you by your employer (or former employer) is notthe tax year. You must prorate the cost from theciary of the policy for the entire period theincluded in your income. However, you musttable if less than a full month of coverage isinsurance is in force during the tax year.include in income the cost of employer-providedinvolved. (You are not entitled to a deduction for ainsurance that is more than the cost of $50,000
charitable contribution for naming a chari-of coverage reduced by any amount you pay COST PER $1,000 OF PROTECTION
table organization as the beneficiary oftoward the purchase of the insurance. FOR ONE MONTH
your policy.)For exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost
excluded, and Entire cost taxed, later. Age Cost 4) The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:Under 25 ............. $  . 0 5If your employer provided more than $50,000
25 through 29..........  . 0 6of coverage, the amount included in your in- a) You retired before January 2, 1984,
30 through 34.......... . 0 8come is reported as part of your wages in box 1 and were covered by the plan when
35 through 39.......... . 0 9of your Form W–2. It is also shown separately in you retired, or
40 through 44.......... . 1 0box 12 with code C. b) You reached age 55 before January 2,45 through 49.......... . 1 5
1984, and were employed by the em-50 through 54.......... . 2 3Group-term life insurance.This insurance is
ployer or its predecessor in 1983.55 through 59.......... . 4 3term life insurance protection (insurance for a
60 through 64.......... . 6 6fixed period of time) that: 65 through 69.......... 1.27
• Provides a general death benefit, Entire cost taxed.You are taxed on the entire70 and older........... 2.06
cost of group-term life insurance if either of the• Is provided to a group of employees, If you pay any part of the cost of the insur-following circumstances apply.
ance, your entire payment reduces, dollar for• Is provided under a policy carried by the • The insurance is provided by your em-dollar, the amount you would otherwise includeemployer, and ployer through a qualified employees’in your income. However, you cannot reduce the
• Provides an amount of insurance to each trust, such as a pension trust or a qualifiedamount to include in your income by:
employee based on a formula that pre- annuity plan.
• Payments for coverage in a different taxvents individual selection. • You are a key employee and youryear,
employer’s plan discriminates in favor ofPermanent benefits.If your group-term life• Payments for coverage through a cafeteriakey employees.insurance policy includes permanent benefits,plan, unless the payments are after-taxsuch as a paid-up or cash surrender value, youcontributions, ormust include in your income, as wages, the cost Meals and Lodging• Payments for coverage not taxed to youof the permanent benefits minus the amount you
  You do not include in your income the value ofbecause of the exceptions discussed laterpay for them. Your employer should be able to
meals and lodging provided to you and yourunder Entire cost excluded.tell you the amount to include in your income.
Page 5

Page 6 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
family by your employer at no charge if theExample. Carl Johnson, a sociology profes- from your income, up to certain limits. A qualified
sor for State University, rents a home from the transportation fringe benefit is:following conditions are met.
university that is qualified campus lodging. The• Transportation in a commuter highway ve-1) The meals are: house is appraised at $100,000. The average hicle (such as a van) between your homerent paid for comparable university lodging byand work place,a) Furnished on the business premises ofpersons other than employees or students is
your employer, and • A transit pass, or$7,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent of
$5,500. Carl does not include in his income anyb) Furnished for the convenience of your • Qualified parking.rental value because the rent he pays equals atemployer.
Cash reimbursement by your employer for theseleast 5% of the appraised value of the house
expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-(5% × $100,000 = $5,000). If Carl paid annual2) The lodging is:
rangement is also excludable. However, cashrent of only $4,000, he would have to include
a) Furnished on the business premises of reimbursement for a transit pass is excludable$1,000 in his income ($5,000 − $4,000).
only if a voucher or similar item that can beyour employer,
exchanged only for a transit pass is not readilyb) Furnished for the convenience of yourMoving Expense Reimbursements available for direct distribution to you.employer, and
Generally, if your employer pays for your movingExclusion limit.The exclusion for commuterc) A condition of your employment. (You
expenses (either directly or indirectly) and thehighway vehicle transportation and transit passmust accept it in order to be able toexpenses would have been deductible if youfringe benefits cannot be more than a total ofproperly perform your duties.) paid them yourself, the value is not included in$100 a month, regardless of the total value of
your income. Get Publication 521 for more infor-both benefits.You also do not include in your income themation. The exclusion for the qualified parking fringevalue of meals or meal money that qualifies as a
benefit cannot be more than $185 a month,de minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini-
regardless of its value.mal) Benefits, earlier. No-Additional-Cost Services If the benefits have a value that is more than
these limits, the excess must be included in yourFaculty lodging. If you are an employee of anThe value of services you receive from yourincome.educational institution or an academic healthemployer for free, at cost, or for a reduced price
center and you are provided with lodging thatis not included in your income if your employer:Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high-
does not meet the three conditions above, you way vehicle that seats at least six adults (not• Offers the same service for sale to cus-still may not have to include the value of the including the driver). At least 80% of thetomers in the ordinary course of the line oflodging in income. However, the lodging must vehicle’s mileage must reasonably be expectedbusiness in which you work, andbe qualified campus lodging, and you must pay to be:
an adequate rent. • Does not have a substantial additional • For transporting employees between theircost (including any sales income given up)Academic health center.This is an organi- homes and work place, andto provide you with the service (regardlesszation that meets the following conditions. • On trips during which employees occupyof what you paid for the service).
at least half of the vehicle’s adult seating• Its principal purpose or function is to pro-
capacity (not including the driver).Generally, no-additional-cost services are ex-vide medical or hospital care or medical
cess capacity services, such as airline, bus, oreducation or research.
train tickets, hotel rooms, and telephone serv-Transit pass.This is any pass, token, fare-• It receives payments for graduate medicalices. card, voucher, or similar item entitling a personeducation under the Social Security Act.
to ride mass transit (whether public or private)Example. You are employed as a flight at-• One of its principal purposes or functions free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commutertendant for a company that owns both an airlineis to provide and teach basic and clinical highway vehicle operated by a person in theand a hotel chain. Your employer allows you tomedical science and research using its business of transporting persons for compensa-take personal flights (if there is an unoccupiedown faculty. tion.seat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if there
is an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. TheQualified campus lodging.Qualified cam- Qualified parking.This is parking provided to
value of the personal flight is not included in youran employee at or near the employer’s place ofpus lodging is lodging furnished to you, your
income. However, the value of the hotel room isbusiness. It also includes parking provided on orspouse, or one of your dependents by, or on
included in your income because you do notnear a location from which the employee com-behalf of, the institution or center for use as a
work in the hotel business. mutes to work in a commuter highway vehicle orhome. The lodging must be located on or near a
carpool. It does not include parking at or nearcampus of the educational institution or aca-
the employee’s home.demic health center. Retirement Planning Services
Adequate rent. The amount of rent you pay
If your employer has a qualified retirement plan,for the year for qualified campus lodging is con- Tuition Reductionqualified retirement planning services providedsidered adequate if it is at least equal to the
to you (and your spouse) by your employer areYou can exclude a qualified tuition reductionlesser of:
not included in your income. Qualified servicesfrom your income. This is the amount of a reduc-
• 5% of the appraised value of the lodging,include retirement planning advice, informationtion in tuition:
or about your employer’s retirement plan, and in-
• For education (below graduate level) fur-formation about how the plan may fit into your• The average of rentals paid by individuals nished by an educational institution to anoverall individual retirement income plan. You(other than employees or students) for employee (or former employee) or his orcannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,comparable lodging held for rent by the her family.accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-educational institution. vided by your employer. Also, see Financial • For education furnished to a graduate stu-
Counseling Fees, earlier.If the amount you pay is less than the lesser of dent at an educational institution if the
these amounts, you must include the difference graduate student is engaged in teaching
in your income. or research activities for that institution.
Transportation
The lodging must be appraised by an inde- • Representing payment for teaching, re-
pendent appraiser and the appraisal must beIf your employer provides you with a qualified search, or other services if you receive the
reviewed on an annual basis. transportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded amount under the National Health Service
Page 6

Page 7 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Corps Scholarship Program or the Armed If there is more than one employee on the subject to income tax at the time contributed.
flight, the cost to charter the aircraft must be However, it is included in wages subject to socialForces Health Professions Scholarship
divided among those employees. The division security and Medicare taxes.and Financial Assistance Program.
must be based on all the facts, including which Elective deferrals include elective contribu-For more information, get Publication 520.employee or employees control the use of the tions to the following retirement plans. 
aircraft.Working Condition Benefits 1) Cash or deferred arrangements (section
401(k) plans).Special valuation rules.You generally canIf your employer provides you with a product oruse a special valuation rule for a fringe benefit2) The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ-service and the cost of it would have been de-only if your employer uses the rule. If your em-ees.ductible as a business expense or depreciationployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannotif you paid for it yourself, the cost is not included 3) Salary reduction simplified employee pen-use a different special rule to value that benefit.in your income. sion plans (SARSEP).You always can use the general valuation rule
discussed earlier, based on facts and circum-4) Savings incentive match plans for employ-Example. You work as an engineer and stances, even if your employer uses a specialees (SIMPLE plans).your employer provides you with a subscriptionrule.to an engineering trade magazine. The cost of 5) Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b)If you and your employer use a special valua-the subscription is not included in your income plans).tion rule, you must include in your income thebecause the cost would have been deductible toamount your employer determines under the 6) Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re-you if you had paid for the subscription yourself.special rule minus the sum of: porting by employer, later.)
1) Any amount you repaid your employer, 7) Section 457 plans.
Valuation of Fringe Benefits plus
Overall limit on deferrals.For 2002, you gen-2) Any amount specifically excluded from in-If a fringe benefit is included in your income, the erally should not have deferred more than a totalcome by law.amount included is generally its value deter- of $11,000 of contributions to the plans listed inmined under the general valuation rule or The special valuation rules are the following.(1) through (6) above. You should not haveunder the special valuation rules. For an ex- deferred more than the lesser of your includible• The automobile lease rule.ception, see Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier. compensation (defined later) or $11,000 of con-• The vehicle cents-per-mile rule. tributions to the plan listed in (7) above (sectionGeneral valuation rule.You must include in 457 plan). These limits will increase by $1,000• The commuting rule.your income the amount by which the fair market each year until it reaches $15,000 in 2006.value of the fringe benefit is more than the sum• The unsafe conditions commuting rule. Your employer or plan administrator shouldof: apply the proper annual limit when figuring your• The employer-operated eating-facility rule.
plan contributions. However, you are responsi-1) The amount, if any, you paid for the bene- ble for monitoring the total you defer to ensureFor more information on these rules, see Pub-fit, plus that the deferrals are not more than the overalllication 15–B, Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe
2) The amount, if any, specifically excluded limit.Benefits.
from your income by law. For information on the non-commercial flightCatch-up contributions.You may be allowedand commercial flight valuation rules, see sec-If you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit, catch-up contributions (additional elective defer-tions 1.61–21(g) and 1.61–21(h) of the regula-no amount is included in your income. rals) if you are age 50 or older. For more infor-tions. mation about catch-up contributions to 403(b)Fair market value.The fair market value of plans, see chapter 6 of Publication 571, Taxa fringe benefit is determined by all the facts andRetirement Plan Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b) plans).circumstances. It is the amount you would have For more information about additional elec-Contributionsto pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit. tive deferrals to:This is determined without regard to:  Your employer’s contributions to a qualified
• SEPs (SARSEPs), see What Is a Salaryretirement plan for you are not included in in-• Your perceived value of the benefit, or Reduction Arrangement in chapter 3 ofcome at the time contributed. (Your employerPublication 590, Individual Retirement Ar-• The amount your employer paid for thecan tell you whether your retirement plan israngements.benefit. qualified.) However, the cost of life insurance
coverage included in the plan may have to be• Simple plans, see How Much Can BeEmployer-provided vehicles.If your em- included. See Group-Term Life Insurance, ear- Contributed on My Behalf in chapter 4 ofployer provides a car (or other highway motorlier, under Fringe Benefits. Publication 590.vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car isIf your employer pays into a nonqualified• Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferralsusually a taxable noncash fringe benefit.plan for you, you generally must include theunder section 457 plans, later.Under the general valuation rules, the value contributions in your income as wages for the
tax year in which the contributions are made.of an employer-provided vehicle is the amount
However, if your interest in the plan is subject toyou would have to pay a third party to lease the Limit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans.If
a substantial risk of forfeiture (you have a goodsame or a similar vehicle on the same or compa- you are a participant in a SIMPLE plan, you
chance of losing it) at the time of the contribu-rable terms in the same geographic area where generally should not have deferred more than
tion, you do not have to include the value of youryou use the vehicle. An example of a compara- $7,000 in 2002. This amount will increase by
interest in your income until it is no longer sub-$1,000 each year until it reaches $10,000 inble lease term is the amount of time the vehicle
ject to a substantial risk of forfeiture.2005. Amounts you defer under a SIMPLE planis available for your use, such as a 1-year pe-
count toward the overall limit ($11,000 for 2002)riod. The value cannot be determined by multi-
and may affect the amount you can defer underplying a cents-per-mile rate times the number of
Elective Deferrals other elective deferral plans.miles driven unless you prove the vehicle could
have been leased on a cents-per-mile basis.If you are covered by certain kinds of retirementLimit for deferrals under section 457 plans.
Flights on employer-provided aircraft. plans, you can choose to have part of your If you are a participant in a section 457 plan (a
Under the general valuation rules, if your flightcompensation contributed by your employer to a deferred compensation plan for employees of
on an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri-retirement fund, rather than have it paid to you. state or local governments or tax-exempt orga-
marily personal and you control the use of theThe amount you set aside (called an elective nizations), you should have deferred no more
aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount itdeferral) is treated as an employer contribution than the lesser of your includible compensa-
would cost to charter the flight from a third party.to a qualified plan. It is not included in wagestion or $11,000. However, if you are within 3
Page 7

Page 8 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
years of normal retirement age, you may be cluded it in your income. Therefore, you are• You reached age 50 by the end of theallowed an increased limit if the plan allows it. taxed twice on the excess deferral left in theyear, andSee Increased limit, later. plan—once when you contribute it, and again
• No other elective deferrals can be madewhen you receive it as a distribution.includible compensation.This is the pay for you to the plan for the year because ofyou received for the year from the employer who Excess distributed to you.If you take outlimits or restrictions.
maintained the section 457 plan. It generally the excess after the year of the deferral and youIf you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of yourincludes all the following payments. receive the corrective distribution by April 15 ofincludible compensation or $11,000 ($12,000the following year, do not include it in incomefor 2003), plus $1,000 ($2,000 for 2003). How-1) Wages and salaries. again in the year you receive it. If you receive itever, if you are within 3 years of retirement age2) Fees for professional services. later, you must include it in income in both theand your plan provides the increased limit ear-
year of the deferral and the year you receive it.lier, that limit may be higher.3) The value of any employer-provided quali-
Any income on the excess deferral taken out isfied transportation fringe benefit (defined
taxable in the tax year in which you take it out. IfLimit for tax-sheltered annuities.If you are aunder Transportation, earlier) that is not
participant in a tax-sheltered annuity planyou take out part of the excess deferral and theincluded in your income. (403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals forincome on it, allocate the distribution proportion-
4) Other amounts received (cash or noncash)2002 generally is $11,000 ($12,000 for 2003).ately between the excess deferral and the in-for personal services you performed, in-However, if you have at least 15 years of servicecome.cluding, but not limited to, the followingwith a public school system, a hospital, a homeYou should receive a Form 1099–R, Distri-health service agency, a health and welfareitems.
butions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirementservice agency, a church, or a convention or
a) Commissions and tips. or Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-association of churches (or associated organi-
tracts, etc., for the year in which the excesszation), the limit on elective deferrals is in-b) Fringe benefits.
deferral is distributed to you. Use the followingcreased by the least of the following amounts.
c) Bonuses. rules to report a corrective distribution shown on1) $3,000. Form 1099–R for 2002.5) Employer contributions (elective deferrals)2) $15,000, reduced by increases to the over-to: • If the distribution was for a 2002 excessall limit that you were allowed in earlier
deferral, your Form 1099–R should haveyears because of this years-of-servicea) The section 457 plan. the code “8” in box 7. Add the excessrule.
b) Qualified cash or deferred arrange- deferral amount to your wages on your3) $5,000 times the number of your years ofments (section 401(k) plans) that are 2002 tax return.service for the organization, minus the to-not included in your income. tal elective deferrals under the plan for• If the distribution was for a 2001 excess
c) A salary reduction simplified employeeearlier years. deferral, your Form 1099–R should have
pension (SARSEP). the code “P” in box 7. If you did not add
Reporting by employer.Your employer gen- the excess deferral amount to your wagesd) A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b)
erally should not include elective deferrals inon your 2001 tax return, you must file anplan).
your wages in box 1 of Form W–2. Instead, youramended return on Form 1040X,e) A savings incentive match plan for em-employer should mark the Retirement plan Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-ployees (SIMPLE plan). checkbox in box 13 and show the total amountturn. If you did not receive the distributiondeferred in box 12.f) A section 125 cafeteria plan. by April 16, 2002, you also must add it to
Section 501(c)(18)(D) contributions. your wages on your 2002 tax return.
Instead of using the amounts listed above toWages shown in box 1 of your Form W–2 • If the distribution was for a 2000 excessdetermine your includible compensation, yourshould not have been reduced for contributions
deferral, your Form 1099–R should haveemployer can use any of the following amounts.you made to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirement
the code “D” in box 7. If you did not addplan. The amount you contributed should be• Your wages as defined for income tax the excess deferral amount to your wagesidentified with code “H” in box 12. You maywithholding purposes. on your 2000 tax return, you must file andeduct the amount deferred subject to the limits
that apply. Include your deduction in the total onamended return on Form 1040X. You also• Your wages as reported in box 1 of Form
line 34 (Form 1040). Enter the amount and must add it to your wages on your 2002W–2, Wage and Tax Statement.
“501(c)(18)” on the dotted line next to line 34.income tax return.• Your wages that are subject to social se-
curity withholding (including elective defer-Excess deferrals.If your deferrals exceed the• If the distribution was for the income
limit, you must notify your plan by the date re-rals). earned on an excess deferral, your Form
quired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex-1099–R should have the code “8” in box
cess amount will be distributed to you. If youIncreased limit.During any, or all, of the 7. Add the income amount to your wages
participate in more than one plan, you can havelast 3 years ending before you reach normal on your 2002 income tax return, regard-
the excess paid out of any of the plans thatretirement age under the plan, your plan may less of when the excess deferral waspermit these distributions. You must notify eachprovide that your limit is the lesser of: made.plan by the date required by that plan of the
Report a loss on a corrective distribution ofamount to be paid from that particular plan. The1) Twice the dollar limit for the year, or
plan must then pay you the amount of the ex-an excess deferral in the year the excess2) The limit for prior years minus the amountcess, along with any income earned on thatamount (reduced by the loss) is distributed toyou deferred in prior years plus the lesseramount, by April 15 of the following year.you. Include the loss as a negative amount onof: You must include the excess deferral in yourline 21 (Form 1040) and identify it as “Loss on
income for the year of the deferral. File FormExcess Deferral Distribution.”a) Your includible compensation for the1040 to add the excess deferral amount to yourcurrent year, or wages on line 7. Do not use Form 1040A or Even though a corrective distribution ofb) The dollar limit for the current year.Form 1040EZ to report excess deferral excess deferrals is reported on Form
amounts. 1099–R, it is not otherwise treated as
TIP
a distribution from the plan. It cannot be rolledCatch-up contributions. You generally Excess not distributed.If you do not take
over into another plan, and it is not subject to thecan have additional elective deferrals made toout the excess amount, you cannot include it in
additional tax on early distributions.your section 457 plan if: the cost of the contract even though you in-
Page 8

Page 9 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you received a corrective payment of ex- readily determined fair market value at the time itExcess Contributions
cess annual additions, you should receive a is granted to you, the option is treated like other
If you are a highly compensated employee, theseparate Form 1099–R for the year of the pay- property received as compensation. See Re-
total of your elective deferrals and other contri-ment with the code “E” in box 7. Report the totalstricted Property, later, for rules on how much
butions made for you for any year under a sec-payment shown in box 1 of Form 1099–R on income to include and when to include it. How-
tion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as a line 16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Form ever, the rule described in that discussion for
percentage of pay, no more than 125% of the1040A. Report the taxable amount shown in box choosing to include the value of property in your
average deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligible2a of Form 1099–R on line 16b of Form 1040 or income for the year of the transfer does not
nonhighly compensated employees. line 12b of Form 1040A. apply to a nonstatutory option.
If the total contributed to the plan is more Even though a corrective distribution of
than the amount allowed under the ADP test, the excess annual additions is reported onOption without readily determined value.Ifexcess contributions must be either distributed Form 1099–R, it is not otherwise the fair market value of the option is not readily
TIP
to you or recharacterized as after-tax employeetreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannotdetermined at the time it is granted to you (evencontributions by treating them as distributed tobe rolled over into another plan, and it is notif it is determined later), you do not have incomeyou and then contributed by you to the plan. Yousubject to the additional tax on early distribu-until you transfer or exercise the option. Whenmust include the excess contributions in yourtions. you exercise this kind of option, the restrictedincome as wages on line 7 of Form 1040. You property rules apply to the property received.cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to The amount to include in your income is thereport excess contribution amounts. Stock Options difference between the amount you pay for the
property and its fair market value when it be-If you receive excess contributions from aIf you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or sellcomes substantially vested. Your basis in the401(k) plan and any income earned on the con-stock or other property as payment for yourproperty you acquire under the option is thetributions within 21/2 months after the close of theservices, you usually will have income eitheramount you pay for it plus any amount you mustplan year, you must include them in your incomewhen you receive the option or when you exer-include in your gross income under this rule. Forin the year of the contribution. If you receivecise the option (use it to buy or sell the stock ormore information on restricted property, see Re-them later, or receive less than $100 excessother property). However, if your option is astricted Property, later.contributions, include the excess contributionsstatutory stock option (defined later), you usuallyand earnings in your income in the year distrib- If you transferred this kind of option in anwill not have any income until you sell or ex-uted. If the excess contributions are recharacter- arm’s-length transaction, you must include inchange your stock. Your employer can tell youized, you must include them in income in the your income the money or other property youwhich kind of option you hold.year a corrective distribution would have oc- received for the transfer, as if you had exercised
curred. For a SARSEP, the employer must notify the option.
you by March 15 following the year in whichNonstatutory Stock Optionsexcess contributions are made that you must
withdraw the excess and earnings. You must Statutory Stock OptionsIf you are granted a nonstatutory stock option,
include the excess contributions in your incomethe amount of income to include and the time to
There are two kinds of statutory stock options.in the year of the contribution (or the year of theinclude it depend on whether the fair market
notification if less than $100) and include thevalue of the option can be readily determined.• Incentive stock options (ISOs), andearnings in your income in the year withdrawn.The fair market value of an option can be readily
determined if it is actively traded on an estab-• Options granted under employee stockYou should receive a Form 1099–R for the
lished market. purchase plans.year in which the excess contributions are dis-
tributed to you (or are recharacterized). AddThe fair market value of an option that is notFor either kind of option, you must be anexcess contributions or earnings shown ontraded on an established market can be readilyemployee of the company granting the option, orForm 1099–R for 2002 to your wages on yourdetermined only if all of the following conditionsa related company, at all times beginning with2002 tax return if code “8” is in box 7. If code “P”exist. the date the option is granted, until 3 monthsor “D” is in box 7, you may have to file an
before you exercise the option (for an incentiveamended 2001 or 2000 return on Form 1040X to• You can transfer the option. stock option, 1 year before if you are disabled).add the excess contributions or earnings to your• You can exercise the option immediatelyAlso, the option must be nontransferable exceptwages in the year of the contribution. in full. at death. If you do not meet the employment
Even though a corrective distribution of requirements, or you receive a transferable op-• The option or the property subject to theexcess contributions is reported on tion, your option is a nonstatutory stock option.option is not subject to any condition orForm 1099–R, it is not otherwise
TIP
See Nonstatutory Stock Options, earlier in thisrestriction (other than a condition to se-treated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot discussion.cure payment of the purchase price) thatbe rolled over into another plan, and it is not If you receive a statutory stock option, do nothas a significant effect on the fair marketsubject to the additional tax on early distribu- include any amount in your income either whenvalue of the option.tions. the option is granted or when you exercise it.• The fair market value of the option privi-You have taxable income or deductible losslege can be readily determined. when you sell the stock that you bought by
Excess Annual Additions exercising the option. Your income or loss is theThe option privilege for an option to buy is the
difference between the amount you paid for theopportunity to benefit during the option’s exer-The amount contributed in 2002 to a defined stock (the option price) and the amount youcise period from any increase in the value ofcontribution plan is generally limited to the receive when you sell it. You generally treat thisproperty subject to the option without risking anylesser of 100% of your compensation or amount as capital gain or loss and report it oncapital. For example, if during the exercise pe-$40,000. Under certain circumstances, contribu- Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains andriod the fair market value of stock subject to antions that exceed these limits (excess annual Losses, for the year of the sale.option is greater than the option’s exercise price,additions) may be corrected by a distribution ofa profit may be realized by exercising the optionHowever, you may have ordinary income foryour elective deferrals or a return of yourand immediately selling the stock at its higherthe year that you sell the stock in either of theafter-tax contributions and earnings from thesevalue. The option privilege for an option to sell isfollowing situations.contributions. the opportunity to benefit during the exercise
• You do not meet the holding period re-A corrective payment of excess annual addi-period from a decrease in the value of the prop-
quirement. This situation applies only iftions consisting of elective deferrals or earningserty subject to the option.
you sell the stock within 1 year after itsfrom your after-tax contributions is fully taxable
transfer to you or within 2 years after thein the year paid. A corrective payment consistingOption with readily determined value.If you
option was granted.of your after-tax contributions is not taxable. receive a nonstatutory stock option that has a
Page 9

Page 10 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You meet the holding period requirement transferable. You include $400 ($1,400 value erty that has certain restrictions that affect its
but the option was granted under an em- when your rights first became transferable mi-value, you do not include the value of the prop-
ployee stock purchase plan for an option nus $1,000 purchase price) as an adjustment onerty in your income until it has been substan-
price that was less than the stock’s fair line 13 of Form 6251. tially vested. (You can choose to include the
market value at that time. value of the property in your income in the year it
Employee stock purchase plan.If you sold is transferred to you, as discussed later, ratherReport your ordinary income as wages on line 7,stock acquired by exercising an option grantedthan the year it is substantially vested.)Form 1040, for the year of the sale. under an employee stock purchase plan, deter-Until the property becomes substantially
mine your ordinary income and your capital gainvested, it is owned by the person who makes theIncentive stock options (ISOs).If you sellor loss as follows. transfer to you, usually your employer. However,stock acquired by exercising an ISO and meet
any income from the property, or the right to usethe holding period requirement, your gain or lossOption granted at discount.If you meet
the property, is included in your income as addi-from the sale is capital gain or loss. the holding period requirement and you have a
tional compensation in the year you receive thegain from the sale, the gain is ordinary incomeIf you do not meet the holding period require- income or have the right to use the property.up to the amount by which the stock’s fair marketment and you have a gain from the sale, the gain
value when the option was granted exceeded When the property becomes substantiallyis ordinary income up to the amount by which
the option price. Any excess gain is capital gain.vested, you must include its fair market value,the stock’s fair market value when you exercised
If you have a loss from the sale, it is a capitalminus any amount you paid for it, in your incomethe option exceeded the option price. Any ex-
loss, and you do not have any ordinary income.for that year.cess gain is capital gain. If you have a loss from
the sale, it is a capital loss and you do not haveExample. Your employer, Y Corporation, Example. Your employer, the RST Corpo-any ordinary income. granted you an option under its employee stockration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 a
purchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of Yshare. At the time of the sale the fair marketExample. Your employer, X Corporation,
Corporation for $20 a share at a time when thevalue of the stock is $100 a share. Under thegranted you an ISO on March 11, 2000, to buy
stock had a value of $22 a share. Eighteenterms of the sale, the stock is under a substantial100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 a
months later, when the value of the stock wasshare, its fair market value at the time. You risk of forfeiture (you have a good chance of
$23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14exercised the option on January 19, 2001, when losing it) for a 5-year period. Your stock is not
months after that you sold your stock for $30 athe stock was selling on the open market for $12 substantially vested when it is transferred, so
share. In the year of sale, you must report asa share. On January 25, 2002, you sold the you do not include any amount in your income inwages the difference between the option pricestock for $15 a share. Although you held the the year you buy it. At the end of the 5-year($20) and the value at the time the option wasstock for more than a year, less than 2 years had period, the fair market value of the stock is $200granted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8) ispassed from the time you were granted the op- a share. You must include $19,000 in your in-capital gain, figured as follows:tion. In 2002, you must report the difference come [100 shares × ($200 fair market value −
between the option price ($10) and the value of $10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor-Selling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $  3,000the stock when you exercised the option ($12) poration on your 100 shares of stock are taxablePurchase price (option price)as wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain, to you as additional compensation during the($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000figured as follows: period the stock can be forfeited.Gain ...................... $  1,000
Amount reported as wagesSelling price ($15 × 100 shares)..... $  1,500 Substantially vested.Property is substan-[($22 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 200Purchase price ($10 × 100 shares) . . .−1,000 tially vested when:Gain ....................... $  5 0 0 Amount reported as capital gain $ 800
Amount reported as wages • It is transferable, or
[($12 × 100 shares) − $1,000]...... − 200 Holding period requirement not met.If
• It is not subject to a substantial risk ofyou do not meet the holding period requirement,Amount reported as capital gain $ 300 forfeiture. (You do not have a goodyour ordinary income is the amount by which the
chance of losing it.)stock’s fair market value when you exercised theAlternative minimum tax (AMT).For the option exceeded the option price. This ordinaryAMT, you must treat stock acquired through the Transferable property.Property is trans-income is not limited to your gain from the saleexercise of an ISO as if no special treatment ferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge yourof the stock. Increase your basis in the stock byapplied. This means that, when your rights in the interest in the property to any person (other thanthe amount of this ordinary income. The differ-stock are transferable and no longer subject to a the transferor), and if the person receiving yourence between your increased basis and the sell-substantial risk of forfeiture, you must include as interest in the property is not required to give uping price of the stock is a capital gain or loss.an adjustment in figuring alternative minimum the property, or its value, if the substantial risk oftaxable income the amount by which the fair forfeiture occurs.Example. The facts are the same as in themarket value of the stock exceeds the optionprevious example, except that you sold theprice. Enter this adjustment on line 13 of Form Substantial risk of forfeiture.A substan-stock only 6 months after you exercised the6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals. tial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in theoption. You did not hold the stock long enough,Increase your AMT basis in any stock you ac- property transferred depend on the future per-so you must report $300 as wages and $700 asquire by exercising the ISO by the amount of the formance (or refraining from performance) ofcapital gain, figured as follows:adjustment. However, no adjustment is required substantial services by any person, or the occur-
if you dispose of the stock in the same year you rence of a certain condition related to the trans-Selling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $3,000exercise the option. fer, and the possibility of forfeiture is substantialPurchase price (option price) if the condition is not satisfied.See Restricted Property, later, for more infor-($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000
mation. Gain ...................... $1,000
Example. The Spin Corporation transfers toAmount reported as wagesYour AMT basis in stock acquired you as compensation for services 100 shares of[($23 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 300through an ISO is likely to differ from its corporate stock for $100 a share. Under theAmount reported as capital gainyour regular tax basis. Therefore, keepRECORDS
terms of the transfer, you must resell the stock to[$3,000 – ($2,000 + $300)] $700adequate records for both the AMT and regular the corporation at $100 a share if you leave your
tax so that you can figure your adjusted gain or job for any reason within 3 years from the date ofloss. transfer. You must perform substantial servicesRestricted Property
over a period of time and you must resell the
stock to the corporation at $100 a share (regard-Example. The facts are the same as in the Generally, if you receive property for your serv-
less of its value) if you do not perform the serv-previous example. On January 19, 2002, when ices, you must include its fair market value in
ices, so your rights to the stock are subject to athe stock was selling on the open market for $14 your income in the year you receive the prop-
substantial risk of forfeiture.a share, your rights to the stock first became erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-
Page 10

Page 11 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Choosing to include in income for year ofyear transferred are treated the same as anyClergy
transfer.You can choose to include the valueother dividends. You should receive a Form
of the property at the time of transfer (minus any1099–DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-If you are a member of the clergy, you must
amount you paid for the property) in your income include in your income offerings and fees youclude the dividends in your wages on your re-
for the year it is transferred. If you make this receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,turn. Report them as dividends.
choice, the substantial vesting rules do not apply masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the
and, generally, any later appreciation in value is offering is made to the religious institution, it isSale of property not substantially vested.
not included in your compensation when the not taxable to you.These rules apply to the sale or other disposition
property becomes substantially vested. Your If you are a member of a religious organiza-of property that you did not choose to include in
basis for figuring gain or loss when you sell the tion and you give your outside earnings to theyour income in the year transferred and that isproperty is the amount you paid for it plus the organization, you still must include the earningsnot substantially vested.amount you included in income as compensa- in your income. However, you may be entitled toIf you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-tion. a charitable contribution deduction for theerty in an arm’s-length transaction, include inamount paid to the organization. Get PublicationIf you make this choice, you cannotyour income as compensation for the year of526, Charitable Contributions. Also, see Mem-revoke it without the consent of thesale the amount realized minus the amount youbers of Religious Orders, later.Internal Revenue Service. Consent willpaid for the property. If you exchange the prop-
CAUTION
!
be given only if you were under a mistake of facterty in an arm’s-length transaction for otherPension. A pension or retirement pay for a
as to the underlying transaction. property that is not substantially vested, treat themember of the clergy usually is treated as any
new property as if it were substituted for theother pension or annuity. It must be reported onIf you forfeit the property after you have in-
lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, or on lines 12aexchanged property.cluded its value in income, your loss is the
and 12b of Form 1040A.If you sell the property in a transaction that isamount you paid for the property minus any
not at arm’s length, include in your income asamount you realized on the forfeiture.
compensation for the year of sale the total of anyHow to make the choice. You make the Housingmoney you received and the fair market value ofchoice by filing a written statement with the Inter-any substantially vested property you received Special rules for housing apply to members ofnal Revenue Service center where you file youron the sale. In addition, you will have to reportthe clergy. Under these rules, you do not includereturn. You must file this statement no later thanincome when the original property becomesin your income the rental value of a home (in-30 days after the date the property was trans-substantially vested, as if you still held it. Reportcluding utilities) or a housing allowance providedferred. A copy of the statement must be attached
as compensation its fair market value minus theto you as part of your pay. However, the exclu-to your tax return for the year the property was
total of the amount you paid for the property andsion cannot be more than the reasonable pay fortransferred. You also must give a copy of this
the amount included in your income from theyour service. If you pay for the utilities, you canstatement to the person for whom you per-
earlier sale. exclude any allowance designed for utility cost,formed the services and, if someone other than
up to your actual cost. The home or allowanceyou received the property, to that person.
Example. In 1999, you paid your employermust be provided as compensation for your du-You must sign the statement and indicate on$50 for a share of stock that had a fair marketties as an ordained, licensed, or commissionedit that you are making the choice under sectionvalue of $100 and was subject to forfeiture untilminister. However, you must include the rental83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state-2002. In 2001, you sold the stock to your spousevalue of the home or the housing allowance asment must contain all of the following informa-
for $10 in a transaction not at arm’s length. Youearnings from self-employment on Schedule SEtion.
had compensation of $10 from this transaction.(Form 1040), Self-Employment Tax, if you are
• Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-In 2002, when the stock had a fair market valuesubject to the self-employment tax. For more
cation number. of $120, it became substantially vested. Forinformation, see Publication 517, Social Secur-
2002, you must report additional compensationity and Other Information for Members of the• A description of each property for whichof $60, figured as follows: Clergy and Religious Workers.you are making the choice.
• The date or dates on which the propertyFair market value of stock at time Members of Religious Orderswas transferred and the tax year for which of substantial vesting........ $120
Minus: Amount paid for stock . . . $50you are making the choice.  If you are a member of a religious order who hasMinus: Compensation previously taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings• The nature of any restrictions on the prop-included in income from sale to that you renounce and turn over to the ordererty. spouse.................. 1 0 −60 depends on whether your services are per-Additional income $60• The fair market value at the time of trans- formed for the order.
fer (ignoring restrictions except those that
Services performed for the order.If you arewill never lapse) of each property forInherited property not substantially vested.performing the services as an agent of the orderwhich you are making the choice. If you inherit property not substantially vested atin the exercise of duties required by the order,the time of the decedent’s death, any income• Any amount that you paid for the property. do not include in your income the amountsyou receive from the property is considered in-turned over to the order.• A statement that you have provided copiescome in respect of a decedent and is taxed If your order directs you to perform servicesto the appropriate persons. according to the rules for restricted propertyfor another agency of the supervising church orreceived for services. For information about in-an associated institution, you are considered toDividends received on restricted stock. come in respect of a decedent, get Publicationbe performing the services as an agent of theDividends you receive on restricted stock are559. order. Any wages you earn as an agent of anextra compensation to you. Your employer order that you turn over to the order are notshould include these payments on your Form included in your income.W–2. If they are also reported on a Form
1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions, you Special Rules for Example. You are a member of a churchshould list them on Schedule B (Form 1040) or order and have taken a vow of poverty. YouSchedule 1 (Form 1040A), Interest and OrdinaryCertain Employees renounce any claims to your earnings and turnDividends for Form 1040A Filers, with a state- over to the order any salaries or wages youment that you have included them as wages. DoThis part of the publication deals with specialearn. You are a registered nurse, so your ordernot include them in the total dividends received.rules for people in certain types of employment:assigns you to work in a hospital that is an
members of the clergy, members of religiousStock you chose to include in your in- associated institution of the church. However,
orders, people working for foreign employers,come. Dividends you receive on restricted you remain under the general direction and con-
military personnel, and volunteers.stock you chose to include in your income in the trol of the order. You are considered to be an
Page 11

Page 12 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
agent of the order and any wages you earn atices performed in the United States, even • Grants for homes designed for wheelchair
the hospital that you turn over to your order are though you are not self-employed. This rule also living.
not included in your income. applies if you are an employee of a qualifying
• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans whowholly-owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-lost their sight or the use of their limbs.Services performed outside the order.If ernment.you are directed to work outside the order, your • Veterans’ insurance proceeds and divi-services are not an exercise of duties requiredNon-U.S. citizen.If you are not a U.S. citizen,dends paid either to veterans or their ben-by the order unless they meet both of the follow-or if you are a U.S. citizen but also a citizen ofeficiaries, including the proceeds of aing requirements. the Philippines, and you work for an interna-veteran’s endowment policy paid beforetional organization in the United States, yourdeath.• They are the kind of services that are ordi-salary from that source is exempt from tax. If younarily the duties of members of the order. • Interest on insurance dividends left on de-work for a foreign government in the United
posit with the VA.• They are part of the duties that you mustStates, your salary from that source is exempt
exercise for, or on behalf of, the religiousfrom tax if your work is like the work done by
order as its agent. employees of the United States in that foreignRehabilitative program payments.VAcountry and the foreign government gives anpayments to hospital patients and resident vet-If you are an employee of a third party, theequal exemption to employees of the Unitederans for their services under the VA’s therapeu-services you perform for the third party will notStates in that country. tic or rehabilitative programs are not treated asbe considered directed or required of you by the
nontaxable veterans’ benefits. Report theseorder. Amounts you receive for these servicesWaiver of alien status.If you are an alien
payments as income on line 21 of Form 1040.are included in your income, even if you havewho works for a foreign government or interna-
taken a vow of poverty. tional organization and you file a waiver under
section 247(b) of the Immigration and National-Volunteers
Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of a ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salary
religious order and has taken a vow of poverty. The tax treatment of amounts you receive as ayou receive after the date you file the waiver is
He renounces all claims to his earnings and volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similarnot exempt under this rule. However, it may be
turns over his earnings to the order. agency is covered in the following discussions.exempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi-
Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructedcation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more Peace Corps. Living allowances you receiveby the superiors of the order to get a job with ainformation about treaties. as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leaderprivate tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-Nonwage income. This exemption appliesfor housing, utilities, household supplies, food,ployee of the school, and, at his request, theonly to employees’ wages, salaries, and fees.and clothing are exempt from tax.school made the salary payments directly to thePensions and other income do not qualify for thisorder. Taxable allowances. The following al-exemption.Because Mark is an employee of the school, lowances must be included in your income and
he is performing services for the school ratherEmployment abroad. For information on thereported as wages.
than as an agent of the order. The wages Marktax treatment of income earned abroad, get • Allowances paid to your spouse and minorearns working for the school are included in hisPublication 54. children while you are a volunteer leaderincome.
training in the United States.
MilitaryExample 2. Gene Dennis is a member of a • Living allowances designated by the Di-
religious order who, as a condition of member- rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-Payments you receive as a member of a militaryship, has taken vows of poverty and obedience. pensation. These are allowances forservice generally are taxed as wages except forAll claims to his earnings are renounced. Gene personal items such as domestic help,retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension.received permission from the order to establish laundry and clothing maintenance, enter-Allowances generally are not taxed. For morea private practice as a psychologist and coun- tainment and recreation, transportation,information on the tax treatment of military al-sels members of religious orders as well as and other miscellaneous expenses.lowances and benefits, get Publication 3, Armednonmembers. Although the order reviews Forces’ Tax Guide. • Leave allowances.Gene’s budget annually, Gene controls not only
the details of his practice but also the means byMilitary retirement pay.If your retirement • Readjustment allowances or termination
which his work as a psychologist is accom-pay is based on age or length of service, it ispayments . These are considered re-
plished. taxable and must be included in your income asceived by you when credited to your ac-
Gene’s private practice as a psychologista pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, orcount.
does not make him an agent of the religiouson lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not
order. The psychological services provided byinclude in your income the amount of any reduc-
Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace CorpsGene are not the type of services that are pro-tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a
volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustmentvided by the order. The income Gene earns as asurvivor annuity for your spouse or children
allowance during his period of service, to be paidpsychologist is earned in his individual capacity.under the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protec-
to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour ofGene must include in his income the earningstion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.
duty. Although the allowance is not available tofrom his private practice. For a more detailed discussion of survivor
him until the end of his service, Gary must in-annuities, get Publication 575.
clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it isForeign Employer Disability.If you are retired on disability,credited to his account.
see Military and Government Disability Pen-Special rules apply if you work for a foreign Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA).Ifsions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.employer. you are a VISTA volunteer, you must includeVeterans’ benefits.Do not include in your in-meal and lodging allowances paid to you in yourU.S. citizen.If you are a U.S. citizen whocome any veterans’ benefits paid under any law,income as wages.works in the United States for a foreign govern-regulation, or administrative practice adminis-ment, an international organization, a foreigntered by the Department of Veterans AffairsNational Senior Service Corps programs.embassy, or any foreign employer, you must(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans or Do not include in your income amounts youinclude your salary in your income. their families are not taxable. receive for supportive services or reimburse-
Social security and Medicare taxes.You ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-• Education, training, and subsistence al-are exempt from social security and Medicare lowing programs.lowances.employee taxes if you are employed in the • Retired Senior Volunteer ProgramUnited States by an international organization or• Disability compensation and pension pay- (RSVP).a foreign government. However, you must pay ments for disabilities paid either to veter-
self-employment tax on your earnings from serv- ans or their families. • Foster Grandparent Program.
Page 12

Page 13 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Senior Companion Program. the dotted line to the left of the amount you ceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a
report on line 21. loan from the buyer. Do not include it in your
income or take depletion based on it.Service Corps of Retired Executives Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If you When production begins, you include all the(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-rent personal property for profit, include yourproceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-ive services or reimbursements for rental expenses in the total amount you enter ontion expenses, and deduct depletion from thatout-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do notline 34 of Form 1040. Also, enter the amountamount to arrive at your taxable income from theinclude these amounts in gross income. and “PPR” on the dotted line to the left.property.If you do not rent personal property for profit,Volunteer tax counseling.Do not include in
your deductions are limited and you cannot re-your income any reimbursements you receive Partnership Incomeport a loss to offset other income. In the discus-for transportation, meals, and other expenses
sion of Miscellaneous Income, later, see Activityyou have in training for, or actually providing, A partnership generally is not a taxable entity.not for profit under Other Income.volunteer federal income tax counseling for the The income, gains, losses, deductions, and
elderly (TCE). credits of a partnership are passed through to
You can deduct as a charitable contributionRoyalties the partners based on each partner’s distributive
your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in share of these items.Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-
Partner’s distributive share.Your distribu-and mineral properties are taxable as ordinarytance (VITA) program.
tive share of partnership income, gains, losses,income.
deductions, or credits is generally based on theYou generally report royalties in Part I of
partnership agreement. You must report yourSchedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income
distributive share of these items on your returnand Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil,Business and whether or not they are actually distributed togas, or mineral interest or are in business as a
you. However, your distributive share of theself-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., reportInvestment Income
partnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba-your income and expenses on Schedule C or
sis of your partnership interest at the end of theSchedule C–EZ (Form 1040).This section provides information on the treat-
partnership year in which the losses took place.ment of income from certain rents and royalties,Copyrights and patents. Royalties fromand from interests in partnerships and S corpo- Partnership agreement. The partnershipcopyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works,rations. For additional information about busi- agreement usually covers the distribution ofand similar property, or from patents on inven-ness and investment income, you may want to profits, losses, and other items. However, if thetions, are amounts paid to you for the right to usesee the following publications. agreement does not state how a specific item ofyour work over a specified period of time. Royal-
gain or loss will be shared, or the allocation• Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Busi-ties generally are based on the number of units
stated in the agreement does not have substan-ness (For Individuals Who Use Schedulesold, such as the number of books, tickets to a
tial economic effect, your distributive share isC or C–EZ). performance, or machines sold.
figured according to your interest in the partner-
• Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-Oil, gas, and minerals.Royalty income from ship.
erty (Including Rental of Vacation Homes).oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amountPartnership return.Although a partnershipyou receive when natural resources are ex-• Publication 541, Partnerships. generally pays no tax, it must file an informationtracted from your property. The royalties arereturn on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership• Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi-based on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., andIncome. This shows the result of thetions of Assets. are paid to you by a person or company whopartnership’s operations for its tax year and theleases the property from you.• Publication 550, Investment Income and items that must be passed through to the part-Expenses (Including Capital Gains and Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco-ners.Losses). nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gasSchedule K–1 (Form 1065). You shouldwells, you can recover your investment throughreceive from each partnership in which you are athe depletion allowance. For information on thisRents From Personal member a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form 1065),subject, see chapter 10 of Publication 535.Partner’s Share of Income, Credits, Deductions,Property Coal and iron ore.Under certain circum-etc., showing your share of income, deductions,
stances, you can treat amounts you receivecredits, and tax preference items of the partner-If you rent out personal property, such as equip-
from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-ship for the tax year. Retain Schedule K–1 forment or vehicles, how you report your income
ments from the sale of a capital asset, ratheryour records. Do not attach it to your Form 1040.and expenses is generally determined by:
than as royalty income. For information about• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi- Partner’s return.You generally must reportgain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,ness, and partnership items on your individual return theget Publication 544.
same way as they are reported on the partner-• Whether or not the rental activity is con-Sale of property interest.If you sell yourship return. That is, if the partnership had aducted for profit. complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights,capital gain, you report your share on Schedule
the amount you receive is considered paymentGenerally, if your primary purpose is income or D (Form 1040). You report your share of partner-
for the sale of section 1231 property, not royaltyprofit and you are involved in the rental activity ship ordinary income on Schedule E (Form
income. Under certain circumstances, the salewith continuity and regularity, your rental activity 1040).
is subject to capital gain or loss treatment onis a business. See Publication 535 for details on Generally, Schedule K–1 (Form 1065)Schedule D (Form 1040). For more informationdeducting expenses for both business and will tell you where to report each item ofon selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3not-for-profit activities. income on your individual return.
TIP
of Publication 544.
If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty,Reporting business income and expenses.
or a net profit interest in a mineral property forIf you are in the business of renting personal S Corporation Incomethe life of the property, you have made a lease orproperty, report your income and expenses on
a sublease, and any cash you receive for theSchedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040). In general, an S corporation does not pay tax onassignment of other interests in the property isThe form instructions have information on how its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc-ordinary income subject to a depletion allow-to complete them. tions, and credits of the corporation are passedance.Reporting nonbusiness income. If you are through to the shareholders based on each
not in the business of renting personal property,Part of future production sold.If you own shareholder’s pro rata share. You must report
report your rental income on line 21 of Form mineral property but sell part of the future pro- your share of these items on your return. Gener-
1040. List the type and amount of the income on duction, you generally treat the money you re- ally, the items passed through to you will in-
Page 13

Page 14 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
crease or decrease the basis of your S you receive in your income. If the amount of the 3) You receive the disability payments for a
corporation stock as appropriate. premiums was included in your income, you are combat-related injury. This is a personal
considered to have paid the premiums and anyinjury or sickness that:S corporation return.An S corporation mustbenefits you receive are not taxable.file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Tax a) Results directly from armed conflict,
Return for an S Corporation. This shows the b) Takes place while you are engaged inDisability Pensionsresults of the corporation’s operations for its tax extra-hazardous service,year and the items of income, losses, deduc-If you retired on disability, you must include intions, or credits that affect the shareholders’ c) Takes place under conditions simulat-income any disability pension you receive underindividual income tax returns. ing war, including training exercisesa plan that is paid for by your employer. You
such as maneuvers, ormust report your taxable disability payments asSchedule K–1 (Form 1120S). You should
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040Areceive from the S corporation in which you are d) Is caused by an instrumentality of war.
until you reach minimum retirement age. Mini-a shareholder a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form
mum retirement age generally is the age at1120S), Shareholder’s Share of Income, Cred- 4) You would be entitled to receive disability
which you can first receive a pension or annuityits, Deductions, etc., showing your share of in- compensation from the Department of Vet-
if you are not disabled.come, losses, deductions, and credits, of the S erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-
corporation for the tax year. Retain Schedule tion for it. Your exclusion under thisYou may be entitled to a tax credit ifK–1 for your records. Do not attach it to your condition is equal to the amount you wouldyou were permanently and totally dis-Form 1040. be entitled to receive from the VA.abled when you retired. For informa-
TIP
tion on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit forShareholder’s return.Your distributive share
the Elderly or the Disabled.of the items of income, losses, deductions, or Pension based on years of service.If you
credits of the S corporation must be shown sep- receive a disability pension based on years ofBeginning on the day after you reach mini-arately on your Form 1040. The character of service, you generally must include it in yourmum retirement age, payments you receive arethese items generally is the same as if you had income. However, if it is a result of active servicetaxable as a pension or annuity. Report therealized or incurred them personally. in one of the listed government services and onepayments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, or
of the listed conditions applies, do not include inon lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For moreGenerally, Schedule K–1 (Form
income the part of your pension that you wouldinformation on pensions and annuities, get Pub-1120S) will tell you where to report
have received if the pension had been based onlication 575.each item of income on your individual
TIP
a percentage of disability. You must include thereturn.
Retirement and profit-sharing plans.If you rest of your pension in your income.
receive payments from a retirement orDistributions.Generally, S corporation dis- Retroactive VA determination.If you retireprofit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-tributions are a nontaxable return of your basis from the armed services based on years of serv-bility retirement, do not treat the payments as ain the corporation stock. However, in certain ice and are later given a retroactive service-con-disability pension. The payments must be re-cases, part of the distributions may be taxable nected disability rating by the VA, yourported as a pension or annuity.as a dividend, or as a long-term or short-term retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-
capital gain, or as both. The corporation’s distri- cluded from income up to the amount of VAAccrued leave payment.If you retire on disa-butions may be in the form of cash or property. disability benefits you would have been entitledbility, any lump-sum payment you receive forto receive. You can claim a refund of any taxaccrued annual leave is a salary payment. TheMore information.For more information, see paid on the excludable amount (subject to thepayment is not a disability payment. Include it inthe instructions for Form 1120S. statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-your income in the tax year you receive it.turn on Form 1040X for each previous year
during the retroactive period.
If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-Military and GovernmentSickness and ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-Disability Pensions
ity benefits, do not include in your income theInjury Benefits
Certain military and government disability pen-portion of the severance payment equal to the
sions are not taxable. VA benefit you would have been entitled to re-Generally, you must report as income any
ceive in that same year. However, you mustamount you receive for personal injury or sick-Service-connected disability.You may be include in your income any lump-sum readjust-ness through an accident or health plan that isable to exclude from income amounts you re-ment or other nondisability severance paymentpaid for by your employer. If both you and yourceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowanceyou received on release from active duty, even ifemployer pay for the plan, only the amount youfor personal injury or sickness resulting fromyou are later given a retroactive disability ratingreceive that is due to your employer’s paymentsactive service in one of the following govern-by the VA.is reported as income. However, certain pay-ment services.ments may not be taxable to you. For informa-
Terrorist attack.Do not include in your in-tion on nontaxable payments, see Military and • The armed forces of any country.
come disability payments you receive for injuriesGovernment Disability Pensions and Sickness • The National Oceanic and Atmospheric resulting directly from a violent attack that oc-and Injury Benefits, later in this discussion. Administration. curs while you are a U.S. government employee
Cost paid by you.If you pay the entire cost of performing official duties. For your disability pay-• The Public Health Service.an accident or health plan, do not include any ments to be tax exempt, the Secretary of State
• The Foreign Service.amounts you receive from the plan for personal must determine the attack was a terrorist attack.
injury or sickness as income on your tax return.
If your plan reimbursed you for medical ex-Conditions for exclusion.Do not include theLong-Term Carepenses you deducted in an earlier year, you maydisability payments in your income if any of theInsurance Contractshave to include some, or all, of the reimburse-following conditions apply.ment in your income. See Recoveries under Long-term care insurance contracts generallyMiscellaneous Income, later. 1) You were entitled to receive a disabilityare treated as accident and health insurancepayment before September 25, 1975. contracts. Amounts you receive from themCafeteria plans.Generally, if you are covered
(other than policyholder dividends or premiumby an accident or health insurance plan through 2) You were a member of a listed govern-
refunds) generally are excludable from incomea cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur- ment service or its reserve component, or
as amounts received for personal injury or sick-ance premiums was not included in your in- were under a binding written commitment
ness. To claim an exclusion for payments madecome, you are not considered to have paid the to become a member, on September 24,
on a per diem or other periodic basis under apremiums and you must include any benefits 1975.
Page 14

Page 15 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
long-term care insurance contract, you must file taxable and must be included in your income as• The cost of qualified long-term care serv-wages.Form 8853 with your return. ices during the period.
A long-term care insurance contract is an If part of the payments you receive• The dollar amount for the period ($210 perinsurance contract that only provides coverage under FECA reduces your social se-day for any period in 2002).for qualified long-term care services. The con- curity or equivalent railroad retirementCAUTION
!
tract must: See section C of Form 8853 and its instructionsbenefits received, that part is considered social
for more information. security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-• Be guaranteed renewable, fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of the
• Not provide for a cash surrender value or taxability of these benefits, see Other IncomeWorkers’ Compensationother money that can be paid, assigned, under Miscellaneous Income, later.
pledged, or borrowed, Amounts you receive as workers’ compensationYou can deduct the amount you spend tofor an occupational sickness or injury are fully• Provide that refunds, other than refunds buy back sick leave for an earlier year to beexempt from tax if they are paid under a workers’on the death of the insured or complete eligible for nontaxable FECA benefits for thatcompensation act or a statute in the nature of asurrender or cancellation of the contract, period. It is a miscellaneous deduction subject toworkers’ compensation act. The exemption alsoand dividends under the contract may be the 2% limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). If youapplies to your survivors. The exemption, how-buy back sick leave in the same year you used it,used only to reduce future premiums orever, does not apply to retirement plan benefitsthe amount reduces your taxable sick leave pay.increase future benefits, and you receive based on your age, length of serv-Do not deduct it separately.• Generally not pay or reimburse expensesice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you
incurred for services or items that wouldretired because of an occupational sickness orOther compensation. Many other amountsinjury.be reimbursed under Medicare, except you receive as compensation for sickness or
where Medicare is a secondary payer or injury are not taxable. These include the follow-If part of your workers’ compensationthe contract makes per diem or other peri- ing amounts.reduces your social security orodic payments without regard to ex- equivalent railroad retirement benefitsCAUTION
!
• Compensatory damages you receive forpenses. received, that part is considered social securityphysical injury or physical sickness,(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits andwhether paid in a lump sum or in periodicmay be taxable. For a discussion of the taxabilityQualified long-term care services.Qualified payments. See Court awards and dam-of these benefits, see Other Income under Mis-long-term care services are: ages under Other Income, later.cellaneous Income, later.
• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera- • Benefits you receive under an accident or
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili- health insurance policy on which eitherReturn to work. If you return to work aftertative services, and maintenance and you paid the premiums or your employerqualifying for workers’ compensation, paymentspersonal care services, and paid the premiums but you had to includeyou continue to receive while assigned to light
them in your income.duties are taxable. Report these payments as• Required by a chronically ill individual and
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, orprovided pursuant to a plan of care pre- • Disability benefits you receive for loss ofon line 1 of Form 1040EZ.scribed by a licensed health care practi- income or earning capacity as a result of
tioner. injuries under a no-fault car insuranceDisability pension.If your disability pension
policy.is paid under a statute that provides benefits
Chronically ill individual.A chronically ill in-only to employees with service-connected disa-• Compensation you receive for permanent
bilities, part of it may be workers’ compensation.dividual is one who has been certified by a loss or loss of use of a part or function of
That part is exempt from tax. The rest of yourlicensed health care practitioner within the previ- your body, or for your permanent disfig-
pension, based on years of service, is taxable asous 12 months as one of the following. urement. This compensation must be
pension or annuity income. If you die, the part ofbased only on the injury and not on the• An individual who, for at least 90 days, isyour survivors’ benefit that is a continuation ofperiod of your absence from work. Theseunable to perform at least two activities ofthe workers’ compensation is exempt from tax.benefits are not taxable even if your em-daily living without substantial assistance ployer pays for the accident and healthdue to loss of functional capacity. Activi- plan that provides these benefits.Other Sicknessties of daily living are eating, toileting,
and Injury Benefitstransferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-
Reimbursement for medical care. A reim-nence. In addition to disability pensions and annuities,bursement for medical care generally is not tax-• An individual who requires substantial su-you may receive other payments for sickness orable. However, it may reduce your medical
injury.pervision to be protected from threats to expense deduction.
health and safety due to severe cognitive If you receive reimbursement for an expenseRailroad sick pay.Payments you receive asimpairment. you deducted in an earlier year, see Recoveries,sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-
later.surance Act are taxable and you must include
Limit on exclusion.The exclusion for pay-them in your income. However, do not include
ments made on a per diem or other periodicthem in your income if they are for an on-the-job
basis under a long-term care insurance contractinjury.
is subject to a limit. The limit applies to the total Miscellaneous IncomeBlack lung benefit payments. These pay-of these payments and any accelerated death
ments are similar to workers’ compensation andbenefits made on a per diem or other periodic This section discusses various types of income.generally are not taxable.basis under a life insurance contract because You may have taxable income from certain
the insured is chronically ill. (For more informa- transactions even if no money changes hands.Federal Employees’ Compensation Act
tion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In- For example, you may have taxable income if(FECA). Payments received under this Act for
surance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous you lend money at a below-market interest ratepersonal injury or sickness, including payments
Income, later.) or have a debt you owe cancelled.to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.
Under this limit, the excludable amount forHowever, you are taxed on amounts you receive
any period is figured by subtracting any reim-under this Act as continuation of pay for up toBartering
bursement received (through insurance or oth-45 days while a claim is being decided. Report
erwise) for the cost of qualified long-term carethis income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form Bartering is an exchange of property or services.
services during the period from the larger of the 1040A, or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay You must include in your income, at the time
following amounts. for sick leave while a claim is being processed is received, the fair market value of property or
Page 15

Page 16 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
services you receive in bartering. If you ex- stances to ensure that income tax is collected on count is canceled debt. You must include the
this income. canceled amount in your income.change services with another person and you
Under backup withholding, the barter ex-both have agreed ahead of time as to the value
Stockholder debt.If you are a stockholder inchange must withhold, as income tax, 30% ofof the services, that value will be accepted as
a corporation and the corporation cancels orthe income if:fair market value unless the value can be shown
forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt isto be otherwise. • You do not give the barter exchange yourdividend income to you.Generally, you report this income on Sched-taxpayer identification number (generally aIf you are a stockholder in a corporation andule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040). How- social security number or an employeryou cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-ever, if the barter involves an exchange of identification number), or tion, you generally do not realize income. This issomething other than services, such as in Ex-
• The IRS notifies the barter exchange thatbecause the canceled debt is considered as aample 4 below, you may have to use another
you gave it an incorrect identification num-contribution to the capital of the corporationform or schedule instead.
ber. equal to the amount of debt principal that you
canceled.Example 1. You are a self-employed attor-If you join a barter exchange, you must certify
ney who performs legal services for a client, aunder penalties of perjury that your taxpayer
small corporation. The corporation gives youidentification number is correct and that you areExceptionsshares of its stock as payment for your services.not subject to backup withholding. If you do not
You must include the fair market value of themake this certification, backup withholding mayThere are several exceptions to the inclusion ofshares in your income on Schedule C or Sched-begin immediately. The barter exchange willcanceled debt in income. These are explainedule C–EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receivegive you a Form W–9, Request for Taxpayer next.them. Identification Number and Certification, or a sim-
ilar form, for you to make this certification.Nonrecourse debt. If you are not personallyExample 2. You are a self-employed ac- liable for the debt (nonrecourse debt), differentThe barter exchange will withhold tax only upcountant. You and a house painter are members rules apply. You may have a gain or loss if ato the amount of any cash paid to you or depos-of a barter club. Members get in touch with each nonrecourse debt is canceled or forgiven in con-ited in your account and any scrip or creditother directly and bargain for the value of the junction with the foreclosure or repossession ofissued to you (and converted to cash).services to be performed. In return for account- property to which the debt attaches. See Publi-ing services you provided, the house painter If tax is withheld from your barter in-cation 544 for more information.painted your home. You must report as your come, the barter exchange will report
income on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ the amount of tax withheld on FormStudent loans. Certain student loans contain
TIP
(Form 1040) the fair market value of the house1099–B, or similar statement. a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to
painting services you received. The house attend the qualified educational institution will be
painter must include in income the fair market canceled if you work for a certain period of timeCanceled Debtsvalue of the accounting services you provided. in certain professions for any of a broad class of
employers.Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled orExample 3. You are self-employed and a You do not have income if your student loanforgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, youmember of a barter club. The club uses credit is canceled after you agreed to this provisionmust include the canceled amount in your in-units as a means of exchange. It adds credit and then performed the services required. Tocome. You have no income from the canceledunits to your account for goods or services you qualify, the loan must have been made by:debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debtprovide to members, which you can use to
includes any indebtedness for which you arepurchase goods or services offered by other 1) The federal government, a state or localliable or which attaches to property you hold.members of the barter club. The club subtracts government, or an instrumentality, agency,If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report thecredit units from your account when you receive or subdivision thereof,canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040. If it isgoods or services from other members. You
a business debt, report the amount on Schedule2) A tax-exempt public benefit corporationmust include in your income the value of the
C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) (or on Sched-that has assumed control of a state,credit units that are added to your account, even
ule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, county, or municipal hospital, and whosethough you may not actually receive goods or
if you are a farmer). employees are considered public employ-services from other members until a later tax
ees under state law, oryear. Form 1099–C. If a federal government
3) An educational institution:agency, financial institution, or credit unionExample 4. You own a small apartment cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 orbuilding. In return for 6 months rent-free use of a) Under an agreement with an entity de-more, you will receive a Form 1099–C, Cancel-an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art scribed in (1) or (2) that provided thelation of Debt. The amount of the canceled debtshe created. You must report as rental income funds to the institution to make theis shown in box 2.on Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market value loan, or
of the artwork, and the artist must report asInterest included in canceled debt.If any b) As part of a program of the institutionincome on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofdesigned to encourage students to(Form 1040) the fair rental value of the apart-canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interest serve in occupations or areas with un-ment. will also be shown in box 3. Whether or not youmet needs and under which the serv-must include the interest portion of the canceledices provided are for or under theForm 1099–B from barter exchange. If you debt in your income depends on whether the direction of a governmental unit or aexchanged property or services through a barterinterest would be deductible if you paid it. Seetax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza-exchange, you should receive Form 1099–B,Deductible debt under Exceptions, later. tion.Proceeds from Broker and Barter Exchange If the interest would not be deductible (such
Transactions, or a similar statement from theas interest on a personal loan), include in yourA loan to refinance a qualified student loanbarter exchange by January 31, 2003. It shouldincome the amount from box 2 of Form 1099–C.will also qualify if it was made by an educationalshow the value of cash, property, services, cred-If the interest would be deductible (such as on ainstitution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organi-its, or scrip you received from exchanges duringbusiness loan), include in your income the netzation under its program designed as described2002. The IRS will also receive a copy of Formamount of the canceled debt (the amount shownin (3)(b) above.1099–B. in box 2 less the interest amount shown in box
An educational institution is an organization3).
Backup withholding. The income you re- with a regular faculty and curriculum and a regu-
ceive from bartering generally is not subject toDiscounted mortgage loan. If your financial larly enrolled body of students in attendance at
regular income tax withholding. However, institution offers a discount for the early payment the place where the educational activities are
backup withholding will apply in certain circum-of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis- carried on.
Page 16

Page 17 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor- benefit payments that are more than the present Include the part of the lump sum payment that is
poration, community chest, fund, or foundation value of the payments at the time of death.more than your cost in your income.
organized and operated exclusively for one or Endowment proceeds that you choose toProceeds received in installments.If you re-more of the following purposes. receive in installments instead of a lump-sumceive life insurance proceeds in installments,payment at the maturity of the policy are taxed• Charitable. you can exclude part of each installment fromas an annuity. This is explained in Publicationyour income.• Educational. 575. For this treatment to apply, you mustTo determine the excluded part, divide thechoose to receive the proceeds in installments• Fostering national or international amateuramount held by the insurance company (gener-before receiving any part of the lump sum. Thissports competition (but only if none of theally the total lump sum payable at the death ofelection must be made within 60 days after theorganization’s activities involve providingthe insured person) by the number of install-lump-sum payment first becomes payable toathletic facilities or equipment). ments to be paid. Include anything over thisyou.excluded part in your income as interest.• Literary.
• Preventing cruelty to children or animals.Example. The face amount of the policy isAccelerated Death Benefits$75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re-• Religious.
ceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each.Certain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-• Scientific. The excluded part of each installment is $625efits under a life insurance contract or viatical
($75,000 ÷ 120), or $7,500 for an entire year.• Testing for public safety. settlement before the insured’s death are ex-
The rest of each payment, $375 a month (orcluded from income if the insured is terminally or
$4,500 for an entire year), is interest income toException. You do have income if your stu- chronically ill.
you.dent loan was made by an educational institu-
tion and is canceled because of services you Viatical settlement.This is the sale or assign-Installments for life.If, as the beneficiary
performed for the institution or other organiza- ment of any part of the death benefit under a lifeunder an insurance contract, you are entitled to
tion that provided the funds. insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-receive the proceeds in installments for the rest
vider. A viatical settlement provider is a personof your life without a refund or period-certainDeductible debt. You do not have income who regularly engages in the business of buyingguarantee, you figure the excluded part of eachfrom the cancellation of a debt if your payment of or taking assignment of life insurance contractsinstallment by dividing the amount held by thethe debt would be deductible. This exception on the lives of insured individuals who are termi-insurance company by your life expectancy. Ifapplies only if you use the cash method of ac- nally or chronically ill and who meets the require-there is a refund or period-certain guarantee, thecounting. For more information, see chapter 5 of ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internalamount held by the insurance company for thisPublication 334. Revenue Code.purpose is reduced by the actuarial value of the
guarantee.Price reduced after purchase.Generally, if
Exclusion for terminal illness.Acceleratedthe seller reduces the amount of debt you oweSurviving spouse. If your spouse died death benefits are fully excludable if the insuredfor property you purchased, you do not havebefore October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-is a terminally ill individual. This is a person whoincome from the reduction. The reduction of theceeds paid to you because of the death of yourhas been certified by a physician as having andebt is treated as a purchase price adjustmentspouse are received in installments, you canillness or physical condition that can reasonablyand reduces your basis in the property. exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-be expected to result in death within 24 monthscluded in the installments. If you remarry, youExcluded debt. Do not include a canceled from the date of the certification.can continue to take the exclusion.debt in your gross income in the following situa-
tions. Exclusion for chronic illness.If the insuredInterest option on insurance.If an insurance
is a chronically ill individual who is not terminally• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy casecompany pays you interest only on proceeds
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basisunder title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi-from life insurance left on deposit, the interest
of costs incurred for qualified long-term carecation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. you are paid is taxable.
services are fully excludable. Accelerated deathIf you chose to receive only the interest from• The debt is canceled when you are insol- benefits paid on a per diem or other periodicyour insurance proceeds, the $1,000 interestvent. However, you cannot exclude any basis are excludable up to a limit. This limitexclusion for a surviving spouse does not apply.amount of canceled debt that is more than applies to the total of the accelerated deathIf you later decide to receive the proceeds fromthe amount by which you are insolvent. benefits and any periodic payments receivedthe policy in installments, you can take the inter-See Publication 908. from long-term care insurance contracts. Forest exclusion from the time you begin to receive
information on the limit and the definitions of• The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-the installments.
chronically ill individual, qualified long-termceled by a qualified person. See chapter 4
Surrender of policy for cash.If you surren-care services, and long-term care insuranceof Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide.
der a life insurance policy for cash, you mustcontracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance• The debt is qualified real property busi-include in income any proceeds that are moreContracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits,ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publicationthan the cost of the life insurance policy. Inearlier.334. general, your cost (or investment in the contract)
is the total of premiums that you paid for the lifeException. The exclusion does not apply to
insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,any amount paid to a person (other than theLife Insurance Proceeds rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that wereinsured) who has an insurable interest in the life
not included in your income. of the insured because the insured:Life insurance proceeds paid to you because of
You should receive a Form 1099–R showingthe death of the insured person are not taxable • Is a director, officer, or employee of thethe total proceeds and the taxable part. Reportunless the policy was turned over to you for a person, orthese amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Formprice. This is true even if the proceeds were paid
1040, or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.under an accident or health insurance policy or • Has a financial interest in the person’s
an endowment contract. business.Endowment proceeds. Endowment pro-
Proceeds not received in installments.If ceeds paid in a lump sum to you at maturity are
Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or taxable only if the proceeds are more than the
ated death benefits made on a per diem or otherother than at regular intervals, include in your cost of the policy. To determine your cost, add
periodic basis, you must file Form 8853 withincome only the benefits that are more than the the aggregate amount of premiums (or other
your return. You do not have to file Form 8853 toamount payable to you at the time of the insured consideration) paid for the contract and subtract
exclude accelerated death benefits paid on theperson’s death. If the benefit payable at death is any amount that you previously received under
basis of actual expenses incurred.not specified, you include in your income the the contract and excluded from your income.
Page 17

Page 18 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax on which the refund is based. You paid 75%justed gross income before applying the rulesRecoveries
($3,000 ÷ $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2001,explained here. See Non-Itemized Deduction
so 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is for Recoveries, later. A recovery is a return of an amount you de-
amounts you paid in 2001 and is a recoveryducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The
item. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item,most common recoveries are refunds, reim- Total recovery included in income. If you
you will include $300 on line 10, Form 1040, forbursements, and rebates of deductions itemized recover any amount that you deducted in an
2002, and attach a copy of your computationon Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may have earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you
showing why that amount is less than therecoveries of non-itemized deductions (such as generally must include the full amount of the
amount shown on the Form 1099–G you re-payments on previously deducted bad debts) recovery in your income in the year you receive
ceived from the state.and recoveries of items for which you previously it. This rule applies if, for the earlier year, all of
claimed a tax credit. the following statements are true.The balance ($100) of the $400 refund is for
your January 2002 estimated tax payment.Tax benefit rule.You must include a recovery 1) Your itemized deductions exceeded theWhen you figure your deduction for state andin your income in the year you receive it up to the standard deduction by at least the amountlocal income taxes paid during 2002, you willamount by which the deduction or credit you of the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-reduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Yourtook for the recovered amount reduced your tax tions did not exceed the standard deduc-deduction for state and local income taxes paidin the earlier year. For this purpose, any in- tion by at least the amount of the recovery,during 2002 will include the January net amountcrease to an amount carried over to the current see Standard deduction limit, later.)of $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimatedyear that resulted from the deduction or credit isstate income taxes paid in 2002 for 2002, and2) You had taxable income. (If you had noconsidered to have reduced your tax in the ear-any state income tax withheld during 2002. taxable income, see Negative taxable in-lier year. come, later.)
Deductions not itemized.If you did not item-Federal income tax refund.Refunds of fed- 3) Your deduction for the item recoveredize deductions for the year for which you re-eral income taxes are not included in your in- equals or exceeds the amount recovered.ceived the recovery of an expense that wascome because they are never allowed as a (If your deduction was less than thedeductible only if you itemized, do not includededuction from income. amount recovered, see Recovery limited toany of the recovery amount in your income.
deduction, later.)State income tax refund.If you received a
state or local income tax refund (or credit orExample. You filed your 2001 federal in-4) Your itemized deductions were not subjectoffset) in 2002, you generally must include it income tax return on Form 1040A. In 2002 you to the limit on itemized deductions. (If yourincome if you deducted the tax in an earlier year.received a refund of your 2001 state income tax.deductions were limited, see Itemized de-You should receive Form 1099–G, Certain Gov- Do not report any of the refund as income be-ductions limited, later.)ernment Payments, from the payer by Januarycause you did not itemize deductions for 2001.
5) You had no unused tax credits. (If you had31, 2003. The IRS also will receive a copy of the
unused tax credits, see Unused tax cred-Form 1099–G. Use the worksheet in the 2002
its, later.)Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figure theItemized Deduction Recoveries
amount (if any) to include in your income. 6) You were not subject to alternative mini-The following discussion explains how to deter-mum tax. (If you were subject to alterna-Mortgage interest refund.If you received amine the amount to include in your income fromtive minimum tax, see Subject torefund or credit in 2002 of mortgage interest paida recovery of an amount deducted in an earlieralternative minimum tax, later.)in an earlier year, the amount should be shownyear as an itemized deduction. However, youin box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interestgenerally do not need to use this discussion ifIf any of the above statements is not true,Statement. Do not subtract the refund amountthe recovery is for state or local income taxessee Total recovery not included in income, later.from the interest you paid in 2002. You maypaid in 2001. Instead, use the worksheet in theWhere to report.Enter your state or localhave to include it in your income under the rules2002 Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figureincome tax refund on line 10 of Form 1040, andexplained in the following discussions. the amount (if any) to include in your income.the total of all other recoveries as other incomeYou cannot use the Form 1040 worksheetInterest on recovery.Interest on any of the on line 21 of Form 1040. You cannot use Formand must use this discussion if any of the follow-amounts you recover must be reported as inter- 1040A or Form 1040EZ.ing statements is true.est income in the year received. For example,
report any interest you received on state or local Example. For 2001, you filed a joint return.• The recovery is for a tax year other thanincome tax refunds on line 8a of Form 1040. Your taxable income was $20,000 and you were2001. not entitled to any tax credits. Your standardRecovery and expense in same year.If the • The recovery is for a deducted item otherdeduction was $7,600, and you had itemizedrefund or other recovery and the expense occurthan state or local income taxes, such asdeductions of $9,000. In 2002, you received thein the same year, the recovery reduces the de-real property taxes. following recoveries for amounts deducted onduction or credit and is not reported as income.
your 2001 return:• Your 2001 taxable income was less thanRecovery for 2 or more years.If you receive zero.a refund or other recovery that is for amounts Medical expenses.............. $200
• You made your last payment of 2001 stateState and local income tax refund.... 4 0 0you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must
Refund of mortgage interest........ 3 2 5or local estimated tax in 2002.allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recovered
Total recoveries................ $925amount between the years in which you paid it.• You owed alternative minimum tax forThis allocation is necessary to determine the None of the recoveries were more than the de-2001.amount of recovery from any earlier years and to ductions taken for 2001.• You could not deduct all your tax creditsdetermine the amount, if any, of your allowable Your total recoveries are less than thefor 2001 because their total was morededuction for this item for the current year. amount by which your itemized deductions ex-than the amount of tax shown on line 42 ofceeded the standard deduction ($9,000 −Example. You paid 2001 estimated state your 2001 Form 1040 minus any foreign$7,600 = $1,400), so you must include your totalincome tax of $4,000 in four equal payments.tax credit shown on line 43 of that form.recoveries in your income for 2002. Report theYou made your fourth payment in January 2002. state and local income tax refund of $400 on line• You could be claimed as a dependent byYou had no state income tax withheld during 10 of Form 1040, and the balance of your recov-someone else in 2001.2001. In 2002, you received a $400 tax refund eries, $525, on line 21 of Form 1040.based on your 2001 state income tax return. You
claimed itemized deductions each year on your If you also recovered an amount de-Total recovery not included in income.If
federal income tax return. ducted as a non-itemized deduction,one or more of the six statements listed in the
You must allocate the $400 refund between figure the amount of that recovery topreceding discussion is not true, you may beCAUTION
!
2001 and 2002, the years in which you paid theinclude in your income and add it to your ad-able to exclude at least part of the recovery from
Page 18

Page 19 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your income. If statements (4), (5), and (6) are subject to the alternative minimum tax), you can ery of amounts deducted after 1986 to include in
true (your itemized deductions were not limited, use Table 1 to determine the part of your recov- your income.
you had no unused tax credits, and you were not
Table 1. Worksheet for Recoveries of Itemized Deductions
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in income on your 2002
Form 1040, see Total recovery not included in income under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If you recovered amounts from more than
one year, such as a state income tax refund from 2001 and a casualty loss reimbursement from 2000, complete a separate worksheet for
each year. Use information from Schedule A (Form 1040) for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year (year of the deduction).
If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to zero, see Unused tax credits and Subject to
alternative minimum tax under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your recovery was for an itemized deduction that was limited, you
should read Itemized deductions limited under Itemized Deduction Recoveries.
1. State/local income tax refund or credit1 ............................................... 1 .
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements
(excluding the amount you entered on line 1)1 ........................................... 2 .
3. Add lines 1 and 2.............................................................. 3 .
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year
(for example, line 28 of Schedule A for 2001)........................ 4 .
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you
(do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2)........................ 5 .
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4...................................... 6 .
7. Standard deduction for the prior year. (The standard deduction amounts for
2001, 2000, and 1999 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4.)................. 7 .
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here.
The amounts on lines 1 and 2 are not taxable........................................... 8 .
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8................................................... 9 .
10. Taxable income for prior year2 (for example, line 39, Form 1040 for 2001) . . . . 10.
11. Amount to include in income for 2002:
• If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
• If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result
(but not less than zero).3 ...................................................... 1 1 .
If line 11 equals line 3—
Enter the amount from line 1 on line 10, Form 1040.
Enter the amount from line 2 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1 or line 2 is zero—
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on line 10, Form 1040.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following worksheet.
A. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the percentage A.
B. Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A.
Enter the result here and on line 10, Form 1040....................................... B .
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11.
Enter the result here and on line 21, Form 1040....................................... C .
1 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year.
2 If taxable income is a negative amount, enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. Taxable income will have
to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see Publication 536, Net Operating Losses.
3 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300
Page 19

Page 20 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
If Your Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,550
7,600
3,800
6,650
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
If Your
Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,650
6,750
8,500
9,400
10,300
11,200
4,700
5,600
6,500
7,400
7,750
8,850
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
And the Number
in the Box
Above is:
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,550
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,800
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,600
● Head of household, enter $6,650
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,100 ($900 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2001.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$750
Table 2. 2001 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 3.
$250
Allocating the included part.If you are Example. In 2002 you recovered $2,500 of• The amount by which your itemized de-
your 2001 itemized deductions, but the recov-ductions exceeded the standard deduc-not required to include all of your recoveries in
eries you must include in your 2002 income aretion.your income, and you have both a state income
only $1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500tax refund and other itemized deduction recov-
was due to your state income tax refund. TheStandard deduction for earlier years.Toeries, you must allocate the taxable recoveriesamount you report as a state tax refund on linedetermine if amounts recovered in 2002 must bebetween the state tax refund you report on line10 of Form 1040 is $300 [($500 ÷ $2,500) × included in your income, you must know the10 of Form 1040 and the amount you report as$1,500]. The balance of the taxable recoveries,standard deduction for your filing status for theother income on line 21 of Form 1040. If you do$1,200, is reported as other income on line 21 ofyear the deduction was claimed. The standardnot use Table 1, make the allocation as follows.Form 1040. deduction tables for 2001, 2000, and 1999 are
shown in  Tables 2, 3, and 4. If you need theStandard deduction limit.You generally are1) Divide your state income tax refund by the standard deduction amounts for years beforeallowed to claim the standard deduction if you dototal of all your itemized deduction recov- 1999, see the copy of your return for that year.not itemize your deductions. Only your itemizederies.
deductions that are more than your standardExample. You filed a joint return for 20012) Multiply the amount of taxable recoveriesdeduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-with taxable income of $25,000. Your itemizedby the percentage in (1). This is theless you are required to itemize your deduc-deductions were $8,700. The standard deduc-amount you report as a state income taxtions). If your total deductions on the earlier yeartion that you could have claimed was $7,600. Inreturn were not more than your income for thatrefund. 2002, you recovered $2,400 of your 2001 item-year, include in your income this year the lesser3) Subtract the result in (2) above from the ized deductions. None of the recoveries wereof:amount of taxable recoveries. This is the more than the actual deductions for 2001. In-
amount you report as other income. • Your recoveries, or clude $1,100 of the recoveries in your 2002
Page 20

Page 21 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
If Your Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,400
7,350
3,675
6,450
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
If Your
Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,500
6,600
8,200
9,050
9,900
10,750
4,525
5,375
6,225
7,075
7,550
8,650
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
And the Number
in the Box
Above is:
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,400
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,675
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,350
● Head of household, enter $6,450
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,100 ($850 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2000.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$700
Table 3. 2000 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
$250
income. This is the smaller of your recoveriesExample. During 2001, you paid $1,700 for If the limit applied, your itemized deductions
($2,400) or the amount by which your itemized were reduced by the smaller of the followingmedical expenses. From this amount you sub-
deductions were more than the standard deduc- amounts.tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted
tion ($8,700 − $7,600 = $1,100). gross income. Your actual medical expense de-• 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-
duction was $200. In 2002, you received a $500ceeded the base amount.Negative taxable income.If your taxable in-
reimbursement from your medical insurance forcome was a negative amount, reduce the recov- • 80% of your otherwise allowable deduc-your 2001 expenses. The only amount of theery you must otherwise include in your income tions other than medical and dental ex-$500 reimbursement that must be included inby the negative amount. penses, investment interest expense,your income for 2002 is $200—the amount ac- nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,tually deducted.Example. The facts are the same as in the and gambling losses.previous example except you had a negative
taxable income of $200 in 2001. You must in-Itemized deductions limited.You were sub- If the amount you recovered was deducted include $900 in your 2002 income, rather thanject to the limit on itemized deductions in thea year in which your itemized deductions were$1,100. limited, you must include it in income up to theearlier year if your adjusted gross income (AGI)
difference between the amount of itemized de-Recovery limited to deduction.You do not was more than a base amount. For example,
ductions actually allowed that year and theinclude in your income any amount of your re-this amount was:
amount you would have been allowed (thecovery that is more than the amount you de-
• For 2001, $132,950 ($66,475 if marriedgreater of your itemized deductions or your stan-ducted in the earlier year. The amount you
filing separately), dard deduction) if you had figured your deduc-include in your income is limited to the smaller
tions using only the net amount of the recoveryof: • For 2000, $128,950 ($64,475 if marrieditem.filing separately), and• The amount deducted on Schedule A To determine the part of the recovery you(Form 1040), or • For 1999, $126,600 ($63,300 if marriedmust include in income, follow the four steps
filing separately).• The amount recovered. below. If your earlier tax year does not involve
Page 21

Page 22 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
IF Your Filing Status is . . .
Your Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,300
7,200
3,600
6,350
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
IF Your
Filing Status
is . . .
THEN your
Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,350
6,400
8,050
8,900
9,750
10,600
4,450
5,300
6,150
7,000
7,400
8,450
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
AND the Number
in the Box Above
is . . .
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,300
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,600
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,200
● Head of household, enter $6,350
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,050 ($850 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 1999.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$700
Table 4. 1999 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 3.
$250
negative taxable income or an unused tax credit, credit from the tax in (a) before apply-lowed in the earlier year after applying the
ing the credit.skip steps 1 and 2 and start with step 3. limit on itemized deductions.
The result of step 4 is the amount of the recov-1) If your taxable income for the earlier year3) Figure the greater of: ery to include in your income for the year youwas a negative amount, reduce your re- receive the recovery.a) The standard deduction for the earliercovery by the negative amount.
year, or For more information on this computation,
2) If your tax for the earlier year was reduced see Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is inb) The amount of itemized deductions youto zero by a tax credit that was not fully Cumulative Bulletin 1993-2.would have been allowed for the ear-used in that year, and if reducing your de-lier year (after taking into account theduction for that year by the recovery would Example. Eileen Martin is single. She hadlimit on itemized deductions) if you hadresult in tax for that year, reduce your re- an AGI of $1,132,950 and itemized her deduc-figured them using only the net amountcovery to an amount equal to your recov- tions on her federal income tax return for 2001.of the recovery item. The net amount isery multiplied by the following fraction: She was not subject to alternative minimum taxthe amount you actually paid reduced
and was not entitled to any credit against incomeby the recovery amount (as reduced ina) Your tax for the earlier year, deter- tax. Her only allowable deduction was $40,000steps 1 and 2, if they apply).mined after reducing your deductions of state income taxes. However, Eileen de-by the recovery and applying the credit,Note. If you were required to itemize yourducted only $10,000 in 2001 because her other-over deductions in the earlier year, use step 3(b)wise allowable deductions of $40,000 wereand not step 3(a).b) The total increase in your tax for the reduced by $30,000. In 2002, she received a
earlier year, determined by subtracting $5,000 refund of her state income taxes for4) Subtract the amount in step 3 from the
2001.your actual tax before applying the amount of itemized deductions actually al-
Page 22

Page 23 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The following table shows how Eileen figured deduction and does not include any of the recov- had a recovery if there was a downward price
ery in her income for 2002. adjustment or similar adjustment on the item forthe $30,000 reduction and other amounts from
which you claimed a credit.the Itemized Deduction Worksheet in the 2001 Subject to alternative minimum tax.If you This rule does not apply to the investmentSchedule A (Form 1040) instructions. Thesewere subject to the alternative minimum tax incredit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries ofamounts are needed to figure the part of thethe year of the deduction, you will have to re-these credits are covered by other provisions of$5,000 refund that Eileen must include in hercompute your tax for the earlier year to deter-the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax Creditincome for 2002. mine if the recovery must be included in yourfor Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture of In-income. This will require a recomputation of yourAGI for 2001................ $1,132,950 vestment Credit, for details.regular tax, as shown in the preceding example,State income taxes paid in 2001 . . . $40,000
and a recomputation of your alternative mini-3% reduction (amount on line 8 of Survivor Benefitsmum tax. If inclusion of the recovery does not2001 Itemized Deduction
Worksheet) change your total tax, you do not include the Generally, payments made by or for an em- [($1,132,950 − $132,950) × 3%]. . . $30,000 recovery in your income. However, if your totalployer because of an employee’s death must be80% reduction not applied (amount tax increases by any amount, you received a taxincluded in income. The following discussionson line 4 of 2001 Itemized benefit from the deduction and you must includeDeductionWorksheet) explain the tax treatment of certain paymentsthe recovery in your income up to the amount by($40,000 × 80%) ............. $32,000 made to survivors. For additional information,which the deduction reduced your tax in the2001 deduction (amount on line 10 see Publication 559.earlier year.of 2001 Itemized Deduction
Lump-sum payments. Lump-sum paymentsWorksheet)
($40,000 − $30,000).......... $10,000 you receive from a decedent’s employer as the
Refund received in 2002 of 2001 Non-Itemized Deduction surviving spouse or beneficiary may be accrued
state income tax............. $5,000 Recoveries salary payments; distributions from employee
Net amount of 2001 state income profit-sharing, pension, annuity, or stock bonustax ($40,000 − $5,000)......... $35,000 This section discusses recovery of deductionsplans; or other items that should be treated sep-
other than those deducted on Schedule A (Formarately for tax purposes. The tax treatment ofIf Eileen had used the $35,000 net amount of1040). these lump-sum payments depends on the typestate income tax to figure her itemized deduc-
of payment.tions for 2001, the deduction allowed wouldTotal recovery included in income.If you
have been $7,000. This is her otherwise allowa-recover an amount that you deducted in an ear-Salary or wages.Salary or wages receivedble deduction of $35,000 reduced by $28,000lier year in figuring your adjusted gross income,after the death of the employee are usually ordi-($35,000 × 80%). By deducting the full $10,000you must generally include the full amount of thenary income to you.paid in 2001, she derived a tax benefit of $3,000recovery in your income in the year received.
Qualified employee retirement plans.($10,000 − $7,000). Therefore, only $3,000 ofTotal recovery not included in income.If Lump-sum distributions from qualified employeethe $5,000 refund is included in her income forany part of the deduction you took for the recov-retirement plans are subject to special tax treat-2002. ered amount did not reduce your tax, you mayment. For information on these distributions, get
be able to exclude at least part of the recoveryPublication 575 (or Publication 721 if you are theUnused tax credits.If you recover an itemfrom your income. You must include the recov-survivor of a federal employee or retiree).deducted in an earlier year in which you hadery in your income only up to the amount byunused tax credits, you must refigure the earlier Deceased public safety officers.If you are awhich the deduction reduced your tax in the yearyear’s tax to determine if you must include the survivor of a public safety officer who died in theof the deduction. (See Tax benefit rule, earlier.)recovery in your income. To do this, add the line of duty, you may be able to exclude from
amount of the recovery to your earlier year’sNegative taxable income.If your taxable in-income certain amounts you receive.
taxable income and refigure the tax and thecome was a negative amount, reduce the recov-For this purpose, the term public safety
credits on the recomputed amount. If the recom-ery by that negative amount. Include thisofficer includes police and law enforcement of-
puted tax, after application of the credits, is morereduced recovery in your income. ficers, firefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad
than the actual tax in the earlier year, include the and ambulance crew members.Unused tax credits.If you recover an itemrecovery in your income up to the amount bydeducted in an earlier year in which you hadwhich it reduced the tax in the earlier year. For Unemployment Benefitsunused tax credits, you must refigure the earlierthis purpose, any increase to an amount carriedyear’s tax to determine if you must include theover to the current year that resulted from de- The tax treatment of unemployment benefits yourecovery in your income. To do this, add theducting the recovered amount in the earlier year receive depends on the type of program payingamount of the recovery to your earlier year’sis considered to have reduced your tax in the the benefits.taxable income and refigure the tax and theearlier year. If the recovery is for an itemizedcredits on the recomputed amount. If the recom-Unemployment compensation. You must in-deduction claimed in a year in which the deduc-puted tax, after application of the credits, is moreclude in your income all unemployment compen-tions were limited, see Itemized deductions lim-than the actual tax in the earlier year, include thesation you receive. You should receive a Formited, earlier. recovery in your income up to the amount by1099–G showing the amount paid to you. Gen-If your tax, after application of the credits,which it reduced the tax in the earlier year. Forerally, you enter unemployment compensationdoes not change, you did not have a tax benefitthis purpose, any increase to an amount carriedon line 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A,from the deduction. Do not include the recoveryover to the current year that resulted from de-or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.in your income. ducting the recovered amount in the earlier year
Types of unemployment compensation.is considered to have reduced your tax in theExample. In 2001, Jean Black filed as head Unemployment compensation generally in-earlier year.of household and itemized her deductions. Her cludes any amount received under an unem-If your tax, after application of the credits,taxable income was $5,260 and her tax was ployment compensation law of the United Statesdoes not change, you did not have a tax benefit$791. She claimed a child care credit of $1,200. or of a state. It includes the following benefits.from the deduction. Do not include the recoveryThe credit reduced her tax to zero and she hadin your income. • Benefits paid by a state or the District ofan unused tax credit of $409 ($1,200 − $791). In Columbia from the Federal Unemployment2002, Jean recovered $1,000 of her itemized Trust Fund.deductions. She reduces her 2001 itemized de-Amounts Recovered for Credits
ductions by $1,000 and recomputes that year’s • State unemployment insurance benefits.
tax on taxable income of $6,260. However, the If you received a recovery in 2002 for an item for• Railroad unemployment compensationchild care credit exceeds the recomputed tax ofwhich you claimed a tax credit in an earlier year,benefits.$941. Jean’s tax liability for 2001 is not changedyou must increase your 2002 tax by the amount
by reducing her deductions by the recovery. Sheof the recovery, up to the amount by which the• Disability payments from a government
did not have a tax benefit from the recoveredcredit reduced your tax in the earlier year. You program paid as a substitute for unem-
Page 23

Page 24 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ployment compensation. (Amounts re- clude the repayment on line 34 of Form 1040, and attendant care, such as interpreter services
and write “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on the for the deaf, reader services for the blind, andceived as workers’ compensation for
dotted line next to line 34. If the amount you services to help mentally retarded persons doinjuries or illness are not unemployment
repay in a later year is more than $3,000, you their work.compensation. See Workers’ Compensa-
may be able to take a credit against your tax fortion under Sickness and Injury Benefits, Disaster relief grants.Grants made underthe later year instead of deducting the amountearlier.) the Disaster Relief Act of 1974 to help victims ofrepaid. For information on this, see Repay- natural disasters are not included in income. Do• Trade readjustment allowances under thements, later. not deduct casualty losses or medical expensesTrade Act of 1974.
that are specifically reimbursed by these disas-Private unemployment fund. Unemploy-• Benefits under the Airline Deregulation Act ter relief grants. Unemployment assistance pay-ment benefit payments from a private fund toof 1978. ments under the Act are taxable unemploymentwhich you voluntarily contribute are taxable only
compensation. See Unemployment compensa-if the amounts you receive are more than your• Unemployment assistance under the Dis-
tion under Unemployment Benefits, earlier.total payments into the fund. Report the taxableaster Relief Act Amendments of 1974.
amount on line 21 of Form 1040. Mortgage assistance payments. PaymentsGovernmental program. If you contribute made under section 235 of the National HousingPayments by a union.Benefits paid to you asto a governmental unemployment compensa- Act for mortgage assistance are not included inan unemployed member of a union from regulartion program and your contributions are not de- the homeowner’s income. Interest paid for theunion dues are included in your income on lineductible, amounts you receive under the homeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-21 of Form 1040.program are not included as unemployment gram cannot be deducted.compensation until you recover your contribu-Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re-
Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.ceive from your employer during periods of un-tions.
Payments made by a state to qualified people toemployment, under a union agreement thatRepayment of unemployment compensa- reduce their cost of winter energy use are notguarantees you full pay during the year, aretion. If you repaid in 2002 unemployment taxable.taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 ofcompensation you received in 2002, subtractForm 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of FormNutrition Program for the Elderly.Foodthe amount you repaid from the total amount you1040EZ. benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-received and enter the difference on line 19 of
gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 ofState employees. Payments similar to a
pare and serve free meals for the program,Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to yourstate’s unemployment compensation may be
include in your income as wages the cash payentry, write “Repaid” and the amount you repaid.made by the state to its employees who are not
you receive, even if you are also eligible for foodIf you repaid unemployment compensation incovered by the state’s unemployment compen-
benefits.2002 that you included in your income in ansation law. Although the payments are fully taxa-
earlier year, you can deduct the amount repaidble, do not report them as unemployment
on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize de-compensation. Report these payments on lineOther Income
ductions. See Repayments, later. 21 of Form 1040.
The following brief discussions are arranged inTax withholding.You can choose to have alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-Welfare and Otherfederal income tax withheld from your unem- cussed in greater detail in another publicationployment compensation. To make this choice,Public Assistance Benefits include a reference to that publication.complete Form W–4V, Voluntary Withholding
 Do not include in your income benefit paymentsActivity not for profit.You must include onRequest, and give it to the paying office. Tax will
from a public welfare fund, such as paymentsyour return income from an activity from whichbe withheld at 10% of your payment.
due to blindness. Payments from a state fund foryou do not expect to make a profit. An exampleIf you do not choose to have tax with-the victims of crime should not be included in theof this type of activity is a hobby or a farm youheld from your unemployment com- victims’ incomes if they are in the nature ofoperate mostly for recreation and pleasure.pensation, you may be liable forCAUTION
!
welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-Enter this income on line 21 of Form 1040.estimated tax. For more information on esti-penses that are reimbursed by such a fund. YouDeductions for expenses related to the activitymated tax, get Publication 505, Tax Withholding must include in your income any welfare pay-are limited. They cannot total more than theand Estimated Tax. ments obtained fraudulently. income you report, and can be taken only if you
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).Alaska residents. Payments the state ofSupplemental unemployment benefits. See Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publi-Alaska makes to its citizens who meet certainBenefits received from an employer-financed cation 535, Business Expenses, for informationage and residency tests that are not based onfund (to which the employees did not contribute) on whether an activity is considered carried onneed are not welfare benefits. Include them inare not unemployment compensation. They are for a profit.income on line 21 of Form 1040.taxable as wages and are subject to withholding Alaska Permanent Fund dividend income.for income tax. They may be subject to socialWork-training program. Payments you re- If you received a payment from Alaska’s mineralsecurity and Medicare taxes. For more informa-ceive from a state welfare agency for taking partincome fund (Alaska Permanent Fund divi-tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefitsin a work-training program are not included indend), report it as income on line 21 of Formin section 5 of Publication 15–A, Employer’s your income, as long as the payments (exclu-1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of FormSupplemental Tax Guide. Report these pay- sive of extra allowances for transportation or1040EZ. The state of Alaska sends each recipi-ments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A orother costs) do not total more than the publicent a document that shows the amount of theon line 1 of Form 1040EZ. welfare benefits you would have received other-payment with the check. The amount is alsowise. If the payments are more than the welfareRepayment of benefits.You may have to reported to IRS.benefits you would have received, the entirerepay some of your supplemental unemploy-amount must be included in your income asAlimony. Include in your income on line 11 ofment benefits to qualify for trade readjustmentwages. Form 1040 any alimony payments you receive.allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you Amounts you receive for child support are notrepay supplemental unemployment benefits inPersons with disabilities.If you have a disa-income to you. For complete information, getthe same year you receive them, reduce thebility, you must include in income compensationPublication 504, Divorced or Separated Individ-total benefits by the amount you repay. If youyou receive for services you perform unless theuals.repay the benefits in a later year, you mustcompensation is otherwise excluded. However,
include the full amount of the benefits in youryou do not include in income the value of goods,Below-market loans. A below-market loan is
income for the year you received them. services, and cash that you receive, not in return a loan on which no interest is charged or on
Deduct the repayment in the later year as anfor your services, but for your training and reha- which the interest is charged at a rate below the
adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (Youbilitation because you have a disability. Excluda-applicable federal rate. If you make a
cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In-ble amounts include payments for transportation below-market gift or demand loan, you must
Page 24

Page 25 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
include the forgone interest (at the federal rate) manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you. court decree, or mediation award that was in
as interest income on your return. These loans Your cost is $8,600. This is your basis on which effect (or issued on or before) September 13,
are considered a transaction in which you, the you figure gain or loss if you sell the car, and 1995, do not include in income any of those
lender, are treated as having made: depreciation if you use it for business. damages received on account of personal inju-
ries or sickness.• A loan to the borrower in exchange for aCasualty insurance and other reimburse-
note that requires the payment of interestments. You generally should not report theseCredit card insurance.Generally, if you re-
at the applicable federal rate, and reimbursements on your return. Get Publicationceive benefits under a credit card disability or
547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts, for more unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are• An additional payment to the borrower,information. taxable to you. These plans make the minimumwhich the borrower transfers back to you
monthly payment on your credit card account ifas interest. Charitable gift annuities.If you are the bene-
you cannot make the payment due to injury,ficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you must in-Depending on the transaction, the additional illness, disability, or unemployment. Report onclude the yearly annuity or fixed percentagepayment to the borrower is treated as a: line 21 of Form 1040 the amount of benefits youpayment in your income.
received during the year that is more than the• Gift, The payer will report the types of income you
amount of the premiums you paid during thereceived on Form 1099–R. Report the gross• Dividend, year.distribution from box 1 on Form 1040, line 16a,
• Contribution to capital, or on Form 1040A, line 12a, and the part taxedEnergy conservation subsidies. You canas ordinary income (box 2a minus box 3) on• Payment of compensation, or exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-Form 1040, line 16b or on Form 1040A, line 12b.vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-• Another type of payment. Report the portion taxed as capital gain onties for the purchase or installation of an energySchedule D, line 8, in column (f), and identify it inThe borrower may have to report this payment conservation measure for a dwelling unit.column (a).as income, depending on its classification. Energy conservation measure. This in-Child support payments.You should not re-For more information on below-market loans, cludes installations or modifications that are pri-port these payments on your return. Get Publi-see chapter 1 of Publication 550. marily designed to reduce consumption ofcation 504 for more information. electricity or natural gas, or improve the man-Campaign contributions. These contribu- agement of energy demand.Court awards and damages.  To determine iftions are not income to a candidate unless theysettlement amounts you receive by compromiseDwelling unit.This includes a house, apart-are diverted to his or her personal use. To beor judgment must be included in your income,ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-exempt from tax, the contributions must beyou must consider the item that the settlementlar property. If a building or structure containsspent for campaign purposes or kept in a fundreplaces. Include the following as ordinary in-both dwelling and other units, any subsidy mustfor use in future campaigns. However, interestcome. be properly allocated.earned on bank deposits, dividends received on
contributed securities, and net gains realized on1) Interest on any award. Estate and trust income. An estate or trust,sales of contributed securities are taxable and
unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal2) Compensation for lost wages or lost profitsmust be reported on Form 1120–POL, U.S.
income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estatein most cases.Income Tax Return for Certain Political Organi-
or trust, you may be taxed on your share of itszations. Excess campaign funds transferred to3) Punitive damages. It does not matter ifincome distributed or required to be distributedan office account must be included in the they relate to a physical injury or physicalto you. However, there is never a double tax.officeholder’s income on line 21 of Form 1040 insickness. Estates and trusts file their returns on Formthe year transferred.
1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and4) Amounts received in settlement of pensionCanceled sales contract.If you sell property Trusts, and your share of the income is reportedrights (if you did not contribute to the plan).(such as land or a residence) under a contract, to you on Schedule K–1 (Form 1041),5) Damages for:but the contract is canceled and you return the Beneficiary’s Share of Income, Deductions,
buyer’s money in the same tax year as the Credits, etc.a) Patent or copyright infringement,original sale, you have no income from the sale. Current income required to be distributed.If the contract is canceled and you return theb) Breach of contract, or If you are the beneficiary of an estate or trustbuyer’s money in a later tax year, you must c) Interference with business operations.that must distribute all of its current income, youinclude your gain in your income for the year of must report your share of the distributable netthe sale. When you return the money and take6) Back pay and damages for emotional dis-income, whether or not you actually received it.back the property in the later year, you treat thetress received to satisfy a claim under Titletransaction as a purchase that gives you a new Current income not required to be distrib-VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.basis in the property equal to the funds you uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate or
return to the buyer. Do not include in your income compensatorytrust and the fiduciary has the choice of whether
Special rules apply to the reacquisition ofdamages for personal physical injury or physicalto distribute all or part of the current income, you
real property where a secured indebtednesssickness (whether received in a lump sum ormust report:
(mortgage) to the original seller is involved. Forinstallments). • All income that is required to be distributedfurther information, see Repossession in Publi- Emotional distress.Damages you receive to you, whether or not it is actually distrib-cation 537, Installment Sales. for emotional distress due to a physical injury oruted, plus
sickness are treated as received for the physicalCar pools. Do not include in your income • All other amounts actually paid or creditedinjury or sickness. Do not include them in youramounts you receive from the passengers for to you,income. If the emotional distress is due to adriving a car in a car pool to and from work.
personal injury that is unrelated to a physical up to the amount of your share of distributableThese amounts are considered reimbursement
injury or sickness (for example, employment dis- net income.for your expenses. However, this rule does not
crimination or injury to reputation), you mustapply if you have developed car pool arrange- How to report. Treat each item of incomeinclude the damages in your income, except forments into a profit-making business of transport- the same way that the estate or trust would treatany damages you receive for medical care dueing workers for hire. it. For example, if a trust’s dividend income isto that emotional distress. Emotional distressdistributed to you, you report the distribution asCash rebates.  A cash rebate you receive includes physical symptoms that result fromdividend income on your return. The same rulefrom a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buyemotional distress, such as headaches, insom-applies to distributions of tax-exempt interestis not income. nia, and stomach disorders. and capital gains.
Example. You buy a new car for $9,000 Pre-existing agreement. If you receive The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell
cash and receive a $400 rebate check from the damages under a written binding agreement, you the type of items making up your share of
Page 25

Page 26 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the estate or trust income and any credits youFoster-care providers.Payments you re- Installment payments. Generally, if you
are allowed on your individual income tax return. ceive from a state, political subdivision, or a win a state lottery prize payable in installments,
qualified foster care placement agency for pro- you must include in your gross income the an-Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-viding care to qualified foster individuals in your nual payments and any amounts you receiveally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.home generally are not included in your income. designated as interest on the unpaid install-
Grantor trust.Income earned by a grantorHowever, you must include in your income pay- ments. If you sell future lottery payments for a
trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-ments received for the care of more than 5 lump sum, you must report the amount you re-
ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control overindividuals age 19 or older and certain ceive from the sale as ordinary income (line 21,
the trust. (The grantor is the one who transferreddifficulty-of-care payments. Form 1040) in the year you receive it.
property to the trust.) This rule applies if theA qualified foster individual is a person who:Form W–2G. You may have received aproperty (or income from the property) put into Form W–2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,1) Is living in a foster family home, andthe trust will or may revert (be returned) to the showing the amount of your gambling winningsgrantor or the grantor’s spouse. 2) Was placed there by: and any tax taken out of them. Include theGenerally, a trust is a grantor trust if the amount from box 1 on the Other Income line ofa) An agency of a state or one of its politi-grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at Form 1040. Include the amount shown in box 2cal subdivisions, orthe date of transfer) at more than 5% of the on your Form 1040 as federal income tax with-value of the transferred property. b) A qualified foster care placement held.
agency.Fees for services.Include all fees for your Gifts and inheritances. Generally, propertyservices in your income. Examples of these fees you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance isare amounts you receive for services you per-Difficulty-of-care payments.These are not included in your income. However, if prop-form as: additional payments that are designated by theerty you receive this way later produces income
payer as compensation for providing the addi-such as interest, dividends, or rents, that income• A corporate director,
tional care that is required for physically, men-is taxable to you. If property is given to a trust• An executor or administrator of an estate,tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified fosterand the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-
individuals. A state must determine that the ad-tributed to you, that income is also taxable to• A notary public, or
ditional compensation is needed, and the careyou. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the• An election precinct official. for which the payments are made must be pro-income from the property, that income is taxable
vided in your home. to you.
You must include in your incomeIf you are not an employee and the fees Inherited pension or IRA.If you inherited adifficulty-of-care payments received for morefor your services from the same payer pension or an individual retirement arrangementthan:total $600 or more for the year, you
TIP
(IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-may receive a Form 1099–MISC. • 10 qualified foster individuals under ageited amount in your income. See Survivors and
19, or Beneficiaries in Publication 575 if you inherited aCorporate director. Corporate director pension. See What If I Inherit an IRAin Publica-• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 orfees are self-employment income. Report these tion 590, Individual Retirement Arrangementsolder.payments on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (IRAs), if you inherited an IRA.(Form 1040).
Maintaining space in home.If you are paid Expected inheritance.If you sell an inter-Personal representatives. All personal to maintain space in your home for emergencyest in an expected inheritance from a living per-representatives must include in their gross in-foster care, you must include the payment inson, include the entire amount you receive income fees paid to them from an estate. If paid toyour income. gross income on line 21 of Form 1040.a professional executor or administrator,
Reporting taxable payments. If you re- Bequest for services.If you receive cashself-employment tax also applies to such fees.
ceive payments that you must include in youror other property as a bequest for services youFor a nonprofessional executor or administrator
income, you are in business as a foster-careperformed while the decedent was alive, the(a person serving in such capacity in an isolated
provider and you are self-employed. Report thevalue is taxable compensation.instance, such as a friend or relative of the
payments on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZdecedent), self-employment tax only applies if a Historic preservation grants.Do not include(Form 1040). Get Publication 587, Business Usetrade or business is included in the estate’s in your income any payment you receive underof Your Home (Including Use by Day-Care Prov-assets, the executor actively participates in the the National Historic Preservation Act to pre-iders), to help you determine the amount youbusiness, and the fees are related to operation serve a historically significant property.can deduct for the use of your home.of the business.
Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are notFree tour. If you received a free tour from aNotary public.Report payments for these deductible from other income. A hobby is antravel agency for organizing a group of tourists,services on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ activity from which you do not expect to make ayou must include its value in your income. Re-(Form 1040). These payments are not subject profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier in thisport the fair market value of the tour on line 21 ofto self-employment tax. (See the separate in- discussion.Form 1040 if you are not in the trade or businessstructions for Schedule C (Form 1040) for de-
of organizing tours. You cannot deduct yourtails.) If you collect stamps, coins, or other
expenses in serving as the voluntary leader of items as a hobby for recreation andElection precinct official.You should re- the group at the group’s request. If you organizepleasure, and you sell any of the items,CAUTION
!
ceive a Form W–2 showing payments for serv-tours as a trade or business, report the tour’syour gain is taxable as a capital gain. However, ifices performed as an election official or electionvalue on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Formyou sell items from your collection at a loss, youworker. Report these payments on line 7 of1040). cannot deduct the loss.Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or on line 1 of Form
1040EZ. Gambling winnings. You must include your Holocaust victims restitution.Restitutiongambling winnings in your income on line 21 ofFood program payments to day care provid- payments you receive as a Holocaust victim (orForm 1040. If you itemize your deductions oners. If you operate a day care service and the heir of a Holocaust victim) after DecemberSchedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-receive payments under the Child Care Food 31, 1999 (and interest earned on the payments,bling losses you had during the year, but only upProgram administered by the Department of Ag- including interest earned on amounts held into the amount of your winnings.riculture that are not for your services, the pay- certain escrow accounts or funds) are not taxa-
ments generally are not included in your income.Lotteries and raffles.Winnings from lotter- ble. You also do not include them in any compu-
However, you must include in your income any ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-tations in which you would ordinarily add
part of the payments you do not use to provide tion to cash winnings, you must include in your excludable income to your adjusted gross in-
food to children eligible for help under the pro- income the fair market value of bonds, cars, come, such as the computation to determine the
gram. houses, and other noncash prizes. taxable part of social security benefits. If the
Page 26

Page 27 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
payments are made in property, your basis in in the same year. Qualified higher educationalMoving expense reimbursements. You gen-
the property is its fair market value when youexpenses are those you pay for tuition anderally should not report these benefits on your
receive it. required fees at an eligible educational institu- return. Get Publication 521 for more information.
Excludable restitution payments are pay- tion for you, your spouse, or your dependent. A
ments or distributions made by any country orqualified U.S. savings bond is a series EE Prizes and awards.  If you win a prize in a
any other entity because of persecution of an bond issued after 1989 or a series I bond. Thelucky number drawing, television or radio quiz
individual on the basis of race, religion, physical bond must have been issued to you when youprogram, beauty contest, or other event, you
or mental disability, or sexual orientation by Nazi were 24 years of age or older. For more informa-must include it in your income. For example, if
Germany, any other Axis regime, or any other tion on this exclusion, see Education Savings you win a $50 prize in a photography contest,
Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whetherBond Program in chapter 1 of Publication 550.you must report this income on line 21 of Form
the payments are made under a law or as a 1040. If you refuse to accept a prize, do notInterest on state and local government obli-result of a legal action. They include compensa- include its value in your income.gations. This interest is usually exempt fromtion or reparation for property losses resulting Prizes and awards in goods or services mustfederal tax. However, you must show thefrom Nazi persecution, including proceeds be included in your income at their fair marketamount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed-under insurance policies issued before and dur- value.eral income tax return. For more information,ing World War II by European insurance compa-see State or Local Government Obligations in Employee awards or bonuses. Cashnies. chapter 1 of Publication 550. awards or bonuses given to you by your em-Amending your 2000 and 2001 returns.If ployer for good work or suggestions generallyJob interview expenses.If a prospective em-your treatment of restitution payments received must be included in your income as wages.ployer asks you to appear for an interview andin 2000 or 2001 was different from the treatment However, certain noncash employee achieve-either pays you an allowance or reimburses youdescribed above and caused you to pay more ment awards can be excluded from income. Seefor your transportation and other travel ex-tax, you should file an amended return on Form Bonuses and awards under Miscellaneouspenses, the amount you receive generally is not1040X. To claim a refund of tax, you should Compensation, earlier.taxable. You include in income only the amountgenerally file the amended return by April 15,you receive that is more than your actual ex-Prize points.If you are a salesperson and2004, for your 2000 return and April 15, 2005, forpenses. receive prize points redeemable for merchan-your 2001 return. See the form instructions for
dise, that are awarded by a distributor to em-more information. Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must be
ployees of dealers, you must include their fairincluded in your income on line 21 of Form 1040.Illegal income.Illegal income, such as stolen market value in your income. The prize pointsIf you must give the pay to your employer be-or embezzled funds, must be included in your are taxable in the year they are paid or madecause your employer continues to pay your sal-income on line 21 of Form 1040, or on Schedule available to you, rather than in the year youary while you serve on the jury, you can deductC or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) if from your redeem them for merchandise.the amount turned over to your employer as anself-employment activity. adjustment to income. Include the amount youPulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.If yourepay your employer on line 34 of Form 1040.Indian fishing rights.If you are a member of were awarded a prize in recognition of pastWrite “Jury Pay” and the amount on the dotteda qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights accomplishments in religious, charitable, scien-line next to line 34.secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act of tific, artistic, educational, literary, or civic fields,
Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not include you generally must include the value of the prizeKickbacks. You must include kickbacks, side
in your income amounts you receive from activi- in your income. However, you do not include thiscommissions, push money, or similar payments
ties related to those fishing rights. The income is prize in your income if you meet all of the follow-you receive in your income on line 21 of Form
not subject to income tax, self-employment tax, ing requirements.1040, or on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ
or employment taxes. (Form 1040) if from your self-employment activ-
1) You were selected without any action onity.Interest on frozen deposits.In general, you your part to enter the contest or proceed-exclude from your income the amount of interest ing.Example. You sell cars and help arrangeearned on a frozen deposit. A deposit is frozencar insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay2) You are not required to perform substantialif, at the end of the calendar year, you cannotback part of their commissions to you for refer-future services as a condition for receivingwithdraw any part of the deposit because:ring customers to them. You must include thethe prize or award.kickbacks in your income.• The financial institution is bankrupt or in-
3) The prize or award is transferred by thesolvent, or Manufacturer incentive payments. You payer directly to a governmental unit ormust include as other income on Form 1040, line• The state where the institution is located tax-exempt charitable organization as des-21 (or Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Formhas placed limits on withdrawals because ignated by you. The following conditions1040) if you are self-employed) incentive pay-other financial institutions in the state are apply to the transfer.ments from a manufacturer that you receive as abankrupt or insolvent.
salesperson. This is true whether you receivea) You cannot use the prize or award
Excludable amount. The amount of inter- the payment directly from the manufacturer orbefore it is transferred.
est you exclude from income for the year is the through your employer.
b) You should provide the designationinterest that was credited on the frozen deposit
before the prize or award is presentedExample. You sell cars for an automobilefor that tax year minus the sum of:
to prevent a disqualifying use. The des-dealership and receive incentive payments from
ignation should contain:1) The net amount withdrawn from the de-the automobile manufacturer every time you sell
posit during that year, and a particular model of car. You report the incen-i) The purpose of the designation bytive payments on line 21 of Form 1040.2) The amount that could have been with- making a reference to section
drawn at the end of that tax year (not re- 74(b)(3) of the Internal RevenueMedical savings accounts (Archer MSAs and
duced by any penalty for premature Code,Medicare+Choice MSAs).  You generally do
withdrawals of a time deposit). not include in income amounts you withdraw ii) A description of the prize or award,from your Archer MSA or Medicare+ChoiceThe excluded part of the interest is included in
iii) The name and address of the or-MSA if you use the money to pay for qualifiedyour income in the tax year it becomes with-
ganization to receive the prize ormedical expenses. Generally, qualified medicaldrawable.
award,expenses are those you can deduct on Sched-
Interest on qualified savings bonds.You ule A (Form 1040). For more information about iv) Your name, address, and taxpayermay be able to exclude from income the interest Archer MSAs or Medicare+Choice MSAs, see identification number, andfrom qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem ifPublication 969, Medical Savings Accounts
v) Your signature and the date signed.you pay qualified higher educational expenses(MSAs).
Page 27

Page 28 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c) In the case of an unexpected presenta- scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re- If you received other railroad retirement ben-
tion, you must return the prize or award ceive that is for: efits, see Railroad retirement annuities, earlier.
before using it (or spending, depositing, Joint return.If you are married and file a• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend aninvesting it, etc., in the case of money) joint return, you and your spouse must combineeducational institution, orand then prepare the statement as de- your incomes and your social security andscribed in (b). • Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-equivalent railroad retirement benefits when fig-
quired for courses at the educational insti-d) After the transfer, you should receive uring whether any of your combined benefits are
tution.from the payer a written response stat- taxable. Even if your spouse did not receive any
ing when and to whom the designated benefits, you must add your spouse’s income toAmounts used for room and board do not qual-
amounts were transferred. yours when figuring if any of your benefits areify. Get Publication 520 for more information on
taxable.qualified scholarships and fellowship grants.
These rules do not apply to scholarship or Taxable amount. Use the worksheet in thePayment for services.Generally, you mustfellowship awards. See Scholarships and fellow- Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruction packageinclude in income the part of any scholarship orships, later. to determine the amount of your benefits tofellowship that represents payment for past,
include in your income. Publication 915 also haspresent, or future teaching, research, or otherQualified tuition programs.A qualified tui- worksheets you can use. However, you mustservices. This applies even if all candidates for ation program (also known as a 529 plan or pro- use the worksheets in Publication 915 if any ofdegree must perform the services to receive thegram) is a program set up to allow you to either the following situations applies.degree.prepay, or contribute to an account established
Do not include in income the part of anyfor paying, a student’s qualified higher educa- • You received a lump-sum benefit paymentscholarship or fellowship representing paymenttion expenses at an eligible educational insti- during the year that is for one or morefor teaching, research, or other services if youtution. Prior to 2002, a program could be earlier years.receive the amount under the National Healthestablished and maintained only by a state or an
• You exclude qualified adoption expenses,Service Corps Scholarship Program or theagency or instrumentality of the state. Beginning
interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds,Armed Forces Health Professions Scholarshipin 2002, QTPs (formerly called QSTPs) also can
or interest paid on a student loan.and Financial Assistance Program.be established and maintained by eligible edu-
cational institutions. For information about the rules that apply to• You take the foreign earned income exclu-
The part of a distribution representing thea tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided tosion, the foreign housing exclusion or de-
amount paid or contributed to a QTP is notemployees and their families by an educationalduction, the exclusion of income from U.S.
included in income. This is a return of the invest-institution, see Publication 520. possessions, or the exclusion of income
ment in the plan. from Puerto Rico by bona fide residents ofVA payments. Allowances paid by the De-Beginning in 2002, the beneficiary generally Puerto Rico.partment of Veterans Affairs are not included indoes not include in income any earnings distrib-your income. These allowances are not consid-uted from a QTP established and maintained by Benefits may affect your IRA deduction.ered scholarship or fellowship grants.a state (or an agency or instrumentality of the You must use the special worksheets in Appen-
state) if the total distribution is less than or equalPrizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contestdix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxable
to adjusted qualified higher education ex-are not scholarships or fellowships if you do notbenefits and your IRA deduction if all of the
penses. However, until 2004, the beneficiaryhave to use the prizes for educational purposes.following conditions apply.
must include in income any earnings distributedYou must include these amounts in your income
• You receive social security or equivalentfrom a QTP established and maintained by anon line 21 of Form 1040, whether or not you use
railroad retirement benefits.eligible educational institution. See Publicationthe amounts for educational purposes.
970, Tax Benefits for Education, for more infor- • You have taxable compensation.mation. Social security and equivalent railroad re-
• You contribute to your IRA.tirement benefits.  Social security or
Railroad retirement annuities.The following equivalent railroad retirement benefits, if taxa-• You or your spouse is covered by a retire-types of payments are treated as pension orble, must be included in the income of the per-ment plan at work.annuity income and are taxable under the rulesson who has the legal right to receive the
explained in Publication 575. benefits. Whether any of your benefits are taxa-How to report. If any of your benefits areble, and the amount that is taxable, depends on• Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or Formthe amount of the benefits and your other in-more than the social security equivalent 1040A to report the taxable part. You cannot usecome.benefit. Form 1040EZ. Report your net benefits (the
Social security benefits include any monthlyamount in box 5 of your Forms SSA–1099 and• Tier 2 benefits. benefit under Title II of the Social Security ActRRB–1099) on line 20a of Form 1040, or line
and any part of a tier I railroad retirement benefit• Vested dual benefits. 14a of Form 1040A. Report the taxable part
treated as a social security benefit. Social secur-(from the last line of the worksheet) on line 20b
ity benefits do not include any supplementalof Form 1040, or on line 14b of Form 1040A.Sale of home. You may be able to exclude security income (SSI) payments.from income all or part of any gain from the sale Transporting school children. Do not in-Form SSA–1099. If you received social se-or exchange of a personal residence. Get Publi- clude in your income a school board mileagecurity benefits during the year, you will receivecation 523. allowance for taking children to and from schoolForm SSA–1099, Social Security Benefit State-if you are not in the business of taking children toSale of personal items.If you sold an itemment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed withschool. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-you owned for personal use, such as a car,your Form SSA–1099. This notice includes aing this transportation.refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, orworksheet you can use to figure whether any of
silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.your benefits are taxable. Union benefits and dues.Amounts deductedReport it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can-For an explanation of the information foundfrom your pay for union dues, assessments,not deduct a loss. on your Form SSA–1099, get Publication 915.contributions, or other payments to a union can-However, if you sold an item you held for
not be excluded from your income.Form RRB–1099. If you receivedinvestment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins,
equivalent railroad retirement or special guar-You may be able to deduct some of theseor gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain
anty benefits during the year, you will receivepayments as a miscellaneous deduction subjectand any loss is deductible as a capital loss.
Form RRB–1099, Payments by the Railroad to the 2% limit if they are related to your job and
Retirement Board.Scholarships and fellowships.A candidate if you itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form
for a degree can exclude amounts received as a For an explanation of the information found 1040). For more information, get Publication
qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified on your Form RRB–1099, get Publication 915. 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.
Page 28

Page 29 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Strike and lockout benefits.Benefits paid you can choose instead to take a tax credit for• Deductions for legal and other expenses
to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits, the year of repayment if you included the income of contesting the repayment.
including both cash and the fair market value of under a claim of right. This means that at the
other property, usually are included in your in- time you included the income, it appeared thatYear of deduction (or credit).If you use thecome as compensation. You can exclude these you had an unrestricted right to it. If you qualifycash method, you can take the deduction (orbenefits from your income only when the facts for this choice, figure your tax under both meth-credit, if applicable) for the tax year in which youclearly show that the union intended them as ods and compare the results. Use the methodactually make the repayment. If you use anygifts to you. (deduction or credit) that results in less tax. other accounting method, you can deduct the
Reimbursed union convention expenses. repayment or claim a credit for it only for the taxMethod 1. Figure your tax for 2002 claiming
If you are a delegate of your local union chapter year in which it is a proper deduction under youra deduction for the repaid amount. If you must
and you attend the annual convention of the accounting method. For example, if you use andeduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,
international union, do not include in your in- accrual method, you are entitled to the deduc-enter it on line 27 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
come amounts you receive from the interna- tion or credit in the tax year in which the obliga-Method 2. Figure your tax for 2002 claimingtional union to reimburse you for expenses of tion for the repayment accrues.a credit for the repaid amount. Follow thesetraveling away from home to attend the conven-steps.tion. You cannot deduct the reimbursed ex-
penses, even if you are reimbursed in a later1) Figure your tax for 2002 without deduct-year. If you are reimbursed for lost salary, you How To Get Tax Helping the repaid amount.must include that reimbursement in your in-
2) Refigure your tax from the earlier yearcome. You can get help with unresolved tax issues,
without including in income the amountorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques-Utility rebates.If you are a customer of an you repaid in 2002. tions, and get more information from the IRS inelectric utility company and you participate in the several ways. By selecting the method that is3) Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownutility’s energy conservation program, you may best for you, you will have quick and easy ac-on your return for the earlier year. This isreceive on your monthly electric bill either: cess to tax help.the credit.• A reduction in the purchase price of elec-
4) Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forContacting Your Taxpayer Advocate.If youtricity furnished to you (rate reduction), or
2002 figured without the deduction (step have attempted to deal with an IRS problem• A nonrefundable credit against the 1). unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-purchase price of the electricity. payer Advocate.If method 1 results in less tax, deduct theThe Taxpayer Advocate represents your in-The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,terests and concerns within the IRS by protect-able credit is not included in your income.claim a credit for the amount repaid on line 68 ofing your rights and resolving problems that haveForm 1040, and write “I.R.C. 1341” next to linenot been fixed through normal channels. While68. Taxpayer Advocates cannot change the tax law
or make a technical tax decision, they can clearRepayments Example. For 2001 you filed a return andup problems that resulted from previous con-reported your income on the cash method. Intacts and ensure that your case is given a com-If you had to repay an amount that you included2002 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2001plete and impartial review.in your income in an earlier year, you may beincome under a claim of right. Your filing statusTo contact your Taxpayer Advocate:able to deduct the amount repaid from yourin 2002 and 2001 is single. Your income and tax
income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, iffor both years are as follows: • Call the Taxpayer Advocate at
the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you 1–877–777–4778.
may be able to take a credit against your tax for 2001 • Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocatethe year in which you repaid it. Generally, you  With Income  Without Income
office in your area.can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-Taxable
Income $15,000 $10,000ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in • Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a
your trade or business or in a for-profit transac- TTY/TDD user.Tax $ 2,254 $ 1,504tion.
For more information, see Publication 1546,2002Type of deduction.The type of deduction you
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS.are allowed in the year of repayment depends
Without Deduction With Deductionon the type of income you included in the earlier Free tax services.To find out what servicesTaxableyear. You generally deduct the repayment on are available, get Publication 910, Guide to FreeIncome $49,950 $44,950the same form or schedule on which you previ- Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi-ously reported it as income. For example, if youTax $ 9,839 $ 8,489 cations and an index of tax topics. It also de-reported it as self-employment income, deduct it scribes other free tax information services,Your tax under method 1 is $8,489. Your taxas a business expense on Schedule C or Sched- including tax education and assistance pro-under method 2 is $9,089, figured as follows:ule C–EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form grams and a list of TeleTax topics.1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deductTax previously determined for 2001 $2,254it as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). If Personal computer. With your per-Less: Tax as refigured.......... − 1,504you reported it as wages, unemployment com- sonal computer and modem, you canDecrease in 2001 tax $ 750pensation, or other nonbusiness income, deduct access the IRS on the Internet atRegular tax liability for 2002....... $9,839it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction on www.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, youLess: Decrease in 2001 tax....... − 750Schedule A (Form 1040). can:Refigured tax for 2002 $9,089If you repaid social security or equivalent • See answers to frequently asked tax ques-You pay less tax using method 1, so you shouldrailroad retirement benefits, get Publication 915. tions or request help by e-mail.take a deduction for the repayment in 2002.Repayment—$3,000 or less. If the amount • Download forms and publications oryou repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it fromRepayment rules do not apply.This discus- search for forms and publications by topicyour income in the year you repaid it. If you mustsion does not apply to: or keyword.deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,
enter it on line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040).• Deductions for bad debts, • Order IRS products on-line.
Repayment—over $3,000. If the amount you • Deductions from sales to customers, such• View forms that may be filled in electroni-
repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct as returns and allowances, and similar cally, print the completed form, and then
the repayment, as described earlier. However, items, or save the form for recordkeeping.
Page 29

Page 30 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins publishedEvaluating the quality of our telephone serv-• Western part of U.S.:
ices. To ensure that IRS representatives give Western Area Distribution Centerin the last few years.
accurate, courteous, and professional answers, Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001• Search regulations and the Internal Reve-we use several methods to evaluate the quality• Central part of U.S.:nue Code. of our telephone services. One method is for aCentral Area Distribution Centersecond IRS representative to sometimes listen• Receive our electronic newsletters on hot P.O. Box 8903in on or record telephone calls. Another is to asktax issues and news. Bloomington, IL 61702–8903some callers to complete a short survey at the• Learn about the benefits of filing electroni- • Eastern part of U.S. and foreignend of the call.cally (IRS e-file). addresses:
Eastern Area Distribution Center• Get information on starting and operating Walk-in. Many products and services P.O. Box 85074a small business. are available on a walk-in basis. Richmond, VA 23261–5074
You can also reach us with your computer
• Products. You can walk in to many postusing File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov. CD-ROM for tax products. You canoffices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick uporder IRS Publication 1796, Federalcertain forms, instructions, and publica-TaxFax Service. Using the phone at- Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain:tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocerytached to your fax machine, you can
• Current tax forms, instructions, and publi-stores, copy centers, city and county gov-receive forms and instructions by call-
cations.ernments, credit unions, and office supplying 703–368–9694. Follow the directions from
stores have an extensive collection ofthe prompts. When you order forms, enter the • Prior-year tax forms and instructions.products available to print from a CD-ROMcatalog number for the form you need. The items
• Popular tax forms that may be filled inor photocopy from reproducible proofs.you request will be faxed to you. electronically, printed out for submission,Also, some IRS offices and libraries haveFor help with transmission problems, call the and saved for recordkeeping.the Internal Revenue Code, regulations,FedWorld Help Desk at 703–487–4608. Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-• Internal Revenue Bulletins.tive Bulletins available for research pur-Phone. Many services are available by poses. The CD-ROM can be purchased from Na-phone.
tional Technical Information Service (NTIS) by• Services. You can walk in to your local
calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet atIRS office to ask tax questions or get help• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica- http://www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first releasewith a tax problem. Now you can set up antions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order cur- is available in early January and the final releaseappointment by calling your local IRS of-rent and prior year forms, instructions, and is available in late February.fice number and, at the prompt, leaving apublications. message requesting Everyday Tax Solu-
CD-ROM for small businesses. IRStions help. A representative will call you• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
Publication 3207, Small Business Re-back within 2 business days to scheduleyour tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.
source Guide, is a must for every smallan in-person appointment at your conve-• Solving problems. Take advantage of Eve- business owner or any taxpayer about to start anience.
ryday Tax Solutions service by calling your business. This handy, interactive CD contains
local IRS office to set up an in-person ap- all the business tax forms, instructions and pub-Mail. You can send your order forpointment at your convenience. Check lications needed to successfully manage a busi-forms, instructions, and publications toyour local directory assistance or ness. In addition, the CD provides anthe Distribution Center nearest to youwww.irs.gov for the numbers. abundance of other helpful information, such asand receive a response within 10 workdays afterhow to prepare a business plan, finding financ-• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access your request is received. Find the address thating for your business, and much more. The de-to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829– applies to your part of the country. sign of the CD makes finding information easy4059 to ask tax questions or to order and quick and incorporates file formats andforms and publications. browsers that can be run on virtually any
• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to desktop or laptop computer.
listen to pre-recorded messages covering  It is available in March. You can get a free
various tax topics. copy by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting the
website at www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
Page 30

Page 31 of 31 of Publication 525 11:13 - 14-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Estate and trust income.... 2 5 Repayments ............ 2 9AK
Restricted property..... 10, 11Activity not for profit....... 2 4 Kickbacks.............. 2 7
Retirement contributions..... 7Adoption assistance........ 4 F
Retirement planning services . . 5Advance commissions...... 3 Faculty lodging........... 6 L
Royalties.............. 1 3Alaska Permanent Fund Fees, receipt of.......... 2 6 Life insurance:
dividend............. 2 4 Accelerated deathFinancial counseling fees.... 5
Alimony ............... 2 4 benefits............ 1 7Food program payments.... 2 6 S
Allowances and Interest option ......... 1 7Foreign employer........ 1 2 S  corporation income...... 1 3
reimbursements......... 3 Lump-sum payments ..... 2 3Form: Sale of home ........... 2 8Paid before death....... 1 7Archer MSA contributions.... 4 RRB–1099 ........... 2 8 Sale of personal items..... 2 8Permanent benefits....... 5Awards ..............3 ,  2 7 SSA–1099 ........... 2 8 Scholarships............ 2 8Premiums ............. 5W – 2 .............. 3 ,  4 School children, transport . . . 28Proceeds ............ 1 7W – 2 G .............. 2 6B Severance pay ........... 3Lodging ................ 5Foster parents andBaby-sitting............. 3 Sick pay................ 3Long-term care coverageproviders............. 2 6Back pay awards.......... 3 Sickness and injurybenefits............... 4Free tax services......... 2 9Bartering: benefits............ 14, 15Lottery winnings......... 2 6Fringe benefits:Backup withholding...... 1 6 Social security:Accident or health plan.... 4Income from .......... 1 5 Benefits............. 2 8Accounting period........ 4 MBelow-market loans....... 2 4 Payments by employer.... 3Athletic facilities......... 4 Manufacturer incentiveBonuses and awards....... 3 State income tax refundsDe minimis (minimal)...... 4 payments ............ 2 7 (see Recoveries)....... 1 8Dependent care benefits . . . 4Meals and lodging......... 5 State welfare payments.... 2 4C Employee discounts...... 5 Medical savings accounts Stock appreciation rights..... 4Campaign contributions.... 2 5 Faculty lodging.......... 6 (MSAs) .............. 2 7 Stock options:Financial counseling fees . . . 5Canceled debts.......... 1 6 Military retirement pay . . . 12, 14Employee stockLife insurance.......... 5Canceled sales contract.... 2 5 More information (See Tax help) purchase plans....... 1 0Meals and lodging....... 5Car pools.............. 2 5 Mortgage assistance Nonstatutory........... 9Moving expenseCash rebate............ 2 5 payments ............ 2 4 Statutory.............. 9reimbursed........... 6Casualty insurance and Moving expense Strike and lockout benefits . . 29No-additional-cost service . . 6other reimbursements.... 2 5 reimbursement........6 ,  2 7Provider of benefit....... 4 Student loan, canceled..... 1 6Catch-up contributions...... 7 MSAs, Archer........... 2 7Recipient of fringe benefit . . 4 Suggestions............. 2Charitable gift annuities.... 2 5 Retirement planning SupplementalChild support payments.... 2 5 services............. 5 unemployment benefits . . . 24NChild-care provider........ 3 Taxation of............ 7 Nonstatutory stock options . . . 9Transportation.......... 6Clergy................ 1 1 Note received for services.... 3 TValuation of............ 7Comments .............. 2 Nutrition Program........ 2 4 Tax help............... 2 9Working condition benefit . . . 7Commissions ............ 3 Taxpayer Advocate....... 2 9Constructive receipt of Tours, free............. 2 6Oincome ............... 2 G
Transportation..........6 ,  2 8Overseas employment..... 1 2Contributions to retirement Gambling winnings....... 2 6
Trust and estate income.... 2 5plan ................. 7 Gifts and inheritances...... 2 6
TTY/TDD information...... 2 9Cost-of-living allowances, PGifts from employer........ 4
Tuition programs, qualified . . 28government ............ 3 Parsonage, rental value of . . . 11Group-term life insurance.... 5
Tuition reduction.......... 6Court awards........... 2 5 Partnership income....... 1 3
Credit card insurance...... 2 5 Peace Corps............ 1 2HCredits, recoveries for..... 2 3 UPrepaid income........... 2Help (See Tax help)
UnemploymentPrizes and awards........ 2 7Historic preservation grants . . 26 compensation ......... 2 3Public assistance payments . . 24D Hobby income and losses . . . 26 Union benefits........... 2 8Public safety officers...... 2 3Damages .............. 2 5 Holocaust victims........ 2 6 Utility rebates........... 2 9Deceased employees,
beneficiaries of......... 2 3 QIDisability pensions, VQualified tuition programs . . . 28Illegal income........... 2 7including military and Veterans’ benefits........ 1 2Indian fishing rights....... 2 7government ........... 1 4 Volunteers............. 1 2RInheritances............ 2 6Disaster relief grants...... 2 4 Railroad retirementInsurance proceeds fromDividends, restricted stock . . . 11 Wbenefits, tier 1......... 2 8long-term care contract . . . 14
Welfare payments........ 2 4Rebate, new car purchase . . . 25Interest, not taxable....... 2 7E Work-training programs . . . 4, 24Recoveries:Interview expenses....... 2 7Educational assistance...... 4 Credits.............. 2 3 Workers’ compensation.... 1 5Itemized deductionElective deferrals.......... 7 Included in income...... 1 8recoveries............ 1 8 ■Employee compensation..... 3 Itemized deductions..... 1 8
Non-itemized deduction . . . 23Endowment proceeds...... 1 7 J Religious orders......... 1 1Energy conservation Jury duty pay........... 2 7subsidies............ 2 5 Rental of personal property . . 13
Page 31