Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 7 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\USERS\pzqbb\documents\Pub502.SGM (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ContentsDepartment of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service What’s New............................... 1
Reminder ................................. 1
Publication 502 Introduction .............................. 2Cat. No. 15002Q
What Are Medical Expenses? ................ 2
What Expenses Can You Include ThisMedical and Year? ................................. 2
How Much of the Expenses Can You
Dental Deduct? .............................. 3
Whose Medical Expenses Can You
Include? .............................. 3Expenses
What Medical Expenses Are Includible? ........ 5
(Including the Health What Expenses Are Not Includible? ........... 14
Coverage Tax Credit) How Do You Treat Reimbursements? .......... 17
How Do You Figure and Report theFor use in preparing Deduction on Your Tax Return? ........... 20
Sale of Medical Equipment or Property ......... 212007 Returns
Damages for Personal Injuries ................ 23
Impairment-Related Work Expenses ........... 24
Health Insurance Costs for Self-Employed
Persons ............................... 24
Health Coverage Tax Credit .................. 25
How To Get Tax Help ....................... 29
Index .................................... 32
What’s New
Standard mileage rate. The standard mileage rate al-
lowed for operating expenses for a car when you use it for
medical reasons is 20 cents per mile. See Transportation
under What Medical Expenses Are Includible.
Retired public safety officers. If you are a retired public
safety officer, do not include as medical expenses any
health or long-term care insurance premiums that you
elected to have paid with tax-free distributions from a
retirement plan. This applies only to distributions that
would otherwise be included in income. For more informa-
tion, see Insurance Premiums for Retired Public Safety
Officers in Publication 575.
ReminderGet forms and other information
faster and easier by:
Photographs of missing children. The Internal Reve-Internet • www.irs.gov nue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for
Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missing

Page 2 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
children selected by the Center may appear in this publica-
National Distribution Centertion on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can help
P.O. Box 8903bring these children home by looking at the photographs
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903and calling 1-800-THE-LOST (1-800-843-5678) if you rec-
ognize a child.
Tax questions. If you have a tax question, check the
information available on www.irs.gov  or call
1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax questions sent toIntroduction
either of the above addresses.This publication explains the itemized deduction for medi-
cal and dental expenses that you claim on Schedule A Useful Items(Form 1040). It discusses what expenses, and whose You may want to see:expenses, you can and cannot include in figuring the
deduction. It explains how to treat reimbursements and Publicationhow to figure the deduction. It also tells you how to report
❏ 969 Health Savings Accounts and Otherthe deduction and what to do if you sell medical property or
Tax-Favored Health Plansreceive damages for a personal injury.
Medical expenses include dental expenses, and in this Forms (and Instructions)publication, the term “medical expenses” is often used to
refer to medical and dental expenses. ❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
You can deduct only the part of your medical and dental ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductionsexpenses that is more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross
❏ 8853 Archer MSAs and Long-Term Care Insuranceincome. If your medical and dental expenses are not more
Contractsthan 7.5% of your adjusted gross income, you cannot claim
a deduction. ❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax Credit
After discussing the medical and dental expenses de-
duction, this publication explains how to treat impair-
ment-related work expenses, health insurance premiums if What Are Medical Expenses?you are self-employed, and the health coverage tax credit
that is available to certain individuals. Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, cure, mitiga-
tion, treatment, or prevention of disease, and the costs forSee How To Get Tax Help near the end of this publica-
treatments affecting any part or function of the body. Theytion for information about getting publications and forms.
include the costs of equipment, supplies, and diagnostic
devices needed for these purposes. They also includeComments and suggestions. We welcome your com- dental expenses.ments about this publication and your suggestions for Medical care expenses must be primarily to alleviate orfuture editions. prevent a physical or mental defect or illness. They do not
You can write to us at the following address: include expenses that are merely beneficial to general
health, such as vitamins or a vacation.
Medical expenses include the premiums you pay forInternal Revenue Service
insurance that covers the expenses of medical care, andIndividual Forms and Publications Branch
the amounts you pay for transportation to get medical care.SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
Medical expenses also include amounts paid for qualified1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
long-term care services and limited amounts paid for anyWashington, DC 20224
qualified long-term care insurance contract.
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
would be helpful if you would include your daytime phone What Expenses Can You
number, including the area code, in your correspondence.
Include This Year?You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asterisk
must be included in the address.) Please put “Publications You can include only the medical and dental expenses youComment” on the subject line. Although we cannot re- paid this year, regardless of when the services were pro-spond individually to each email, we do appreciate your vided. (But see Decedent under Whose Medical Expensesfeedback and will consider your comments as we revise Can You Include, later, for an exception.) If you pay medi-our tax products. cal expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver the
Ordering forms and publications. Visit www.irs.gov/ check generally is the date of payment. If you use a
formspubs to download forms and publications, call “pay-by-phone” or “online” account to pay your medical
1-800-829-3676, or write to the address below and receive expenses, the date reported on the statement of the finan-
a response within 10 days after your request is received. cial institution showing when payment was made is the
Page 2 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 3 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
date of payment. If you use a credit card, include medical
expenses you charge to your credit card in the year the Whose Medical Expensescharge is made, not when you actually pay the amount
charged.
Can You Include?If you did not claim a medical or dental expense that
would have been deductible in an earlier year, you can file You can generally include medical expenses you pay forForm 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re- yourself, as well as those you pay for someone who wasturn, for the year in which you overlooked the expense. Do your spouse or your dependent either when the servicesnot claim the expense on this year’s return. Generally, an were provided or when you paid for them. There areamended return must be filed within 3 years from the date different rules for decedents and for individuals who arethe original return was filed or within 2 years from the time the subject of multiple support agreements.the tax was paid, whichever is later.
You cannot include medical expenses that were paid by What if you are claimed as a dependent on someonean insurance company or other sources. This is true else’s return? Even if you, or your spouse if you are filingwhether the payments were made directly to you, to the a joint return, are claimed as a dependent on someonepatient, or to the provider of the medical services. else’s return, you can include the medical expenses of any
Separate returns. If you and your spouse live in a non- person you could have claimed as a dependent if you, or
community property state and file separate returns, each of your spouse if filing jointly, were not being claimed as a
you can include only the medical expenses each actually dependent on someone else’s return.
paid. Any medical expenses paid out of a joint checking
account in which you and your spouse have the same Spouseinterest are considered to have been paid equally by each
of you, unless you can show otherwise. You can include medical expenses you paid for your
spouse. To include these expenses, you must have beenCommunity property states. If you and your spouse
married either at the time your spouse received the medi-live in a community property state and file separate re-
cal services or at the time you paid the medical expenses.turns, any medical expenses paid out of community funds
are divided equally. Each of you should include half the
Example 1. Mary received medical treatment beforeexpenses. If medical expenses are paid out of the separate
she married Bill. Bill paid for the treatment after theyfunds of one spouse, only the spouse who paid the medical
married. Bill can include these expenses in figuring hisexpenses can include them. If you live in a community
medical expense deduction even if Bill and Mary file sepa-property state, are married, and file a separate return, see
rate returns.Publication 555, Community Property.
If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could not include
Mary’s expenses in his separate return. Mary would in-
clude the amounts she paid during the year in her separateHow Much of the Expenses
return. If they filed a joint return, the medical expenses
Can You Deduct? both paid during the year would be used to figure their
medical expense deduction.
You can deduct only the amount of your medical and
dental expenses that is more than 7.5% of your adjusted Example 2. This year, John paid medical expenses for
gross income (Form 1040, line 38). his wife Louise, who died last year. John married Belle this
In this publication, the term “7.5% limit” is used to refer year and they file a joint return. Because John was married
to 7.5% of your adjusted gross income. The phrase “sub- to Louise when she received the medical services, he can
ject to the 7.5% limit” is also used. This phrase means that include those expenses in figuring his medical deduction
you must subtract 7.5% (.075) of your adjusted gross for this year.
income from your medical expenses to figure your medical
expense deduction.
Dependent
Example. Your adjusted gross income is $40,000, You can include medical expenses you paid for your de-7.5% of which is $3,000. You paid medical expenses of pendent. For you to include these expenses, the person$2,500. You cannot deduct any of your medical expenses must have been your dependent either at the time thebecause they are not more than 7.5% of your adjusted medical services were provided or at the time you paid thegross income. expenses. A person generally qualifies as your dependent
for purposes of the medical expense deduction if both of
the following requirements are met.
1. The person was a qualifying child (defined later) or a
qualifying relative (defined later), and
2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national or a resi-
dent of the United States, Canada, or Mexico. If your
Publication 502 (2007) Page 3

Page 4 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
qualifying child was adopted, see Exception for 3. The child’s parents:
adopted child, next.
a. Are divorced or legally separated under a decree
of divorce or separate maintenance,Exception for adopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen or
national and your adopted child lived with you as a mem- b. Are separated under a written separation agree-
ber of your household for 2007, that child does not have to ment, or
be a U.S. citizen or national, or a resident of the United c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 months ofStates, Canada, or Mexico.
the year.
Qualifying Child This does not apply if the child’s exemption is being
claimed under a multiple support agreement.
A qualifying child is a child who:
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother, Qualifying Relative
sister, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of any
of them (for example, your grandchild, niece, or A qualifying relative is a person:
nephew),
1. Who is your:
2. At the end of 2007 was:
a. Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or a de-
a. Under age 19, scendant of any of them (for example, your
grandchild),b. Under age 24 and a full-time student, or
b. Brother, sister, or a son or daughter of either ofc. Permanently and totally disabled,
them,
3. Lived with you for more than half of 2007, and c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sibling of either
of them (for example, your grandmother, grandfa-4. Did not provide over half of his or her own support for
ther, aunt, or uncle),2007.
d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, stepmother,
Adopted child. A legally adopted child is treated as your son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law,own child. This child includes a child lawfully placed with mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, oryou for legal adoption.
e. Any other person (other than your spouse) whoYou can include medical expenses that you paid for a
lived with you all year as a member of yourchild before adoption, if the child qualified as your depen-
household if your relationship did not violate localdent when the medical services were provided or when the
law,expenses were paid.
If you pay back an adoption agency or other persons for
2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Qualifying childmedical expenses they paid under an agreement with you,
above) of any taxpayer for 2007, andyou are treated as having paid those expenses provided
you clearly substantiate that the payment is directly attribu- 3. For whom you provided over half of the support intable to the medical care of the child. 2007. But see Child of divorced or separated par-But if you pay the agency or other person for medical ents, earlier, Support claimed under a multiple sup-care that was provided and paid for before adoption negoti- port agreement, next, and Kidnapped child underations began, you cannot include them as medical ex- Qualifying Relative in Publication 501, Exemptions,penses. Standard Deduction, and Filing Information.
You may be able to take a credit for other ex-
penses related to an adoption. See the Instruc- Support claimed under a multiple support agreement.tions for Form 8839 , Qualified Adoption
TIP
If you are considered to have provided more than half of aExpenses, for more information. qualifying relative’s support under a multiple support
agreement, you can include medical expenses you pay forChild of divorced or separated parents. For purposes
that person. A multiple support agreement is used whenof the medical and dental expenses deduction, a child of
two or more people provide more than half of a person’sdivorced or separated parents can be treated as a depen-
support, but no one alone provides more than half.dent of both parents. Each parent can include the medical
expenses he or she pays for the child, even if the other For rules regarding what expenses you can include this
parent claims the child’s dependency exemption, if: year, see What Expenses Can You Include This Year,
earlier.
1. The child is in the custody of one or both parents for Any medical expenses paid by others who joined you inmore than half the year, the agreement cannot be included as medical expenses by
anyone. However, you can include the entire un-2. The child receives over half of his or her support
reimbursed amount you paid for medical expenses.during the year from his or her parents, and
Page 4 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 5 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You and your three brothers each provide
one-fourth of your mother’s total support. Under a multiple What Medical Expenses Are
support agreement, you treat your mother as your depen-
Includible?dent. You paid all of her medical expenses. Your brothers
repaid you for three-fourths of these expenses. In figuring
Following is a list of items that you can include in figuringyour medical expense deduction, you can include only
your medical expense deduction. The items are listed inone-fourth of your mother’s medical expenses. Your broth-
alphabetical order.ers cannot include any part of the expenses. However, if
you and your brothers share the nonmedical support items
and you separately pay all of your mother’s medical ex-
Abortion
penses, you can include the unreimbursed amount you
paid for her medical expenses in your medical expenses. You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for a legal abortion.
Decedent
Acupuncture
Medical expenses paid before death by the decedent are
included in figuring any deduction for medical and dental You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
expenses on the decedent’s final income tax return. This for acupuncture.
includes expenses for the decedent’s spouse and depen-
dents as well as for the decedent. AlcoholismThe survivor or personal representative of a decedent
can choose to treat certain expenses paid by the dece- You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
dent’s estate for the decedent’s medical care as paid by an inpatient’s treatment at a therapeutic center for alcohol
the decedent at the time the medical services were pro- addiction. This includes meals and lodging provided by the
vided. The expenses must be paid within the 1-year period center during treatment.
beginning with the day after the date of death. If you are the You can also include in medical expenses amounts you
survivor or personal representative making this choice, pay for transportation to and from Alcoholics Anonymous
you must attach a statement to the decedent’s Form 1040 meetings in your community if the attendance is pursuant
(or the decedent’s amended return, Form 1040X) saying to medical advice that membership in Alcoholics Anony-
that the expenses have not been and will not be claimed on mous is necessary for the treatment of a disease involving
the estate tax return. the excessive use of alcoholic liquors.
 Qualified medical expenses paid before death by
the decedent are not deductible if paid with a Ambulance
tax-free distribution from any Archer MSA orCAUTION
!
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forhealth savings account.
ambulance service.
What if the decedent’s return had been filed and the
medical expenses were not included? Form 1040X can Artificial Limb
be filed for the year or years the expenses are treated as
You can include in medical expenses the amount you paypaid, unless the period for filing an amended return for that
for an artificial limb.year has passed. Generally, an amended return must be
filed within 3 years of the date the original return was filed,
or within 2 years from the time the tax was paid, whichever
Artificial Teeth
date is later.
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
Example. John properly filed his 2006 income tax re- for artificial teeth.
turn. He died in 2007 with unpaid medical expenses of
$1,500 from 2006 and $1,800 in 2007. His survivor or Autoettepersonal representative can file an amended return for
2006 claiming a deduction based on the $1,500 medical See Wheelchair, later.
expenses. The $1,800 of medical expenses from 2007 can
be included on the decedent’s final return for 2007.
Bandages
What if you pay medical expenses of a deceased You can include in medical expenses the cost of medicalspouse or dependent? If you paid medical expenses for supplies such as bandages used to cover torn skin.your deceased spouse or dependent, include them as
medical expenses on your Form 1040 in the year paid,
whether they are paid before or after the decedent’s death.
The expenses can be included if the person was your
spouse or dependent either at the time the medical serv-
ices were provided or at the time you paid the expenses.
Publication 502 (2007) Page 5

Page 6 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Modifying stairways.Breast Reconstruction Surgery
• Adding handrails or grab bars anywhere (whether orYou can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay not in bathrooms).for breast reconstruction surgery following a mastectomy
• Modifying hardware on doors.for cancer.
• Modifying areas in front of entrance and exit door-
Birth Control Pills ways.
• Grading the ground to provide access to the resi-You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay dence.for birth control pills prescribed by a doctor.
Only reasonable costs to accommodate a home to aBraille Books and Magazines disabled condition are considered medical care. Additional
costs for personal motives, such as for architectural orYou can include in medical expenses the part of the cost of aesthetic reasons, are not medical expenses.Braille books and magazines for use by a visually impaired
person that is more than the cost of regular printed edi- Capital expense worksheet. Use Worksheet A to figure
tions. the amount of your capital expense to include in your
medical expenses.
Worksheet A. Capital Expense WorksheetCapital Expenses
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any,You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
of your medical expenses due to a home improvement.special equipment installed in a home, or for improve-
ments, if their main purpose is medical care for you, your 1. Enter the amount you paid for the homespouse, or your dependent. The cost of permanent im- improvement ..................... 1.provements that increase the value of your property may
be partly included as a medical expense. The cost of the 2. Enter the value of your home
improvement is reduced by the increase in the value of immediately after the
your property. The difference is a medical expense. If the improvement ............ 2.
value of your property is not increased by the improve- 3. Enter the value of your homement, the entire cost is included as a medical expense. immediately before theCertain improvements made to accommodate a home improvement ............ 3.to your disabled condition, or that of your spouse or your
4. Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is thedependents who live with you, do not usually increase the
increase in the value of your home due tovalue of the home and the cost can be included in full as
the improvement. .................. 4.medical expenses. These improvements include, but are
not limited to, the following items. • If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1,
you have no medical expenses due to the• Constructing entrance or exit ramps for your home.
home improvement; stop here.• Widening doorways at entrances or exits to your
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.home.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are• Widening or otherwise modifying hallways and inte-
your medical expenses due to the homerior doorways.
improvement ..................... 5.• Installing railings, support bars, or other modifica-
tions to bathrooms.
Example. You have a heart ailment. On your doctor’s• Lowering or modifying kitchen cabinets and equip-
advice, you install an elevator in your home so that you willment.
not have to climb stairs. The elevator costs $8,000. An• Moving or modifying electrical outlets and fixtures. appraisal shows that the elevator increases the value of
your home by $4,400. You figure your medical expense as• Installing porch lifts and other forms of lifts (but ele-
shown in the filled-in example of Worksheet A.vators generally add value to the house).
• Modifying fire alarms, smoke detectors, and other
warning systems.
Page 6 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 7 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Special design. You can include in medical expenses theWorksheet A. Capital Expense
difference between the cost of a regular car and a carWorksheet—Illustrated
specially designed to hold a wheelchair.
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any, Cost of operation. The includible costs of using a car forof your medical expenses due to a home improvement. medical reasons are explained under Transportation, later.
1. Enter the amount you paid for the home
Chiropractorimprovement ..................... 1. 8,000
2. Enter the value of your home You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to aimmediately after the chiropractor for medical care.improvement ............ 2. 124,400
3. Enter the value of your home Christian Science Practitioner
immediately before the
improvement ............ 3. 120,000 You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to
Christian Science practitioners for medical care.4. Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the
increase in the value of your home due to
Contact Lensesthe improvement. .................. 4. 4,400
• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1, You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay foryou have no medical expenses due to the contact lenses needed for medical reasons. You can alsohome improvement; stop here. include the cost of equipment and materials required for
using contact lenses, such as saline solution and enzyme• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.
cleaner. See Eyeglasses and Eye Surgery, later.5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are
your medical expenses due to the home
Crutchesimprovement ..................... 5. 3,600
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
to buy or rent crutches.Operation and upkeep. Amounts you pay for operation
and upkeep of a capital asset qualify as medical expenses,
Dental Treatmentas long as the main reason for them is medical care. This
rule applies even if none or only part of the original cost of You can include in medical expenses the amounts you paythe capital asset qualified as a medical care expense. for dental treatment. This includes fees paid to dentists for
X-rays, fillings, braces, extractions, dentures, etc. But seeExample. If, in the previous example, the elevator in- Teeth Whitening under What Expenses Are Not Includible,creased the value of your home by $8,000, you would have later.no medical expense for the cost of the elevator. However,
the cost of electricity to operate the elevator and any costs
Diagnostic Devicesto maintain it are medical expenses as long as the medical
reason for the elevator exists.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of devices
used in diagnosing and treating illness and disease.Improvements to property rented by a person with a
disability. Amounts paid to buy and install special plumb- Example. You have diabetes and use a blood sugaring fixtures for a person with a disability, mainly for medical test kit to monitor your blood sugar level. You can includereasons, in a rented house are medical expenses. the cost of the blood sugar test kit in your medical ex-
penses.Example. John has arthritis and a heart condition. He
cannot climb stairs or get into a bathtub. On his doctor’s
Disabled Dependent Care Expensesadvice, he installs a bathroom with a shower stall on the
first floor of his two-story rented house. The landlord did
Some disabled dependent care expenses may qualify asnot pay any of the cost of buying and installing the special
either:plumbing and did not lower the rent. John can include in
medical expenses the entire amount he paid.
• Medical expenses, or
• Work-related expenses for purposes of taking aCar credit for dependent care.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of special You can choose to apply them either way as long as you do
hand controls and other special equipment installed in a not use the same expenses to claim both a credit and a
car for the use of a person with a disability. medical expense deduction.
Publication 502 (2007) Page 7

Page 8 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Drug Addiction Health Maintenance
Organization (HMO)You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
an inpatient’s treatment at a therapeutic center for drug You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay toaddiction. This includes meals and lodging at the center entitle you, your spouse, or a dependent to receive medicalduring treatment. care from a health maintenance organization. These
amounts are treated as medical insurance premiums. See
Insurance Premiums, later.
Drugs
See Medicines, later. Hearing Aids
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a hearingEyeglasses
aid and the batteries you buy to operate it.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
eyeglasses and contact lenses needed for medical rea- Home Caresons. You can also include fees paid for eye examinations.
See Nursing Services, later.
Eye Surgery
Home ImprovementsYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for eye surgery to treat defective vision, such as laser eye See Capital Expenses, earlier.surgery or radial keratotomy.
Hospital ServicesFertility Enhancement
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forYou can include in medical expenses the cost of the the cost of inpatient care at a hospital or similar institution iffollowing procedures to overcome an inability to have chil- a principal reason for being there is to receive medicaldren. care. This includes amounts paid for meals and lodging.
Also see Lodging, later.• Procedures such as in vitro fertilization (including
temporary storage of eggs or sperm).
Insurance Premiums• Surgery, including an operation to reverse prior sur-
gery that prevented the person operated on from You can include in medical expenses insurance premiumshaving children. you pay for policies that cover medical care. Policies can
provide payment for:
• Hospitalization, surgical fees, X-rays, etc.,Founder’s Fee
• Prescription drugs,
See Lifetime Care—Advance Payments , later.
• Dental care,
• Replacement of lost or damaged contact lenses,Guide Dog or Other Animal
• Membership in an association that gives cooperativeYou can include in medical expenses the costs of buying, or so-called “free-choice” medical service, or grouptraining, and maintaining a guide dog or other animal to hospitalization and clinical care, orassist a visually-impaired or hearing-impaired person, or a
person with other physical disabilities. • Qualified long-term care insurance contracts (subject
to additional limitations). See Qualified Long-Term
Care Insurance Contracts under Long-Term Care,
Health Institute
later.
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay for
If you have a policy that provides more than one kind oftreatment at a health institute only if the treatment is pre-
payment, you can include the premiums for the medicalscribed by a physician and the physician issues a state-
care part of the policy if the charge for the medical part isment that the treatment is necessary to alleviate a physical
reasonable. The cost of the medical part must be sepa-or mental defect or illness of the individual receiving the
rately stated in the insurance contract or given to you in atreatment.
separate statement.
Note. When figuring the amount of insurance premiums
you can deduct on Schedule A, do not include any health
coverage tax credit advance payments shown in box 1 of
Page 8 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 9 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Ad- Prepaid Insurance Premiums
vance Payments.
Premiums you pay before you are age 65 for insurance for
medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents
Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Plan after you reach age 65 are medical care expenses in the
year paid if they are:Do not include in your medical and dental expenses any
insurance premiums paid by an employer-sponsored 1. Payable in equal yearly installments or more often,
health insurance plan unless the premiums are included in and
box 1 of your Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. Also, 2. Payable for at least 10 years, or until you reach agedo not include any other medical and dental expenses paid 65 (but not for less than 5 years).by the plan unless the amount paid is included in box 1 of
your Form W-2.
Unused Sick Leave Used To Pay PremiumsExample. You are a federal employee participating in
the premium conversion plan of the Federal Employee You must include in gross income cash payments youHealth Benefits (FEHB) program. Your share of the FEHB receive at the time of retirement for unused sick leave. Youpremium is paid by making a pre-tax reduction in your also must include in gross income the value of unused sicksalary. Because you are an employee whose insurance leave that, at your option, your employer applies to the costpremiums are paid with money that is never included in of your continuing participation in your employer’s healthyour gross income, you cannot deduct the premiums paid plan after you retire. You can include this cost of continuingwith that money. participation in the health plan as a medical expense.
If you participate in a health plan where your employerLong-term care services. Contributions made by your
automatically applies the value of unused sick leave to theemployer to provide coverage for qualified long-term care
cost of your continuing participation in the health plan (andservices under a flexible spending or similar arrangement
you do not have the option to receive cash), do not includemust be included in your income. This amount will be
the value of the unused sick leave in gross income. Youreported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.
cannot include this cost of continuing participation in that
health plan as a medical expense.Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). If you have
medical expenses that are reimbursed by a health reim-
bursement arrangement, you cannot include those ex-
Insurance Premiums You Cannot Includepenses in your medical expenses. This is because an HRA
is funded solely by the employer. You cannot include premiums you pay for:
• Life insurance policies,
Medicare A • Policies providing payment for loss of earnings,
If you are covered under social security (or if you are a • Policies for loss of life, limb, sight, etc.,government employee who paid Medicare tax), you are
• Policies that pay you a guaranteed amount eachenrolled in Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare A
week for a stated number of weeks if you are hospi-is not a medical expense. If you are not covered under
talized for sickness or injury,social security (or were not a government employee who
paid Medicare tax), you can voluntarily enroll in Medicare • The part of your car insurance premiums that pro-A. In this situation you can include the premiums you paid vides medical insurance coverage for all personsfor Medicare A as a medical expense. injured in or by your car because the part of the
premium for you, your spouse, and your dependents
is not stated separately from the part of the premium
Medicare B for medical care for others, or
Medicare B is a supplemental medical insurance. Premi- • Health or long-term care insurance if you elected toums you pay for Medicare B are a medical expense. If you pay these premiums with tax-free distributions fromapplied for it at age 65 or after you became disabled, you a retirement plan made directly to the insurance pro-can include in medical expenses the monthly premiums vider and these distributions would otherwise haveyou paid. If you were over age 65 or disabled when you first been included in income.enrolled, check the information you received from the So-
Taxes imposed by any governmental unit, such as Medi-cial Security Administration to find out your premium.
care taxes, are not insurance premiums.
Medicare D
Medicare D is a voluntary prescription drug insurance
program for persons with Medicare A or B. You can include
as a medical expense premiums you pay for Medicare D.
Publication 502 (2007) Page 9

Page 10 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Laboratory Fees Lodging
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals and
lodging at a hospital or similar institution if a principalfor laboratory fees that are part of medical care.
reason for being there is to receive medical care. See
Nursing Home, later.Lead-Based Paint Removal You may be able to include in medical expenses the
cost of lodging not provided in a hospital or similar institu-You can include in medical expenses the cost of removing
tion. You can include the cost of such lodging while awaylead-based paints from surfaces in your home to prevent a
from home if all of the following requirements are met.child who has or has had lead poisoning from eating the
paint. These surfaces must be in poor repair (peeling or 1. The lodging is primarily for and essential to medicalcracking) or within the child’s reach. The cost of repainting care.the scraped area is not a medical expense.
2. The medical care is provided by a doctor in a li-If, instead of removing the paint, you cover the area with
censed hospital or in a medical care facility relatedwallboard or paneling, treat these items as capital ex-
to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital.penses. See Capital Expenses, earlier. Do not include the
cost of painting the wallboard as a medical expense. 3. The lodging is not lavish or extravagant under the
circumstances.
Learning Disability 4. There is no significant element of personal pleasure,
recreation, or vacation in the travel away from home.See Special Education, later.
The amount you include in medical expenses for lodg-
ing cannot be more than $50 for each night for eachLegal Fees person. You can include lodging for a person traveling with
the person receiving the medical care. For example, if aYou can include in medical expenses legal fees you paid
parent is traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per nightthat are necessary to authorize treatment for mental ill-
can be included as a medical expense for lodging. Mealsness. However, you cannot include in medical expenses
are not included.fees for the management of a guardianship estate, fees for
Do not include the cost of lodging while away from homeconducting the affairs of the person being treated, or other
for medical treatment if that treatment is not received fromfees that are not necessary for medical care.
a doctor in a licensed hospital or in a medical care facility
related to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital or if that
Lifetime Care—Advance Payments lodging is not primarily for or essential to the medical care
received.You can include in medical expenses a part of a life-care
fee or “founder’s fee” you pay either monthly or as a lump
Long-Term Caresum under an agreement with a retirement home. The part
of the payment you include is the amount properly alloca-
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid forble to medical care. The agreement must require that you
qualified long-term care services and premiums paid forpay a specific fee as a condition for the home’s promise to
qualified long-term care insurance contracts.provide lifetime care that includes medical care. You can
use a statement from the retirement home to prove the
amount properly allocable to medical care. The statement
Qualified Long-Term Care Servicesmust be based either on the home’s prior experience or on
information from a comparable home. Qualified long-term care services are necessary diagnos-
tic, preventive, therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, re-
Dependents with disabilities. You can include in medi- habilitative services, and maintenance and personal care
cal expenses advance payments to a private institution for services (defined later) that are:
lifetime care, treatment, and training of your physically or
1. Required by a chronically ill individual, andmentally impaired child upon your death or when you
become unable to provide care. The payments must be a 2. Provided pursuant to a plan of care prescribed by a
condition for the institution’s future acceptance of your licensed health care practitioner.
child and must not be refundable.
Chronically ill individual. An individual is chronically ill if,Payments for future medical care. Generally, you can- within the previous 12 months, a licensed health carenot include in medical expenses current payments for practitioner has certified that the individual meets either ofmedical care (including medical insurance) to be provided the following descriptions.substantially beyond the end of the year. This rule does not
apply in situations where the future care is purchased in 1. He or she is unable to perform at least two activities
connection with obtaining lifetime care of the type de- of daily living without substantial assistance from an-
scribed earlier. other individual for at least 90 days, due to a loss of
Page 10 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 11 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
functional capacity. Activities of daily living are eat- Mealsing, toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing, and con-
tinence. You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals at a
hospital or similar institution if a principal reason for being2. He or she requires substantial supervision to be pro- there is to get medical care.tected from threats to health and safety due to se- You cannot include in medical expenses the cost ofvere cognitive impairment. meals that are not part of inpatient care.
Maintenance and personal care services.  Mainte- Medical Conferencesnance or personal care services is care which has as its
primary purpose the providing of a chronically ill individual You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for
with needed assistance with his or her disabilities (includ- admission and transportation to a medical conference if
ing protection from threats to health and safety due to the medical conference concerns the chronic illness of
severe cognitive impairment). yourself, your spouse, or your dependent. The costs of the
medical conference must be primarily for and necessary to
the medical care of you, your spouse, or your dependent.
Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance The majority of the time spent at the conference must beContracts spent attending sessions on medical information.
A qualified long-term care insurance contract is an insur- The cost of meals and lodging while attending the
ance contract that provides only coverage of qualified conference is not deductible as a medical ex-
long-term care services. The contract must: pense.CAUTION
!
1. Be guaranteed renewable,
Medical Information Plan2. Not provide for a cash surrender value or other
money that can be paid, assigned, pledged, or bor- You can include in medical expenses amounts paid to arowed, plan that keeps medical information in a computer data
3. Provide that refunds, other than refunds on the death bank and retrieves and furnishes the information upon
of the insured or complete surrender or cancellation request to an attending physician.
of the contract, and dividends under the contract
must be used only to reduce future premiums or Medical Servicesincrease future benefits, and
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for4. Generally not pay or reimburse expenses incurred legal medical services provided by:for services or items that would be reimbursed under
Medicare, except where Medicare is a secondary • Physicians,
payer, or the contract makes per diem or other peri- • Surgeons,odic payments without regard to expenses.
• Specialists, orThe amount of qualified long-term care premiums you
can include is limited. You can include the following as • Other medical practitioners.
medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040).
1. Qualified long-term care premiums up to the
Medicinesamounts shown below.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay fora. Age 40 or under – $290.
prescribed medicines and drugs. A prescribed drug is oneb. Age 41 to 50 – $550. that requires a prescription by a doctor for its use by an
individual. You can also include amounts you pay forc. Age 51 to 60 – $1,110.
insulin. Except for insulin, you cannot include in medicald. Age 61 to 70 – $2,950. expenses amounts you pay for a drug that is not pre-
scribed.e. Age 71 or over – $3,680.
Imported medicines and drugs. If you imported2. Unreimbursed expenses for qualified long-term care medicines or drugs from other countries, see Medicinesservices. and Drugs From Other Countries,  under What Expenses
Are Not Includible, later.Note. The limit on premiums is for each person.
Also, you cannot include premiums for long-term care
insurance if you elected to pay these premiums with
tax-free distributions from a qualified retirement plan made
directly to the insurance provider and these distributions
would otherwise have been included in income.
Publication 502 (2007) Page 11

Page 12 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
person who provides medical care. If the attendant alsoMentally Retarded, provides personal and household services, you can in-Special Home for clude as a medical expense only the amount of employ-
ment taxes paid for medical services as explained earlier.You can include in medical expenses the cost of keeping a For information on employment tax responsibilities ofmentally retarded person in a special home, not the home household employers, see Publication 926, Householdof a relative, on the recommendation of a psychiatrist to Employer’s Tax Guide.help the person adjust from life in a mental hospital to
community living.
Operations
Nursing Home You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
legal operations that are not for unnecessary cosmeticYou can include in medical expenses the cost of medical surgery. See Cosmetic Surgery under What Expenses Arecare in a nursing home, home for the aged, or similar Not Includible, later.institution, for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents.
This includes the cost of meals and lodging in the home if a
Optometristprincipal reason for being there is to get medical care.
Do not include the cost of meals and lodging if the See Eyeglasses, earlier.
reason for being in the home is personal. You can, how-
ever, include in medical expenses the part of the cost that Organ Donorsis for medical or nursing care.
See Transplants, later.
Nursing Services
OsteopathYou can include in medical expenses wages and other
amounts you pay for nursing services. The services need You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay tonot be performed by a nurse as long as the services are of an osteopath for medical care.a kind generally performed by a nurse. This includes serv-
ices connected with caring for the patient’s condition, such
Oxygenas giving medication or changing dressings, as well as
bathing and grooming the patient. These services can be You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forprovided in your home or another care facility. oxygen and oxygen equipment to relieve breathing
Generally, only the amount spent for nursing services is problems caused by a medical condition.
a medical expense. If the attendant also provides personal
and household services, amounts paid to the attendant
Prosthesismust be divided between the time spent performing house-
hold and personal services and the time spent for nursing See Artificial Limb, earlier.
services. However, certain maintenance or personal care
services provided for qualified long-term care can be in-
Psychiatric Carecluded in medical expenses. See Maintenance and per-
sonal care services under Long-Term Care , earlier. You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forAdditionally, certain expenses for household services or psychiatric care. This includes the cost of supporting afor the care of a qualifying individual incurred to allow you mentally ill dependent at a specially equipped medicalto work may qualify for the child and dependent care credit. center where the dependent receives medical care. SeeSee Publication 503, Child and Dependent Care Ex- Psychoanalysis, next, and Transportation, later.penses.
You can also include in medical expenses part of the Psychoanalysis
amount you pay for that attendant’s meals. Divide the food
expense among the household members to find the cost of You can include in medical expenses payments for psy-
the attendant’s food. Then divide that cost in the same choanalysis. However, you cannot include payments for
manner as in the preceding paragraph. If you had to pay psychoanalysis that is part of required training to be a
additional amounts for household upkeep because of the psychoanalyst.
attendant, you can include the extra amounts with your
medical expenses. This includes extra rent or utilities you Psychologistpay because you moved to a larger apartment to provide
space for the attendant. You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
a psychologist for medical care.
Employment taxes. You can include as a medical ex-
pense social security tax, FUTA, Medicare tax, and state
employment taxes you pay for a nurse, attendant, or other
Page 12 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 13 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
subtitles for hearing-impaired persons. This may be theSpecial Education
cost of an adapter that attaches to a regular set. It also may
be the part of the cost of a specially equipped televisionYou can include in medical expenses fees you pay on a
that exceeds the cost of the same model regular televisiondoctor’s recommendation for a child’s tutoring by a teacher
set.who is specially trained and qualified to work with children
who have learning disabilities caused by mental or physi-
cal impairments, including nervous system disorders.
Therapy
You can include in medical expenses the cost (tuition,
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay formeals, and lodging) of attending a school that furnishes
therapy received as medical treatment.special education to help a child to overcome learning
disabilities. A doctor must recommend that the child attend “Patterning” exercises. You can include in medicalthe school. Overcoming the learning disabilities must be a expenses amounts you pay to an individual for givingprincipal reason for attending the school, and any ordinary “patterning” exercises to a mentally retarded child. Theseeducation received must be incidental to the special edu- exercises consist mainly of coordinated physical manipula-cation provided. Special education includes: tion of the child’s arms and legs to imitate crawling and
• Teaching Braille to a visually impaired person, other normal movements.
• Teaching lip reading to a hearing-impaired person,
Transplantsor
• Giving remedial language training to correct a condi- You can include any expenses you pay for medical care
tion caused by a birth defect. you receive because you are a donor or a possible donor of
a kidney or other organ. This includes transportation.You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of You can include any expenses you pay for the medicalsending a problem child to a school where the course of care of a donor in connection with the donating of an organ.study and the disciplinary methods have a beneficial effect This includes transportation.on the child’s attitude if the availability of medical care in
the school is not a principal reason for sending the student
Transportationthere.
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid forSterilization transportation primarily for, and essential to, medical care.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a legal You can include:sterilization (a legally performed operation to make a per-
son unable to have children). • Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares or ambulance service,
• Transportation expenses of a parent who must go
Stop-Smoking Programs with a child who needs medical care,
• Transportation expenses of a nurse or other personYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
who can give injections, medications, or other treat-a program to stop smoking. However, you cannot include
ment required by a patient who is traveling to getin medical expenses amounts you pay for drugs that do not
medical care and is unable to travel alone, andrequire a prescription, such as nicotine gum or patches,
that are designed to help stop smoking. • Transportation expenses for regular visits to see a
mentally ill dependent, if these visits are recom-
Surgery mended as a part of treatment.
See Operations, earlier.
Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocket expenses,
such as the cost of gas and oil, when you use a car forTelephone medical reasons. You cannot include depreciation, insur-
ance, general repair, or maintenance expenses.You can include in medical expenses the cost of special
If you do not want to use your actual expenses, for 2007telephone equipment that lets a hearing-impaired person
you can use a standard rate of 20 cents a mile for use of acommunicate over a regular telephone. This includes tele-
car for medical reasons.typewriter (TTY) and telecommunications device for the
deaf (TDD) equipment. You can also include the cost of  You can also include parking fees and tolls. You can
repairing the equipment. add these fees and tolls to your medical expenses whether
you use actual expenses or use the standard mileage rate.
Television
Example. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for medical rea-
sons during the year. He spent $250 for gas, $5 for oil, andYou can include in medical expenses the cost of equip-
ment that displays the audio part of television programs as $50 for tolls and parking. He wants to figure the amount he
Publication 502 (2007) Page 13

Page 14 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can include in medical expenses both ways to see which Weight-Loss Programgives him the greater deduction.
He figures the actual expenses first. He adds the $250 You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
for gas, the $5 for oil, and the $50 for tolls and parking for a lose weight if it is a treatment for a specific disease diag-
total of $305. nosed by a physician (such as obesity, hypertension, or
He then figures the standard mileage amount. He multi- heart disease). This includes fees you pay for membership
plies the 2,800 miles by 20 cents a mile for a total of $560. in a weight reduction group and attendance at periodic
He then adds the $50 tolls and parking for a total of $610. meetings. You cannot include membership dues in a gym,
Bill includes the $610 of car expenses with his other health club, or spa as medical expenses, but you canmedical expenses for the year because the $610 is more include separate fees charged there for weight loss activi-than the $305 he figured using actual expenses. ties.
Transportation expenses you cannot include. You You cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages in
cannot include in medical expenses the cost of transporta- medical expenses because the diet food and beverages
tion in the following situations. substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-
tional needs. You can include the cost of special food in• Going to and from work, even if your condition re- medical expenses only if:quires an unusual means of transportation.
1. The food does not satisfy normal nutritional needs,• Travel for purely personal reasons to another city for
an operation or other medical care. 2. The food alleviates or treats an illness, and
• Travel that is merely for the general improvement of 3. The need for the food is substantiated by a physi-one’s health. cian.
• The costs of operating a specially equipped car for The amount you can include in medical expenses is limitedother than medical reasons. to the amount by which the cost of the special food ex-
ceeds the cost of a normal diet. See also Weight-Loss
Program under What Expenses Are Not Includible, later.
Trips
WheelchairYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
transportation to another city if the trip is primarily for, and You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay foressential to, receiving medical services. You may be able an autoette or a wheelchair used mainly for the relief ofto include up to $50 per night for lodging. See Lodging, sickness or disability, and not just to provide transportationearlier. to and from work. The cost of operating and maintainingYou cannot include in medical expenses a trip or vaca- the autoette or wheelchair is also a medical expense.tion taken merely for a change in environment, improve-
ment of morale, or general improvement of health, even if
the trip is made on the advice of a doctor. However, see
Wig
Medical Conferences, earlier.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a wig
purchased upon the advice of a physician for the mentalTuition health of a patient who has lost all of his or her hair from
disease.Under special circumstances, you can include charges for
tuition in medical expenses. See Special Education, ear-
lier.
X-ray
You can include charges for a health plan included in a
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forlump-sum tuition fee if the charges are separately stated or
X-rays for medical reasons.can easily be obtained from the school.
Vasectomy
What Expenses Are Not
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for a vasectomy. Includible?
Following is a list of some items that you cannot include inVision Correction Surgery
figuring your medical expense deduction. The items are
listed in alphabetical order.See Eye Surgery, earlier.
Page 14 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 15 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
account if you contribute a part of your income on a pre-taxBaby Sitting, Childcare, and Nursing basis to pay for the qualified benefit.Services for a Normal, Healthy Baby
Funeral ExpensesYou cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for the care of children, even if the expenses enable you, You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you payyour spouse, or your dependent to get medical or dental for funerals.treatment. Also, any expense allowed as a childcare credit
cannot be treated as an expense paid for medical care.
Future Medical Care
Controlled Substances Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses current
payments for medical care (including medical insurance)You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay to be provided substantially beyond the end of the year.for controlled substances (such as marijuana, laetrile, This rule does not apply in situations where the future careetc.), in violation of federal law. is purchased in connection with obtaining lifetime care or
long-term care of the type described at Lifetime Care—
Cosmetic Surgery Advance Payments  or Long-Term Care,  earlier under
What Medical Expenses Are Includible.
Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses the
amount you pay for unnecessary cosmetic surgery. This Hair Transplantincludes any procedure that is directed at improving the
patient’s appearance and does not meaningfully promote See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
the proper function of the body or prevent or treat illness or
disease. You generally cannot include in medical ex-
Health Club Duespenses the amount you pay for procedures such as face
lifts, hair transplants, hair removal (electrolysis), and li- You cannot include in medical expenses health club dues,
posuction. or amounts paid to improve one’s general health or to
You can include in medical expenses the amount you relieve physical or mental discomfort not related to a partic-
pay for cosmetic surgery if it is necessary to improve a ular medical condition.
deformity arising from, or directly related to, a congenital You cannot include in medical expenses the cost ofabnormality, a personal injury resulting from an accident or membership in any club organized for business, pleasure,trauma, or a disfiguring disease. recreation, or other social purpose.
Example. An individual undergoes surgery that
Health Coverage Tax Creditremoves a breast as part of treatment for cancer. She pays
a surgeon to reconstruct the breast. The surgery to recon- You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you paystruct the breast corrects a deformity directly related to the for health insurance that you use in figuring your healthdisease. The cost of the surgery is includible in her medical coverage tax credit. For more information, see Healthexpenses. Coverage Tax Credit, later.
Dancing Lessons Health Savings Accounts
You cannot include the cost of dancing lessons, swimming You cannot include in medical expenses any payment orlessons, etc., even if they are recommended by a doctor, if distribution for medical expenses out of a health savingsthey are only for the improvement of general health. account. Contributions to health savings accounts are de-
ducted separately. See Publication 969.
Diaper Service
Household HelpYou cannot include in medical expenses the amount you
pay for diapers or diaper services, unless they are needed You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of house-to relieve the effects of a particular disease. hold help, even if such help is recommended by a doctor.
This is a personal expense that is not deductible. However,
Electrolysis or Hair Removal you may be able to include certain expenses paid to a
person providing nursing-type services. For more informa-
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier. tion, see Nursing Services,  earlier under What Medical
Expenses Are Includible . Also, certain maintenance or
personal care services provided for qualified long-term
Flexible Spending Account
care can be included in medical expenses. For more infor-
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts for mation, see Long-Term Care, earlier under What Medical
which you are fully reimbursed by your flexible spending Expenses Are Includible.
Publication 502 (2007) Page 15

Page 16 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Illegal Operations and Treatments Personal Use Items
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of an
item ordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposesfor illegal operations, treatments, or controlled substances
unless it is used primarily to prevent or alleviate a physicalwhether rendered or prescribed by licensed or unlicensed
or mental defect or illness. For example, the cost of apractitioners.
toothbrush and toothpaste is a nondeductible personal
expense.Insurance Premiums
Where an item purchased in a special form primarily to
See Insurance Premiums under What Medical Expenses alleviate a physical defect is one that in normal form is
Are Includible, earlier. ordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposes, the
excess of the cost of the special form over the cost of the
normal form is a medical expense (see Braille Books and
Maternity Clothes
Magazines under What Medical Expenses Are Includible ,
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay earlier).
for maternity clothes.
Swimming Lessons
Medical Savings Account (MSA)
See Dancing Lessons, earlier.
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you
contribute to an Archer MSA. You cannot include medical Teeth Whitening
expenses you pay for with a tax-free distribution from your
Archer MSA. You also cannot use other funds equal to the You cannot include in medical expenses amounts paid to
amount of the distribution and include the expenses. For whiten teeth. See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
more information on Archer MSAs, see Publication 969.
Veterinary Fees
Medicines and Drugs From Other
You, generally, cannot include veterinary fees in your med-Countries ical expenses, but see Guide Dog or Other Animal  under
What Medical Expenses Are Includible earlier.In general, you cannot include in your medical expenses
the cost of a prescribed drug brought in (or ordered
Weight-Loss Programshipped) from another country, because you can only
include the cost of a drug that was imported legally. (You You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of acan include the cost of a prescribed drug the Food and weight-loss program if the purpose of the weight loss is theDrug Administration announces can be legally imported by improvement of appearance, general health, or sense ofindividuals.) However, you can include the cost of a pre- well-being. You cannot include amounts you pay to losescribed drug you purchase and consume in another coun- weight unless the weight loss is a treatment for a specifictry if the drug is legal in both the other country and the disease diagnosed by a physician (such as obesity, hyper-United States. tension, or heart disease). This includes fees you pay for
membership in a weight reduction group and attendance at
Nonprescription Drugs and Medicines periodic meetings. Also, you cannot include membership
dues in a gym, health club, or spa.
Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical expenses
You cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages inamounts you pay for a drug that is not prescribed.
medical expenses because the diet food and beverages
substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-Example. Your doctor recommends that you take aspi-
tional needs. You cannot include the cost of special food inrin. Because aspirin is a drug that does not require a
medical expenses unless all three of the following require-physician’s prescription, you cannot include its cost in your ments are met.medical expenses.
1. The food does not satisfy normal nutritional needs.
Nutritional Supplements 2. The food alleviates or treats an illness.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of nutri- 3. The need for the food is substantiated by a physi-
tional supplements, vitamins, herbal supplements, “natural cian.
medicines,” etc. unless they are recommended by a medi- The amount you can include in medical expenses is limitedcal practitioner as treatment for a specific medical condi- to the amount by which the cost of the special food ex-tion diagnosed by a physician. Otherwise, these items are ceeds the cost of a normal diet.taken to maintain your ordinary good health, and are not
for medical care.
Page 16 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 17 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How Do You Treat
Reimbursements?
You can include in medical expenses only those amounts
paid during the tax year for which you received no insur-
ance or other reimbursement.
Insurance Reimbursement
You must reduce your total medical expenses for the year
by all reimbursements for medical expenses that you re-
ceive from insurance or other sources during the year. This
includes payments from Medicare.
Even if a policy provides reimbursement only for certain
specific medical expenses, you must use amounts you
receive from that policy to reduce your total medical ex-
penses, including those it does not provide reimbursement
for.
Example. You have insurance policies which cover
your hospital and doctors’ bills but not your nursing bills.
The insurance you receive for the hospital and doctors’
bills is more than their charges. In figuring your medical
deduction, you must reduce the total amount you spent for
medical care by the total amount of insurance you received
even if the policies do not cover some of your medical
expenses.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). A health
reimbursement arrangement is an employer-funded plan
that reimburses employees for medical care expenses and
allows unused amounts to be carried forward. An HRA is
funded solely by the employer and the reimbursements for
medical expenses, up to a maximum dollar amount for a
coverage period, are not included in your income.
Figure 1.
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this publication.
Was any part of
your premiums
paid by your
employer?
Were your
employer’s
contributions to
your premiums
included in your
income?
Did you pay any
part of the
premiums?
NONE of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Is Your Excess Medical
Reimbursement Taxable?
Other reimbursements. Generally, you do not reduce
medical expenses by payments you receive for: Premiums paid by you. If you pay the entire premium for
• Permanent loss or loss of use of a member or func- your medical insurance or all the costs of a plan similar to
tion of the body (loss of limb, sight, hearing, etc.) or medical insurance, and your insurance payments or other
disfigurement to the extent the payment is based on reimbursements are more than your total medical ex-
the nature of the injury without regard to the amount penses for the year, you have excess reimbursement.of time lost from work, or Generally, you do not include the excess reimbursement in
• Loss of earnings. your gross income. However, gross income does include
total payments in excess of $260 a day ($94,900 for 2007)
You must, however, reduce your medical expenses by for qualified long-term care services.
any part of these payments that is designated for medical
costs. See How Do You Figure and Report the Deduction Premiums paid by you and your employer. If both youon Your Tax Return, later. and your employer contribute to your medical insuranceFor how to treat damages received for personal injury or
plan and your employer’s contributions are not included insickness, see Damages for Personal Injuries, later.
your gross income, you must include in your gross income
the part of your excess reimbursement that is from your
What If Your Insurance Reimbursement Is employer’s contribution.
More Than Your Medical Expenses? If you are not covered by more than one policy, you can
figure the amount of the excess reimbursement you mustIf you are reimbursed more than your medical expenses,
include in gross income using Worksheet B. If you areyou may have to include the excess in income. You may
covered under more than one policy, see More then onewant to use Figure 1 to help you decide if any of your
policy, later.reimbursement is taxable.
Publication 502 (2007) Page 17

Page 18 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must include in your gross income 30% (.30) ofWorksheet B. Excess Reimbursement
$500, or $150, of the excess reimbursement you receivedIncludible in Income When
for medical expenses under the policy.You Have Only One Policy
Premiums paid by your employer. If your employer orInstructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of your former employer pays the total cost of your medicalexcess reimbursement you must include in income when both insurance plan and your employer’s contributions are notyou and your employer contributed to your medical insurance
included in your income, you must report all of your excessand your employer’s contributions are not included in your
reimbursement as other income.gross income.
More than one policy. If you are covered under more1. Enter the amount contributed to your than one policy, the cost of at least one of which is paid bymedical insurance for the year by both you and your employer, you must first divide theyour employer ................. 1. medical expenses among the policies to figure the excess
2. Enter the total annual cost of the reimbursement from each policy. Then divide the policy
policy ....................... 2. costs to figure the part of any excess reimbursement that is
from your employer’s contribution. Any excess reimburse-3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ........... 3. ment that is due to your employer’s contributions is includi-
4. Enter the amount of excess ble in your income.
reimbursement ................ 4. You can figure the part of the excess reimbursement
that is from your employer’s contribution by using Work-5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the sheet C. Use Worksheet C only if both you and youramount of the excess reimburse- employer paid part of the cost of at least one policy. If youment you must include as other
had more than one policy, but you did not share in the costincome on Form 1040, line 21 ..... 5.
of at least one policy, do not use Worksheet C.
Worksheet C. Excess ReimbursementExample. You are covered by your employer’s medical
insurance policy. The annual premium is $2,000. Your Includible in Income When
employer pays $600 of that amount, which is not included You Have More Than One
in your gross income, and the balance of $1,400 is taken Policy
out of your wages. You receive $500 excess reimburse-
ment for your medical expenses. The part of the excess
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of
excess reimbursement you must include as income on yourreimbursement you receive under the policy that is from
tax return when a) you are reimbursed under two or moreyour employer’s contributions is figured as follows.
health insurance policies, b) at least one of which is paid for
by both you and your employer, and c) your employer’s
Worksheet B. Excess Reimbursement contributions are not included in your gross income. If you
Includible in Income When and your employer did not share in the cost of at least one
policy, do not use this worksheet.You Have Only One Policy—
Illustrated 1. Enter the reimbursement from your
employer’s policy................ 1.Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of
excess reimbursement you must include in income when both 2. Enter the reimbursement from youryou and your employer contributed to your medical insurance own policy ..................... 2.and your employer’s contributions are not included in your
gross income. 3. Add lines 1 and 2 ................ 3.
4. Divide line 1 by line 3. ............ 4.1. Enter the amount contributed to your
medical insurance for the year by 5. Enter the total medical expenses youyour employer ................. 1. 600 paid during the year. If this amount is
at least as much as the amount on line2. Enter the total annual cost of the
3, stop here because there is nopolicy ....................... 2. 2,000
excess reimbursement. ........... 5.3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ........... 3. .30
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ............ 6.4. Enter the amount of excess
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1 ......... 7.reimbursement ................ 4. 500
8. Enter employer’s contribution to the5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the
annual cost of the employer’s policy . . 8.amount of the excess reimburse-
ment you must include as other
income on Form 1040, line 21 ..... 5. 150
Page 18 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 19 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet C. Excess Reimbursement9. Enter total annual cost of the
Includible in Income Whenemployer’s policy................ 9.
You Have More Than One10. Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the Policy—Illustratedpercentage of your total excess
reimbursement you must report as Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount ofother income ................... 10. excess reimbursement you must include as income on your
tax return when a) you are reimbursed under two or more11. Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the
health insurance policies, b) at least one of which is paid foramount of your total excess by both you and your employer, and c) your employer’sreimbursement you must report as contributions are not included in your gross income. If youother income on Form 1040, line 21 . . 11. and your employer did not share in the cost of at least one
policy, do not use this worksheet.
Example. You are covered by your employer’s health 1. Enter the reimbursement from your
insurance policy. The annual premium is $1,200. Your employer’s policy................. 1. 2,400
employer pays $300 and the balance of $900 is deducted
2. Enter the reimbursement from your ownfrom your wages. You also paid the entire premium ($250) policy .......................... 2. 1,600for a personal health insurance policy.
During the year, you paid medical expenses of $3,600. 3. Add lines 1 and 2 ................. 3. 4,000
In the same year, you were reimbursed $2,400 under your
4. Divide line 1 by line 3 .............. 4. .60employer’s policy and $1,600 under your own personal
policy. The amount you must report as other income is 5. Enter the total medical expenses you
figured as follows. paid during the year. If this amount is at
least as much as the amount on line 3,
stop here because there is no excess
reimbursement. .................. 5. 3,600
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ............. 6. 2,160
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1 .......... 7. 240
8. Enter employer’s contribution to the
annual cost of the employer’s policy . . . 8. 300
9. Enter total annual cost of the
employer’s policy................. 9. 1,200
10. Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the
percentage of your total excess
reimbursement you must report as
other income .................... 10. .25
11. Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the
amount of your total excess
reimbursement you must report as
other income on Form 1040, line 21 . . . 11. 60
What If You Receive Insurance
Reimbursement in a Later Year?
If you are reimbursed in a later year for medical expenses
you deducted in an earlier year, you generally must report
the reimbursement as income up to the amount you previ-
ously deducted as medical expenses.
However, you do not report as income the amount of
reimbursement you received up to the amount of your
medical deductions that did not reduce your tax for the
earlier year.
For more information about the recovery of an amount
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier
year, see Recoveries in Publication 525, Taxable and
Nontaxable Income.
Publication 502 (2007) Page 19

Page 20 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 2. Enter your adjusted gross income from FormWhat If You Are Reimbursed for Medical
1040, line 38.Expenses You Did Not Deduct?
If you did not deduct a medical expense in the year you Line 3. Multiply the amount on line 2 (adjusted grosspaid it because your medical expenses were not more than income) by 7.5% (.075) and enter the result.7.5% of your adjusted gross income, or because you did
not itemize deductions, do not include the reimbursement,
Line 4. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-. Otherwise,up to the amount of the expense, in income. However, if
subtract the amount on line 3 from the amount on line 1.the reimbursement is more than the expense, see What If
Your Insurance Reimbursement Is More Than Your Medi- This is your deduction for medical and dental expenses.
cal Expenses, earlier.
Example. Bill and Helen Jones belong to a group medi-
Example. Last year, you had $500 of medical ex- cal plan and part of their insurance is paid by Bill’s em-
penses. You cannot deduct the $500 because it is less ployer. They file a joint return, and their adjusted gross
than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income. If, in a later year, income is $33,004. The following list shows the net
you are reimbursed for any of the $500 of medical ex- amounts, after insurance reimbursements, that Bill andpenses, you do not include that amount in your gross Helen paid this year for medical expenses.income.
1. For themselves, Bill and Helen paid $375 for pre-
scription medicines and drugs, $337 for hospital bills,
$439 for doctor bills, $295 for hospitalization insur-How Do You Figure and Report
ance, $380 for medical and surgical insurance, and
the Deduction on Your Tax $33 for transportation for medical treatment, which
totals $1,859.
Return?
2. For Grace Taylor (Helen’s dependent mother), they
Once you have determined which medical care expenses paid $300 for doctors, $300 for insulin, and $175 for
you can include, figure and report the deduction on your eyeglasses, which totals $775.
tax return.
3. For Betty Jones (Bill’s dependent sister), they paid
$450 for doctors and $350 for prescription medicinesWhat Tax Form Do You Use? and drugs, which totals $800.
You report your medical expense deduction on Schedule Bill and Helen add all their medical and dental expenses
A, Form 1040. You cannot claim medical expenses on together ($1,859 + $775 + $800 = $3,434). They figure
Form 1040A, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, or Form their deduction on the medical and dental expenses part of1040EZ, Income Tax Return for Single and Joint Filers Schedule A, Form 1040, as shown.With No Dependents. An example of a filled-in medical and
dental expense part of Schedule A is shown. Recordkeeping. For each medical expense, you
should keep a record of:
How Do You Figure Your Deduction?
RECORDS
To figure your medical and dental expense deduction, • The name and address of each person you paid,
complete lines 1 through 4 of Schedule A, Form 1040, as and
follows: • The amount and date of each payment.
Line 1. Enter the amount you paid for medical expenses
after reducing the amount by payments you received from
insurance and other sources.
000 00 0000
3,434
2,475
33,004
959
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and 
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-2)1
22
3Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 38
(99) /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A&B (Form 1040).
Bill and Helen Jones
2007
Page 20 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 21 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can keep a record like the following.
Record of medical expenses
Name of person Address of person Amount paid Date paid Transportation
you paid you paid (mileage, taxi, etc.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
You should also keep a statement or itemized invoice
showing the following. Sale of Medical Equipment or
• What medical care was received. Property
• Who received the care.
If you deduct the cost of medical equipment or property in• The nature and purpose of any other medical ex- one year and sell it in a later year, you may have a taxablepenses. gain. The taxable gain is the amount of the selling price
that is more than the adjusted basis of the equipment or• Who the other medical expenses were for.
property.• The amount of the other medical expenses and the The adjusted basis is the portion of the cost of thedate of payment. equipment or property that you could not deduct because
of the 7.5% limit used to compute the medical deduction.Do not send these records with your return.
Use Worksheet D, later, to figure the adjusted basis of the
equipment or property.
Publication 502 (2007) Page 21

Page 22 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical Worksheet E. Gain or Loss On the Sale of
Equipment or Property Sold Medical Equipment or
Property
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of
medical equipment or property in one year and sold the Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure total gainequipment or property in a later year. This worksheet will give or loss on the sale of medical equipment or property that youyou the adjusted basis of the equipment or property you sold. deducted in an earlier year.
1. Enter the cost of the equipment 1. Enter the amount that the medicalor property. ................ 1. equipment or property sold for ...... 1.
2. Enter your total includible medical 2. Enter your selling expenses ....... 2.expenses for the year you
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ......... 3.included the cost in your medical
expenses .................. 2. 4. Enter the adjusted basis of the
equipment or property from line 5 or3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ......... 3.
Worksheet D, line 12 ............. 4.4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is theyear the cost was included in your
total gain or loss from the sale of themedical expenses ........... 4.
medical equipment or property. ..... 5.5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your
allowable itemized deductions for If you have a loss, it is not deductible. If you have a gain,the year you purchased the it is includible in your income. The part of the gain that is aequipment or property were not recovery of an amount you previously deducted is taxablemore than your AGI for that year, as ordinary income. Enter it on Form 1040, line 21. Anystop here. This is the adjusted part of the gain that is more than the recovery of an amountbasis of the equipment or you previously deducted is taxable as a capital gain. Enterproperty. If your allowable it on Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains and Losses.itemized deductions for the year
For more information about the recovery of an amountyou purchased the equipment or
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlierproperty were more than your
year, see Recoveries in Publication 525.AGI for that year, complete lines
6 through 11 ............... 5.
Example. You have a heart condition and difficulty6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ...... 6. breathing. Your doctor prescribed oxygen equipment to
help you breathe. Last year, you bought the oxygen equip-7. Enter your total allowable
ment for $3,000. You itemized deductions and included ititemized deductions for the year
in your medical expense deduction.the cost was included in your
medical expenses ........... 7. Last year you also paid $10,750 for deductible medical
services and $6,400 for other itemized deductions. Your8. Divide line 6 by line 7 ......... 8. adjusted gross income (AGI) was $15,000.
9. Enter your AGI for the year the Taking into account the 7.5% limit on medical expenses,
cost was included in your medical your allowable itemized deductions totaled $19,025, fig-
expenses .................. 9. ured as follows:
10. Subtract line 9 from line 7 ...... 10. Oxygen equipment ..................... 3,000
11. Multiply line 8 by line 10. ...... 11. Medical services ....................... 10,750
Total medical expenses ................. 13,75012. Add line 5 to line 11. If your 7.5% of AGI (.075 × $15,000) ............. −1,125allowable itemized deductions for Allowable medical expense deduction ....... 12,625the year you purchased the Other itemized deductions ............... 6,400equipment or property were more
than your AGI for that year, this is Allowable itemized deductions ............ 19,025the adjusted basis of the
equipment or property ........ 12.
Next, use Worksheet E to figure the total gain or loss on You figure your adjusted basis as shown on the filled-in
the sale of the medical equipment or property. Worksheet D.
Page 22 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 23 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical Worksheet E. Gain or Loss On the Sale of
Equipment or Property Medical Equipment or
Sold—Illustrated Property—Illustrated
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure gain or
medical equipment or property in one year and sold the loss on the sale of medical equipment or property that you
equipment or property in a later year. This worksheet will give deducted in an earlier year.
you the adjusted basis of the equipment or property you sold.
1. Enter the amount that the medical
1. Enter the cost of the equipment equipment or property sold for ..... 1. 2,025
or property. ................ 1. 3,000 2. Enter your selling expenses ....... 2. 25
2. Enter your total includible 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ......... 3. 2,000medical expenses for the year
you included the cost in your 4. Enter the adjusted basis of themedical expenses ........... 2. 13,750 equipment or property from line 5 or
Worksheet D, line 12 ............ 4. 8293. Divide line 1 by line 2 ......... 3. .218
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the total gain or loss from the sale of theyear the cost was included in medical equipment or property. ..... 5. 1,171your medical expenses ....... 4. 1,125
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your
Determining gain. The taxable gain is the amount ofallowable itemized deductions for
the selling price that is more than the equipment’s adjustedthe year you purchased the
basis. You realized a gain of $1,171. In this case, the entireequipment or property were not
amount represents the recovery of an amount previouslymore than your AGI for that year,
stop here. This is the adjusted deducted for federal income tax purposes and is taxable as
basis of the equipment or ordinary income.
property. If your allowable
itemized deductions for the year
you purchased the equipment or Damages for Personal Injuriesproperty were more than your
AGI for that year, complete lines If you receive an amount in settlement of a personal injury6 through 11 ............... 5. 245
suit, part of that award may be for medical expenses that
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ...... 6. 2,755 you deducted in an earlier year. If it is, you must include
that part in your income in the year you receive it to the7. Enter your total allowable extent it reduced your taxable income in the earlier year.itemized deductions for the year
See What If You Receive Insurance Reimbursement in athe cost was included in your
Later Year , discussed earlier under How Do You Treatmedical expenses ........... 7. 19,025
Reimbursements.
8. Divide line 6 by line 7 ......... 8. .145
Example. You sued this year for injuries you suffered in9. Enter your AGI for the year the
an accident last year. You sought $10,000 for your injuriescost was included in your
and did not itemize your damages. Last year, you paidmedical expenses ........... 9. 15,000
$500 for medical expenses for your injuries. You deducted10. Subtract line 9 from line 7 ...... 10. 4,025 those expenses on last year’s tax return. This year you
settled your lawsuit for $2,000. Your settlement did not11. Multiply line 8 by line 10. ...... 11. 584
itemize or allocate the damages. The $2,000 is first pre-
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your sumed to be for the medical expenses that you deducted.allowable itemized deductions for The $500 is includible in your income this year because thethe year you purchased the entire $500 was allowed as a medical expense deductionequipment or property were more last year.than your AGI for that year, this
is the adjusted basis of the Future medical expenses. If you receive an amount inequipment or property. ........ 12. 829 settlement of a damage suit for personal injuries, part of
that award may be for future medical expenses. If it is, youThis year you sold the oxygen equipment for $2,025 and
must reduce any future medical expenses for these injuriesyou had selling expenses of $25. You must report on this
until the amount you received has been completely used.year’s tax return part of the $2,000 as ordinary income. To
compute the part of the sales price that is taxable, you
Example. You were injured in an accident. You suedmust determine the gain by subtracting the total adjusted
and sought a judgment of $50,000 for your injuries. Youbasis from the selling price.
settled the suit for $45,000. The settlement provided that
Publication 502 (2007) Page 23

Page 24 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$10,000 of the $45,000 was for future medical expenses working hours at your place of work and outside your
for your injuries. You cannot include the first $10,000 that regular working hours away from your place of work. The
you pay for medical expenses for those injuries. reader’s services are only for your work. You can deduct
your expenses for the reader as business expenses.
Workers’ compensation. If you received workers’ com-
pensation and you deducted medical expenses related to
that injury, you must include the workers’ compensation in Health Insurance Costs forincome up to the amount you deducted. If you received
workers’ compensation, but did not deduct medical ex-
Self-Employed Personspenses related to that injury, no workers’ compensation is
includible in your income. If you were self-employed and had a net profit for the year,
were a general partner (or a limited partner receiving
guaranteed payments), or received wages from an S cor-
poration in which you were a more than 2% shareholder
Impairment-Related Work
(who is treated as a partner), you may be able to deduct, as
Expenses an adjustment to income, all of the amount paid for medical
and qualified long-term care insurance on behalf of your-
If you are disabled, you can take a business deduction for self, your spouse, and dependents.
expenses that are necessary for you to be able to work. If The insurance plan must be established under your
you take a business deduction for these impair- trade or business, and you cannot take this deduction to
ment-related work expenses, they are not subject to the the extent that the amount of the deduction is more than
7.5% limit that applies to medical expenses. your earned income from that trade or business.
You are disabled if you have: You cannot take this deduction for any month in which
you were eligible to participate in any subsidized health
• A physical or mental disability (for example, blind- plan maintained by your employer or your spouse’s em-ness or deafness) that functionally limits your being ployer. This rule is applied separately to plans that provideemployed, or long-term care insurance and plans that do not provide
• A physical or mental impairment (for example, a long-term care insurance.
sight or hearing impairment) that substantially limits If you qualify to take the deduction, use the
one or more of your major life activities, such as Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet in
performing manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath- the Form 1040 instructions to figure the amount you can
ing, learning, or working. deduct. But if any of the following applies, do not use the
worksheet.
Impairment-related expenses defined. Impair- • You had more than one source of income subject to
ment-related expenses are those ordinary and necessary self-employment tax.
business expenses that are: • You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or
• Necessary for you to do your work satisfactorily, Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.
• For goods and services not required or used, other • You are using amounts paid for qualified long-term
than incidentally, in your personal activities, and care insurance to figure the deduction.
• Not specifically covered under other income tax If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-
laws. tions, use the worksheet in Publication 535, Business
Expenses, to figure your deduction.
Where to report. If you are self-employed, deduct the
business expenses on the appropriate form (Schedule C, Note. When figuring the amount you can deduct for
C-EZ, E, or F) used to report your business income and insurance premiums, do not include any advance pay-
expenses. ments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H. Also, if you are
If you are an employee, complete Form 2106, Employee claiming the health coverage tax credit, subtract the
Business Expenses, or Form 2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Em- amount shown on Form 8885, line 4 from the total insur-
ployee Business Expenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form ance premiums you paid.
1040), line 28, that part of the amount on Form 2106, line Also, do not include amounts paid for health insurance
10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, that is related to your impair- coverage with retirement plan distributions that were
ment. Enter the amount that is unrelated to your impair- tax-free because you are a retired public safety officer.
ment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. Your
impairment-related work expenses are not subject to the Where to report. You take this deduction on Form 1040,
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies to other line 29. If you itemize your deductions and do not claim
employee business expenses. 100% of your self-employed health insurance on line 29,
include any remaining premiums with all other medical
Example. You are blind. You must use a reader to do care expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to the
your work. You use the reader both during your regular 7.5% limit.
Page 24 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 25 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You received benefits under an alternative
trade adjustment assistance program for older workers forHealth Coverage Tax Credit
October 2007. The program was established by the De-
partment of Labor. You were an eligible alternative TAAThe health coverage tax credit is available to certain indi-
recipient on the first day of October and November.viduals who receive a pension benefit from the Pension
Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) or are eligible trade
Alternative TAA workers. If you are an eligible alterna-adjustment assistance (TAA) recipients or eligible alterna-
tive TAA recipient, you are eligible for this credit for ative trade adjustment assistance (alternative TAA) recipi-
period up to 2 years if you:ents.
1. Are covered by a qualifying certification,
Who Can Take This Credit?
2. Are reemployed not more than 26 weeks after the
date of separation from the adversely affected em-You can take this credit for any month in which all of the
ployment,following were true on the first day of the month.
3. Are at least 50 years of age,1. You were an eligible:
4. Do not earn more than $50,000 a year in wages froma. Trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, reemployment,
b. Alternative TAA recipient, or 5. Are employed on a full-time basis, and
c. Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) 6. Do not return to the employment from which youpension recipient. were separated.
2. You paid the premium for qualified health insurance
coverage for yourself. See Qualified Health Insur- PBGC Pension Recipientance, later.
You were an eligible PBGC pension recipient on the first3. You were not imprisoned under federal, state, or
day of the month, if both of the following apply.local authority.
4. You did not have other specified coverage. See 1. You were age 55 or older on the first day of the
Other Specified Coverage, later. month.
2. You received a benefit for that month that was paid
No credit if exemption claimed by another taxpayer. by the PBGC under title IV of the Employee Retire-
You cannot take this credit if you can be claimed as an ment Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA).
exemption on someone else’s tax return.
Lump-sum payment. Item (2) above will also apply if you
TAA Recipient received a lump-sum payment from the PBGC after August
5, 2002, for any month that you would have received a
You were an eligible TAA recipient on the first day of the PBGC benefit if you had not received a lump-sum pay-
month if, for any day in that month or the prior month, you: ment.
• Received a trade readjustment allowance, or
Qualifying Family Member• Would have been entitled to receive such an allow-
ance except that you had not exhausted all rights to You can include the premiums you pay for qualified healthany unemployment insurance (except additional insurance for qualifying family members in figuring yourcompensation that is funded by a state and is not credit. A qualifying family member is:reimbursed from any federal funds) to which you
• Your spouse (but see Married persons filing sepa-were entitled (or would be entitled if you applied).
rate returns below), or
• Anyone whom you can claim as a dependent onExample. You received a trade readjustment allow-
your tax return. (For children whose parents are di-ance for January 2007. You were an eligible TAA recipient
vorced, see Children of divorced parents, later.)on the first day of January and February.
However, if any otherwise qualifying family member has
other specified coverage (defined later), then that person isAlternative TAA Recipient
not a qualifying family member.
You were an eligible alternative TAA recipient on the first
Married persons filing separate returns. Your spouse isday of the month if, for that month or the prior month, you
not treated as a qualifying family member if your filingreceived benefits under an alternative trade adjustment
status is married filing separately and either (1) or (2)assistance program for older workers established by the
below applies.Department of Labor.
Publication 502 (2007) Page 25

Page 26 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Your spouse was an eligible TAA recipient, alterna- before 1985, this requirement is met if the noncus-
todial parent provides at least $600 for the support oftive TAA recipient, or PBGC pension recipient during
the child for the year.the year.
2. All of the following apply: The noncustodial parent is the parent with whom the
child lived for the lesser portion of the year.a. You lived apart from your spouse during the last 6
If this exception applies, the other parent cannot treatmonths of the year.
the child as a qualifying family member for purposes of theb. A qualifying family member (other than your HCTC, even though that parent claims the child as aspouse) lived in your home for more than half the dependent.
year. If you can treat the child as a qualifying family member
c. You provided over half the cost of keeping up for purposes of the HCTC, even though you do not claim
the child as your dependent, the child must also meet all ofyour home.
the other conditions of a qualifying family member.
Married and living apart. For purposes of this credit,
Qualified Health Insuranceyou are not considered married on the last day of the year if
all of the following apply. The following health insurance qualifies for the credit.
• You file a separate return. • COBRA continuation coverage. (This is coverage
• Your home is the home for more than half the year that employers with 20 or more employees must
of a dependent under age 13 or a dependent who is offer to employees or former employees and their
beneficiaries who have lost coverage because ofphysically or mentally not able to care for himself or
certain events.)herself.
• Coverage under a group health plan that is available• You pay more than half the cost of keeping up your
through the employment of your spouse. (But seehome for the year.
Other Specified Coverage, later.)• Your spouse does not live in your home for the last 6
• Coverage under an individual health insurance pol-months of the year.
icy if you were covered during the entire 30-day
period that ends on the date you separated from theLegally separated. You are not considered married if
employment which qualified you for the allowance oryou are legally separated from your spouse under a decree
benefit as an eligible individual (defined earlier). Forof divorce or separate maintenance. You can claim the
this purpose, coverage under an individual healthcredit on a separate return. insurance policy includes medical insurance offered
to individuals and their families, but does not includeChildren of divorced parents. You may be able to take coverage under a federal, state, or other group
the credit based on amounts paid for qualified health insur- health insurance policy.
ance expenses of your child even if the child is not your
dependent. If your child is not your dependent, he or she is State-qualified health insurance. The following healtha qualifying family member only if all of the following apply. insurance qualifies for the credit to the extent the sponsor-
• The parents are divorced or legally separated or ing state elects to have it apply.
lived apart at all times during the last 6 months of the • State-based continuation coverage provided by theyear. state under a state law that requires such coverage.
• The child received over half of his or her support for • Coverage offered through a qualified state high-riskthe year from the parents (without regard to the rules pool.on multiple support agreements). See the discussion
• Coverage under a health insurance program offeredof multiple support agreements at Support claimed
to state employees or a similar state-based healthunder a multiple support agreement earlier under
insurance program.Whose Medical Expenses Can You Include.
• Coverage through an arrangement entered into by• The child is in custody of one or both of the parents
the state and a group health plan, an issuer of healthfor more than half of the year.
insurance coverage, an administrator, or an em-
• A decree of divorce or separate maintenance or writ- ployer.
ten separation agreement that applies to 2007 pro-
• Coverage offered through a state arrangement withvides that (a) the noncustodial parent can claim the a private sector health care coverage purchasingexemption for the child, or (b) the custodial parent pool.will sign a written declaration that he or she will not
claim the child as a dependent for 2007. If the di- • Coverage under a state-operated health plan that
vorce or separation agreement went into effect does not receive any federal financial participation.
Page 26 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 27 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To find out which plans are qualified for your state, you charge that is stated in the contract or furnished by
can: the insurance company.
• Visit the website, www.irs.gov, type “hctc: list of • The amount stated in the contract or furnished by
state-qualified health plans” in the search box, click the insurance company is not unreasonably large in
on “search,” and then, click on HCTC: List of relation to the total charges under the contract.
State-Qualified Health Plans, or
• You can call 1-866-628-4282 (tollfree) (or TDD/TTY
1-866-626-4282). Eligible Coverage Month
Eligibility for the credit is determined on a monthly basis.
An eligible coverage month is any month in which, as of theNonqualified Health Insurance first day of the month, you:
The following health insurance does not qualify for the 1. Are an eligible TAA recipient, eligible alternative TAAcredit. recipient, or eligible PBGC recipient (see TAA Recip-
ient, Alternative TAA Recipient, or PBGC Pension1. Medicare supplemental (Medigap) insurance, Tricare
Recipient earlier),supplemental insurance, or similar supplemental in-
surance to an employer-sponsored group health 2. Are covered by qualified health insurance (definedplan. earlier) that you pay for,
2. Any insurance if substantially all of the coverage is: 3. Do not have other specified coverage (defined later),
anda. Coverage for on-site medical clinics,
4. Are not imprisoned under federal, state, or local au-b. Hospital indemnity or other fixed indemnity insur-
thority.ance,
If you file a joint return, only one spouse has to satisfy thec. Accident or disability income insurance (or a com-
requirements.bination of the two),
d. Liability insurance,
Other Specified Coveragee. A supplement to liability insurance,
Even if you are otherwise eligible, you are not eligible forf. Workers’ compensation or similar insurance,
the credit for a month if, as of the first day of the month, youg. Automobile medical payment insurance, have other specified coverage. Other specified coverage is
h. Credit-only insurance, coverage under the following.
i. Limited scope dental or vision benefits, 1. Any insurance which constitutes medical care (un-
less substantially all of that insurance is for benefitsj. Benefits for long-term care, nursing home care,
listed earlier under (1) or (2) under Nonqualifiedhome health care, community-based care (or any
Health Insurance) if at least 50% of the cost of thecombination), or
coverage is paid by an employer (or former em-k. Coverage for only a specified disease or illness. ployer) of you or your spouse.
3. Coverage under a flexible spending or similar ar- 2. Any of the following government health programs:
rangement.
a. Medicare Part A or Part B,
Insurance that covers other individuals. If you have b. Medicaid, or the State Children’s Health Insur-qualified health insurance that covers anyone besides ance Program (SCHIP),yourself and your qualifying family member(s), (defined
c. The Federal Employees Health Benefit Planearlier), you may not be able to take into account all of your
(FEHBP), orpayments. You cannot treat an amount as paid for insur-
ance for yourself and qualifying family members unless all d. Tricare, the medical and dental care program forof the following requirements are met. members and certain former members of the uni-
• The charge for insurance for yourself and qualifying formed services and their dependents.
family members is either separately stated in the
contract or furnished to you by the insurance com-
pany in a separate statement. Benefits from the Veterans Administration. Entitle-
ment to or receipt of benefits from the Veterans Adminis-
• The amount you paid for insurance for yourself and
tration is not other specified coverage.qualifying family members is not more than the
Publication 502 (2007) Page 27

Page 28 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Two important points here are that you are not d. Covered family members, their dates of birth, their
entitled to the credit for a month, if on the first day relationship to you, and their social security num-
of that month, you are either: bers.CAUTION
!
1. Covered by Medicare, or 3. A copy of “Notice of Rights to Continue Coverage.”
2. Covered by a group health plan available through Your former employer should have provided you with
a copy of this notice.your or your spouse’s employer and the employer
contributes 50% or more of the premium.
Non-group (individual) health plans. You must in-
clude the information listed above under All health plans
How To Report and both of the following documents.
• A letter or other document from your former em-To claim the credit, complete Form 8885, and attach it to
ployer or your unemployment office that shows theyour Form 1040; Form 1040NR, U.S. Nonresident Alien
date you left your job.Income Tax Return; Form 1040-SS, U.S. Self-Employment
Tax Return; or Form 1040-PR, Planilla para la Declaraci´on • A document from your health plan that shows your
de la Contribuci´on Federal sobre al Trabajo por Cuenta first date of coverage. Your first day of coverage in a
non-group (individual) health plan must have been atPropia. You cannot claim the credit on Form 1040A, Form
least 30 days before you left your job.1040EZ, or Form 1040NR-EZ, U.S. Income Tax Return for
Certain Nonresident Aliens With No Dependents.
Coverage through your spouse’s employer.  You
must include the information listed above under All health
Required documents. You must attach to your tax return plans and the following documents.
the documents listed below. • Copies of paycheck stubs showing the health cover-
All health plans. For all health plans you must include age deductions for the qualified months.
both of the following. • A letter or other statement from your spouse’s em-
ployer that states the employer contributed less than1. A copy of your health insurance bills or COBRA pay-
50% of the cost of the coverage.ment coupons. The bills must have:
a. Your name, E-filed return.  If you e-file, you must attach a copy of
the required documents to Form 8453, U.S. Individualb. The name of your health plan, Income Tax Transmittal for an IRS e-file Return, or Form
c. Your monthly premium amount, 8453-OL, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declaration for an
IRS e-file Online Return.d. Dates of coverage, and
e. Your health plan identification number. No double benefit. If you claim this credit, you cannot
take the same expenses that you use to figure your health2. Proof of payment, such as: coverage tax credit into account in determining your:
a. Canceled checks, • Medical and dental expenses on Schedule A (Form
1040), orb. Bank statements, or
• Self-employed health insurance deduction.c. Credit card statements.
You cannot use payments out of the following distribu-COBRA coverage. You must include the information tions to figure the credit:
listed above under All health plans and one of the following
• Health Savings Accounts (HSAs), ordocuments.
• Archer Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs).1. A copy of your completed and signed COBRA Elec-
tion Letter. It may also be called a COBRA Enroll-
ment Form, Application Form, Enrollment Application
Refundable Creditfor Continuing Coverage, or Election Agreement.
The HCTC credit is refundable. You can claim the full2. A letter from your former employer or COBRA admin-
credit even if you do not owe any taxes or earn any income.istrator saying you have COBRA coverage. The letter
To get the credit, you must:must have:
1. Qualify for the credit, anda. The COBRA coverage start and end dates,
2. File a tax return, even if you:b. Name of the health plan,
c. Your home address, and a. Do not owe any tax,
Page 28 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 29 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. Did not earn enough money to file a return, or Clinic List, provides information on clinics in your area. It is
available at www.irs.gov or at your local IRS office.c. Did not have income taxes withheld from your
pay. Free tax services. To find out what services are avail-
able, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free Tax Services.See How To Report earlier for instructions on how to It contains a list of free tax publications and describes otherclaim this credit. free tax information services, including tax education and
assistance programs and a list of TeleTax topics.
Advance Payments Accessible versions of IRS published products are
available on request in a variety of alternative formats forYou can either take this credit on your tax return or have it people with disabilities.paid on your behalf in advance to your insurance company.
Internet. You can access the IRS website atYour payments and any payments paid on your behalf in
www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to:advance are treated as having been made on the first day
of the month for which they are made.
You can get your credit in advance by calling the HCTC
• E-file your return. Find out about commercial taxcustomer contact center at 1-866-628-4282 (tollfree) (or
preparation and e-file services available free to eligi-TDD/TTY 1-866-626-4282) to register. The Treasury De-
ble taxpayers.partment will pay your insurer 65% of your health insur-
ance premiums as you pay the remaining 35%. • Check the status of your 2007 refund. Click on
Where’s My Refund. Wait at least 6 weeks from the
date you filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-
tronically). Have your 2007 tax return available be-How To Get Tax Help
cause you will need to know your social security
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free number, your filing status, and the exact whole dollar
publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa- amount of your refund.
tion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method • Download forms, instructions, and publications.that is best for you, you will have quick and easy access to
tax help. • Order IRS products online.
• Research your tax questions online.Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The Taxpayer
Advocate Service (TAS) is an independent organization • Search publications online by topic or keyword.
within the IRS whose employees assist taxpayers who are
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published inexperiencing economic harm, who are seeking help in
the last few years.resolving tax problems that have not been resolved
through normal channels, or who believe that an IRS • Figure your withholding allowances using the with-
system or procedure is not working as it should. holding calculator online at www.irs.gov/individuals.
You can contact the TAS by calling the TAS toll-free
• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed using our Al-case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD
ternative Minimum Tax (AMT) Assistant.1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligible for assistance.
You can also call or write to your local taxpayer advocate, • Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
whose phone number and address are listed in your local email.
telephone directory and in Publication 1546, Taxpayer
• Get information on starting and operating a smallAdvocate Service - Your Voice at the IRS. You can file
business.Form 911, Request for Taxpayer Advocate Service Assis-
tance (And Application for Taxpayer Assistance Order), or
ask an IRS employee to complete it on your behalf. For
more information, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. Phone. Many services are available by phone.
Taxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP). The TAP listens to
taxpayers, identifies taxpayer issues, and makes sugges-
tions for improving IRS services and customer satisfaction. • Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. CallIf you have suggestions for improvements, contact the 1-800-829-3676 to order current-year forms, instruc-TAP, toll free at 1-888-912-1227 or go to tions, and publications, and prior-year forms and in-www.improveirs.org. structions. You should receive your order within 10
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). LITCs are in- days.
dependent organizations that provide low income taxpay- • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your taxers with representation in federal tax controversies with the questions at 1-800-829-1040.IRS for free or for a nominal charge. The clinics also
provide tax education and outreach for taxpayers with • Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help
limited English proficiency or who speak English as a solving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax-
second language. Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer payer Assistance Centers. An employee can explain
Publication 502 (2007) Page 29

Page 30 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IRS letters, request adjustments to your account, or schedule an in-person appointment at your conve-
help you set up a payment plan. Call your local nience. To find the number, go to www.irs.gov/local-
Taxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. To contacts or look in the phone book under United
find the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or States Government, Internal Revenue Service.
look in the phone book under United States Govern-
ment, Internal Revenue Service. Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
tions, and publications to the address below. You• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/
should receive a response within 10 days afterTDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax
your request is received.questions or to order forms and publications.
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen to National Distribution Centerpre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.
P.O. Box 8903
• Refund information. To check the status of your Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
2007 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for
automated refund information or call CD/DVD for tax products. You can order Publi-
1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least 6 weeks cation 1796, IRS Tax Products CD/DVD, and
from the date you filed your return (3 weeks if you obtain:
filed electronically). Have your 2007 tax return avail- • Current-year forms, instructions, and publications.able because you will need to know your social se-
curity number, your filing status, and the exact whole • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.
dollar amount of your refund. • Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD - Ships with the
final release.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.ensure IRS representatives give accurate, courteous, and
professional answers, we use several methods to evaluate • Tax law frequently asked questions.
the quality of our telephone services. One method is for a • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys-second IRS representative to listen in on or record random tem.telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to complete
a short survey at the end of the call. • Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-
• Toll-free and email technical support.able on a walk-in basis.
• The CD which is released twice during the year.
– The first release will ship the beginning of January• Products. You can walk in to many post offices,
2008.libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,
– The final release will ship the beginning of Marchinstructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li-
braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county 2008.
government offices, credit unions, and office supply
Purchase the CD/DVD from National Technical Informa-stores have a collection of products available to print
from a CD or photocopy from reproducible proofs. tion Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $35 (no
Also, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter- handling fee) or call 1-877-CDFORMS (1-877-233-6767)
nal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue toll free to buy the CD/DVD for $35 (plus a $5 handling
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re- fee). Price is subject to change.
search purposes.
CD for small businesses. Publication 3207, The
• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer Small Business Resource Guide CD for 2007, is aAssistance Center every business day for personal, must for every small business owner or any tax-face-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRS payer about to start a business. This year’s CD includes:letters, request adjustments to your tax account, or
• Helpful information, such as how to prepare a busi-help you set up a payment plan. If you need to
ness plan, find financing for your business, andresolve a tax problem, have questions about how the
much more.tax law applies to your individual tax return, or you’re
more comfortable talking with someone in person, • All the business tax forms, instructions, and publica-visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Center where tions needed to successfully manage a business.you can spread out your records and talk with an
• Tax law changes for 2007.IRS representative face-to-face. No appointment is
necessary, but if you prefer, you can call your local • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.Center and leave a message requesting an appoint-
• Web links to various government agencies, businessment to resolve a tax account issue. A representa-
associations, and IRS organizations.tive will call you back within 2 business days to
Page 30 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 31 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• “Rate the Product” survey—your opportunity to sug- An updated version of this CD is available each year in
gest changes for future editions. early April. You can get a free copy by calling
1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.gov/smallbiz.• A site map of the CD to help you navigate the pages
of the CD with ease.
• An interactive “Teens in Biz” module that gives prac-
tical tips for teens about starting their own business,
creating a business plan, and filing taxes.
Publication 502 (2007) Page 31

Page 32 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Christian Science Eggs, temporary storage of ...... 8A
practitioners .................... 7 Electrolysis ...................... 1 5Abortion ........................... 5
Chronically ill persons .......... 1 0 Employer-sponsored healthAcupuncture ...................... 5
Comments on publication ........ 2 insurance plans ................ 9Adopted child’s medical
Community property states ...... 3 Employment taxes ............... 1 2expenses ....................... 4
Computer data banks to track Equipment  (See Medical equipmentAGI limitation ...................2 ,  3
medical information ........... 1 1 o r  property)Alcoholism ........................ 5
Contact lenses .................... 7 Excess reimbursements  (SeeAlternative trade adjustment
Reimbursements)Controlled substances .......... 1 5assistance recipient:
Excluded expenses:Cosmetic surgery ................ 1 5Health coverage tax credit ...... 2 5
Insurance premiums ............. 9Credit  (See Health coverage taxAmbulances ...................... 5
Eye surgery ....................... 8credit)Archer MSAs:
Eyeglasses ........................ 8Crutches .......................... 7Health coverage tax credit ...... 2 8
Medical expenses paid for
decedent from ................. 5 D F
Artificial limbs .................... 5 Damages, personal injury ....... 2 3 Fertility enhancement ............ 8
Artificial teeth ..................... 5 Dancing lessons ................. 1 5 Figuring the deduction ....... 20-21
Aspirin ........................... 1 6 Decedents: Final return for decedent:
Medical and dental expenses .... 5Assistance  (See Tax help) Medical expenses paid .......... 5
Deductible amount ............... 3Assisted living homes ........... 1 2 Flexible spending account ...... 1 5
Deductible expenses .......... 3-14Athletic club dues ............... 1 5 Food  (See Weight-loss programs)
Definition of medicalAutoettes ......................... 1 4 Form 1040:
expenses ....................... 2Automobiles  (See Cars) Health coverage tax credit ...... 2 8
Dental treatment .................. 7 Self-employed persons, health
Artificial teeth .................... 5 insurance costs .............. 2 4B Teeth whitening ................. 1 6 Form 1040, Schedule A:Baby sitting ...................... 1 5 Dentures .......................... 5 Impairment-related workBandages ......................... 5 Dependents: expenses ..................... 2 4Basis: Adopted child .................... 4 Medical and dentalMedical equipment or property Claimed as a dependent on expenses .................. 2 ,  2 0(Worksheet D) ................ 2 2 someone else’s return......... 3 Self-employed persons, health
Birth control pills ................. 6 Disabled dependent care .... 7 ,  1 0 insurance costs .............. 2 4
Medical expenses ............... 3Braille books and magazines .... 6 Form 1040, Schedule C:
Multiple support agreement ...... 4Breast reconstruction Impairment-related workQualifying child .................. 3surgery ......................... 6 expenses ..................... 2 4Qualifying relative ............... 3 Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:Diagnostic devices ............... 7 Impairment-related workC Diaper services .................. 1 5 expenses ..................... 2 4Calculation of deduction ........ 2 0 Disabilities, persons with: Form 1040, Schedule E:Capital expenses ................. 6 Dependent care expenses .......7 , Impairment-related workImprovements to property rented 10 expenses ..................... 2 4by disabled persons ........... 7 Improvements to property rented Form 1040, Schedule F:Operation and upkeep ........... 7 b y ............................. 7 Impairment-related workWorksheet A ..................... 6 Special education ............... 1 3 expenses ..................... 2 4Cars ............................... 7 Divorced taxpayers: Form 1040NR:Out-of-pocket expenses ........ 1 3 Health coverage tax credit for Health coverage tax credit ...... 2 8children....................... 2 6Child care ........................ 1 5 Form 1040X:Medical expenses of child ....... 4Children, missing: Amended individual return ....... 3Drug addiction .................... 8Photographs of, included in IRS Deceased taxpayer .............. 5
Drugs  (See Medicines)publications ................... 1 Form 1099-H:
Dues:Children’s medical expenses: Self-employed persons, health
Health club ..................... 1 5Adopted child .................... 4 insurance costs .............. 2 4
Dependents ..................... 3 Form 2106:
Health coverage tax credit ...... 2 6 E Impairment-related work
Chiropractors ..................... 7 expenses ..................... 2 4Education, special ............... 1 3
Page 32 Publication 502 (2007)

Page 33 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2106-EZ: Health insurance: Lodging  (See also Travel and
Credit (See Health coverage tax transportation expenses) ...... 1 0 ,Impairment-related work
credit) 13expenses ..................... 2 4
Employer-sponsored plan ....... 9 Long-term care .................. 1 0Form 2555:
Premiums: Chronically ill individuals ........ 1 0Self-employed persons, health
Deductible ..................... 8insurance costs .............. 2 4 Maintenance and personal care
Nondeductible ................. 9 services ...................... 1 1Form 2555-EZ:
Paid by employer ............. 1 8 Qualified insuranceSelf-employed persons, health
Paid by employer and you .... 1 7 contracts ..................... 1 1insurance costs .............. 2 4
Paid by you .................. 1 7 Qualified services ............... 1 0Form 8453: Prepaid ........................ 9Health coverage tax credit ...... 2 8 Unused sick leave used toForm 8885: Mp a y.......................... 9Health coverage tax credit ...... 2 8 Maintenance and personal careReimbursements (SeeSelf-employed persons, health services ........................ 1 1Reimbursements)insurance costs .............. 2 4 Self-employed persons ......... 2 4 Maternity clothes ................ 1 6Founder’s fee  (See Lifetime care, Health maintenance organizations Meals  (See also Weight-lossadvance payments) (HMOs) .......................... 8 programs) .................. 11, 14Free tax services ................ 2 9 Health reimbursement Medical conferences ............ 1 1Funeral expenses ................ 1 5 arrangements (HRAs) ......... 1 7 Medical equipment or property:Future medical care ......... 10, 15 Health Savings Accounts (HSAs): Adjusted basis (Worksheet
Payments from ................. 1 5 D ) ............................ 2 2
Gain or loss (Worksheet E) ..... 2 3Hearing aids ...................... 8G
Sale of .......................... 2 1Hearing-impaired persons:Glasses ........................... 8
Medical expense records ........ 2 0Guide dog or other animal for .... 8Guide dog or other animal ....... 8
Medical information plans ....... 1 1Help  (See Tax help)
Medical savings accountsHMOs (Health maintenanceH (MSAs) ......................... 1 6organizations) .................. 8
Hair: Medicare:Home care  (See Nursing services)
Removal ........................ 1 5 Medicare A, deductibleHome improvements  (See CapitalTransplants ..................... 1 5 expense ....................... 9expenses)Wigs ............................ 1 4 Medicare B, deductibleHospital services ................. 8Health club dues ................. 1 5 expense ....................... 9Hotels ............................ 1 0Health coverage tax credit ..... 1 5 , Medicines ........................ 1 1Household help .................. 1 525 Imported .................... 11, 16HRAs (Health reimbursementAdvance payments ............. 2 9 Nonprescription drugs andarrangements) ................. 1 7Alternative TAA recipient ....... 2 5 medicines .................... 1 6
Alternative TAA workers ........ 2 5 Mentally retarded persons:IArcher MSAs ................... 2 8 Special homes for .............. 1 2
Illegal operations andChildren of divorced parents .... 2 6 Mileage rates ...................... 1treatments ..................... 1 6Eligible coverage month ........ 2 7 Missing children:Illegal substances ............... 1 5Insurance that covers other Photographs of, included in IRSindividuals .................... 2 7 Impairment-related work publications ................... 1Legally separated ............... 2 6 expenses ...................... 2 4 More information  (See Tax help)Definition ....................... 2 4Married persons filing separate Multiple support agreements .... 4Reporting of .................... 2 4returns ....................... 2 5
Nonqualified health In vitro fertilization ............... 8
insurance ..................... 2 7 NInsulin ............................ 1 6
Other specified coverage: Nondeductible expenses ..... 14-16Insurance  (See Health insurance)
Benefits from the Veterans Nonprescription drugs and
Administration .............. 2 7 medicines ...................... 1 6LPBGC pension recipient ........ 2 5 Nursing homes .................. 1 2Laboratory fees .................. 1 0Lump-sum payment .......... 2 5 Nursing services ............. 12, 15Laser eye surgery ................ 8Qualified health insurance ...... 2 6 Chronically ill individuals ........ 1 0Lead-based paint removal ....... 1 0Qualifying family member ....... 2 5 Nutritional supplements ......... 1 6Learning disabilities ............. 1 3Refundable credit ............... 2 8
Legal fees ........................ 1 0Reporting ....................... 2 8
OState-qualified health Lessons, dancing and
insurance ..................... 2 6 swimming ...................... 1 5 Operations ....................... 1 2
TAA recipient ................... 2 5 Cosmetic surgery ............... 1 5Lifetime care:
Health institutes .................. 8 Eye surgery ...................... 8Advance payments for .......... 1 0
Publication 502 (2007) Page 33

Page 34 of 34 of Publication 502 12:39 -  8-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Operations (Cont.) Therapy .......................... 1 3S
Illegal operations and Transplants ...................... 1 3Sale of medical equipment or
treatments .................... 1 6 Travel and transportationproperty ..................... 21-23
Optometrist services ............. 8 expenses ...................... 1 3Adjusted basis (Worksheet
Organ donors .................... 1 3 Car expenses ................... 1 3D ) ............................ 2 2
Includible expenses......... 13, 14Gain or loss (Worksheet E) ..... 2 3Osteopaths ....................... 1 2
Parking fees and tolls ........... 1 3Schedules  (See Form 1040)Oxygen ........................... 1 2
Standard mileage rate for car useSeeing-eye dogs .................. 8
for medical .................... 1Self-employed persons:P Trips .............................. 1 4Health coverage tax credit ...... 2 8Paint removal, for TTY/TDD information ............ 2 9Health insurance costs ......... 2 4lead-based ..................... 1 0
Tuition ............................ 1 4Senior housing .................. 1 2Parking fees and tolls ........... 1 3
Separate returns:Patterning exercises............. 1 3
Community property states ...... 3 VPersonal injury damages ........ 2 3 Medical and dental expenses .... 3 Vasectomy ....................... 1 4Personal use items .............. 1 6 Separated taxpayers: Veterinary fees ................... 1 6Physical therapy ................. 1 3 Health coverage tax credit ...... 2 6 Vision correction surgery ........ 8Plastic surgery ................... 1 5 Medical expenses of child ....... 4 Visually-impaired persons:Premiums  (See Health insurance) Sick leave: Guide dog or other animal for .... 8Prepaid insurance premiums .... 9 Used to pay health insuranceProsthesis ........................ 5 premiums ..................... 9 WPsychiatric care ................. 1 2 Special education................ 1 3 Weight-loss programs ....... 14, 16Psychoanalysis .................. 1 2 Spouse’s medical expenses ..... 3 What’s new:Psychologists .................... 1 2 Deceased spouse ............... 5 Health insurance for public safetyPublications  (See Tax help) Standard mileage rates: officer ......................... 1Medical reasons for use of Standard mileage rate ........... 1c a r ............................ 1R Wheelchairs ...................... 1 4Sterilization ...................... 1 3Radial keratotomy ................ 8 Wigs .............................. 1 4Stop-smoking programs ........ 1 3Recordkeeping................... 2 0 Work expenses:Suggestions for publication ..... 2Rehabilitation facilities .......... 1 2 Disabled dependent care ........ 7Surgery  (See Operations)Reimbursements ............. 17-20 Impairment-related ............. 2 4Excess includible in income: Swimming lessons .............. 1 5 Workers’ compensation......... 2 4When more than one policy Worksheets:(Worksheet C) ............. 1 9 T Capital expenses (WorksheetWhen one policy (Worksheet Tables and figures: A ) ............................. 6B ) .......................... 1 8 Medical equipment or property: Medical equipment or property:Excess may be taxable (Figure Adjusted basis (Worksheet Adjusted basis (Worksheet1 )............................. 1 7 D ) .......................... 2 2 D ) .......................... 2 2Health Reimbursement Gain or loss (Worksheet Gain or loss (WorksheetArrangement (HRA) .......... 1 7 E ) .......................... 2 3 E ) .......................... 2 3Insurance ....................... 1 7 Reimbursements, excess includible Reimbursements, excess includibleMedical expenses not in income: in income:deducted ..................... 1 9 When more than one policy When more than one policyMore than one policy ........... 1 8 (Worksheet C) ............. 1 9 (Worksheet C) ............. 1 9Received in later year .......... 2 0 When one policy (Worksheet When one policy (WorksheetRental property: B ) .......................... 1 8 B ) .......................... 1 8Improvements to ................. 7 Reimbursements, excess may be
Reporting: taxable (Figure 1) ............ 1 7 XHealth coverage tax credit ...... 2 8 Tax help .......................... 2 9 X-rays ............................ 1 4Impairment-related work Taxpayer Advocate .............. 2 9expenses ..................... 2 4 ■Teeth:Medical and dental Artificial .......................... 5expenses ..................... 2 0 Dental treatment ................. 7Medical deduction (See Form Whitening ....................... 1 61040, Schedule A) Telephone ........................ 1 3Self-employed persons, health Television ........................ 1 3insurance costs .............. 2 4
Page 34 Publication 502 (2007)