Department
of the
Treasury
Internal
Revenue
Service
Your Federal
Income Tax
For Individuals
Publication 17
Cat. No. 10311G
For use in
preparing
2000
Returns

Your Federal
Income Tax
For IndividualsDepartment
of the
Treasury
Internal
Revenue
Service
Contents
Introduction ......................................................1
Important Changes for 2000...........................1
Important Reminders.......................................2
Part One. The Income Tax Return
1 Filing Information ....................................4
2 Filing Status ............................................19
3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents ..24
4 Decedents ...............................................33
5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax ......39
Part Two. Income 
6 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings ....47
7 Tip Income ..............................................54
8 Interest Income .......................................56
9 Dividends and Other Corporate
Distributions ...........................................64
10 Rental Income and Expenses ................67
11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and
Annuities ................................................76
12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad
Retirement Benefits ...............................82
13 Other Income ..........................................86
Part Three. Gains and Losses
14 Basis of Property ....................................94
15 Sale of Property ......................................99
16 Selling Your Home ..................................106
17 Reporting Gains and Losses ..................111
Part Four. Adjustments to Income
18 Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) .....................................................117
19 Moving Expenses ...................................130
20 Alimony ...................................................135
Part Five. Standard Deduction and Itemized
Deductions
21 Standard Deduction ................................138
22 Limit on Itemized Deductions .................141
23 Medical and Dental Expenses ................142
24 Taxes ......................................................147
25 Interest Expense .....................................151
26 Contributions ...........................................158
27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses166
28 Car Expenses and Other Employee
Business Expenses ...............................172
29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related
Education ...............................................190
30 Miscellaneous Deductions ......................195
Part Six. Figuring Your Taxes and Credits 
31 How To Figure Your Tax ........................201
32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain
Minor Children .......................................204
33 Child and Dependent Care Credit ..........211
34 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled .....221
35 Child Tax Credit ......................................229
36 Education Credits ...................................233
37 Earned Income Credit .............................237
38 Other Credits ..........................................251
2000 Tax Table.................................................254
2000 Tax Rate Schedules................................266
Your Rights as a Taxpayer.............................267
How To Get Tax Help.......................................268
Index ..................................................................270
Order Blank 
(Inside back cover)
The explanations and examples in this publication re-
flect the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) of:
 Tax laws enacted by Congress,
 Treasury regulations, and
 Court decisions. 
However, the information given does not cover every
situation and is not intended to replace the law or
change its meaning.
This publication covers some subjects on which a
court may have made a decision more favorable to
taxpayers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until
these differing interpretations are resolved by higher
court decisions or in some other way, this publication
will continue to present the interpretation by the IRS.
All taxpayers have important rights when working
with the IRS. These rights are described in Your
Rights as a Taxpayer in the back of this publication.
The IRS Mission. Provide America's taxpayers top
quality service by helping them understand and meet
their tax responsibilities and by applying the tax law
with integrity and fairness to all.
All material in this
publication may be
reprinted freely. A
citation to Your Federal
Income Tax (2000)
would be appropriate.
Page 2

Introduction
This publication can help you
prepare your tax return by taking
you through each part of the re-
turn. It supplements the informa-
tion in your tax form instruction
booklet. It explains the tax law
and will help you understand
your taxes so that you pay only
the tax you owe and no more.
The publication begins with
the rules for filing a tax return.
It explains who must file a return,
which tax form to use, when the
return is due, and other general
information. It will help you iden-
tify which filing status you qualify
for, whether you can claim any
dependents, and whether the in-
come you are receiving is taxa-
ble. The publication goes on to
explain the standard deduction,
the kinds of expenses you may
be able to deduct, and the vari-
ous kinds of credits you may be
able to take to reduce your tax.
Throughout the publication
are examples showing how the
tax law applies in typical situ-
ations. Sample forms and
schedules show you how to re-
port certain items on your return.
Also throughout the publication
are flowcharts and tables that
present tax information in an
easy-to-understand manner.
The index in the back of the
publication will help you find the
information you need.
Some material that you may
find helpful is not included in this
publication but can be found in
your tax form instruction booklet.
It includes the following informa-
tion.
 List of where to report cer-
tain items listed on informa-
tion documents.
 List of mailing addresses for
where to file returns.
 List of recorded tax informa-
tion topics (TeleTax).
If you operate your own
business or have other self-
employment income, such as
baby sitting or selling crafts, see
the following publications for
more information.
 Publication 334, Tax Guide
for Small Business (For In-
dividuals Who Use Schedule
C or C–EZ).
 Publication 533, Self-
Employment Tax.
 Publication 535, Business
Expenses.
 Publication 587, Business
Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Day-Care Providers).
For information on how you
can get free IRS publications and
forms, see How To Get Tax Help
in the back of this publication.
Sending us comments and re-
commendations.  We welcome
your comments about this publi-
cation and your suggestions for
future editions. You can write us
at the following address.
Internal Revenue Service
Technical Publications
Branch (W:CAR:MP:FP:P)
1111 Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters
by telephone. Therefore, it would
be helpful if you would include
your daytime phone number, in-
cluding the area code, in your
correspondence.
Using a personal com-
puter and modem, you
can e-mail us while visit-
ing our web site at
www.irs.gov/help/email2.html.
/H18549
Important Changes for 2000
This section summarizes impor-
tant tax changes that took effect
in 2000. These changes are dis-
cussed in more detail throughout
this publication.
Changes are also discussed
in Publication 553, Highlights of
2000 Tax Changes.
Interest on student loans.You
may be able to claim a deduction
for interest paid on a qualified
student loan. The maximum de-
duction for interest paid on a
qualified student loan is in-
creased to $2,000. You claim
the deduction on line 24 of Form
1040 or line 17 of Form 1040A.
See Publication 970, Tax Bene-
fits for Higher Education.
Individual retirement arrange-
ments (IRAs). The following
paragraphs highlight the
changes that relate to IRAs. See
chapter 18 for details.
Traditional IRA income lim-
its. Generally, if you have a tra-
ditional IRA and are covered by
an employer retirement plan, the
amount of income you can have
and not be affected by the de-
duction phaseout is increased.
The amounts vary depending on
filing status.
Returned contributions and
recharacterizations. For IRA
contributions made after 1999, a
new method allows you to use
the actual earnings and losses
of the IRA during the time it held
the contribution to calculate the
net income that must be with-
drawn or recharacterized. Under
this method, net income may be
a negative amount.
Capital gain distributions.For
2000, you may be able to report
a capital gain distribution on
Form 1040A. However, if any
distribution includes 28% rate
gain, unrecaptured section 1250
gain, or section 1202 gain, you
must use Form 1040. See chap-
ter 17.
Foreign earned income exclu-
sion. The amount of foreign
earned income that you can ex-
clude increases to $76,000. See
Publication 54, Tax Guide for
U.S. Citizens and Resident Al-
iens Abroad.
Standard mileage rate. The
standard mileage rate for the
cost of operating your car is
32
1 / 2 cents a mile for all business
miles driven. See  chapter 28.
Meal expenses when subject
to “hours of service limits”.If
you are subject to the Depart-
ment of Transportation's “hours
of service” limits, the percentage
of your business-related meal
expenses that you can deduct
has increased. For 2000 and
2001, you can deduct 60% if the
meals take place during or inci-
dent to the period subject to
those limits. See chapter 28.
Lump-sum distributions. Be-
ginning in 2000, the 5-year tax
option for figuring the tax on a
lump-sum distribution from a
qualified retirement plan is re-
pealed. However, plan partic-
ipants can continue to choose
the 10-year tax option or capital
gain treatment for a lump-sum
distribution that qualifies for the
special treatment. See chapter
11.
Revocation of exemption from
social security coverage. If
you are a minister, a member of
a religious order not under a vow
of poverty, or a Christian Science
practitioner who previously
elected exemption from social
security coverage and self-
employment tax, you can now
revoke that exemption. How-
ever, you have a limited time in
which to do so. See Publication
517, Social Security and Other
Information for Members of the
Clergy and Religious Workers.
1040PC format is no longer
accepted. The IRS no longer
accepts the 1040PC format. If
you used 1040PC in the past, the
IRS encourages you to file using
the fastest, most accurate way
to file—IRS e-file. See chapter
1.
Paid preparer authorization.If
you want to allow the IRS to
discuss your 2000 tax return with
the paid preparer who signed it,
check the “Yes” box in the sig-
nature area of the return. This
authorization applies only to the
individual whose signature ap-
pears in the “Paid Preparer's Use
Only” section of your return. See
chapter 1.
Eligible foster child.Beginning
in 2000, a child is your eligible
foster child for the child tax
credit and the earned income
credit if all the following apply.
1) The child is your brother,
sister, stepbrother, or
stepsister (or a descendant
of such relative) or has
been placed with you by an
authorized placement
agency.
2) You cared for that child as
you would your own child.
3) The child lived with you for
the whole year, except for
temporary absences.
Previously the child only had
to meet (2) and (3) to be an eli-

gible foster child. See chapters
35 and 37.
Limit on personal credits.For
2000 and 2001, your
nonrefundable personal credits
for the year can offset both your
regular tax (after reduction by the
foreign tax credit) and your al-
ternative minimum tax for that
year. See your Form 1040 in-
structions for more information.
Estimated tax safe harbor for
higher income individuals.For
estimated tax payments for tax
years beginning in 2001, the es-
timated tax safe harbor for higher
income individuals (other than
farmers and fishermen) has been
modified. If your 2000 adjusted
gross income is more than
$150,000 ($75,000 if you are
married filing a separate return
for 2001), you will have to pay
the smaller of 90% of your ex-
pected tax for 2001 or 110% of
the tax shown on your 2000 re-
turn to avoid an estimated tax
penalty. See chapter 5.
Definition of noncapital assets
expanded. The definition of
noncapital assets (assets that
generally produce ordinary,
rather than capital, gain or loss
when sold) has been expanded
to include three additional cate-
gories of assets. See Capital
Assets and Noncapital Assets in
chapter 15.
Certain amounts increased.
Some tax items that are indexed
for inflation increased for 2000.
Earned income credit. The
maximum amount of income you
can earn and still get the earned
income credit has increased.
You may be able to take the
credit if you earned less than
$31,152 ($10,380 if you do not
have any qualifying children).
The maximum amount of invest-
ment income you can have and
still be eligible for the credit has
increased to $2,400. See chapter
37.
Standard deduction. The
standard deduction for taxpayers
who do not itemize deductions
on Schedule A (Form 1040) is
higher in 2000 than it was in
1999. The amount depends on
your filing status. See chapter
21.
Exemption amount. You are
allowed a $2,800 deduction for
each exemption to which you are
entitled. However, your ex-
emption amount could be
phased out if you have high in-
come. See chapter 3.
Limit on itemized de-
ductions. Some of your itemized
deductions may be limited if your
adjusted gross income is more
than $128,950 ($64,475 if you
are married filing separately).
See chapter 22.
Social security and Medi-
care taxes. The maximum
wages subject to social security
tax (6.2%) is increased to
$76,200. All wages are subject
to Medicare tax (1.45%).
Photographs of missing chil-
dren. The Internal Revenue
Service is a proud partner with
the National Center for Missing
and Exploited Children. Photo-
graphs of missing children se-
lected by the Center may appear
in this publication on pages that
would otherwise be blank. You
can help bring these children
home by looking at the photo-
graphs and calling 1–800–THE–
LOST (1–800–843–5678) if you
recognize a child.
/H18549
Important Reminders
Listed below are important re-
minders and other items that
may help you file your 2000 tax
return. Many of these items are
explained in more detail later in
this publication.
Write in your social security
number. To protect your pri-
vacy, social security numbers
(SSNs) are not printed on the
peel-off label that comes in the
mail with your tax instruction
booklet. This means you must
enter your SSN in the space
provided on your tax form. If you
filed a joint return for 1999 and
are filing a joint return for 2000
with the same spouse, enter your
names and SSNs in the same
order as on your 1999 return.
See chapter 1.
Taxpayer identification num-
bers. You must provide the
taxpayer identification number
for each person for whom you
claim certain tax benefits. This
applies even if the person was
born in 2000. Generally, this
number is the person's social
security number (SSN). See
chapter 1.
Child tax credit.You may be
able to claim a tax credit for each
of your qualifying children under
age 17. This credit can be as
much as $500 for each qualifying
child. See chapter 35.
Tax from recapture of educa-
tion credits.You may owe this
tax if you claimed an education
credit in one year and in a later
year you, your spouse if filing
jointly, or your dependent re-
ceived:
 A refund of qualified tuition
and related expenses, or 
 Tax-free educational assist-
ance. 
See chapter 36.
Advance earned income
credit.If a qualifying child lives
with you and you expect to
qualify for the earned income
credit in 2001, you may be able
to get part of the credit paid to
you in advance throughout the
year (by your employer) instead
of waiting until you file your tax
return. See chapter 37.
Sale of your home.Generally,
you will only need to report the
sale of your home if your gain is
more than $250,000 ($500,000
if married filing a joint return).
See chapter 16.
Individual retirement arrange-
ments (IRAs). The following
paragraphs highlight important
reminders that relate to IRAs.
See chapter 18 for details.
Individual retirement ar-
rangement (IRA) for spouse. A
married couple filing a joint re-
turn can contribute up to $2,000
each to their IRAs, even if one
spouse had little or no income.
Spouse covered by plan.
Even if your spouse is covered
by an employer-sponsored re-
tirement plan, you may be able
to deduct contributions to your
traditional IRA if you are not
covered by an employer plan.
 Roth IRA. You may be able
to establish a Roth IRA. In this
type of IRA, contributions are not
deductible but earnings grow tax
free and qualified withdrawals
are not taxable. You may also
be able to convert a traditional
IRA to a Roth IRA, but you must
include all or part of the taxable
converted amount in income.
Foreign source income.If you
are a U.S. citizen with income
from sources outside the United
States (foreign income), you
must report all such income on
your tax return unless it is ex-
empt by U.S. law. This is true
whether you reside inside or
outside the United States and
whether or not you receive a
Form W–2 or 1099 from the for-
eign payer. This applies to
earned income (such as wages
and tips) as well as unearned
income (such as interest, divi-
dends, capital gains, pensions,
rents and royalties).
If you reside outside the
United States, you may be able
to exclude part or all of your for-
eign source earned income. For
details, see Publication 54, Tax
Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad. 
Joint return responsibility.
Generally, both spouses are re-
sponsible for the tax and any in-
terest or penalties on a joint tax
return. In some cases, one
spouse may be relieved of that
responsibility for items of the
other spouse that were incor-
rectly reported on the joint return.
For details, see Joint responsi-
bility in chapter 2.
Include your phone number on
your return.  To promptly re-
solve any questions we have in
processing your tax return, we
would like to be able to call you.
Please enter your daytime tele-
phone number on your tax form
next to your signature.
Payment of taxes. Make your
check or money order payable to
“United States Treasury.” You
can pay your taxes by credit
card. See chapter 1.
Faster ways to file your return.
The IRS offers fast, accurate
ways to file your tax return infor-
mation without filing a paper tax
return. You can use IRS e-file
(electronic filing). For details, see
chapter 1.
Private delivery services.You
may be able to use a designated
private delivery service to mail
your tax returns and payments.
See chapter 1 for more informa-
tion.
Refund on a late filed return.
If you were due a refund but you
did not file a return, you generally
must file within 3 years from the
date the return was originally due
to get that refund. 
Privacy Act and paperwork re-
duction information.The IRS
Restructuring and Reform Act of
1998, the Privacy Act of 1974,
and the Paperwork Reduction
Act of 1980 require that when
we ask you for information we
must first tell you what our legal
right is to ask for the information,
Page 2

why we are asking for it, how it
will be used, what could happen
if we do not receive it, and
whether your response is volun-
tary, required to obtain a benefit,
or mandatory under the law. A
complete statement on this sub-
ject can be found in your tax form
instruction booklet.
Treasury Inspector General for
Tax Administration.  If you want
to confidentially report miscon-
duct, waste, fraud, or abuse by
an IRS employee, you can call
1–800–366–4484 (1–800–877–
8339 for TTY/TDD users). You
can remain anonymous.
Page 3

The five chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax
system. They take you through the first steps of filling out a tax return—
such as deciding what your filing status is, how many exemptions you
can take, and what form to file. They also discuss recordkeeping
requirements, IRS e-file (electronic filing), certain penalties, and the two
methods used to pay tax during the year: withholding and estimated tax.
Part One.
The Income
Tax Return
1.
Filing
Information
Important Changes
Who must file.  Generally, the amount of
income you can receive before you must file
a return has been increased.
1040PC format no longer accepted.  The
1040PC format was a computer-generated
paper tax return. The availability of e-filing
for home computer users has reduced the
need for this format. The IRS will no longer
accept tax returns in the 1040PC format.
The IRS encourages all former 1040PC
filers to use IRS e-file.
Paid preparer authorization.You can now
allow the IRS to discuss your 2000 tax re-
turn with the paid preparer who signed it by
checking the “Yes” box in the area where
you sign your return. See Signatures, later.
Important Reminders
Alternative filing methods.Rather than
filing a return on paper, you may be able to
file electronically using IRS e-file. For more
information, see Does My Return Have To
Be On Paper, later.
Change of address. If you change your
address, you should notify the IRS. See
Change of Address, later, under What
Happens After I File.
Write in your social security number. You
must write your social security number
(SSN) in the spaces provided on your tax
return. If you file a joint return, please write
the SSNs in the same order as the names.
Direct deposit of refund.Instead of get-
ting a paper check, you may be able to have
your refund deposited directly into your ac-
count at a bank or other financial institution.
See Direct deposit under Refunds, later.
Alternative payment methods.If you owe
additional tax, you may be able to pay
electronically. See How to Pay, later.
Installment agreement.If you cannot pay
the full amount due with your return, you
may ask to make monthly installment pay-
ments. See Installment Agreement, later,
under Amount You Owe.
Service in combat zone.You are allowed
extra time to take care of tax matters if you
are a member of the Armed Forces who
served in a combat zone, or if you served
in the combat zone in support of the Armed
Forces. See Individuals Serving in Combat
Zone, later, under When Do I Have To File.
Adoption taxpayer identification number.
If a child has been placed in your home for
purposes of legal adoption and you will not
be able to get a social security number
(SSN) for the child in time to file your return,
you may be able to get an adoption tax-
payer identification number (ATIN). See
Adoption taxpayer identification number
(ATIN), later, under Social Security Number.
Taxpayer identification number for al-
iens. If you or your dependent is a nonres-
ident or resident alien who does not have
and is not eligible to get a social security
number, file Form W–7 with the IRS to ap-
ply for an Individual Taxpayer Identification
Number (ITIN). For more information on
ITINs, see Social Security Number under
How Do I Prepare My Return.
Introduction
This chapter discusses:
 Whether you have to file a return,
 Which form to use,
 How to file electronically,
 When, how, and where to file your re-
turn,
 What happens if you pay too little or too
much tax,
 What records you should keep and how
long you should keep them, and
 How you can change a return you have
already filed.
Do I Have To
File a Return?
You must file a federal income tax return if
you are a citizen or resident of the United
States or a resident of Puerto Rico and you
meet the filing requirements for any of the
following categories that apply to you.
1) Individuals in general. (There are spe-
cial rules for surviving spouses, exec-
utors, administrators, legal represen-
tatives, U.S. citizens living outside the
United States, residents of Puerto
Rico, and individuals with income from
U.S. possessions.)
 2) Dependents.
 3) Self-employed persons.
 4) Aliens.
The filing requirements for each cate-
gory are explained in this chapter.
The filing requirements apply even if you
do not owe tax.
TIP
Even if you do not have to file a re-
turn, it may be to your advantage to
do so. See Who Should File, later.
One return. File only one federal income
tax return for the year regardless of how
many jobs you had, how many Forms W–2
you received, or how many states you lived
in during the year.
Individuals—In General 
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether
you must file a return depends on three
factors:
1) Your gross income,
2) Your filing status, and
3) Your age. 
To find out whether you must file, see
Table 1–1, Table 1–2, and Table 1–3. Even
if no table shows that you must file, you may
need to file to get money back (see Who
Should File, later).
Gross income. This includes all income
you receive in the form of money, goods,
property, and services that is not exempt
from tax. It also includes income from
sources outside the United States (even if
you may exclude all or part of it). Common
types of income are discussed in the chap-
ters in Part Two of this publication. 
Community property. If you are mar-
ried and your permanent home is in a
community property state, half of any in-
come described by state law as community
income may be considered yours. This af-
fects your federal taxes, including whether
you must file, if you do not file a joint return
with your spouse. See Publication 555,
Community Property, for more information. 
Self-employed individuals. If you are
self-employed, your gross income includes
the amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form
1040), Profit or Loss From Business, or line
1 of Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit
From Business. See Self-Employed Per-
Page 4 Chapter 1  Filing Information

sons, later, for more information about your
filing requirements. 
CAUTION
!
If you do not report all of your self-
employment income, you could
cause your social security benefits
to be lower when you retire.
Filing status. Your filing status depends on
whether you are single or married and on
your family situation. Your filing status is
determined on the last day of your tax year,
which is December 31 for most taxpayers.
See chapter 2 for an explanation of each
filing status. 
Age. If you are 65 or older at the end of the
year, you generally can have a higher
amount of gross income than other taxpay-
ers before you must file. See Table 1–1.
You are considered 65 on the day before
your 65th birthday. For example, if your 65th
birthday was on January 1, 2001, you are
considered 65 for 2000.
Surviving Spouses,
Executors, Administrators,
or Legal Representatives
You must file a final return for a decedent
(a person who died) if both of the following
are true.
 You are the surviving spouse, executor,
administrator, or legal representative.
 The decedent met the filing require-
ments at the date of death. 
For more information on rules for filing
a decedent's final return, see chapter 4.
U.S. Citizens Living
Outside the United States 
If you are a U.S. citizen living outside the
United States, you must file a return if you
meet the filing requirements. For informa-
tion on special tax rules that may apply to
you, get Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S.
Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad. It is
available at most U.S. embassies and con-
sulates. Also see How To Get Tax Help in
the back of this publication. 
Residents of Puerto Rico 
Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a
resident of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S.
income tax return if you meet the filing re-
quirements. This is in addition to any legal
requirement you may have to file an income
tax return for Puerto Rico. 
If you are a resident of Puerto Rico for
the entire year, gross income does not in-
clude income from sources within Puerto
Rico, except for amounts received as an
employee of the United States or a United
States agency. If you receive income from
Puerto Rican sources that is not subject to
U.S. tax, you must reduce your standard
deduction. As a result, the amount of in-
come you must have before you are re-
quired to file a U.S. income tax return is
lower than the applicable amount in Table
1–1 or Table 1–2. See U.S. taxation and its
discussion, Standard deduction, under The
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico in Publica-
tion 570, Tax Guide for Individuals With In-
come From U.S. Possessions, for further
information. 
Table 1–1. 2000 Filing Requirements for Most Taxpayers
To use this table, first find your marital status at the end of 2000. Then, read across
the line that shows your filing status and age at the end of 2000. You must file a
return if your gross income was at least the amount shown in the last column.
Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods,
property, and services that is not exempt from tax, including any income from sources
outside the United States (even if you may exclude part or all of it).
Also, see Table 1–2 and Table 1–3 for other situations when you must file a return.
Marital Status Filing Status Age* Gross Income
Single (including divorced
and legally separated)
Single
Head of
household
65 or older
under 65 $7,200
$8,300
65 or older
under 65 $9,250
$10,350
Married, with a child,
living apart from your
spouse during the last 6
months of 2000
Head of
household 65 or older
under 65 $9,250
$10,350
Married, separate
return any age $2,800
Married, living with
your spouse at end of
2000 (or on the date your
spouse died)
Married, joint
return
65 or older
(one spouse)
under 65
(both spouses)
65 or older
(both spouses)
$12,950
$13,800
$14,650
Married, not living with
your spouse at end of
2000 (or on the date your
spouse died)
Married, joint or
separate return any age $2,800
Single
Head of
household
65 or older
under 65 $7,200
$8,300
65 or older
under 65 $9,250
$10,350
Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child 65 or older
under 65 $10,150
$11,000
Widowed before 2000 and
not remarried in 2000
*If you turned age 65 on January 1, 2001, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2000.
When using this table, do not include social security benefits as gross income
unless you are married filing a separate return and lived with your spouse at any time
in 2000. (If you must include the benefits, see chapter 12 for the amount to include.)
Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions 
If you had income from Guam, the Com-
monwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,
American Samoa, or the Virgin Islands,
special rules may apply when determining
whether you must file a U.S. federal income
tax return. In addition, you may have to file
a return with the individual island govern-
ment. See Publication 570 for more infor-
mation. 
Dependents 
If you are a dependent (one who meets the
dependency tests in chapter 3), see Table
1–2 to find whether you must file a return.
You also must file if your situation is de-
scribed in Table 1–3. 
Responsibility of parent. Generally, a
child is responsible for filing his or her own
tax return and for paying any tax on the re-
turn. But if a dependent child who must file
an income tax return cannot file it for any
reason, such as age, a parent, guardian,
or other legally responsible person must file
it for the child. If the child cannot sign the
return, the parent or guardian must sign the
child's name followed by the words “By
(signature), parent (or guardian) for minor
child.” 
Child's earnings. Amounts a child
earns by performing services are his or her
gross income. This is true even if under lo-
cal law the child's parents have the right to
the earnings and may actually have re-
ceived them. If the child does not pay the
tax due on this income, the parent is liable
for the tax. 
Child Under Age 14 
If a child's only income is interest and divi-
dends (including Alaska Permanent Fund
dividends) and certain other conditions are
met, a parent can elect to include the child's
income on the parent's return. If this election
is made, the child does not have to file a
return. See Parent's Election To Report
Child's Interest and Dividends in chapter 32.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 5

Table 1–2. 2000 Filing Requirements for Dependents
If your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, and any of the
situations below apply to you, you must file a return. (See Table 1–3 for other
situations when you must file.)
In this table, earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, and professional fees. It
also includes taxable scholarship and fellowship grants (see Scholarship and
Fellowship Grants in chapter 13). Unearned income includes investment-type income
such as interest, dividends, and capital gains. It also includes unemployment
compensation, taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions
of unearned income from a trust.
Single dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
See chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim you as a dependent.
Caution: If your gross income was $2,800 or more, you generally cannot be claimed
as a dependent unless you were under age 19 or a full-time student under age 24.
For details, see Gross Income Test in chapter 3.
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
● Your unearned income was more than $700.
● Your gross income was more than the larger of:
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
● Your earned income was more than $5,500 ($6,600 if 65 or older and blind).
● Your unearned income was more than $1,800 ($2,900 if 65 or older and blind).
● Your gross income was more than:
1) The larger of $700, or your earned income (up to $4,150) plus $250, plus
2) $1,100 ($2,200 if 65 or older and blind).
Married dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
● Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and
itemizes deductions.
● Your earned income was more than $3,675.
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
● Your earned income was more than $4,525 ($5,375 if 65 or older and blind).
● Your unearned income was more than $1,550 ($2,400 if 65 or older and blind).
● Your gross income was more than:
1) The larger of $700 or your earned income (up to $3,425) plus $250, plus
2) $850 ($1,700 if 65 or older and blind).
● Your unearned income was more than $700.
● Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and
itemizes deductions.
● Your earned income was more than $4,400.
1) $700, or
2) Your earned income (up to $4,150) plus $250.
● Your gross income was more than the larger of:
1) $700, or
2) Your earned income (up to $3,425) plus $250.
Information for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers.  
Aliens
Your status as an alien—resident, nonresi-
dent, or dual-status—determines whether
and how you must file an income tax return.
The rules used to determine your alien
status are discussed in Publication 519,
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Resident alien. If you are a resident alien
for the entire year, you must file a tax return
following the same rules that apply to U.S.
citizens. Use the forms discussed in this
publication. 
Nonresident alien. If you are a nonresident
alien, the rules and tax forms that apply to
you are different from those that apply to
U.S. citizens and resident aliens. See Pub-
lication 519 to find out if U.S. income tax
laws apply to you and which forms you
should file. 
Dual-status taxpayer. If you were a resi-
dent alien for part of the tax year and a
nonresident alien for the rest of the year,
you are a dual-status taxpayer. Different
rules apply for each part of the year. For
information on dual-status taxpayers, see
Publication 519. 
Who Should File 
TIP
Even if you do not have to file, you
should file a federal income tax re-
turn to get money back if any of the
following conditions apply.
1) You had income tax withheld from your
pay. 
2) You qualify for the earned income
credit. See chapter 37 for more infor-
mation. 
3) You qualify for the additional child tax
credit. See chapter 35 for more infor-
mation.
Which Form
Should I Use?
You must use one of three forms to file your
return: Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form
1040. (But also see Does My Return Have
To Be On Paper, later.)
Form 1040EZ
Form 1040EZ is the simplest form to use.
You can use Form 1040EZ if all of the
following apply. 
1) Your filing status is single or married
filing jointly. If you were a nonresident
alien at any time in 2000, your filing
status must be married filing jointly.
2) You (and your spouse if married filing
a joint return) were under age 65 on
January 1, 2001, and not blind at the
end of 2000.
3) You do not claim any dependents.
Self-Employed Persons
You are self-employed if you:
 Carry on a trade or business as a sole
proprietor,
 Are an independent contractor,
 Are a member of a partnership, or
 Are in business for yourself in any other
way. 
Self-employment can include work in
addition to your regular full-time business
activities. It also includes certain part-time
work that you do at home or in addition to
your regular job. 
You must file a return if your gross in-
come is at least as much as the filing re-
quirement amount for your filing status and
age (shown in Table 1–1). Also, you must
file Form 1040 and Schedule SE (Form
1040), Self-Employment Tax, if: 
1) Your net earnings from self-employ-
ment (excluding church employee in-
come) were $400 or more, or
2) You had church employee income of
$108.28 or more (see Table 1–3).
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure
your self-employment tax. Self-employment
tax is comparable to the social security and
Medicare tax withheld from an employee's
wages. For more information about this tax,
get Publication 533, Self-Employment Tax.
Foreign governments or international
organizations. If you are a U.S. citizen who
works in the United States for an interna-
tional organization, a foreign government,
or a wholly owned instrumentality of a for-
eign government, and your employer does
not deduct social security and Medicare
taxes from your income, you must include
your earnings from services performed in
the United States when figuring your net
earnings from self-employment. 
Ministers. You must include income
from services you performed as a minister
when figuring your net earnings from self-
employment, unless you have requested
and received an exemption from self-
employment tax. This also applies to
Christian Science practitioners and mem-
bers of a religious order who have not taken
a vow of poverty. For more information, get
Publication 517, Social Security and Other
Page 6 Chapter 1  Filing Information

4) Your taxable income is less than
$50,000.
5) Your income is only from wages, sal-
aries, tips, unemployment compen-
sation, Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends, taxable scholarship and
fellowship grants, qualified state tuition
program earnings, and taxable interest
of $400 or less.
6) You did not receive any advance
earned income credit (EIC) payments.
7) You do not claim any adjustments to
income, such as a deduction for IRA
contributions or student loan interest.
8) You do not claim any credits other than
the earned income credit.
You must meet all of these requirements to
use Form 1040EZ. If you do not, you must
use Form 1040A or Form 1040. 
Figuring tax.On Form 1040EZ, you can
only use the tax table to figure your tax. You
cannot use Form 1040EZ to report any
other tax.
Form 1040A
If you do not qualify to use Form 1040EZ,
you may be able to use Form 1040A.
You can use Form 1040A if all of the
following apply.
1) Your income is only from wages, sal-
aries, tips, IRA distributions, pensions
and annuities, taxable social security
and railroad retirement benefits, taxa-
ble scholarship and fellowship grants,
interest, ordinary dividends (including
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends),
capital gain distributions, qualified state
tuition program earnings, and unem-
ployment compensation.
2) Your taxable income is less than
$50,000.
3) Your adjustments to income are for
only the following items.
a) The deduction for contributions to
an IRA.
b) The student loan interest de-
duction.
4) You do not itemize your deductions.
5) Your taxes are from only the following
items.
 a) Tax Table.
b) Alternative minimum tax. (See
chapter 31.)
c) Advance earned income credit
(EIC) payments, if you received
any. (See chapter 37.)
d) Recapture of an education credit.
e) Form 8615, Tax for Children Un-
der Age 14 Who Have Investment
Income of More Than $1,400.
f)  Capital Gain Tax Worksheet.
6) You claim only the following credits.
a) The credit for child and dependent
care expenses. (See chapter 33.)
b) The credit for the elderly or the
disabled. (See chapter 34.)
Table 1–3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2000 Return
If any of the four conditions listed below apply, you must file a return, even if your
income is less than the amount shown in Table 1–1 or Table 1–2.
1. You owe any special taxes, such as:
● Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer.
(See chapter 7.)
● Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you
reported to your employer. (See chapter 7.)
● Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on your
group-term life insurance.
● Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter 31.)
● Tax from recapture of investment credit or a low-income housing credit you
claimed in a previous year. (See the instructions for Form 4255, Recapture of
Investment Credit, or Form 8611, Recapture of Low-Income Housing Credit.)
● Recapture tax on the disposition of a home purchased with a
federally-subsidized mortgage. (See chapter 16.)
● Recapture of the qualified electric vehicle credit. (See chapter 38.)
2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your
employer. This amount should be shown in box 9 of your Form W –2. (See
chapter 37.)
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See
Self-Employed Persons in this chapter.)
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified
church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer social security and
Medicare taxes. (See Publication 533.)
● Tax on a medical savings account (MSA). (See Publication 969, Medical Savings
Accounts (MSAs).)
● Tax on a qualified retirement plan, including an individual retirement
arrangement (IRA). (See chapter 18.)
● Recapture of the Indian employment credit.
● Recapture of an education credit. (See chapter 36.)
c) The child tax credit. (See chapter
35.) 
d) The additional child tax credit.
(See chapter 35.)
e) The education credits. (See
chapter 36.)
f) The earned income credit. (See
chapter 37.)
g) The adoption credit. (See chapter
38.)
You must meet all of the above require-
ments to use Form 1040A. If you do not,
you must use Form 1040. 
CAUTION
!
If you receive a capital gain distri-
bution that includes 28% rate gain,
unrecaptured section 1250 gain, or
section 1202 gain, you cannot use Form
1040A. You must use Form 1040.
Form 1040
If you cannot use Form 1040EZ or Form
1040A, you must use Form 1040. You can
use Form 1040 to report all types of income,
deductions, and credits, including those you
cannot put on either Form 1040EZ or Form
1040A.
You may have received Form 1040A or
Form 1040EZ in the mail because of the
return you filed last year. If your situation
has changed this year, it may be to your
advantage to file Form 1040 instead. You
may pay less tax by filing Form 1040 be-
cause you can take itemized deductions,
some adjustments to income, and credits
you cannot take on Form 1040A or Form
1040EZ.
You must use Form 1040 if any of the
following apply.
1) Your taxable income is $50,000 or
more.
2) You itemize your deductions.
3) You received or paid interest on secu-
rities transferred between interest pay-
ment dates.
4) You received nontaxable distributions
required to be reported as capital
gains.
5) You received capital gain distributions
that included 28% rate gain,
unrecaptured section 1250 gain, or
section 1202 gain.
6) You have to complete Part III of
Schedule B (Form 1040) because:
a) You received a distribution from
a foreign trust, or
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 7

b) You had a bank, securities, or
other financial account in a foreign
country at any time during the
year.
Note. If the combined value
of the foreign account(s) was
$10,000 or less during all of 2000,
or if the account(s) was with a
U.S. military banking facility oper-
ated by a U.S. financial institution,
you may be able to use Form
1040A or Form 1040EZ.
7) You had income that cannot be re-
ported on Form 1040EZ or Form
1040A. This includes gain from the
sale of property, barter income,
alimony income, taxable refunds of
state and local income taxes, self-
employment income (including farm
income), and income received as a
partner in a partnership, a shareholder
in an S corporation, or a beneficiary of
an estate or trust.
8) You are reporting original issue dis-
count in an amount more or less than
the amount shown on Form 1099–OID.
9) You sold or exchanged capital assets
or business property.
10) You claim adjustments to gross income
for other than contributions to an IRA
or the student loan interest deduction.
If these are your only adjustments to
gross income, you may be able to file
Form 1040A.
11) Your Form W–2 shows uncollected
employee tax (social security and
Medicare tax) on tips or group-term life
insurance in box 13. (See chapter 7.)
12) You received $20 or more in tips in any
one month and did not report all of
them to your employer. (See chapter
7.)
13) You must pay tax on self-employment
income. (See Schedule SE (Form
1040), Self-Employment Tax.)
14) You must pay household employment
taxes. (See Schedule H (Form 1040).)
15) You have to recapture an investment
credit, a low-income housing credit, a
qualified electric vehicle credit, or an
Indian employment credit you claimed
in a previous year. 
16) You have to recapture tax on the dis-
position of a home purchased with a
federally-subsidized mortgage. (See
chapter 16.) 
17) You have to pay tax on an excess
golden parachute payment. 
18) You claim any credits other than the
credits listed earlier under Form
1040A.
19) You have to file other forms with your
return to report certain exclusions,
taxes, or transactions. This includes
the following forms.
a) Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-
come.
b) Form 2555–EZ, Foreign Earned
Income Exclusion.
c) Form 4563, Exclusion of Income
for Bona Fide Residents of Amer-
ican Samoa.
d) Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation
Distribution of Trusts.
e) Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum
Distributions. (See chapter 11.)
f) Form 5329, Additional Taxes At-
tributable to IRAs, Other Qualified
Retirement Plans, Annuities,
Modified Endowment Contracts,
and MSAs.
Note. Do not file Form 1040
only because you have to file
Form 5329. File Form 5329 by it-
self. (See chapters 11 and 18.)
g) Form 8271, Investor Reporting of
Tax Shelter Registration Number.
h) Form 8814, Parents' Election To
Report Child's Interest and Divi-
dends.
i) Form 8853, Medical Savings Ac-
counts and Long-Term Care In-
surance Contracts.
Does My Return Have
To Be On Paper? 
You may be able to file a paperless return,
or a return with less paper. This section
explains IRS e-file (electronic filing):
 Using a tax professional,
 Using your personal computer, or
 Using a telephone (TeleFile).
IRS e-file
Table 1–4 lists the benefits of IRS e-file. IRS
e-file uses automation to replace most of the
manual steps needed to process paper re-
turns. As a result, processing of e-file re-
turns is faster and more accurate than the
processing of paper returns. However, er-
rors on the return or problems with its
transmission can delay processing.
As with a paper return, you are respon-
sible for making sure your return contains
accurate information and is filed on time.
Using e-file does not affect your chances
of an IRS examination of your return.
State returns.In most states, you can file
an electronic state return simultaneously
with your federal return. For more informa-
tion, check with your local IRS office, state
tax agency, tax professional, or the IRS
Web site at www.irs.gov.
Refunds. You can have a refund check
mailed to you, or you can have your refund
deposited directly to your checking or
savings account. 
With e-file, your refund will be issued in
half the time as when filing on paper. Most
refunds are issued within 3 weeks. If you
choose direct deposit, you can receive your
refund in as few as 10 days.
Offset against debts.  As with a paper
return, you may not get all of your refund if
you owe certain past-due amounts, such as
federal tax, state tax, a student loan, or child
support. See Offset Against Debts under
Refunds, later.
Refund inquiries.If you do not receive
your refund within 4 weeks after your return
was accepted by IRS, you can call TeleTax
Refund Information. See What is TeleTax?
in your tax forms package for information
on how to use this service.
If TeleTax has no information about your
return, contact your tax professional or
electronic return transmitter for the date IRS
accepted your return. If your return was
accepted more than 6 weeks ago, contact
the IRS. Explain that you filed your return
electronically and that TeleTax has no in-
formation on it. Also, provide the first social
security number shown on your return and
the date the IRS accepted your return.
Balance due.  If you have a balance due
with your return, you must pay it by April 16,
2001, to avoid late-payment penalties and
interest. You can make your payment elec-
tronically by direct debit to your checking
or savings account or by credit card.
See How To Pay, later, for information
on how to pay the balance due.
VITA or TCE. The IRS Volunteer Income
Tax Assistance (VITA) and Tax Counseling
for the Elderly (TCE) programs may be able
to help you file your return electronically.
For information on these programs, call the
IRS.
Using a Tax Professional
Many tax professionals file returns elec-
tronically for their clients. You can prepare
your own return and have a professional
electronically transmit it, or you can have
your return prepared and transmitted by a
tax professional. Depending on the tax pro-
Table 1–4. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy ● Computer program quickly checks for errors or
missing information
Acknowledgment
File Now,
Pay Later
Fast Refunds
Simultaneous
Federal/State
Filing
● IRS provides an acknowledgment within 48 hours
that your return has been accepted for processing
● File early and pay the balance due by April 16, 2001
● Expect to receive it in half the time as when filing on
paper— even faster with direct deposit
● File both federal and state tax returns with the IRS at
the same time
● Privacy and security are assuredConfidential
Page 8 Chapter 1  Filing Information

fessional, and the specific services re-
quested, a fee may be charged. Look for the
“Authorized IRS e-file Provider” sign or
search for a provider near you on the IRS
web site at www.irs.gov (click on Electronic
Services).
Form 8453. Your tax professional may ask
you to sign Form 8453, U.S. Individual In-
come Tax Declaration for an IRS e-file Re-
turn. Both spouses must sign if a joint return
is being filed. Your tax professional will file
the Form 8453 with the IRS. Your tax pro-
fessional is required to give you the
preparer-signed copy of your return, includ-
ing a copy of the completed Form 8453.
This material is for your records. Do not mail
this copy to the IRS.
Using a Personal Computer
If you have a computer and tax preparation
software, you can e-file your return elec-
tronically from your home. Tax preparation
software offering the e-file option is avail-
able at your local computer retailer or
through various web sites over the Internet.
Depending on the software program, you
will need Internet access or a modem to file
your return. Using your personal computer,
you can file 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You may be charged a fee for having your
return transmitted to the IRS. Your elec-
tronic return transmitter will inform you when
the IRS accepts your return.
Form 8453–OL. After the IRS has ac-
cepted your return, you may have to send
the IRS Form 8453–OL, U.S. Individual In-
come Tax Declaration for On-line Filing.
Form 8453–OL is available through your
electronic return transmitter.
Using a Telephone (TeleFile)
If you receive a TeleFile tax package, you
may be able to file your Form 1040EZ in-
formation over the phone. If you are eligible
to use TeleFile, IRS will send you the
TeleFile tax package automatically. You can
use TeleFile only if you receive the pack-
age. You cannot order it.
To file using TeleFile, follow the in-
structions in the TeleFile tax package. The
call takes about 10 minutes and is free. You
must use a touch-tone phone.
TeleFile is a paperless system.You will
not have to mail a paper tax return or Forms
W–2 to the IRS.
When Do I
Have To File?
April 16, 2001, is the due date for filing your
2000 income tax return if you use the cal-
endar year. For a quick view of due dates
for filing a return with or without an exten-
sion of time to file (discussed later), see
Table 1–5.
If you use a fiscal year (a year ending
on the last day of any month except De-
cember, or a 52–53 week year), your in-
come tax return is due by the 15th day of
the 4th month after the close of your fiscal
year. 
When the due date for doing any act for
tax purposes—filing a return, paying taxes,
Table 1–5. When To File Your 2000 Return (For U.S. citizens and
residents who file returns on a calendar year)
For Most
Taxpayers
No extension
requested
April 16, 2001 June 15, 2001
For Certain Taxpayers
Outside the U.S.
Automatic extension
Form 4868 filed, or
electronic payment
made
August 15, 2001
2nd extension
Form 2688 filed, after
filing Form 4868 or
making electronic
payment
October 15, 2001
August 15, 2001
October 15, 2001
etc.—falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, the due date is delayed until the
next business day. 
Filing on time. Your paper return is filed
on time if it is mailed in an envelope that is
properly addressed and postmarked by the
due date. The envelope must have enough
postage. If you send your return by regis-
tered mail, the date of the registration is the
postmark date. The registration is evidence
that the return was delivered. If you send a
return by certified mail and have your re-
ceipt postmarked by a postal employee, the
date on the receipt is the postmark date.
The postmarked certified mail receipt is ev-
idence that the return was delivered. 
Private delivery services.  If you use
a private delivery service designated by the
IRS to send your return, the postmark date
generally is the date the private delivery
service records in its database or marks on
the mailing label. The private delivery ser-
vice can tell you how to get written proof of
this date.
The following are designated private
delivery services.
 Airborne Express (Airborne): Overnight
Air Express Service, Next Afternoon
Service, and Second Day Service.
 DHL Worldwide Express (DHL): DHL
“Same Day” Service and DHL USA
Overnight.
 Federal Express (FedEx): FedEx Prior-
ity Overnight, FedEx Standard Over-
night, and FedEx 2Day.
 United Parcel Service (UPS): UPS Next
Day Air, UPS Next Day Air Saver, UPS
2nd Day Air, and UPS 2nd Day Air A.M.
CAUTION
!
Private delivery services cannot de-
liver items to P.O. boxes. You must
use the U.S. Postal Service to mail
any item to an IRS P.O. box address.
Electronically filed returns.If you use IRS
e-file (other than TeleFile), your return is
considered filed when all the following
actions have been completed.
1) The electronic return is transmitted by
the due date (including extensions) of
the return.
2) The IRS acknowledges that the return
has been accepted for processing.
3) The IRS receives a completed and
signed, if required, Form 8453 or Form
8453–OL.
The return is considered timely filed if it is
transmitted by the due date and the proce-
dures for completing, if required, Form 8453
or Form 8453–OL are followed.
If the IRS rejects your timely-filed elec-
tronic return, you will be notified of the rea-
son for the rejection. You can correct the
problem and refile the return electronically
and the return will still be considered timely
filed. If you choose not to refile electron-
ically, you must file a paper return. The pa-
per return will be considered timely filed if
it is filed by the later of the following dates.
1) Due date (including extensions) of the
return. 
2) Ten calendar days after the date the
IRS gave notification that the return
was rejected.
You should include on the paper return an
explanation of why the return is being filed
after the due date.
Filing late. If you do not file your return by
the due date, you may have to pay a
failure-to-file penalty and interest. For more
information, see Penalties, later. Also see
Interest under Amount You Owe. 
If you were due a refund but you did not
file a return, you generally must file within
3 years from the date the return was ori-
ginally due to get that refund. 
Nonresident alien. If you are a nonresident
alien and earn wages subject to U.S. in-
come tax withholding, your 2000 U.S. in-
come tax return (Form 1040NR or Form
1040NR–EZ) is due by:
 April 16, 2001, if you use a calendar
year, or
 The 15th day of the 4th month after the
end of your fiscal year if you use a fiscal
year. 
If you do not earn wages subject to U.S.
income tax withholding, your return is due
by:
 June 15, 2001, if you use a calendar
year, or
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 9

 The 15th day of the 6th month after the
end of your fiscal year, if you use a fis-
cal year.
Get Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Al-
iens, for more filing information. 
Filing for a decedent. If you must file a final
income tax return for a taxpayer who died
during the year (a decedent), the return is
due by the 15th day of the 4th month after
the end of the decedent's normal tax year.
In most cases, for a 2000 return, this will
be April 16, 2001. See Final Return for the
Decedent in chapter 4. 
Extensions of Time To File
You may be able to get an extension of time
to file your return. Special rules apply if you
were:
 Outside the United States, or
 Serving in a combat zone.
These rules are discussed separately.
Automatic extension. If you cannot file
your 2000 return by the due date, you may
be able to get an automatic 4-month exten-
sion of time to file. To get the automatic
extension, you can file a paper Form 4868,
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.
You can also get an extension using the
electronic payment method. 
Example. If your return is due on April
16, 2001, you will have until August 15,
2001, to file. 
CAUTION
!
If you want the IRS to figure your
tax, you cannot use the automatic
extension of time to file. Nor can you
use it if you are under a court order to file
by the regular due date. 
When to file.You must file Form 4868
or make an electronic payment by the due
date for your return. You can file your return
any time before the 4-month extension pe-
riod ends. 
Payment of tax. An extension of time
to file is not an extension of time to pay. You
must make an accurate estimate of your tax
for the tax year. If you cannot pay the full
amount due, you can still get the extension.
You will owe interest on the unpaid amount.
You also may be charged a penalty for
paying the tax late unless you have rea-
sonable cause for not paying your tax when
due. See Penalties, later. 
Interest and penalties are assessed
(charged) from the original due date of the
return, which for most taxpayers is April 15.
Electronic payment method.You can
get an extension if you pay any part of your
estimate of income tax due using either of
the following methods.
 Direct debit. You can file Form 4868
electronically or by TeleFile and make
a payment by authorizing a direct debit
(automatic withdrawal) from your
checking or savings account. Check
with your financial institution to make
sure that an automatic withdrawal is al-
lowed and to get the correct routing and
account numbers. 
 Credit card. You can make a credit
card payment by phone or Internet.
You do not need to file Form 4868. See
How To Pay, later.
When you file your return. Enter any
payment you made related to the extension
of time to file on line 63, Form 1040. If you
file Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, include
that payment in your total payments on line
9 of Form 1040EZ or line 40 of Form 1040A.
Also print “Form 4868” and the amount paid
in the space to the left of line 9 or line 40. 
Extension beyond 4 months. If you qualify
for the 4-month extension and you later find
that you are not able to file within the
4-month extension period, you may be able
to get 2 more months to file, for a total of 6
months. 
You can apply for an extension beyond
the 4-month extension either by writing a
letter to the IRS or by filing  Form 2688,
Application for Additional Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.
You should ask for the extension early so
that, if it is not approved, you still will be able
to file on time. Except in cases of undue
hardship, a request for additional time will
not be approved unless you have first used
the automatic 4-month extension. Form
2688 or your letter will not be considered if
you file it after the extended due date.
To get an extension beyond the auto-
matic 4-month extension, you must give all
the following information.
 The reason for requesting the exten-
sion.
 The tax year to which the extension
applies.
 The length of time needed for the ex-
tension.
 Whether another extension of time to
file has already been requested for this
tax year.
You must sign the request for this exten-
sion, or it may be signed by your attorney,
CPA, enrolled agent, or a person with a
power of attorney. If you are unable to sign
the request because of illness or for another
good reason, a person with a close personal
or business relationship to you can sign for
you, stating why you could not sign the re-
quest. 
Extension approved. If your application
for this extension is approved, you will be
notified by the IRS.
If the IRS later determines that the
statements made on your request for this
extension are false or misleading and an
extension would not have been approved
at the time based on the true facts, the ex-
tension is null and void. You will have to
pay the failure-to-file penalty (discussed
later). 
Extension not approved. If your appli-
cation for this extension is not approved,
you must file your return by the extended
due date of the automatic extension. You
may be allowed to file within 10 days of the
date of the notice you get from the IRS if the
end of the 10-day period is later than the
due date. The notice will tell you if the
10-day grace period is granted. 
No further extensions. An extension of
more than 6 months will not be approved if
you are in the United States. 
Individuals Outside
the United States
You are allowed an automatic 2-month ex-
tension (until June 15, 2001, if you use the
calendar year) to file your 2000 return and
pay any federal income tax due if:
1) You are a U.S. citizen or resident, and
2) On the due date of your return: 
a) You are living outside of the
United States and Puerto Rico,
and your main place of business
or post of duty is outside the
United States and Puerto Rico,
or
b) You are in military or naval service
on duty outside the United States
and Puerto Rico.
However, if you pay the tax due after the
due date (generally, April 15), interest will
be charged from that date until the date the
tax is paid. 
See When To File and Pay in Publication
54 for more information.
If you served in a combat zone, see In-
dividuals Serving in Combat Zone, later, for
special rules that apply to you. 
Married taxpayers. If you file a joint return,
only one spouse has to qualify for this au-
tomatic extension. If you and your spouse
file separate returns, this automatic exten-
sion applies only to the spouse who quali-
fies. 
How to get the extension. To use this
special automatic extension, you must at-
tach a statement to your return explaining
what situation (see the situations listed un-
der 2, earlier) qualified you for the exten-
sion.
Extensions beyond 2 months. If you can-
not file your return within the automatic
2-month extension period, you may be able
to get an additional 2-month extension, for
a total of 4 months. Generally, you must file
Form 4868 by the end of the automatic ex-
tension period (usually June 15, 2001) to
get this additional 2-month extension.
This additional 2-month extension of
time to file is not an extension of time to
pay. See Payment of tax, earlier.
Extension beyond 4 months. If you are
still unable to file your return within the
4-month extension, you may be able to get
an extension for 2 more months, for a total
of 6 months. See Extension beyond 4
months, earlier.
No further extension. An extension of
more than 6 months will generally not be
granted. However, if you are outside the
United States and meet certain tests, you
may be granted a longer extension. See
When To File and Pay in Publication 54 for
more information. 
Individuals Serving
in Combat Zone
The deadline for filing your tax return, pay-
ing any tax you may owe, and filing a claim
for refund is automatically extended if you
serve in a combat zone. This applies to
members of the Armed Forces, as well as
Page 10 Chapter 1  Filing Information

Red Cross personnel, accredited corre-
spondents, and civilians under the direction
of the Armed Forces in support of the
Armed Forces. 
Combat zone. For purposes of the auto-
matic extension, the term “combat zone”
includes the following areas.
1) The Persian Gulf Area, effective Au-
gust 2, 1990.
2) The qualified hazardous duty area of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and
Macedonia, effective November 21,
1995.
3) The qualified hazardous duty area of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia/Montenegro), Albania, the
Adriatic Sea, and the Ionian Sea north
of the 39th parallel, effective March 24,
1999.
See Publication 3, Armed Forces' Tax
Guide, for information about other tax ben-
efits available to military personnel serving
in a combat zone.
Extension period. The deadline for filing
your return, paying any tax due, and filing
a claim for refund is extended for at least
180 days after the later of:
1) The last day you are in a combat zone
(or the last day the area qualifies as a
combat zone), or
2) The last day of any continuous qual-
ified hospitalization for injury from ser-
vice in the combat zone.
In addition to the 180 days, your dead-
line is also extended by the number of days
you had left to take action with the IRS when
you entered the combat zone. For example,
you have 3
1/2 months (January 1 – April 15)
to file your tax return. Any days left in this
period when you entered the combat zone
(or the entire 3
1/2 months if you entered it
before the beginning of the year) are added
to the 180 days. See Extension of Deadline
in Publication 3 for more information.
How Do I
Prepare My Return?
This section explains how to get ready to fill
in your tax return and when to report your
income and expenses. It also explains how
to complete certain sections of the form.
You may find Table 1–6 helpful when you
prepare your return.
In most cases, the IRS will mail you
Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ
with related instructions, or a TeleFile
package, based on what you filed last year.
Before you fill in the form, look it over to see
if you need additional forms or schedules.
You may also want to read Does My Return
Have To Be On Paper, earlier.
If you do not receive a tax return pack-
age in the mail, or if you need other forms,
you can order them. See How To Get Tax
Help in the back of this publication.
Table 1–6. 6 Steps for Preparing
Your Return
1— Get your records together for
income and expenses.
2— Get the forms, schedules, and
publications you need.
3— Fill in your return.
4— Check your return to make sure it
is correct.
5— Sign and date your return.
6— Attach all required forms and
schedules.
Substitute tax forms. You cannot use your
own version of a tax form unless it meets
the requirements explained in Publication
1167, Substitute Printed, Computer-
Prepared, and Computer-Generated Tax
Forms and Schedules. 
Form W–2.  If you are an employee, you
should receive Form W–2 from your em-
ployer. You will need the information from
this form before you prepare your return.
If you do not receive Form W–2 by Jan-
uary 31, 2001, contact your employer. If you
still do not get the form by February 15, the
IRS can help you by requesting the form
from your employer. For more information,
see Form W –2 under Credit for Withholding
and Estimated Tax in chapter 5. 
Form 1099. If you received certain types
of income, you may receive a Form 1099.
For example, if you received taxable interest
of $10 or more, the payer generally must
give you a Form 1099–INT. If you have not
received it by January 31, 2001, contact the
payer. If you still do not get the form by
February 15, call the IRS for help. 
When Do I Report My
Income and Expenses? 
You must figure your taxable income on the
basis of a tax year. A “tax year” is an annual
accounting period used for keeping records
and reporting income and expenses. You
must account for your income and expenses
in a way that clearly shows your taxable in-
come. The way you do this is called an ac-
counting method. This section explains
which accounting periods and methods you
can use. 
Accounting Periods
Most individual tax returns cover a calendar
year — the 12 months from January 1
through December 31. If you do not use a
calendar year, your accounting period is a
fiscal year. A regular fiscal year is a
12-month period that ends on the last day
of any month except December. A 52–53
week fiscal year varies from 52 to 53 weeks
and always ends on the same day of the
week.
You must choose your accounting period
when you file your first income tax return.
It cannot be longer than 12 months. 
More information. For more information on
accounting periods, including how to
change your accounting period, see Publi-
cation 538, Accounting Periods and Meth-
ods.
Accounting Methods
Your accounting method is the way you
account for your income and expenses.
Most taxpayers use either the cash method
or an accrual method. You choose a method
when you file your first income tax return.
If you want to change your accounting
method after that, you generally must get
IRS approval. 
Cash method. If you use this method, re-
port all items of income in the year in which
you actually or constructively receive them.
Deduct all expenses in the year you actually
pay them. This is the method most individ-
ual taxpayers use. 
Constructive receipt. You construc-
tively receive income when it is credited to
your account or set apart in any way that
makes it available to you. You do not need
to have physical possession of it. For ex-
ample, interest credited to your bank ac-
count on December 31, 2000, is taxable in-
come to you in 2000 if you could have
withdrawn it in 2000 (even if the amount is
not entered in your passbook or withdrawn
until 2001). 
Garnisheed wages. If your employer
uses your wages to pay your debts, or if
your wages are attached or garnisheed, the
full amount is constructively received by
you. You must include these wages in in-
come for the year you would have received
them. 
Brokerage and other accounts. Profits
from a brokerage account, or similar ac-
count, are fully taxable in the year you earn
them. This is true even if:
1) You do not withdraw the earnings,
2) The credit balance in the account may
be reduced or eliminated by losses in
later years, or
3) Current profits are used to reduce or
eliminate a debit balance from previous
years. 
Debts paid for you. If another person
cancels or pays your debts (but not as a gift
or loan), you have constructively received
the amount and generally must include it in
your gross income for the year. See Can-
celed Debts in chapter 13 for more infor-
mation. 
Payment to third party. If a third party
is paid income from property you own, you
have constructively received the income. It
is the same as if you had actually received
the income and paid it to the third party. 
Payment to an agent. Income an agent
receives for you is income you construc-
tively received in the year the agent re-
ceives it. If you indicate in a contract that
your income is to be paid to another person,
you must include the amount in your gross
income when the other person receives it. 
Check received or available. A valid
check you received or that was made
available to you before the end of the tax
year is constructively received by you in that
year, even if you do not cash the check or
deposit it in your account until the next year.
No constructive receipt. There may be
facts to show that you did not constructively
receive income.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 11

Example. Alice Johnson, a teacher,
agreed to her school board's condition that,
in her absence, she would receive only the
difference between her regular salary and
the salary of a substitute teacher hired by
the school board. Therefore, Alice did not
constructively receive the amount by which
her salary was reduced to pay the substitute
teacher. 
Accrual method. If you use an accrual
method, you generally report income when
you earn it, rather than when you receive it.
You generally deduct your expenses when
you incur them, rather than when you pay
them. 
Income paid in advance. Prepaid in-
come is generally included in gross income
in the year you receive it. Your method of
accounting does not matter as long as the
income is available to you. Prepaid income
includes rents or interest you receive in ad-
vance and pay for services you will perform
later. 
Additional information. For more informa-
tion on accounting methods, including how
to change your accounting method, get
Publication 538.
Social Security Number
You must enter your social security number
(SSN) in the space provided on your return.
Be sure the SSN on your return is the same
as the SSN on your social security card. If
you are married, enter the SSNs for both
you and your spouse, whether you file jointly
or separately.
If you are filing a joint return, write the
SSNs in the same order as the names.
Please use this same order in submitting
other forms and documents to the IRS.
Name change.  If you changed your name
because of marriage, divorce, etc., imme-
diately notify your Social Security Adminis-
tration (SSA) office so the name on your tax
return is the same as the one the SSA has
on its records. This may prevent delays in
issuing your refund and safeguard your fu-
ture social security benefits. 
Dependent's social security number. You
must provide the SSN of each dependent
you claim, regardless of the dependent's
age. This requirement applies to all de-
pendents (not just your children) claimed
on your tax return.
Exception. If your child was born and
died in 2000 and you do not have an SSN
for the child, you may attach a copy of the
child's birth certificate instead. If you do,
enter “DIED” in column 2 of line 6c.
No social security number. File Form
SS–5 with your local SSA office to get an
SSN for yourself or your dependent. It usu-
ally takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN. If
you or your dependent is not eligible for an
SSN, see Individual taxpayer identification
number, later.
If you are a U.S. citizen, you must show
proof of age, identity, and citizenship with
your Form SS–5. If you are 18 or older, you
must appear in person with this proof at an
SSA office. 
Form SS–5 is available at any SSA of-
fice. If you have any questions about which
documents you can use as proof of age,
identity, or citizenship, contact your SSA
office.
If your dependent does not have an SSN
by the time your return is due, you may want
to ask for an extension of time to file, as
explained earlier under When Do I Have To
File.
If you do not provide a required SSN or
if you provide an incorrect SSN, your tax
may be increased and any refund may be
reduced.
Adoption taxpayer identification
number (ATIN). If you are in the process
of adopting a child who is a U.S. citizen or
resident and cannot get an SSN for the child
until the adoption is final, you can apply for
an ATIN to use instead of an SSN.
File Form W–7A with the IRS to get an
ATIN if all of the following are true.
 You have a child living with you who
was placed in your home for legal
adoption by an authorized placement
agency.
 You cannot get the child's existing SSN
even though you have made a reason-
able attempt to get it from the birth
parents, the placement agency, and
other persons.
 You cannot get an SSN for the child
from the SSA because, for example, the
adoption is not final.
 You cannot get an Individual Taxpayer
Identification Number (ITIN) (discussed
later) for the child.
 You are eligible to claim the child as a
dependent on your tax return.
After the adoption is final, you must apply
for a social security number for the child.
You cannot continue using the ATIN.
See Form W–7A for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse
is a nonresident alien and you file a joint or
separate return, your spouse must have ei-
ther an SSN or an ITIN. If your spouse is
not eligible for an SSN, see the next dis-
cussion.
Individual taxpayer identification number
(ITIN). The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you
are a nonresident or resident alien and you
do not have and are not eligible to get an
SSN. To apply for an ITIN, file Form W–7
with the IRS. It usually takes about 30 days
to get an ITIN. Enter this number on your
tax return wherever your SSN is requested.
An incorrect or missing taxpayer identifica-
tion number may increase your tax or re-
duce your refund.
Alien dependent. If your dependent is
a nonresident or resident alien who does
not have and is not eligible to get a social
security number (SSN), file Form W–7 with
the IRS to apply for an ITIN. Enter this
number on your return wherever the de-
pendent's SSN is requested.
CAUTION
!
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does
not entitle you or your dependent to
social security benefits or change
the employment or immigration status of
either of you under U.S. law.
Penalty for not providing social security
number. If you do not include your SSN or
the SSN of your spouse or dependent as
required, you may have to pay a penalty.
See the discussion on Penalties, later, for
more information. 
SSN on correspondence. If you write to
the IRS about your tax account, be sure to
include your SSN in your correspondence.
Because your SSN is used to identify your
account, this helps the IRS respond to your
correspondence promptly.
Presidential Election
Campaign Fund
This fund was set up to help pay for presi-
dential election campaigns. You may have
$3 of your tax liability go to this fund by
checking the Yes box on Form 1040, Form
1040A, or Form 1040EZ. If you are filing a
joint return, your spouse may also have $3
go to the fund. If you check Yes, it will not
change the tax you pay or the refund you
will receive. 
Computations
The following information on entering num-
bers on your tax return may be useful in
making the return easier to complete.
Rounding off dollars.You may round off
cents to whole dollars on your return and
schedules. If you do round to whole dollars,
you must round all amounts. To round, drop
amounts under 50 cents and increase
amounts from 50 to 99 cents to the next
dollar. For example, $1.39 becomes $1 and
$2.50 becomes $3.
If you have to add two or more amounts
to figure the amount to enter on a line, in-
clude cents when adding the amounts and
round off only the total. 
Example. You receive two W–2 forms:
one showing wages of $5,000.55 and one
showing wages of $18,500.73. On Form
1040, line 7, you would enter $23,501
($5,000.55 + $18,500.73 = $23,501.28), not
$23,502 ($5,001 + $18,501).
Equal amounts. If you are asked to enter
the smaller or larger of two equal amounts,
enter that amount.
Example. Line 1 is $500. Line 3 is $500.
Line 5 asks you to enter the smaller of line
1 or 3. Enter $500 on line 5.
Negative amounts. If you need to enter a
negative amount, put the amount in paren-
theses rather than using a minus sign. To
combine positive and negative amounts,
add all the positive amounts together and
then subtract the negative amounts.
Attachments 
Depending on the form you file and the
items reported on your return, you may have
to complete additional schedules and forms
and attach them to your return.
Form W–2.  Form W–2, Wage and Tax
Statement, is a statement from your em-
ployer of wages and other compensation
paid to you and taxes withheld from your
pay. You should have a Form W–2 from
each employer. Be sure to attach a copy of
Form W–2 in the place indicated on the front
page of your return. Attach it only to the
front page of your return, not to any attach-
Page 12 Chapter 1  Filing Information

ments. For more information, see Form
W –2 in chapter 5. 
If you received a Form 1099–R, Distri-
butions From Pensions, Annuities, Retire-
ment or Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insur-
ance Contracts, etc., showing federal
income tax withheld, attach a copy of that
form in the place indicated on the front page
of your return.
Form 1040EZ. There are no additional
schedules to file with Form 1040EZ.
Form 1040A. Attach the additional sched-
ules and forms that you had to complete
behind the Form 1040A in order by number.
If you are filing Schedule EIC, put it last.
Do not attach items unless required to do
so.
Form 1040. Attach any forms and sched-
ules behind Form 1040 in order of the “At-
tachment Sequence Number” shown in the
upper right corner of the form or schedule.
Put forms without an attachment sequence
number next. Then arrange all other state-
ments or attachments in the same order as
the forms and schedules they relate to and
attach them last. Do not attach items unless
required to do so. 
Signatures 
You must sign and date your return. If you
file a joint return, both you and your spouse
must sign the return, even if only one of you
had income. 
CAUTION
!
If you file a joint return, both
spouses are generally liable for the
tax, and the entire tax liability may
be assessed against either spouse. See
chapter 2.
If you are due a refund, it cannot be is-
sued unless you have signed your return.
Enter your occupation in the space pro-
vided in the signature section. If you file a
joint return, enter both your occupation and
your spouse's occupation. Entering your
daytime telephone number is optional.
If you prepare your own return, leave the
space under your signature blank. If another
person prepares your return and does not
charge you, that person should not sign
your return.
Paid preparer. Generally, anyone you pay
to prepare, assist in preparing, or review
your tax return must sign it and fill in the
other blanks in the paid preparer's area of
your return. Signature stamps and labels
are not acceptable. Paid preparers of Form
1040EZ must also put an “X” in box 10 in
the lower right corner of page 1 of the re-
turn.
If the preparer is self-employed (that is,
not employed by any person or business to
prepare the return), he or she should check
the self-employed box in the Paid Preparer's
Use Only space on the return. 
 The preparer must give you a copy of
your return in addition to the copy filed with
the IRS. 
If you have questions about whether a
preparer must sign your return, please
contact any IRS office.
Paid preparer authorization.In the
signature area of your 2000 tax return, you
are asked whether the IRS can discuss the
return with the paid preparer who signed the
return. If you check the “Yes” box, you are
authorizing:
1) The IRS to call the paid preparer to
answer any questions that arise during
the processing of your return, and
2) The paid preparer to:
a) Give information that is missing
from your return to the IRS,
b) Call the IRS for information about
the processing of your return or
the status of your refund or pay-
ments, and
c) Respond to certain IRS notices
that you have shown the preparer.
These notices about math errors,
offsets (see Refunds, later), and
return preparation will be sent to
you, not the preparer.
The authorization cannot be revoked.
However, it will automatically end no later
than the due date (without any extensions)
for filing your 2001 tax return. This is April
15, 2002, for most people.
See your form instructions for more in-
formation.
When someone can sign for you. You can
appoint an agent to sign your return if you
are:
1) Unable to sign the return because of
disease or injury,
2) Absent from the United States for a
continuous period of at least 60 days
before the due date for filing your re-
turn, or
3) Given permission to do so by the IRS
office in your area.
Power of attorney.  A return signed by
an agent in any of these cases must have
a power of attorney (POA) attached that
authorizes the agent to sign for you. You
can use a POA that states that the agent is
granted authority to sign the return, or you
can use Form 2848, Power of Attorney and
Declaration of Representative. Part I of
Form 2848 must state that the agent is
granted authority to sign the return. 
Unable to sign. If the taxpayer is men-
tally incompetent and cannot sign the re-
turn, it must be signed by a court-appointed
representative who can act for the taxpayer.
If the taxpayer is mentally competent but
physically unable to sign the return or POA,
a valid “signature” is defined under state
law. It can be anything that clearly indicates
the taxpayer's intent to sign. For example,
the taxpayer's “X” with the signatures of two
witnesses might be considered a valid sig-
nature under a state's law.
Spouse unable to sign. If your spouse is
unable to sign for any reason, see Signing
a joint return, in chapter 2.
Child's return. If a child has to file a tax
return but cannot sign the return, the child's
parent, guardian, or another legally respon-
sible person must sign the child's name,
followed by the words “By (signature), par-
ent (or guardian) for minor child.” 
Refunds
When you complete your return, you will
determine if you paid more income tax than
you owed. If so, you can get a refund of the
amount you overpaid or, if you file Form
1040 or Form 1040A, you can choose to
apply all or part of the overpayment to your
next year's (2001) estimated tax.
CAUTION
!
If you choose to have a 2000 over-
payment applied to your 2001 esti-
mated tax, you cannot change your
mind and have any of it refunded to you
after the due date of your 2000 return. 
You cannot have your overpayment ap-
plied to your 2001 estimated tax if you file
Form 1040EZ.
Follow the instructions in your tax forms
package to complete the entries to claim
your refund and/or to apply your overpay-
ment to your 2001 estimated tax.
Direct deposit. Instead of getting a paper
check, you may be able to have your refund
deposited directly into your account at a
bank or other financial institution. To re-
quest direct deposit, follow the instructions
for the refund line on your return.
If the direct deposit cannot be done, the
IRS will send a check instead.
Overpayment less than one dollar. If your
overpayment is less than one dollar, you
will not get a refund unless you ask for it in
writing. 
Cashing your refund check. Cash your tax
refund check soon after you receive it.
Checks not cashed within 12 months of the
date they are issued will be canceled and
the proceeds returned to the IRS. 
If your check has been canceled, you
can apply to the IRS to have it reissued.
Refund more or less than expected. If you
receive a check for a refund you are not
entitled to, or for an overpayment that
should have been credited to estimated tax,
do not cash the check. Call the IRS.
If you receive a check for more than the
refund you claimed, do not cash the check
until you receive a notice explaining the
difference.
If your refund check is for less than you
claimed, it should be accompanied by a
notice explaining the difference. Cashing
the check does not stop you from claiming
an additional amount of refund.
If you did not receive a notice and you
have any questions about the amount of
your refund, you should wait two weeks. If
you still have not received a notice, call the
IRS.
Offset against debts.  If you are due a re-
fund but have not paid certain amounts you
owe, all or part of your refund may be used
to pay all or part of the past-due amount.
This includes past-due federal income tax,
other federal debts (such as student loans),
state income tax, and child and spousal
support payments. You will be notified if the
refund you claimed has been offset against
your debts.
Joint return and injured spouse.
When a joint return is filed and only one
spouse owes a past-due amount, the other
spouse can be considered an injured
spouse. An injured spouse can get a refund
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 13

for his or her share of the overpayment that
would otherwise be used to pay the past-
due amount. 
To be considered an injured spouse, you
must:
1) File a joint return,
2) Have reported income (such as wages,
interest, etc.),
3) Have made and reported tax payments
(such as federal income tax withheld
from wages or estimated tax pay-
ments), or claimed the earned income
credit or other refundable credit, and
4) Have an overpayment, all or part of
which may be applied against the
past-due amount.
If you are an injured spouse, you can
obtain your portion of the joint refund by
completing  Form 8379, Injured Spouse
Claim and Allocation. Follow the instructions
on the form. 
Amount You Owe 
When you complete your return, you will
determine if you have paid the full amount
of tax that you owe. If you owe additional
tax, you should pay it with your return.
If the IRS figures your tax for you, you
will receive a bill for any tax that is due. You
should pay this bill within 30 days (or by the
due date of your return, if later). See Tax
Figured by IRS in chapter 31. 
CAUTION
!
If you do not pay your tax when due,
you may have to pay a failure-to-pay
penalty. See Penalties, later. For
more information about your balance due,
see Publication 594, The IRS Collection
Process. 
How To Pay
If you have an amount due on your tax re-
turn, you can pay by check, money order,
or credit card. If you filed electronically, you
also may be able to make your payment by
direct debit (automatic withdrawal). 
TIP
You do not have to pay if the
amount you owe is less than $1.
Payment by check or money order.If you
pay by check or money order, make it out
to the “United States Treasury.” Please
show your correct name, address, social
security number, daytime telephone num-
ber, and the tax year and form number on
the front of your check or money order.
For example, if you file Form 1040 for
2000 and you owe additional tax, show your
name, address, social security number,
daytime telephone number, and “2000 Form
1040” on the front of your check or money
order. If you file an amended return (Form
1040X) for 1999 and you owe tax, show
your name, address, social security number,
daytime telephone number, and “1999 Form
1040X” on the front of your check or money
order.
Enclose your payment with your return,
but do not attach it to the form.  If you filed
Form 1040, please complete Form 1040–V,
Payment Voucher, and enclose it with your
payment and return. Form 1040–V will help
us process your payment more accurately
and efficiently. Follow the instructions that
come with the form.
Do not mail cash with your return. If you
pay cash at an IRS office, keep the receipt
as part of your records. 
Payment not honored. If your check
or money order is not honored by your bank
(or other financial institution) and the IRS
does not receive the funds, you still owe the
tax. In addition, you may be subject to a
dishonored check penalty. 
Payment by credit card.You can use your
American Express /H17051, Discover /H17051, or
MasterCard/H17051 credit card.
To pay by credit card, call a service
provider and follow the recorded in-
structions. You can also pay by credit card
over the Internet using a service provider's
web site. 
The service providers charge a conven-
ience fee based on the amount you are
paying. Fees may vary between the provid-
ers. You will be told what the fee is during
the transaction and will have the option to
continue or end the transaction. You may
also obtain the convenience fee by calling
the service provider's automated customer
service telephone number or visiting their
respective web site. 
CAUTION
!
Do not add the convenience fee to
your tax payment.
If you pay by credit card, write the con-
firmation number you were given at the end
of the transaction and the payment amount
in the upper left corner of your tax return.
Service Providers
Electronic payment by electronic filer.
If you file your tax return electronically, you
can make your payment electronically. 
You can file and pay in a single step by
authorizing a direct debit (automatic with-
drawal) from your checking or savings ac-
count. This option is available through tax
software packages, tax professionals, and
TeleFile. If you select the direct debit pay-
ment option, you will need to have your ac-
count number, your financial institution's
routing transit number, and account type
(checking or savings). You can schedule the
payment for any future date up to and in-
cluding the return due date (April 16, 2001).
CAUTION
!
Be sure to check with your financial
institution to make sure that an au-
tomatic withdrawal is allowed and to
get the correct routing and account num-
bers.
To pay by direct debit from your check-
ing or savings account when you file by
TeleFile, fill in lines E, F, G, and H on the
TeleFile Tax Record. 
You can also file and pay in a single step
by authorizing a credit card payment. This
option is available through some tax soft-
ware packages and tax professionals.
Estimated tax payments. Do not include
any 2001 estimated tax payment in the
payment for your 2000 income tax return.
See chapter 5 for information on how to pay
estimated tax.
Interest
Interest is charged on tax you do not pay
by the due date of your return. Interest is
charged even if you get an extension of time
for filing.
TIP
If the IRS figures your tax for you,
interest cannot start earlier than the
31st day after the IRS sends you a
bill. For information, see Tax Figured by
IRS in chapter 31. 
Interest on penalties. Interest is charged
on the failure-to-file penalty, the accuracy-
related penalty, and the fraud penalty from
the due date of the return (including exten-
sions) to the date of payment. Interest on
other penalties starts on the date of notice
and demand, but is not charged on penal-
ties paid within 21 calendar days from the
date of the notice (or within 10 business
days if the notice is for $100,000 or more).
Interest due to IRS error or delay. All or
part of any interest you were charged can
be forgiven if the interest is due to an un-
reasonable error or delay by an officer or
employee of the IRS in performing a
ministerial or managerial act. 
A ministerial act is a procedural or me-
chanical act that occurs during the proc-
essing of a taxpayer's case. A managerial
act includes personnel transfers and ex-
tended personnel training. A decision con-
cerning the proper application of federal tax
law is not a ministerial or managerial act.
The interest can be forgiven only if you
are not responsible in any important way for
the error or delay and the IRS has notified
you in writing of the deficiency or payment.
For more information, get Publication 556,
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights, and
Claims for Refund. 
Interest and certain penalties may also
be suspended for a limited period if you filed
your return by the due date (including ex-
tensions) and the IRS does not provide you
with a notice specifically stating your liability
and the basis for it before the close of the
18-month period beginning on the later of:
 The date the return is filed, or
 The due date of the return without re-
gard to extensions.
For more information, get Publication 556.
Installment Agreement 
If you cannot pay the full amount due with
your return, you can ask to make monthly
installment payments. However, you will be
charged interest and may be charged a late
payment penalty on the tax not paid by April
16, 2001, even if your request to pay in in-
stallments is granted. If your request is
granted, you must also pay a fee. To limit
the interest and penalty charges, pay as
Official Payments
Corporation
To make a
payment, call ...... 1–800–2PAY–TAX
or ........................ 1–800–272–9829
For Customer
Service ............... 1–877–754–4413
Web Address ..... www.officialpayments.com
PhoneCharge Inc.
To make a
payment, call ...... 1–888–ALL–TAXX
or ........................ 1–888–255–8299
For Customer
Service ............... 1–877–851–9964
Web Address ..... www.About1888ALLTAXX.com
Page 14 Chapter 1  Filing Information

much of the tax as possible with your return.
But before requesting an installment agree-
ment, you should consider other less costly
alternatives, such as a bank loan. 
To ask for an installment agreement, use
Form 9465, Installment Agreement Re-
quest. You should receive a response to
your request within 30 days. But if you file
your return after March 31, it may take
longer for a reply. 
Guaranteed availability of installment
agreement. The IRS must agree to accept
the payment of your tax liability in install-
ments if, as of the date you offer to enter
into the agreement:
1) Your total taxes (not counting interest,
penalties, additions to the tax, or addi-
tional amounts) do not exceed
$10,000,
2) In the last 5 years, you (and your
spouse if the liability relates to a joint
return) have not:
a) Failed to file any required income
tax return,
b) Failed to pay any tax shown on
any such return, or
c) Entered into an installment
agreement for the payment of any
income tax,
3) You show you cannot pay your income
tax in full when due,
4) The tax will be paid in full in 3 years
or less, and
5) You agree to comply with the tax laws
while your agreement is in effect.
Gift To Reduce
the Public Debt
You can make a contribution (gift)
to reduce the public debt. If you wish
to do so, make a separate check
payable to “Bureau of the Public Debt.” You
can send it to:
Bureau of the Public Debt
Department G
P.O. Box 2188
Parkersburg, WV 26106-2188.
Or, you can enclose the check in the en-
velope with your income tax return. Please
do not add this gift to any tax you owe.
You can deduct this gift as a charitable
contribution on next year's tax return if you
itemize your deductions on Schedule A
(Form 1040). 
Peel-Off Address Label
After you have completed your return, peel
off the label with your name and address
from the inside of your tax return package
and place it in the appropriate area of the
Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ
you send to the IRS. If you have someone
prepare your return, give that person your
label to use on your tax return.
If you file electronically (and Form 8453
is required), use your label on Form 8453.
(More information on electronic filing is
found earlier in this chapter.) 
The label helps the IRS to correctly
identify your account. It also saves proc-
essing costs and speeds up processing so
that refunds can be issued sooner.
CAUTION
!
You must write your SSN in the
spaces provided on your tax return.
Correcting the label. Make necessary
name and address changes on the label. If
you have an apartment number that is not
shown on the label, please write it in. If you
changed your name, see the discussion
under Social Security Number, earlier. 
No label. If you did not receive a tax return
package with a label, print or type your
name and address in the spaces provided
at the top of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If
you are married filing a separate return, do
not enter your spouse's name in the space
at the top. Instead, enter his or her name in
the space provided on line 3.
If you file Form 1040EZ and you do not
have a label, print (do not type) this infor-
mation in the spaces provided.
P.O. box. If your post office does not deliver
mail to your street address and you have a
P.O. box, print your P.O. box number on the
line for your present home address instead
of your street address. 
Foreign address. If your address is outside
the United States or its possessions or ter-
ritories, enter the information on the line for
“City, town or post office, state, and ZIP
code” in the following order:
 1) City,
2) Province or state, and
3) Name of foreign country (do not ab-
breviate the name of the country).
Follow the country's practice for entering the
postal code. 
Where Do I File?
After you complete your return, you must
send it to the IRS. You can mail it or you
may be able to file it electronically. See
Does My Return Have To Be On Paper,
earlier.
Mailing your return. If an addressed en-
velope came with your tax forms package,
you should mail your return in that envelope.
If you do not have an addressed envel-
ope or if you moved during the year, mail
your return to the Internal Revenue Service
Center for the area where you now live. A
list of Service Center addresses is shown
in your tax forms package.
If you are making a payment, follow any
additional instructions in your tax forms
package.
What Happens
After I File? 
After you send your return to IRS, you may
have some questions. This section dis-
cusses concerns you may have about
recordkeeping, your refund, and what to do
if you move.
What Records
Should I Keep?
RECORDS
You must keep records so that you
can prepare a complete and accu-
rate income tax return. The law does
not require any special form of records.
However, you should keep all receipts,
canceled checks or other proof of payment,
and any other records to support any de-
ductions or credits you claim. 
If you file a claim for refund, you must
be able to prove by your records that you
have overpaid your tax.
How long to keep records. You must keep
your records for as long as they are impor-
tant for the federal tax law. 
Keep records that support an item of in-
come or a deduction appearing on a return
until the period of limitations for the return
runs out. (A period of limitations is the pe-
riod of time after which no legal action can
be brought.) For assessment of tax you
owe, this generally is 3 years from the date
you filed the return. For filing a claim for
credit or refund, this generally is 3 years
from the date you filed the original return,
or 2 years from the date you paid the tax,
whichever is later. Returns filed before the
due date are treated as filed on the due
date.
If you did not report income that you
should have reported on your return, and it
is more than 25% of the income shown on
the return, the period of limitations does not
run out until 6 years after you filed the re-
turn. If a return is false or fraudulent with
intent to evade tax, or if no return is filed,
an action can generally be brought at any
time. 
You may need to keep records relating
to the basis of property longer than the pe-
riod of limitations. Keep those records as
long as they are important in figuring the
basis of the original or replacement prop-
erty. Generally, this means for as long as
you own the property and, after you dispose
of it, for the period of limitations that applies
to you. See chapter 14 for information on
basis. 
Note. If you receive a Form W–2, keep
Copy C until you begin receiving social se-
curity benefits. This will help protect those
benefits, just in case there is a question
about your work record or earnings in a
particular year. The Social Security Admin-
istration suggests that you confirm your
work record with them from time to time.
Copies of returns. You should keep copies
of tax returns you have filed and the tax
forms package as part of your records. They
may be helpful in amending filed returns or
preparing future ones.
If you need a copy of a prior year tax
return, you can get it from the IRS. Use 
Form 4506, Request for Copy or Transcript
of Tax Form. There is a charge for a copy
of a return, which you must pay with Form
4506. 
Transcript. You can also use Form
4506 to ask for a transcript of your return
filed this year or during the 3 preceding
years. It will show most lines from your ori-
ginal return, including accompanying forms
and schedules.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 15

Tax account information.If you need a
statement of your tax account showing any
later changes that you or the IRS made to
the original return, you will need to ask for
tax account information.
Do not use Form 4506 for tax account
information. Instead, contact the IRS. You
should have your name and address, social
security number or employer identification
number (if applicable), tax period, and form
number available. You will get the following
information:
 Type of return filed,
 Filing status,
 Federal income tax withheld,
 Tax shown on return,
 Adjusted gross income,
 Taxable income,
 Self-employment tax,
 Number of exemptions,
 Amount of refund,
 Amount of earned income credit, and 
 Whether you claimed a mortgage inter-
est deduction or real estate tax de-
duction. 
More information. For more information
on recordkeeping, get Publication 552,
Recordkeeping for Individuals.
Interest on Refunds
If you are due a refund, you may get interest
on it. The interest rates are adjusted quar-
terly. 
If the refund is made within 45 days after
the due date of your return, no interest will
be paid. If you file your return after the due
date (including extensions), no interest will
be paid if the refund is made within 45 days
after the date you filed. If the refund is not
made within this 45-day period, interest will
be paid from the due date of the return or
from the date you filed, whichever is later. 
Accepting a refund check does not
change your right to claim an additional re-
fund and interest. File your claim within the
period of time that applies. See Amended
Returns and Claims for Refund, later. If you
do not accept a refund check, no more in-
terest will be paid on the overpayment in-
cluded in the check. 
Interest on erroneous refund. All or part
of any interest you were charged on an er-
roneous refund generally will be forgiven.
Any interest charged for the period before
demand for repayment was made will be
forgiven unless:
1) You, or a person related to you,
caused the erroneous refund in any
way, or
2) The refund is more than $50,000. 
For example, if you claimed a refund of
$100 on your return, but the IRS made an
error and sent you $1,000, you would not
be charged interest for the time you held the
$900 difference. You must, however, repay
the $900 when the IRS asks.
Past-Due Refund 
If you do not get your refund within 4 weeks
after filing your return, you can call TeleTax.
For details on how to use this telephone
service, see What Is TeleTax? in your tax
forms package. Please wait at least 4
weeks after filing your 2000 tax return be-
fore using this service. In some cases,
TeleTax may not have refund information
until 6 weeks after you file.
See IRS e-file, earlier, for information
about refund inquiries when you file an
electronic return.
Change of Address
If you have moved, file your return using
your new address.
If you move after you filed your return,
always notify the Internal Revenue Service
in writing of your new address. You can use
Form 8822, Change of Address. If you are
expecting a refund, also notify the post of-
fice serving your old address. This will help
in forwarding your check to your new ad-
dress (unless you chose direct deposit of
your refund). 
Be sure to include your social security
number (and the name and social security
number of your spouse, if you filed a joint
return) in any correspondence with the IRS.
What If I Made
a Mistake? 
Errors may delay your refund or result in
notices being sent to you. If you discover
an error, you can file an amended return or
claim for refund.
Amended Returns and
Claims for Refund
You should correct your return if, after you
have filed it, you find that:
1) You did not report some income,
2) You claimed deductions or credits you
should not have claimed,
3) You did not claim deductions or credits
you could have claimed, or
4) You should have claimed a different
filing status. (You cannot change your
filing status from married filing jointly
to married filing separately after the
due date of the original return. How-
ever, an executor may be able to make
this change for a deceased spouse.) 
If you need a copy of your return, see
Copies of returns under What Records
Should I Keep, earlier in this chapter.
Form 1040X. Use Form 1040X, Amended
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to cor-
rect the return you have already filed. An
amended tax return cannot be filed elec-
tronically under the e-file system.
Completing Form 1040X. On Form
1040X, write your income, deductions, and
credits as you originally reported them on
your return, the changes you are making,
and the corrected amounts. Then figure the
tax on the corrected amount of taxable in-
come and the amount you owe or your re-
fund.
If you owe tax, pay the full amount with
Form 1040X. The tax owed will not be sub-
tracted from any amount you had credited
to your estimated tax.
If you cannot pay the full amount due
with your return, you can ask to make
monthly installment payments. See Install-
ment Agreement, earlier.
If you overpaid tax, you can have all or
part of the overpayment refunded to you,
or you can apply all or part of it to your es-
timated tax. If you choose to get a refund,
it will be sent separately from any refund
shown on your original return.
Filing Form 1040X. After you finish your
Form 1040X, check it to be sure that it is
complete. Do not forget to show the year
of your original return and explain all
changes you made. Be sure to attach any
forms or schedules needed to explain your
changes. Mail your Form 1040X to the
Internal Revenue Service Center serving
the area where you now live (as shown in
the instructions to the form).
File a separate form for each tax year
involved.
Time for filing a claim for refund. Gener-
ally, you must file your claim for a credit or
refund within 3 years after the date you filed
your original return or within 2 years after
the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.
Returns filed before the due date (without
regard to extensions) are considered filed
on the due date (even if the due date was
a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday).
These time periods are suspended while
you are financially disabled, discussed later.
If the last day for claiming a credit or
refund is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holi-
day, you can file the claim on the next
business day. 
If you do not file a claim within this pe-
riod, you may not be entitled to a credit or
a refund.
Late-filed return.If you were due a
refund but you did not file a return, you
generally must file within 3 years from the
date the return was originally due to get that
refund. 
Limit on amount of refund. If you file your
claim within 3 years after the date you filed
your return, the credit or refund cannot be
more than the part of the tax paid within the
3-year period (plus any extension of time for
filing your return) immediately before you
filed the claim. This time period is sus-
pended while you are financially disabled,
discussed later. 
Tax paid. Payments made before the
due date (without regard to extensions) of
the original return are considered paid on
the due date. Examples include federal in-
come tax withheld from wages and esti-
mated income tax.
Example 1. You made estimated tax
payments of $500 and got an automatic
extension of time to August 15, 1998, to file
your 1997 income tax return. When you filed
your return on that date, you paid an addi-
tional $200 tax. On August 15, 2001, you
filed an amended return and claimed a re-
fund of $700. Because you filed your claim
within 3 years after you filed your original
return, you can get a refund of up to $700,
the tax paid within the 3 years plus the
4-month extension period immediately be-
fore you filed the claim.
Page 16 Chapter 1  Filing Information

Example 2. The situation is the same
as in Example 1, except you filed your re-
turn on October 31, 1998, 2
1/2 months after
the extension period ended. You paid an
additional $200 on that date. On October
27, 2001, you filed an amended return and
claimed a refund of $700. Although you filed
your claim within 3 years from the date you
filed your original return, the refund was
limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3
years plus the 4-month extension period
immediately before you filed the claim. The
estimated tax of $500 paid before that pe-
riod cannot be refunded or credited.
If you file a claim more than 3 years
after you file your return, the credit or re-
fund cannot be more than the tax you paid
within the 2 years immediately before you
file the claim. 
Example. You filed your 1997 tax return
on April 15, 1998. You paid taxes of $500.
On November 1, 1999, after an examination
of your 1997 return, you had to pay an ad-
ditional tax of $200. On May 11, 2001, you
file a claim for a refund of $300. However,
because you filed your claim more than 3
years after you filed your return, your refund
will be limited to the $200 you paid during
the 2 years immediately before you filed
your claim.
Financially disabled.The time periods are
suspended for the period in which you are
financially disabled. You are financially dis-
abled if you are unable to manage your fi-
nancial affairs because of a medically de-
terminable physical or mental impairment
which can be expected to result in death or
which has lasted or can be expected to last
for a continuous period of not less than 12
months. However, you are not treated as
financially disabled during any period your
spouse or any other person is authorized to
act on your behalf in financial matters.
To claim that you are financially disa-
bled, you must send in the following written
statements with your claim for refund.
1) A statement from your qualified physi-
cian that includes:
a) The name and a description of
your physical or mental impair-
ment,
b) The physician's medical opinion
that the impairment prevented you
from managing your financial af-
fairs,
c) The physician's medical opinion
that the impairment was or can
be expected to result in death, or
that its duration has lasted, or can
be expected to last, at least 12
months,
d) The specific time period (to the
best of the physician's knowl-
edge), and
e) The following certification signed
by the physician: “I hereby certify
that, to the best of my knowledge
and belief, the above representa-
tions are true, correct, and com-
plete.”
2) A statement made by the person sign-
ing the claim for credit or refund that
no person, including your spouse, was
authorized to act on your behalf in fi-
nancial matters during the period of
disability (or the exact dates that a
person was authorized to act for you).
Exceptions for special types of refunds.
If you file a claim for one of the items listed
below, the dates and limits discussed earlier
may not apply. These items, and where to
get more information, are as follows.
 A bad debt. (See Nonbusiness Bad
Debts in chapter 15.) 
 A worthless security. (See Worthless
securities in chapter 15.)
 Foreign tax paid or accrued. (See Pub-
lication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for In-
dividuals.)
 Net operating loss carryback. (See
Publication 536, Net Operating Losses
(NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and
Trusts.)
 Carryback of certain business tax cred-
its. (See Form 3800, General Business
Credit.)
 A claim based on an agreement with
the Service extending the period for
assessment of tax.
 An injured spouse claim. (See Offset
against debts, earlier.) 
Processing claims for refund. Claims are
usually processed shortly after they are
filed. Your claim may be accepted as filed,
disallowed, or subject to examination. If a
claim is examined, the procedures are the
same as in the examination of a tax return.
If your claim is disallowed, you will re-
ceive an explanation of why it was disal-
lowed.
Taking your claim to court. You can sue
for a refund in court, but you must first file
a timely claim with the IRS. If the IRS rejects
your claim or does not act on your claim
within 6 months after you file it, you can then
take your claim to court. For information on
the burden of proof in a court proceeding,
see Publication 556, Examination of Re-
turns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for
Refund. 
The IRS provides a fast method to move
your claim to court if:
 You are filing a claim for a credit or re-
fund based solely on contested income
tax or on estate tax or gift tax issues
considered in your previously examined
returns, and
 You want to take your case to court in-
stead of appealing it within the IRS.
When you file your claim with the IRS,
you get the fast method by requesting in
writing that your claim be immediately re-
jected. A notice of claim disallowance will
then be promptly sent to you.
You have 2 years from the date of mail-
ing of the notice of disallowance to file a
refund suit in the United States District
Court having jurisdiction or in the United
States Court of Federal Claims. 
Interest on refund. If you receive a refund
because of your amended return, interest
will be paid on it from the due date of your
original return or the date you filed your or-
iginal return, whichever is later, to the date
you filed the amended return. However, if
the refund is not made within 45 days after
you file the amended return, interest will be
paid up to the date the refund is paid. 
Reduced refund. Your refund may be re-
duced by an additional tax liability that has
been assessed against you. 
Also, your refund may be reduced by
amounts you owe for past-due child sup-
port, debts to another federal agency, or for
state tax. The refund procedures discussed
in this chapter will not be available to you
to get back the reduction. See Offset
against debts, earlier. 
Effect on state tax liability. If your return
is changed for any reason, it may affect your
state income tax liability. This includes
changes made as a result of an examination
of your return by the IRS. Contact your
state tax agency for more information.
Penalties 
The law provides penalties for failure to file
returns or pay taxes as required.
Civil Penalties 
If you do not file your return and pay your
tax by the due date, you may have to pay
a penalty. You may also have to pay a
penalty if you substantially understate your
tax, file a frivolous return, or fail to supply
your social security number. If you provide
fraudulent information on your return, you
may have to pay a civil fraud penalty. 
Filing late. If you do not file your return by
the due date (including extensions), you
may have to pay a failure-to-file penalty.
The penalty is based on the tax not paid by
the due date (without regard to extensions).
The penalty is usually 5% for each month
or part of a month that a return is late, but
not more than 25%. 
Fraud. If your failure to file is due to
fraud, the penalty is 15% for each month
or part of a month that your return is late,
up to a maximum of 75%. 
Return over 60 days late. If you file
your return more than 60 days after the due
date or extended due date, the minimum
penalty is the smaller of $100 or 100% of
the unpaid tax. 
Exception. You will not have to pay the
penalty if you show that you failed to file on
time because of reasonable cause and not
because of willful neglect. 
Paying tax late. You will have to pay a
failure-to-pay penalty of 
1/2 of 1% (.50%)
of your unpaid taxes for each month, or part
of a month, after the due date that the tax
is not paid. This penalty does not apply
during the automatic 4-month extension of
time to file period, if you paid at least 90%
of your actual tax liability on or before the
due date of your return and pay the balance
when you file the return. 
The monthly rate of the failure-to-pay
penalty is half the usual rate (.25% instead
of .50%) if an installment agreement is in
effect for that month. You must have filed
your return by the due date (including ex-
tensions) to qualify for this reduced penalty.
If a notice of intent to levy is issued, the
rate will increase to 1% at the start of the
first month beginning at least 10 days after
the day that the notice is issued. If a notice
and demand for immediate payment is is-
sued, the rate will increase to 1% at the start
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 17

of the first month beginning after the day
that the notice and demand is issued. 
This penalty cannot be more than 25%
of your unpaid tax. You will not have to pay
the penalty if you can show that you had a
good reason for not paying your tax on time.
Combined penalties. If both the failure-to-
file penalty and the failure-to-pay penalty
(discussed earlier) apply in any month, the
5% (or 15%) failure-to-file penalty is re-
duced by the failure-to-pay penalty. How-
ever, if you file your return more than 60
days after the due date or extended due
date, the minimum penalty is the smaller of
$100 or 100% of the unpaid tax. 
Accuracy-related penalty.  You may have
to pay an accuracy-related penalty if:
1) You underpay your tax because of ei-
ther “negligence” or “disregard” of rules
or regulations, or
2) You substantially understate your in-
come tax.
The penalty is equal to 20% of the under-
payment. The penalty will not be figured
on any part of an underpayment on which
the fraud penalty (discussed later) is
charged.
Negligence or disregard. The term
“negligence” includes a failure to make a
reasonable attempt to comply with the tax
law or to exercise ordinary and reasonable
care in preparing a return. Negligence also
includes failure to keep adequate books and
records. You will not have to pay a
negligence penalty if you have a reasonable
basis for a position you took. 
The term “disregard” includes any care-
less, reckless, or intentional disregard. 
Adequate disclosure. You can avoid
the penalty for disregard of rules or regu-
lations if you adequately disclose on your
return a position that has at least a reason-
able basis. See Disclosure statement, later.
Substantial understatement of in-
come tax. You understate your tax if the tax
shown on your return is less than the correct
tax. The understatement is substantial if it
is more than the larger of 10% of the correct
tax or $5,000. However, the amount of the
understatement is reduced to the extent the
understatement is due to:
1) Substantial authority, or
2) Adequate disclosure and a reasonable
basis. 
Substantial authority. Whether there is
or was substantial authority for the tax
treatment of an item depends on the facts
and circumstances. Consideration will be
given to court opinions, Treasury regu-
lations, revenue rulings, revenue proce-
dures, and notices and announcements is-
sued by the IRS and published in the
Internal Revenue Bulletin that involve the
same or similar circumstances as yours. 
Disclosure statement.  To adequately
disclose the relevant facts about your tax
treatment of an item, use  Form 8275, Dis-
closure Statement. You must also have a
reasonable basis for treating the item the
way you did. 
In cases of substantial understatement
only, items that meet the requirements of
Revenue Procedure 99–41 (or later update)
are considered adequately disclosed on
your return without filing Form 8275. 
Use Form 8275–R, Regulation Disclo-
sure Statement, to disclose items or posi-
tions contrary to regulations. 
Reasonable cause. You will not have
to pay a penalty if you show a good reason
(reasonable cause) for the way you treated
an item. You must also show that you acted
in good faith. 
Frivolous return. You may have to pay a
penalty of $500 if you file a frivolous return.
A frivolous return is one that does not in-
clude enough information to figure the cor-
rect tax or that contains information clearly
showing that the tax you reported is sub-
stantially incorrect. 
You will have to pay the penalty if you
filed this kind of return because of a frivo-
lous position on your part or a desire to
delay or interfere with the administration of
federal income tax laws. This includes al-
tering or striking out the preprinted language
above the space provided for your signa-
ture. 
This penalty is added to any other pen-
alty provided by law. 
The penalty must be paid in full upon
notice and demand from IRS even if you
protest the penalty. 
Fraud. If there is any underpayment of tax
on your return due to fraud, a penalty of
75% of the underpayment due to fraud will
be added to your tax. 
Joint return. The fraud penalty on a
joint return does not apply to a spouse un-
less some part of the underpayment is due
to the fraud of that spouse. 
Failure to supply social security number.
If you do not include your social security
number (SSN) or the SSN of another person
where required on a return, statement, or
other document, you will be subject to a
penalty of $50 for each failure. You will also
be subject to a penalty of $50 if you do not
give your SSN to another person when it is
required on a return, statement, or other
document. 
For example, if you have a bank account
that earns interest, you must give your SSN
to the bank. The number must be shown
on the Form 1099–INT or other statement
the bank sends you. If you do not give the
bank your SSN, you will be subject to the
$50 penalty. (You also may be subject to
“backup” withholding of income tax. See
chapter 5.) 
You will not have to pay the penalty if
you are able to show that the failure was
due to reasonable cause and not willful
neglect. 
Failure to furnish tax shelter registration
number. A person who sells (or otherwise
transfers) to you an interest in a tax shelter
must give you the tax shelter registration
number or be subject to a $100 penalty. If
you claim any deduction, credit, or other tax
benefit because of the tax shelter, you must
attach  Form 8271, Investor Reporting of
Tax Shelter Registration Number, to your
return to report this number. You will have
to pay a penalty of $250 for each failure to
report a tax shelter registration number on
your return. The penalty can be excused if
you have a reasonable cause for not re-
porting the number. 
Criminal Penalties 
You may be subject to criminal prosecution
(brought to trial) for actions such as:
1) Tax evasion, 
2) Willful failure to file a return, supply in-
formation, or pay any tax due, 
3) Fraud and false statements, or 
4) Preparing and filing a fraudulent return.
Page 18 Chapter 1  Filing Information

2.
Filing Status
Introduction
This chapter discusses which filing status
you should use. There are five filing
statuses. They are:
 Single,
 Married Filing Jointly,
 Married Filing Separately,
 Head of Household, and
 Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent
Child.
TIP
If more than one filing status applies
to you, choose the one that will give
you the lowest tax.
You use your filing status in determining
your filing requirements(see chapter 1),
standard deduction (see chapter 21), and
correct tax (see chapter 31). Your filing
status is also important in determining
whether you can take certain deductions
and credits.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554501 Exemptions, Standard De-
duction, and Filing Information
/H18554519 U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
/H18554 555 Community Property
Marital Status
In general, your filing status depends on
whether you are considered unmarried or
married. A marriage means only a legal
union between a man and a woman as
husband and wife.
Unmarried persons. You are considered
unmarried for the whole year if, on the last
day of your tax year, you are unmarried or
legally separated from your spouse under
a divorce or a separate maintenance de-
cree. State law governs whether you are
married, or legally separated under a di-
vorce or separate maintenance decree.
Divorced persons.If you are divorced
under a final decree by the last day of the
year, you are considered unmarried for the
whole year.
Divorce and remarriage.If you obtain
a divorce in one year for the sole purpose
of filing tax returns as unmarried individuals,
and at the time of divorce you intended to
and did remarry each other in the next tax
year, you and your spouse must file as
married individuals.
Annulled marriages. If you obtain a
court decree of annulment, which holds that
no valid marriage ever existed, you are
considered unmarried even if you filed joint
returns for earlier years. You must file
amended returns (Form 1040X, Amended
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return) claiming
single or head of household status for all tax
years affected by the annulment that are not
closed by the statute of limitations for filing
a tax return. The statute of limitations gen-
erally does not expire until 3 years after your
original return was filed.
Head of household or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child. If you are
considered unmarried, you may be able to
file as a head of household or as a qualify-
ing widow(er) with a dependent child. See
Head of Household and Qualifying
Widow(er) With Dependent Child to see if
you qualify.
Married persons. If you are considered
married for the whole year, you and your
spouse can file a joint return, or you can file
separate returns. 
Considered married. You are consid-
ered married for the whole year if on the last
day of your tax year you and your spouse
meet any one of the following tests.
1) You are married and living together as
husband and wife.
2) You are living together in a  common
law marriage that is recognized in the
state where you now live or in the state
where the common law marriage be-
gan.
3) You are married and living apart, but
not legally separated under a decree
of divorce or separate maintenance.
4) You are separated under an
interlocutory (not final) decree of di-
vorce. For purposes of filing a joint re-
turn, you are not considered divorced.
Spouse died during the year.If your
spouse died during the year, you are con-
sidered married for the whole year for filing
status purposes.
If you did not remarry before the end of
the tax year, you can file a joint return for
yourself and your deceased spouse. For
the next 2 years, you may be entitled to the
special benefits described later under
Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child.
If you remarried before the end of the tax
year, you can file a joint return with your
new spouse. Your deceased spouse's filing
status is married filing separately for that
year.
Married persons living apart.If you
live apart from your spouse and meet cer-
tain tests, you may be considered unmar-
ried. If this applies to you, you can file as
head of household even though you are not
divorced or legally separated. If you qualify
to file as head of household instead of as
married filing separately, your standard de-
duction will be higher. Also, your tax may
be lower, and you may be able to claim the
earned income credit. See Head of House-
hold, later.
Single
Your filing status is single if, on the last day
of the year, you are unmarried or legally
separated from your spouse under a divorce
or separate maintenance decree, and you
do not qualify for another filing status. To
determine your marital status on the last day
of the year, see Marital Status, earlier.
Your filing status may be single if you
were widowed before January 1, 2000, and
did not remarry in 2000. However, you might
be able to use another filing status that will
give you a lower tax. See Head of House-
hold and Qualifying Widow(er) With De-
pendent Child to see if you qualify.
How to file.You can file Form 1040EZ (if
you have no dependents, are under 65 and
not blind, and meet other requirements),
Form 1040A, or Form 1040. If you file Form
1040A or Form 1040, show your filing status
as single by checking the box on line 1.
Use the Single column of the Tax Table, or
Schedule X of the Tax Rate Schedules, to
figure your tax.
Married Filing Jointly
You can choose married filing jointly as
your filing status if you are married and both
you and your spouse agree to file a joint
return. On a joint return, you report your
combined income and deduct your com-
bined allowable expenses.
If you and your spouse decide to file a
joint return, your tax may be lower than your
combined tax for the other filing statuses.
Also, your standard deduction (if you do not
itemize deductions) may be higher, and you
may qualify for tax benefits that do not apply
to other filing statuses. You can file a joint
return even if one of you had no income or
deductions.
TIP
If you and your spouse each have
income, you may want to figure your
tax both on a joint return and on
separate returns (using the filing status of
married filing separately). Choose the
method that gives the two of you the lower
combined tax.
How to file. If you file as married filing
jointly, you can use Form 1040 or Form
1040A. If you have no dependents, are un-
der 65 and not blind, and meet other re-
quirements, you can file Form 1040EZ. If
you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A, show
this filing status by checking the box on line
2. Use the Married filing jointly column of the
Tax Table, or Schedule Y–1 of the Tax Rate
Schedules, to figure your tax.
Spouse died during the year. If your
spouse died during the year, you are con-
sidered married for the whole year and can
choose married filing jointly as your filing
status. See Spouse died during the year,
earlier.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced un-
der a final decree by the last day of the year,
you are considered unmarried for the whole
year and you cannot choose married filing
jointly as your filing status.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 19

Filing a Joint Return
Both you and your spouse must include all
of your income, exemptions, and deductions
on your joint return.
Accounting period.Both of you must use
the same accounting period, but you can
use different accounting methods. See Ac-
counting Periods and Accounting Methods
in chapter 1.
Joint responsibility.Both of you may be
held responsible, jointly and individually, for
the tax and any interest or penalty due on
your joint return. One spouse may be held
responsible for all the tax due even if all the
income was earned by the other spouse.
Divorced taxpayer.You may be held
jointly and individually responsible for any
tax, interest, and penalties due on a joint
return filed before your divorce. This re-
sponsibility may apply even if your divorce
decree states that your former spouse will
be responsible for any amounts due on
previously filed joint returns.
Relief from joint liability.In some
cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint
liability for tax, interest, and penalties on a
joint return for items of the other spouse that
were incorrectly reported on the joint return.
You can ask for relief no matter how small
the liability. 
There are three types of relief available.
1) Innocent spouse relief, which applies
to all joint filers.
2) Separation of liability, which applies to
joint filers who are divorced, widowed,
legally separated, or have not lived to-
gether for the past 12 months.
3) Equitable relief, which applies to all
joint filers who do not qualify for inno-
cent spouse relief or separation of li-
ability and to married couples filing
separate returns in community property
states.
You must file Form 8857, Request for
Innocent Spouse Relief, to request any of
these kinds of relief. Publication 971, Inno-
cent Spouse Relief, explains these kinds of
relief and who may qualify for them.
Signing a joint return.  For a return to be
considered a joint return, both husband and
wife must generally sign the return. If your
spouse died before signing the return, see
Signing the return in chapter 4.
Spouse away from home. If your
spouse is away from home, you should
prepare the return, sign it, and send it to
your spouse to sign so that it can be filed
on time.
Injury or disease prevents signing.If
your spouse cannot sign because of dis-
ease or injury and tells you to sign, you can
sign your spouse's name in the proper
space on the return followed by the words
“By (your name), Husband (or Wife).” Be
sure to also sign in the space provided for
your signature. Attach a dated statement,
signed by you, to the return. The statement
should include the form number of the return
you are filing, the tax year, the reason your
spouse cannot sign, and that your spouse
has agreed to your signing for him or her.
Signing as guardian of spouse.If you
are the guardian of your spouse who is
mentally incompetent, you can sign the re-
turn for your spouse as guardian.
Spouse in combat zone. If your
spouse is unable to sign the return because
he or she is serving in a combat zone, such
as the Persian Gulf Area or Yugoslavia, or
a qualified hazardous duty area (Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, and Macedonia), and
you do not have a power of attorney or other
statement, you can sign for your spouse.
Attach a signed statement to your return
that explains that your spouse is serving in
a combat zone. For more information on
special tax rules for persons who are serv-
ing in a combat zone, get Publication 3,
Armed Forces' Tax Guide. 
Other reasons spouse cannot sign.
If your spouse cannot sign the joint return
for any other reason, you can sign for your
spouse only if you are given a valid power
of attorney (a legal document giving you
permission to act for your spouse). Attach
the power of attorney (or a copy of it) to your
tax return. You can use Form 2848, Power
of Attorney and Declaration of Represen-
tative.
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. 
A joint return generally cannot be made if
either spouse is a nonresident alien at any
time during the tax year. However, if one
spouse was a nonresident alien or dual-
status alien who was married to a U.S. citi-
zen or resident at the end of the year, the
spouses can choose to file a joint return. If
you do file a joint return, you and your
spouse are both treated as U.S. citizens or
residents for the entire tax year. For infor-
mation on this choice, see chapter 1 of
Publication 519.
Married Filing
Separately
You can choose married filing separately
as your filing status if you are married. This
method may benefit you if you want to be
responsible only for your own tax or if this
method results in less tax than a joint return.
If you and your spouse do not agree to file
a joint return, you may have to use this filing
status.
If you live apart from your spouse and
meet certain tests, you may be considered
unmarried and may be able to file as head
of household. This can apply to you even
if you are not divorced or legally separated.
If you qualify to file as head of household,
instead of as married filing separately, your
tax may be lower, you may be able to claim
the earned income credit and certain other
credits, and your standard deduction will be
higher. The head of household filing status
allows you to choose the standard de-
duction even if your spouse chooses to
itemize deductions. See Head of House-
hold, later, for more information.
TIP
Unless you are required to file sep-
arately, you should figure your tax
both ways (on a joint return and on
separate returns). This way you can make
sure you are using the method that results
in the lowest combined tax. However, you
will generally pay more combined tax on
separate returns than you would on a joint
return because the tax rate is higher for
married persons filing separately.
How to file.If you file a separate return,
you generally report only your own income,
exemptions, credits, and deductions on your
individual return. You can claim an ex-
emption for your spouse if your spouse had
no gross income and was not a dependent
of another person. However, if your spouse
had any gross income, or was the depend-
ent of someone else, you cannot claim an
exemption for him or her on your separate
return.
If you file as married filing separately,
you can use Form 1040A or Form 1040.
Select this filing status by checking the box
on line 3 of either form. You must also write
your spouse's social security number and
full name in the spaces provided. Use the
Married filing separately column of the Tax
Table or Schedule Y–2 of the Tax Rate
Schedules, to figure your tax.
Special Rules
Special rules apply if your filing status is
married filing separately.
Community property states. If you live in
Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana,
Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington,
or Wisconsin and file separately, your in-
come may be considered separate income
or community income for income tax pur-
poses. See Publication 555.
Deductions, credits, and certain income.
If your filing status is married filing sepa-
rately:
1) You should itemize deductions if your
spouse itemizes deductions, because
you cannot claim the standard de-
duction. 
2) You cannot deduct interest paid on a
qualified student loan.
3) You cannot take the credit for child and
dependent care expenses in most in-
stances, and the amount that you can
exclude from income under an em-
ployer's dependent care assistance
program is limited to $2,500 (instead
of $5,000 if you filed a joint return).
4) You cannot take the earned income
credit.
5) You cannot exclude any interest in-
come from qualified U.S. savings
bonds that you used for higher educa-
tion expenses.
6) You cannot take the credit for the el-
derly or the disabled unless you lived
apart from your spouse for the entire
year.
7) You cannot take the education credits
(the Hope and lifetime learning credits).
8) You cannot take the exclusion or credit
for adoption expenses in most in-
stances.
9) You will become subject to the limit on
the child tax credit, the limit on itemized
deductions, and the phaseout of the
deduction for personal exemptions at
income levels that are half of those for
a joint return.
10) You may have to include in income
more of your social security benefits (or
equivalent railroad retirement benefits)
than you would on a joint return. For
information on social security and rail-
Page 20 Chapter 2  Filing Status

Table 2–1. Who Is a Qualifying Person For Filing as Head of Household?
1
Parent, Grandparent, Brother, Sister,
Stepbrother, Stepsister, Stepmother,
Stepfather, Mother-in-law, Father-in-law,
Half brother, Half sister, Brother-in-law,
Sister-in-law, Son-in-law, or
Daugher-in-law
You can claim an exemption for him or
her
2
Uncle, Aunt, Nephew, or Niece
Child, Grandchild, Stepchild, or Adopted
child
1
A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
Foster child
5
You cannot claim an exemption for him or
her
He or she is related to you by blood and
you can claim an exemption for him or
her
2, 3
He or she is not related to you by blood
3
You cannot claim an exemption for him or
her
He or she is single
He or she is married, and
 you can claim
an exemption for him or her
2
The child lived with you all year, and you
can claim an exemption for him or her
2
The child did not live with you all year, or you
cannot claim an exemption for him or her
A qualifying person
He or she is married, and  you cannot
claim an exemption for him or her
NOT a qualifying person
A qualifying person
NOT a qualifying person
NOT a qualifying person
4
A qualifying person
A qualifying person
NOT a qualifying person
A qualifying person
2
If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person cannot be a qualifying per son. See Multiple Support
Agreement.
3
You are related by blood to an uncle or aunt if he or she is the brother or sister of your mother or father. You are related by  blood to a nephew or niece if
he or she is the child of your brother or sister.
4
This child is a qualifying person if you could claim an exemption for the child except that the child ’s other parent claims the exemption under the special
rules for a noncustodial parent discussed under Support Test for Divorced or Separated Parents in chapter 3.
IF the person is your ... AND ... THEN that person is ...
5
The term “foster child” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents in chapter 3.
road retirement benefits, see Publica-
tion 915, Social Security and Equiv-
alent Railroad Retirement Benefits.
11) You cannot roll over amounts from a
traditional IRA into a Roth IRA during
the year, unless you did not live with
your spouse at any time during the
year.
12) Your capital loss deduction limit is
$1,500 (instead of $3,000 if you filed
a joint return).
Individual retirement arrangements
(IRAs).  You may not be able to deduct all
or part of your contributions to a traditional
IRA if you or your spouse were covered by
an employee retirement plan at work during
the year. Your deduction is reduced or
eliminated if your income is more than a
certain amount. This amount is lower for
married individuals who file separately and
lived together at any time during the year.
For more information, see How Much Can
I Deduct? in Publication 590, Individual Re-
tirement Arrangements (IRAs).
Rental activity losses.  If you actively
participated in a passive rental real estate
activity that produces a loss, you generally
can deduct the loss from your nonpassive
income, up to $25,000. This is called a
“special allowance.” However, married per-
sons filing separate returns who lived to-
gether at any time during the year cannot
claim this special allowance. Married per-
sons filing separate returns who lived apart
at all times during the year are each allowed
a $12,500 maximum special allowance for
losses from passive real estate activities.
See Limits on Rental Losses in chapter 10.
Joint Return After
Separate Returns
You can change your filing status by filing
an amended return using Form 1040X.
If you or your spouse (or each of you)
file a separate return, you generally can
change to a joint return any time within 3
years from the due date of the separate re-
turn or returns. This does not include any
extensions. A separate return includes a
return filed by you or your spouse claiming
married filing separately, single, or head of
household filing status.
Separate Returns After
Joint Return
Once you file a joint return, you cannot
choose to file separate returns for that year
after the due date of the return.
Exception. A personal representative for
a decedent can change from a joint return
elected by the surviving spouse to a sepa-
rate return for the decedent. The personal
representative has 1 year from the due date
of the return to make the change. See
chapter 4 for more information on filing a
return for a decedent.
Head of Household
You may be able to file as head of house-
hold if you meet all of the following require-
ments.
1) You are unmarried or considered un-
married on the last day of the year.
2) You paid more than half the cost of
keeping up a home for the year.
3) A qualifying person must live with you
in the home for more than half the year
(except for temporary absences, such
as school). However, your dependent
parent does not have to live with you.
See Special rule for parent, later, under
Qualifying Person. A foster child must
live with you all year.
TIP
If you qualify to file as head of
household, your tax rate usually will
be lower than the rates for single or
married filing separately. You will also re-
ceive a higher standard deduction than if
you file as single or married filing sepa-
rately.
How to file.If you file as head of house-
hold, you can use either Form 1040A or
Form 1040. Indicate your choice of this filing
status by checking the box on line 4 of either
form. Use the Head of a household column
of the Tax Table, or Schedule Z of the Tax
Rate Schedules, to figure your tax.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 21

Considered Unmarried
You are considered unmarried on the last
day of the year if you are legally separated
from your spouse, according to your state
law, under a divorce or separate mainte-
nance decree.
You are also considered unmarried on
the last day of the tax year if you meet all
of the following tests.
1) You file a separate return. 
2) You paid more than half the cost of
keeping up your home for the tax year.
3) Your spouse did not live in your home
during the last 6 months of the tax
year. Your spouse is considered to live
in your home even if he or she is tem-
porarily absent due to special circum-
stances. See Temporary absences,
later. 
4) Your home was the main home of your
child, stepchild or adopted child for
more than half the year or was the
main home of your foster child for the
entire year. (See Home of qualifying
person, later, for rules applying to a
child's birth, death, or temporary ab-
sence during the year.)
5) You must be able to claim an ex-
emption for the child. However, you
can still meet this test if you cannot
claim the exemption only because the
noncustodial parent is allowed to claim
the exemption for the child. See Ex-
ception in chapter 3 for situations
where the noncustodial parent is al-
lowed to claim the exemption for the
child.
The general rules to claim an exemption
for a dependent are explained in chapter 3.
CAUTION
!
If you were considered married for
part of the year and lived in a com-
munity property state (listed earlier
under Married Filing Separately), special
rules may apply in determining your income
and expenses. See Publication 555 for
more information.
Nonresident alien spouse. You are con-
sidered unmarried for head of household
purposes if your spouse was a nonresident
alien at any time during the year and you
do not choose to treat your nonresident
spouse as a resident alien. However, your
spouse is not a qualifying person for head
of household purposes. You must have an-
other qualifying person and meet the other
tests to be eligible to file as a head of
household.
Earned income credit. Even if you are
considered unmarried for head of household
purposes because you are married to a
nonresident alien, you are still considered
married for purposes of the earned income
credit (unless you meet the five tests listed
earlier). You are not entitled to the credit
unless you file a joint return with your
spouse and meet other qualifications. See
Publication 596, Earned Income Credit, for
more information.
Choice to treat spouse as resident.
You are considered married if you choose
to treat your spouse as a resident alien.
Keeping Up a Home 
To qualify for head of household status, you
must pay more than half of the cost of
keeping up a home for the year. You can
determine whether you paid more than half
of the cost of keeping up a home by using
the Cost of Keeping Up a Home worksheet,
shown later.
Costs you include.Include in the cost of
upkeep expenses such as rent, mortgage
interest, real estate taxes, insurance on the
home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in the
home.
Costs you do not include.Do not include
in the cost of upkeep expenses such as
clothing, education, medical treatment, va-
cations, life insurance, or transportation.
Also, do not include the rental value of a
home you own or the value of your services
or those of a member of your household.
 
Qualifying Person
See Table 2–1 to see who is a qualifying
person.
Any person not described in Table 2–1
is not a qualifying person.
Home of qualifying person. Generally,
the qualifying person must live with you for
more than half the year.
Special rule for parent.You may be
eligible to file as head of household even if
the parent for whom you can claim an ex-
emption does not live with you. You must
pay more than half the cost of keeping up
a home that was the main home for the
entire year for your father or mother. You
are keeping up a main home for your father
or mother if you pay more than half the cost
of keeping your parent in a rest home or
home for the elderly.
Temporary absences. You and your
qualifying person are considered to live to-
gether even if one or both of you are tem-
porarily absent from your home due to
special circumstances such as illness, edu-
cation, business, vacation, and military ser-
vice. It must be reasonable to assume that
the absent person will return to the house-
hold after the temporary absence. You must
continue to keep up the home during the
absence.
Death or birth.You may be eligible to
file as head of household if the individual
who qualifies you for this filing status is born
or dies during the year. You must have
provided more than half of the cost of
keeping up a home that was the individual's
main home for more than half the year, or,
if less, the period during which the individual
lived.
Example. You are unmarried. Your
mother, for whom you can claim an ex-
emption, lived in an apartment by herself.
She died on September 2. The cost of the
upkeep of her apartment for the year until
her death was $6,000. You paid $4,000 and
your brother paid $2,000. Your brother
made no other payments toward your
mother's support. Your mother had no in-
come. Because you paid more than half the
cost of keeping up your mother's apartment
from January 1 until her death, and you can
claim an exemption for her, you can file as
a head of household.
Qualifying Widow(er)
With Dependent Child
If your spouse died in 2000, you can use
married filing jointly as your filing status for
2000 if you would otherwise qualify to use
that status. The year of death is the last year
for which you can file jointly with your de-
ceased spouse. See Married Filing Jointly,
earlier.
You may be eligible to use qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child as your
filing status for 2 years following the year
of death of your spouse. For example, if
your spouse died in 1999, and you have not
remarried, you may be able to use this filing
status for 2000 and 2001.
This filing status entitles you to use joint
return tax rates and the highest standard
deduction amount (if you do not itemize
deductions). This status does not entitle you
to file a joint return.
How to file. If you file as qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child, you can
use either Form 1040A or Form 1040. Indi-
cate your filing status by checking the box
on line 5 of either form. Write the year your
spouse died in the space provided on line
5. Use the Married filing jointly column of
the Tax Table or Schedule Y–1 of the Tax
Rate Schedules, to figure your tax.
Eligibility rules.You are eligible to file
your 2000 return as a qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child if you meet all of the
following tests.
1) You were entitled to file a joint return
with your spouse for the year your
spouse died. It does not matter
whether you actually filed a joint return.
2) You did not remarry before the end of
2000.
3) You have a child, stepchild, adopted
child, or foster child for whom you can
claim an exemption.
4) You paid more than half the cost of
keeping up a home that is the main
home for you and that child for the
entire year, except for temporary ab-
sences. See Temporary absences and
Cost of Keeping Up a Home
Amount
You Total
Paid Cost
Property taxes $ $
Mortgage interest expense
Rent
Utility charges
Upkeep and repairs
Property insurance
Food consumed on
the premises
Other household expenses
Totals $ $
Minus total amount you paid (  )
Amount others paid $
If the total amount you paid is more than the
amount others paid, you meet the requirement of
paying more than half the cost of keeping up the
home.
Page 22 Chapter 2  Filing Status

Keeping Up a Home, discussed earlier
under Head of Household.
CAUTION
!
As mentioned earlier, this filing sta-
tus is only available for 2 years fol-
lowing the year of death of your
spouse.
Example. John Reed's wife died in
1998. John has not remarried. During 1999
and 2000, he continued to keep up a home
for himself and his child (for whom he can
claim an exemption). For 1998 he was en-
titled to file a joint return for himself and his
deceased wife. For 1999 and 2000 he can
file as qualifying widower with a dependent
child. After 2000 he can file as head of
household if he qualifies.
Death or birth.You may be eligible to file
as a qualifying widow(er) with dependent
child if the child who qualifies you for this
filing status is born or dies during the year.
You must have provided more than half of
the cost of keeping up a home that was the
child's main home during the entire part of
the year he or she was alive.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 23

3.
Personal
Exemptions and
Dependents
Important Changes
Exemption amount. The amount you can
deduct for each exemption has increased
from $2,750 in 1999 to $2,800 in 2000.
Exemption phaseout. You will lose all or
part of the benefit of your exemptions if your
adjusted gross income is above a certain
amount. The amount at which this phaseout
begins depends on your filing status. For
2000, the phaseout begins at $96,700 for
married persons filing separately; $128,950
for unmarried individuals; $161,150 for
heads of household; and at $193,400 for
married persons filing jointly. See Phaseout
of Exemptions, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses exemptions. The
following topics will be explained.
 Personal exemptions — You generally
can take one for yourself and, if you are
married, one for your spouse.
 Exemptions for dependents — You
must meet five exemption tests for each
exemption you claim. If you are entitled
to claim an exemption for a dependent,
that dependent cannot claim a personal
exemption on his or her own tax return.
 Phaseout of exemptions — You get less
of a deduction when your taxable in-
come goes above a certain amount.
 Social security number (SSN) require-
ment for dependents.
Exemptions reduce your taxable income.
Generally, you can deduct $2,800 for each
exemption you claim in 2000. How you
claim an exemption on your tax return de-
pends on which form you file.
If you file Form 1040EZ, the exemption
amount is combined with the standard de-
duction amount and entered on line 5.
If you file Form 1040A or Form 1040,
follow the instructions for the form. The total
number of exemptions you can claim is the
total in the box on line 6d. Also complete
line 24 (Form 1040A) or line 38 (Form 1040)
by multiplying the total number of ex-
emptions shown in the box on line 6d by
$2,800.
CAUTION
!
If your adjusted gross income is
more than $96,700, see Phaseout
of Exemptions, later. 
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Form (and Instructions)
/H185542120 Multiple Support Declaration 
/H185548332 Release of Claim to Exemption
for Child of Divorced or Sepa-
rated Parents 
Exemptions
There are two types of exemptions: per-
sonal exemptions and exemptions for de-
pendents. While these are both worth the
same amount, different rules apply to each
type.
Personal Exemptions
You are generally allowed one exemption
for yourself and, if you are married, one
exemption for your spouse. These are
called personal exemptions.
Your Own Exemption
You can take one exemption for yourself
unless you can be claimed as a dependent
by another taxpayer.
Single persons.If another taxpayer is en-
titled to claim you as a dependent, you
cannot take an exemption for yourself. This
is true even if the other taxpayer does not
actually claim your exemption.
Married persons.If you file a joint return,
you can take your own exemption. If you
file a separate return, you can take your
own exemption only if another taxpayer is
not entitled to claim you as a dependent.
Your Spouse's Exemption
Your spouse is never considered your de-
pendent. You may be able to take one ex-
emption for your spouse only because you
are married.
Joint return. On a joint return you can claim
one exemption for yourself and one for your
spouse.
Separate return. If you file a separate re-
turn, you can claim the exemption for your
spouse only if your spouse had no gross
income and was not the dependent of an-
other taxpayer. This is true even if the other
taxpayer does not actually claim your
spouse's exemption. This is also true if your
spouse is a nonresident alien.
Death of spouse. If your spouse died dur-
ing the year, you can generally claim your
spouse's exemption under the rules just
explained under Joint return and Separate
return.
If you remarried during the year, you
cannot take an exemption for your de-
ceased spouse.
If you are a surviving spouse without
gross income and you remarry in the year
your spouse died, you can be claimed as
an exemption on both the final separate re-
turn of your deceased spouse and the sep-
arate return of your new spouse for that
year. If you file a joint return with your new
spouse, you can be claimed as an ex-
emption only on that return.
Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-
tained a final decree of divorce or separate
maintenance by the end of the year, you
cannot take your former spouse's ex-
emption. This rule applies even if you pro-
vided all of your former spouse's support.
Exemptions for
Dependents
You are allowed one exemption for each
person you can claim as a dependent. To
claim the exemption for a dependent, you
must meet all five of the dependency tests,
discussed later. You can take an exemption
for your dependent even if your dependent
files a return. But that dependent cannot
claim his or her own personal exemption if
you are entitled to do so. However, see
Joint Return Test, later in this chapter.
Child tax credit. You may be entitled to a
child tax credit for each of your qualifying
children for whom you can claim an ex-
emption. For more information see chapter
35.
Child born alive.If your child was born
alive during the year, and the dependency
tests are met, you can take the full ex-
emption. This is true even if the child lived
only for a moment. State or local law must
treat the child as having been born alive.
There must be proof of a live birth shown
by an official document, such as a birth
certificate.
Stillborn child.You cannot claim an ex-
emption for a stillborn child.
Death of dependent. If your dependent
died during the year and otherwise met the
dependency tests, you can take an ex-
emption for your dependent.
Example. Your dependent mother died
on January 15. The five dependency tests
are met. You can take a full exemption for
her on your return. 
Housekeepers, maids, or servants. If
these people work for you, you cannot claim
exemptions for them.
Dependency tests.  The following five tests
must be met for you to claim an exemption
for a dependent.
1) Member of Household or Relationship
Test.
2) Citizen or Resident Test.
3) Joint Return Test.
4) Gross Income Test.
 5) Support Test.
Member of Household
or Relationship Test
To meet this test, a person must either:
1) Live with you for the entire year as a
member of your household, or
2) Be related to you in one of the ways
listed later under Relatives who do not
have to live with you.
Page 24 Chapter 3  Personal Exemptions and Dependents

If at any time during the year the person
was your spouse, that person cannot be
your dependent. However, see Personal
Exemptions, earlier.
Temporary absences. A person lives with
you as a member of your household even
if either (or both) of you are temporarily ab-
sent due to special circumstances. Tempo-
rary absences due to special circumstances
include absences because of illness, edu-
cation, business, vacation, and military ser-
vice.
If the person is placed in a nursing home
for an indefinite period of time to receive
constant medical care, the absence is con-
sidered temporary.
Death or birth.A person who died during
the year, but was a member of your
household until death, will meet the member
of household test. The same is true for a
child who was born during the year and was
a member of your household for the rest of
the year. The test is also met if a child would
have been a member except for any re-
quired hospital stay following birth.
Local law violated.A person does not
meet the member of household test if at any
time during your tax year the relationship
between you and that person violates local
law.
Relatives who do not have to live with
you. A person related to you in any of the
following ways does not have to live with
you for the entire year as a member of your
household to meet this test.
 Your child, grandchild, great grandchild,
etc. (a legally adopted child is consid-
ered your child). 
 Your stepchild. 
 Your brother, sister, half brother, half
sister, stepbrother, or stepsister. 
 Your parent, grandparent, or other di-
rect ancestor, but not foster parent.
 Your stepfather or stepmother. 
 A brother or sister of your father or
mother. 
 A son or daughter of your brother or
sister. 
 Your father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-
in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law,
or sister-in-law. 
Any of these relationships that were estab-
lished by marriage are not ended by death
or divorce.
Adoption. Before legal adoption, a child is
considered to be your child if he or she was
placed with you for adoption by an author-
ized agency. Also, the child must have been
a member of your household. If the child
was not placed with you by an authorized
agency, the child will meet this test only if
he or she was a member of your household
for your entire tax year.
Foster child. A foster child must live with
you as a member of your household for the
entire year to qualify as your dependent.
Cousin. You can claim an exemption for
your cousin only if he or she lives with you
as a member of your household for the en-
tire year. A cousin is a descendant of a
brother or sister of your father or mother and
does not qualify under the relationship test.
Joint return.If you file a joint return, you
do not need to show that a person is related
to both you and your spouse. You also do
not need to show that a person is related to
the spouse who provides support. 
For example, your spouse's uncle who
receives more than half his support from
you may be your dependent, even though
he does not live with you. However, if you
and your spouse file separate returns, your
spouse's uncle can be your dependent only
if he is a member of your household and
lives with you for your entire tax year.
Citizen or Resident Test
To meet the citizen or resident test, a per-
son must be a U.S. citizen or resident, or a
resident of Canada or Mexico, for some part
of the calendar year in which your tax year
begins.
Children's place of residence.Children
usually are citizens or residents of the
country of their parents. 
If you were a U.S. citizen when your
child was born, the child may be a U.S. cit-
izen although the other parent was a non-
resident alien and the child was born in a
foreign country. If so, and the other de-
pendency tests are met, you can take the
exemption. It does not matter if the child
lives abroad with the nonresident alien par-
ent.
If you are a U.S. citizen who has legally
adopted a child who is not a U.S. citizen or
resident, and the other dependency tests
are met, you can take the exemption if your
home is the child's main home and the child
is a member of your household for your
entire tax year.
Foreign students' place of residence. 
Foreign students brought to this country
under a qualified international education
exchange program and placed in American
homes for a temporary period generally are
not U.S. residents and do not meet the citi-
zen or resident test. You cannot claim ex-
emptions for them. However, if you provided
a home for a foreign student, you may be
able to take a charitable contribution de-
duction. See Expenses Paid for Student
Living With You in chapter 26.
Joint Return Test
Even if the other dependency tests are met,
you are generally not allowed an exemption
for your dependent if he or she files a joint
return.
Example. You supported your daughter
for the entire year while her husband was
in the Armed Forces. The couple files a joint
return. Even though all the other tests are
met, you cannot take an exemption for your
daughter. 
Exception. The joint return test does not
apply if a joint return is filed by the de-
pendent and his or her spouse merely as a
claim for refund and no tax liability would
exist for either spouse on separate returns.
Example. Your son and his wife each
had less than $2,000 of wages and no un-
earned income. Neither is required to file a
tax return. Taxes were taken out of their
pay, so they file a joint return to get a re-
fund. You are allowed to take exemptions
for your son and daughter-in-law if the other
dependency tests are met. 
Gross Income Test
Generally, you cannot take an exemption for
a dependent if that person had gross in-
come of $2,800 or more for 2000. This test
does not apply if the person is your child
and is either:
1) Under age 19 at the end of the year,
or 
2) A student under age 24 at the end of
the year.
The exceptions for children under age 19
and students under age 24 are discussed
in detail later.
If you file on a fiscal year basis, the
gross income test applies to the calendar
year in which your fiscal year begins. 
Gross income defined.All income in the
form of money, property, and services that
is not exempt from tax is gross income.
In a manufacturing, merchandising, or
mining business, gross income is the total
net sales minus the cost of goods sold, plus
any miscellaneous income from the busi-
ness.
Gross receipts from rental property are
gross income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs,
etc., to determine the gross income from
rental property. 
Gross income includes a partner's share
of the gross, not a share of the net, part-
nership income.
Gross income also includes all unem-
ployment compensation and certain schol-
arship and fellowship grants. Scholarships
received by degree candidates that are
used for tuition, fees, supplies, books, and
equipment required for particular courses
are not included in gross income. For more
information, see chapter 13.
Tax-exempt income, such as certain
social security payments, is not included in
gross income.
Disabled dependents. For this gross
income test, gross income does not include
income received by a permanently and
totally disabled individual for services per-
formed at a sheltered workshop. The avail-
ability of medical care must be the main
reason the individual is at the workshop.
Also, the income must come solely from
activities at the workshop that are incident
to this medical care. A sheltered workshop
is a school operated by certain tax-exempt
organizations, or by a state, a U.S. pos-
session, a political subdivision of a state or
possession, the United States, or the Dis-
trict of Columbia, that provides special in-
struction or training designed to alleviate the
disability of the individual.
Child defined.For purposes of the gross
income test, your child is your son, stepson,
daughter, stepdaughter, a legally adopted
child, or a child who was placed with you
by an authorized placement agency for your
legal adoption. A foster child who was a
member of your household for your entire
tax year is also considered your child.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 25

Figure 3–A. Can You Claim an Exemption for a Dependent?
Was the person either a member of your household for the entire tax
year or related to you? (See Member of Household or Relationship
Test.)
You cannot
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
You can
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
Start Here
No
Yes
No
Yes
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075 Was the person a U.S. citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada or
Mexico, for any part of the tax year?
1
Did the person file a joint return for the year?
2
Did you provide more than half the person ’s total support for the
year? (If you are a divorced or separated parent of the person, see
Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents. )
3
Did the person have gross income of $2,800 or more during the tax
year?
4
Was the person your child?
Was your child under 19 at the end of the year?
Was your child under 24 at the end of the year and a full-time
student for some part of each of five months during the year? (See
Student under age 24. )
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
No
No
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
1
If the person was your legally adopted child and lived in your home as a member of your household for the entire tax year, answ er “yes” to this question.
2
If neither the person nor the person ’s spouse is required to file a return, but they file a joint return only to claim a refund of tax withheld, answer “no” to this
question.
3
Answer “yes” to this question if you meet the multiple support requirements under Multiple Support Agreement.
/H17075
4
Gross income for this purpose does not include income received by a permanently disabled individual at a sheltered workshop. Se e Disabled dependent.
Child under 19.If your child is under 19
at the end of the year, the gross income test
does not apply. Your child can have any
amount of income and you can still claim
an exemption if the other dependency tests,
including the support test, are met.
Example. Marie, 18, earned $3,000.
Her father provided more than half her
support. Because Marie is under 19, the
gross income test does not apply. If the
other dependency tests were met, Marie's
father can claim an exemption for her. 
Student under age 24. The gross income
test does not apply if your child is a student
who is under age 24 at the end of the cal-
endar year. The other exemption tests must
still be met.
Student defined.To qualify as a stu-
dent, your child must be, during some part
of each of 5 calendar months during the
calendar year (not necessarily consecutive):
1) A full-time student at a school that has
a regular teaching staff, course of
study, and regularly enrolled body of
students in attendance, or 
2) A student taking a full-time, on-farm
training course given by a school de-
scribed in (1) above or a state, county,
or local government.
Full-time student defined.A full-time
student is a person who is enrolled for the
number of hours or courses the school
considers to be full-time attendance.
School defined.  The term “school” in-
cludes elementary schools, junior and sen-
ior high schools, colleges, universities, and
technical, trade, and mechanical schools. It
does not include on-the-job training
courses, correspondence schools, and night
schools.
Example. James, 22, attends college
as a full-time student. During the summer,
James earned $3,000. If the other depend-
ency tests are met, his parents can take the
exemption for James.
Vocational high school students.
People who work on “co-op” jobs in private
industry as a part of the school's prescribed
course of classroom and practical training
are considered full-time students.
Page 26 Chapter 3  Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Night school. Your child is not a full-
time student while attending school only at
night. However, full-time attendance at a
school can include some attendance at
night as part of a full-time course of study.
Support Test 
You must provide more than half of a per-
son's total support during the calendar year
to meet the support test. You figure whether
you have provided more than half by com-
paring the amount you contributed to the
person's support with the entire amount of
support the person received from all
sources. This includes support the person
provided from his or her own funds.
You may find Table 3–1 helpful in figur-
ing whether you provided more than half of
a person's support.
Person's own funds not used for sup-
port.A person's own funds are not support
unless they are actually spent for support.
Example. Your mother received $2,400
in social security benefits and $300 in in-
terest. She paid $2,000 for lodging and
$400 for recreation. 
Even though your mother received a
total of $2,700, she spent only $2,400 for
her own support. If you spent more than
$2,400 for her support and no other support
was received, you have provided more than
half of her support. 
Child's wages used for own support.
You cannot include in your contribution to
your child's support any support that is paid
for by the child with the child's own wages,
even if you paid the wages.
Year support is provided.The year you
provide the support is the year you pay for
it, even if you do so with borrowed money
that you repay in a later year.
If you use a fiscal year to report your
income, you must provide more than half
of the dependent's support for the calendar
year in which your fiscal year begins.
Armed Forces dependency allotments. 
The part of the allotment contributed by the
government and the part taken out of your
military pay are both considered provided
by you in figuring whether you provide more
than half of the support. If your allotment is
used to support persons other than those
you name, you can take the exemptions for
them if they otherwise qualify.
Example. You are in the Armed Forces.
You authorize an allotment for your wid-
owed mother that she uses to support her-
self and your sister. If the allotment provides
more than half of their support, you can take
an exemption for each of them, if they oth-
erwise qualify, even though you authorize
the allotment only for your mother. 
Tax-exempt military quarters allow-
ances. These allowances are treated the
same way as dependency allotments in fig-
uring support. The allotment of pay and the
tax-exempt basic allowance for quarters are
both considered as provided by you for
support.
Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's
total support, include tax-exempt income,
savings, and borrowed amounts used to
support that person. Tax-exempt income
includes certain social security benefits,
welfare benefits, nontaxable life insurance
proceeds, Armed Forces family allotments,
nontaxable pensions, and tax-exempt inter-
est.
Example 1. You provide $4,000 toward
your mother's support during the year. She
has earned income of $600, nontaxable
social security benefit payments of $4,800,
and tax-exempt interest of $200. She uses
all these for her support. You cannot claim
an exemption for your mother because the
$4,000 you provide is not more than half of
her total support of $9,600. 
Example 2. Your daughter takes out a
student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay
her college tuition. She is personally re-
sponsible for the loan. You provide $2,000
toward her total support. You cannot claim
an exemption for your daughter because
you provide less than half of her support. 
Social security benefit payments.If
a husband and wife each receive payments
that are paid by one check made out to both
of them, half of the total paid is considered
to be for the support of each spouse, unless
they can show otherwise.
If a child receives social security benefits
and uses them toward his or her own sup-
port, the payments are considered as pro-
vided by the child.
Support provided by the state (food
stamps, housing, etc.). Benefits provided
by the state to a needy person generally are
considered to be used for support. How-
ever, payments based on the needs of the
recipient will not be considered as used
entirely for that person's support if it is
shown that part of the payments were not
used for that purpose.
Foster care payments and expenses.
Payments you receive for the support of a
foster child from a child placement agency
are considered support provided by the
agency. Similarly, payments you receive for
the support of a foster child from a state or
county are considered support provided by
the state or county.
If you are not in the trade or business
of providing foster care to a child and your
unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in
caring for a foster child were mainly to
benefit an organization qualified to receive
deductible charitable contributions, the ex-
penses are deductible as charitable contri-
butions, but are not considered support you
provided. For more information about the
deduction for charitable contributions, see
Publication 526. If your unreimbursed ex-
penses are not deductible as charitable
contributions, they are considered support
you provided.
If you are in the trade or business of
providing foster care, your unreimbursed
expenses are not considered support pro-
vided by you.
Home for the aged. If you make a lump-
sum advance payment to a home for the
aged to take care of your relative for life and
the payment is based on that person's life
expectancy, the amount of support you
provide each year is the lump-sum payment
divided by the relative's life expectancy. The
amount of support you provide also includes
any other amounts that you provided during
the year.
Total Support
To figure if you provided more than half of
the support of a person, you must first de-
termine the total support provided for that
person. Total support includes amounts
spent to provide food, lodging, clothing, ed-
ucation, medical and dental care, recre-
ation, transportation, and similar necessi-
ties.
Generally, the amount of an item of
support is the amount of the expense in-
curred in providing that item. For lodging,
the amount of support is the fair rental value
of the lodging.
Expenses that are not directly related to
any one member of a household, such as
the cost of food for the household, must be
divided among the members of the house-
hold.
Example. Your parents live with you,
your spouse, and your two children in a
house you own. The fair rental value of your
parents' share of lodging is $2,000 a year,
which includes furnishings and utilities. Your
father receives a nontaxable pension of
$4,200, which he spends equally between
your mother and himself for items of support
such as clothing, transportation, and recre-
ation. Your total food expense for the
household is $6,000. Your heat and utility
bills amount to $1,200. Your mother has
hospital and medical expenses of $600,
which you pay during the year. Figure your
parents' total support as follows:
You must apply the support test sepa-
rately to each parent. You provide $2,000
($1,000 lodging, $1,000 food) of your fa-
ther's total support of $4,100 — less than
half. You provide $2,600 to your mother
($1,000 lodging, $1,000 food, $600 medical)
— more than half of her total support of
$4,700. You meet the support test for your
mother, but not your father. Heat and utility
costs are included in the fair rental value of
the lodging, so these are not considered
separately.
Lodging defined.Lodging is the fair rental
value of the room, apartment, or house in
which the person lives. It includes a rea-
sonable allowance for the use of furniture
and appliances, and for heat and other util-
ities. 
Fair rental value defined. This is the
amount you could reasonably expect to re-
ceive from a stranger for the same kind of
lodging. It is used in place of rent or taxes,
interest, depreciation, paint, insurance, util-
ities, cost of furniture and appliances, etc.
In some cases, fair rental value may be
equal to the rent paid.
If you provide the total lodging, the
amount of support you provide is the fair
rental value of the room the person uses,
or a share of the fair rental value of the en-
tire dwelling if the person has use of your
entire home. If you do not provide the total
lodging, the total fair rental value must be
divided depending on how much of the total
lodging you provide. If you provide only a
part and the person supplies the rest, the
fair rental value must be divided between
Support Provided FatherMother
Fair rental value of lodging .......... $1,000 $1,000
Pension spent for their support .... 2,100 2,100
Share of food (1/6 of $6,000) ...... 1,000 1,000
Medical expenses for mother .......
600
Parents' total support $4,100 $4,700
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 27

Table 3–1. Worksheet for Determining Support
1)
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
Total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable and
nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other accounts at
the beginning of the year
2) Amount used for support
$
3) Amount used for other purposes $
4) Amount in savings and other accounts at end of the year $
$(The total of lines 2, 3, and 4 should equal line 1)
5) Lodging (Complete item a or b)
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
a) Rent paid $
b) If not rented, show fair rental value of home. If the person you supported owned the home, include
this amount in line 19. $
6) Food $
7) Utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 5a or 5b) $
8) Repairs (not included in line 5a or 5b) $
9) Other. Do not include expenses of maintaining home, such as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and
insurance.
Total household expenses (Add lines 5 through 9) $
Total number of persons who lived in household
$
10)
11)
Expenses for the Person You Supported
Each person’s part of household expenses (line 10 divided by line 11)
$12)
Clothing $13)
Education $14)
Medical, dental $15)
Travel, recreation $16)
Other (specify)
$
17)
Total cost of support for the year (Add lines 12 through 17) $18)
19) Amount the person provided for own support (line 2, plus line 5b if the person you supported owned
the home) $
20) Amount others provided for the person ’s support. Include amounts provided by state, local, and other
welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. $
Amount you provided for the person ’s support (line 18 minus lines 19 and 20) $21)
50% of line 18 $22)
Is line 21 is more than line 22?
Did You Provide More Than Half?
Yes. You meet the support test for the person. If the other exemption tests are met, you may claim an exemption for the person.
No. You do not meet the support test for the person. You cannot claim an exemption for the person unless you can do so under a
multiple support agreement. See Multiple Support Agreement in this chapter.
$
Page 28 Chapter 3  Personal Exemptions and Dependents

both of you according to the amount each
provides.
Example. Your parents live rent free in
a house you own. It has a fair rental value
of $5,400 a year furnished, which includes
a fair rental value of $3,600 for the house
and $1,800 for the furniture. This does not
include heat and utilities. The house is
completely furnished with furniture belong-
ing to your parents. You pay $600 for their
utility bills. Utilities are not usually included
in rent for houses in the area where your
parents live. Therefore, you consider the
total fair rental value of the lodging to be
$6,000 ($3,600 fair rental value of the un-
furnished house, $1,800 allowance for fur-
nishings provided by your parents, and
$600 cost of utilities) of which you are con-
sidered to provide $4,200 ($3,600 + $600).
Person living in his or her own home.
The total fair rental value of a person's
home that he or she owns is considered
support contributed by that person. 
Living with someone rent free.If you
live with a person rent free in his or her
home, you must reduce the amount you
provide for support by the fair rental value
of lodging he or she provides you.
Property. Property provided as support is
measured by its fair market value. Fair
market value is the price that property would
sell for on the open market. It is the price
that would be agreed upon between a will-
ing buyer and a willing seller, with neither
being required to act, and both having rea-
sonable knowledge of the relevant facts.
Capital expenses.Capital items, such
as furniture, appliances, and cars, that are
bought for a person during the year can be
included in total support under certain cir-
cumstances.
The following examples show when a
capital item is or is not support. 
Example 1. You buy a $200 power lawn
mower for your 13-year-old child. The child
is given the duty of keeping the lawn
trimmed. Because a lawn mower is ordi-
narily an item you buy for personal and
family reasons that benefits all members of
the household, you cannot include the cost
of the lawn mower in the support of your
child. 
Example 2. You buy a $150 television
set as a birthday present for your
12-year-old child. The television set is
placed in your child's bedroom. You can in-
clude the cost of the television set in the
support of your child. 
Example 3. You pay $5,000 for a car
and register it in your name. You and your
17-year-old daughter use the car equally.
Because you own the car and do not give
it to your daughter but merely let her use it,
you cannot include the cost of the car in
your daughter's total support. However, you
can include in your daughter's support your
out-of-pocket expenses of operating the car
for her benefit. 
Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, using
personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You
provide all the rest of your son's support —
$4,000. Since the car is bought and owned
by your son, the car's fair market value
($4,500) must be included in his support.
The $4,000 support you provide is less than
half of his total support of $8,500. You
cannot claim an exemption for your son. 
Medical insurance premiums. Medical
insurance premiums you pay, including
premiums for supplementary Medicare cov-
erage, are included in the support you pro-
vide.
Medical insurance benefits.Medical
insurance benefits, including basic and
supplementary Medicare benefits, are not
part of support.
Tuition payments and allowances under
the GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under
the GI Bill for tuition payments and allow-
ances while they attend school are included
in total support.
Example. During the year, your son
receives $2,200 from the government under
the GI Bill. He uses this amount for his ed-
ucation. You provide the rest of his support
— $2,000. Because GI benefits are included
in total support, your son is not your de-
pendent. 
Other support items.Other items may be
considered as support depending on the
facts in each case. For example, if you pay
someone to provide child care or disabled
dependent care, you can include these
payments as support, even if you claim a
credit for them. For information on the
credit, see chapter 33.
Do Not Include in Total Support
The following items are not included in total
support.
1) Federal, state, and local income taxes
paid by persons from their own income.
2) Social security and Medicare taxes
paid by persons from their own income.
3) Life insurance premiums.
 4) Funeral expenses.
5) Scholarships received by your child if
your child is a full-time student.
6) Survivors' and Dependents' Educa-
tional Assistance payments used for
support of the child who receives them.
Multiple Support
Agreement
Sometimes no one provides more than half
of the support of a person. Instead, two or
more persons, each of whom would be able
to take the exemption but for the support
test, together provide more than half of the
person's support. 
When this happens, you can agree that
any one of you who individually provides
more than 10% of the person's support, but
only one, can claim an exemption for that
person. Each of the others must sign a
written statement agreeing not to claim the
exemption for that year. The statements
must be filed with the income tax return of
the person who claims the exemption. Form
2120, Multiple Support Declaration, can be
used for this purpose.
Example 1. You, your sister, and your
two brothers provide the entire support of
your mother for the year. You provide 45%,
your sister 35%, and your two brothers each
provide 10%. Either you or your sister can
claim an exemption for your mother. The
other must sign a Form 2120 or a similar
statement agreeing not to take an ex-
emption for her. Because neither brother
provides more than 10% of the support,
neither can take the exemption. Your
brothers do not have to sign a Form 2120
or the written statement. 
Example 2. You and your brother each
provide 20% of your mother's support for
the year. The remaining 60% of her support
is provided equally by two persons who are
not related to her. She does not live with
them. Because more than half of her sup-
port is provided by persons who cannot
claim an exemption for her, no one can take
the exemption. 
Example 3. Your father lives with you
and receives 25% of his support from social
security, 40% from you, 24% from his
brother, and 11% from a friend. Either you
or your uncle can take the exemption for
your father. A Form 2120 or a similar
statement from the one not taking the ex-
emption must be attached to the return of
the one who takes the exemption. 
Support Test for
Child of Divorced or
Separated Parents
The support test for a child of divorced or
separated parents is based on the special
rules explained here and shown in Figure
3–B. However, these special rules apply
only if all of the following are true.
1) The parents are divorced or legally
separated under a decree of divorce
or separate maintenance, or separated
under a written separation agreement,
or lived apart at all times during the last
6 months of the calendar year.
2) One or both parents provide more than
half of the child's total support for the
calendar year.
3) One or both parents have custody of
the child for more than half of the cal-
endar year. 
“Child” is defined earlier under Gross
Income Test.
This discussion does not apply if the
support of the child is determined under a
multiple support agreement, discussed ear-
lier.
CAUTION
!
Parents who never married. These
special rules do not apply to parents
who never married each other.
General rule. The parent who has custody
of the child for the greater part of the year
(the custodial parent) is generally treated
as the parent who provides more than half
of the child's support. It does not matter
whether the custodial parent actually pro-
vided more than half of the support.
Custody. Custody is usually deter-
mined by the terms of the most recent de-
cree of divorce or separate maintenance,
or a later custody decree. If there is no de-
cree, use the written separation agreement.
If neither a decree nor agreement estab-
lishes custody, then the parent who has the
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 29

Figure 3–B. Support Test for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents
Are the parents divorced or
legally separated, separated
under a written agreement, or
did they live apart the last 6
months of the year?
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
after 1984 that
unconditionally entitles
the noncustodial parent
to the exemption?
Start Here
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
/H17075
Did one or both parents
furnish over half of the child ’s
total support?
Is the child in the custody of
one or both parents for more
than half of the year?
Did the custodial parent sign
a Form 8332 or similar
statement releasing the
exemption?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
YesDid any one person
provide over half of the
child’s total support?
The person who provided over
half of the child ’s support meets
the support test.
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
before 1985 (and not
modified after 1984)
that entitles the
noncustodial parent to
the exemption?
Did the noncustodial
parent provide at least
$600 of the child ’s
support during the
year?
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
See Multiple Support
Agreement.
The custodial parent meets the
support test.
The noncustodial parent meets
the support test.
Page 30 Chapter 3  Personal Exemptions and Dependents

physical custody of the child for the greater
part of the year is considered to have cus-
tody of the child. This also applies if the
validity of a decree or agreement awarding
custody is uncertain because of legal pro-
ceedings pending on the last day of the
calendar year.
If the parents are divorced or separated
during the year and had joint custody of the
child before the separation, the parent who
has custody for the greater part of the rest
of the year is considered to have custody
of the child for the tax year.
Example 1. Under the terms of your
divorce, you have custody of your child for
10 months of the year. Your former spouse
has custody for the other 2 months. You and
your former spouse provide the child's total
support. You are considered to have pro-
vided more than half of the support of the
child. However, see Exception, later. 
Example 2. You and your former
spouse provided your child's total support
for 2000. You had custody of your child
under your 1994 divorce decree, but on
August 31, 2000, a new custody decree
granted custody to your former spouse.
Because you had custody for the greater
part of the year, you are considered to have
provided more than half of your child's sup-
port, unless the exception described next
applies. 
Exception. The noncustodial parent will
be treated as providing more than half of the
child's support if:
1) The custodial parent signs a written
declaration that he or she will not claim
the exemption for the child, and the
noncustodial parent attaches this writ-
ten declaration to his or her return,
2) A decree or agreement went into effect
after 1984 and states the noncustodial
parent can claim the child as a de-
pendent without regard to any condi-
tion, such as payment of support, or
3) A decree or agreement executed be-
fore 1985 provides that the noncusto-
dial parent is entitled to the exemption,
and he or she provides at least $600
for the child's support during the year,
unless the pre-1985 decree or agree-
ment is modified after 1984 to specify
that this provision will not apply.
Noncustodial parent. The noncusto-
dial parent is the parent who has custody
of the child for the shorter part of the year
or who does not have custody at all.
Example. Under the terms of your 1984
divorce decree, your former spouse has
custody of your child. The decree specif-
ically states that you are entitled to the ex-
emption. You provide at least $600 in child
support during the calendar year. You are
considered to have provided more than half
of the child's support. 
Written declaration. The custodial par-
ent may use either Form 8332 or a similar
statement to make the written declaration
to release the exemption to the noncustodial
parent. The noncustodial parent must attach
the form or statement to his or her tax re-
turn.
The exemption can be released for a
single year, for a number of specified years
(for example, alternate years), or for all fu-
ture years, as specified in the declaration.
If the exemption is released for more than
one year, the original release must be at-
tached to the return of the noncustodial
parent for the first year of such release, and
a copy must be attached for each later year.
Divorce decree or separation agree-
ment. If your divorce decree or separation
agreement went into effect after 1984 and
it states you can claim the child as your
dependent without regard to any condition,
such as payment of support, you can attach
a copy of the following pages from the de-
cree or agreement instead of Form 8332.
1) Cover page (write the other parent's
social security number on this page). 
2) The page that states you can claim the
child as your dependent.
3) Signature page with the other parent's
signature and the date of the agree-
ment. 
CAUTION
!
If your divorce decree or separation
agreement went into effect after
1984 and it states that you can claim
the child as your dependent if you meet
certain conditions, you must attach to your
return Form 8332 or a similar statement
from the custodial parent releasing the ex-
emption.
Child support. All child support payments
actually received from the noncustodial
parent are considered used for the support
of the child.
Example. The noncustodial parent
provides $1,200 for the child's support. This
amount is considered support provided by
the noncustodial parent even if the $1,200
was actually spent on things other than
support.
Paid in a later year.If you fail to pay
child support in the year it is due, but pay
it in a later year, your payment of the over-
due amount is not considered paid for the
support of your child, either for the year the
payment was due or for the year it is paid.
It is payment of an amount you owed to the
custodial parent, but it is not considered
paid by you for the support of your child.
Example. You owed but failed to pay
child support last year. This year, you pay
all of the amount owed from last year and
the full amount due for this year. Your pay-
ment of this year's child support counts as
support for this year, but your payment of
the amount owed from last year does not
count as support either for this year or for
last year.
Third-party support.Support provided by
a third party for a divorced or separated
parent is not included as support provided
by that parent. However, see Remarried
parent, later.
Example. You are divorced. During the
entire year, you and your child live with your
mother in a house she owns. The fair rental
value of the lodging provided by your
mother for your child is $3,000. The home
provided by your mother is not included in
the amount of support you provide. 
Remarried parent.If you remarry, the
support provided by your new spouse is
treated as provided by you.
Example. You have two children from
a former marriage who live with you. You
have remarried and are living in a home
owned by your new spouse. The fair rental
value of the home provided to the children
by your new spouse is treated as provided
by you. 
Home jointly owned.If you and your for-
mer spouse have the right to use and live
in the home, each of you is considered to
provide half of your child's lodging. How-
ever, if the divorce decree gives only you
the right to use and live in the home, you
are considered to provide your child's entire
lodging. It does not matter if the legal title
to the home remains in the names of both
parents.
Phaseout of
Exemptions
The amount you can claim as a deduction
for exemptions is phased out once your
adjusted gross income (AGI) goes above a
certain level for your filing status. These
levels are as follows:
You must reduce the dollar amount of
your exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or
part of $2,500 ($1,250 if you are married
filing separately), that your AGI exceeds the
amount shown for your filing status. If your
AGI exceeds the amount shown by more
than $122,500 ($61,250 if married filing
separately), the amount of your deduction
for exemptions is reduced to zero.
If your AGI exceeds the level for your
filing status, use the Deduction for Ex-
emptions Worksheet in the instructions for
Form 1040 to figure the amount of your
deduction for exemptions. 
Social Security
Numbers for
Dependents
You must list the social security number
(SSN) of any person for whom you claim
an exemption in column (2) of line 6c of your
Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
CAUTION
!
If you do not list the dependent's
SSN when required or if you list an
incorrect SSN, the exemption may
be disallowed.
Note. If your dependent does not have
and cannot get an SSN, you must list the
individual taxpayer identification number
(ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identification
number (ATIN) instead of an SSN. See
Taxpayer identification numbers for aliens
or Taxpayer identification number for
adoptees, later.
Filing Status
AGI Level
Which Reduces
Exemption Amount
Married filing separately ............. $96,700
Single .......................................... 128,950
Head of household ..................... 161,150
Married filing jointly .................... 193,400
Qualifying widow(er) ................... 193,400
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 31

No social security number.If a person for
whom you expect to claim an exemption on
your return does not have an SSN, either
you or that person should apply for an SSN
as soon as possible by filing  Form SS–5,
Application for a Social Security Card, with
the Social Security Administration (SSA).
Information about applying for an SSN and
Form SS–5 is available at your local SSA
office.
It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an
SSN. If you do not have a required SSN by
the filing due date, you can file Form 4868
for an extension of time to file.
Born and died in 2000. If your child was
born and died in 2000, and you do not have
an SSN for the child, you may attach a copy
of the child's birth certificate instead. If you
do, enter “DIED” in column (2) of line 6c of
your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Taxpayer identification numbers for al-
iens.  If your dependent is a resident or
nonresident alien who does not have and is
not eligible to get an SSN, the IRS will issue
your dependent an individual taxpayer
identification number (ITIN). Write the num-
ber in column (2) of line 6c of your Form
1040 or Form 1040A. To apply for an ITIN,
use Form W–7, Application for IRS Individ-
ual Taxpayer Identification Number.
It usually takes about 30 days to get an
ITIN.
Taxpayer identification numbers for
adoptees. If you have a child who was
placed with you by an authorized placement
agency, you may be able to claim an ex-
emption for the child. However, if you can-
not get an SSN or an ITIN for the child, you
must get an adoption taxpayer identification
number (ATIN) for the child from the IRS.
You must be eligible to claim an exemption
for the child to get an ATIN. See Form
W–7A, Application for Taxpayer Identifica-
tion Number for Pending U.S. Adoptions, for
details.
Page 32 Chapter 3  Personal Exemptions and Dependents

4.
Decedents
Important Reminders
Medical savings accounts (MSAs).  The
treatment of a medical savings account
(MSA), including a Medicare+Choice MSA,
at the death of the account holder depends
on who acquires the interest in the account.
For details, see the discussions of MSAs
under How To Report Certain Income and
Income in Respect of the Decedent, later.
Consistent treatment of estate items.
Beneficiaries must generally treat estate
items the same way on their individual re-
turns as they are treated on the estate's
return. For more information, see How and
When To Report under Distributions to
Beneficiaries From an Estate in Publication
559, Survivors, Executors, and Administra-
tors. 
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax responsibil-
ities of the person who is in charge of the
property (estate) of an individual who has
died (decedent). It also covers the following
topics.
 Filing the decedent's final return.
 Tax effects on survivors.
This chapter does not discuss the re-
quirements for filing an income tax return
of an estate (Form 1041). For information
on Form 1041, see Income Tax Return of
an Estate— Form 1041 in Publication 559.
This chapter also does not discuss the re-
quirements for filing an estate tax return
(Form 706). For information, see Form 706
and its instructions.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554 559 Survivors, Executors, and Ad-
ministrators
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554 56 Notice Concerning Fiduciary
Relationship
/H18554 706 United States Estate (and
Generation-Skipping Transfer)
Tax Return
/H18554 1310 Statement of Person Claiming
Refund Due a Deceased Tax-
payer
/H185544810 Request for Prompt Assessment
Under Internal Revenue Code
Section 6501(d)
/H18554 5495 Request for Discharge From
Personal Liability Under Internal
Revenue Code Section 6905
Personal
Representative
A personal representative of an estate is an
executor, administrator, or anyone who is in
charge of the decedent's property. 
Executor. Generally, an executor (or ex-
ecutrix) is named in a decedent's will to
administer the estate (property and debts
left by the decedent) and distribute proper-
ties as the decedent has directed. 
Administrator. An administrator (or ad-
ministratrix) is usually appointed by the
court if no will exists, if no executor was
named in the will, or if the named executor
cannot or will not serve. 
Personal representative.In general, an
executor and an administrator perform the
same duties and have the same responsi-
bilities. Because a personal representative
for a decedent's estate can be an executor,
administrator, or anyone in charge of the
decedent's property, the term “personal
representative” will be used throughout this
chapter.
The surviving spouse may or may not
be the personal representative, depending
on the terms of the decedent's will or the
court appointment.
Duties
The primary duties of a personal represen-
tative are to collect all of the decedent's
assets, pay the creditors, and distribute the
remaining assets to the heirs or other ben-
eficiaries.
The personal representative also must
perform the following duties.
1) Notify the IRS (as discussed below)
that he or she is acting as the personal
representative.
2) File any income tax and estate tax re-
turn when due. (See Final Return for
the Decedent, next.)
3) Pay any tax determined up to the date
of discharge from duties.
4) Provide the payers of any interest and
dividends the name(s) and identifica-
tion number(s) of the new owner(s).
(See Interest and Dividend Income
(Forms 1099), later.)
For more information on the duties and
responsibilities of the personal represen-
tative, see Duties under Personal Repre-
sentatives in Publication 559.
Notifying the IRS.  File a written notice (or
Form 56) with the IRS office where the re-
turns are filed for the person (or estate) for
whom you are acting. See the instructions
for Form 56 for more information.
Final Return
for the Decedent 
The same filing requirements that apply to
individuals determine if a final income tax
return must be filed for the decedent. Filing
requirements are discussed in chapter 1.
Filing to get a refund.A return should be
filed to obtain a refund if tax was withheld
from salaries, wages, pensions, or annui-
ties, or if estimated tax was paid, even if a
return is not required to be filed. See
Claiming a refund, later. Also, the decedent
may be entitled to other credits that result
in a refund. See chapters 37 and 38 for
additional information on refundable credits.
Determining income and deductions. The
method of accounting regularly used by the
decedent before death generally determines
what income you must include and what
deductions you can take on the final return.
Generally, individuals use one of two meth-
ods of accounting: cash or accrual.
Cash method. If the decedent used the
cash method of accounting, include only the
items of income actually or constructively
received before death and deduct only the
expenses the decedent paid before death.
For an exception for certain medical ex-
penses not paid before death, see Dece-
dents in chapter 23.
Accrual method. If the decedent used
an accrual method of accounting, report
only those items of income that the dece-
dent accrued, or earned, before death. De-
duct those expenses the decedent was lia-
ble for before death, regardless of whether
the expenses were paid.
Additional information.For more in-
formation on the cash and accrual methods,
see Accounting Methods in chapter 1. 
Who must file the return?The personal
representative (defined earlier) must file the
final income tax return of the decedent for
the year of death and any returns not filed
for preceding years. A surviving spouse,
under certain circumstances, may have to
file the returns for the decedent. See Joint
Return, later.
Example. Samantha Smith died on
March 21, 2000, before filing her 1999 tax
return. Her personal representative must file
her 1999 return by April 17, 2000. Her final
tax return is due April 16, 2001.
Filing the return. The word
“DECEASED,” the decedent's name, and
the date of death should be written across
the top of the tax return. In the name and
address space, you should write the name
and address of the decedent and, if a joint
return, the surviving spouse. If a joint return
is not being filed, the decedent's name
should be written in the name space and the
personal representative's name and ad-
dress should be written in the remaining
space.
Example 1. John Stone died in early
2000. He was survived by his wife Jane.
Their final joint return included the required
information as shown later in the illustration
of the top of Form 1040.
Chapter 4 Decedents Page 33

Department of the Treasury — Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1 –Dec. 31, 2000, or other tax year beginning , 2000, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 19.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse ’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 19. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 19.
Presidential
Election Campaign
(See page 19.)
1 Single
Filing Status 2 Married filing joint return (even if only one had income)
Form
/H17075
Label
IRS Use Only— Do not write or staple in this space.(99)
/H17073/H17073
2000
Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
DECEASED FEBRUARY 28, 2000JOHN S. STONE
765 00 4321
123 00 4567I
R
S
CAR-RT SO RT**CR01
LP S29 30
JOHN S & JANE M STONE
1 9 92 OAK ST 1 03
SHERIDAN WY 82801
70Estimated tax penalty. Also include on line 69
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.
70
Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
May the IRS discuss this return with the preparer
shown below (see page 52)?
Joint return?
See page 19.
Daytime phone number
()
Yes No
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2000)
Jane M. Stone
Filing as surviving spouse
4/1/01 Engineer
Signing the return.If a personal repre-
sentative has been appointed, that person
must sign the return. If it is a joint return, the
surviving spouse must also sign it.
If no personal representative has been
appointed, the surviving spouse (on a joint
return) should sign the return and write in
the signature area “Filing as surviving
spouse.” See Joint return, later.
If no personal representative has been
appointed and if there is no surviving
spouse, the person in charge of the dece-
dent's property must file and sign the return
as “personal representative.”
Example 2. Assume in Example 1 that
Mrs. Stone is filing as a surviving spouse.
No personal representative has been ap-
pointed. She signs their final joint return as
shown above in the illustration of the bottom
of Form 1040. 
TIP
If you pay someone to prepare, as-
sist in preparing, or review the tax
return, that person must sign the
return and fill in the other blanks in the paid
preparer's area of the return. You can
check a box in the signature area that au-
thorizes the IRS to contact that paid
preparer for certain information. See the
form instructions for more information.
Claiming a refund. Generally, a person
who is filing a return for a decedent and
claiming a refund must file Form 1310 with
the return. However, if the person claiming
the refund is a surviving spouse filing a joint
return with the decedent, or a court-
appointed or certified personal represen-
tative filing an original return for the dece-
dent, Form 1310 is not needed. The
personal representative must attach to the
return a copy of the court certificate showing
that he or she was appointed the personal
representative.
Example. Assume that Mr. Green died
before filing his tax return. You were ap-
pointed the personal representative for Mr.
Green's estate and you file his Form 1040
showing a refund due. You do not need
Form 1310 to claim the refund if you attach
a copy of the court certificate showing you
were appointed the personal representative.
When and where to file.The final income
tax return is due at the same time the de-
cedent's return would have been due had
death not occurred. The final return for a
decedent who was a calendar year taxpayer
is generally due April 15 following the year
death occurred. However, when the due
date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, the due date is delayed until the
next business day.
Generally, you must file the final income
tax return of the decedent with the Internal
Revenue Service center for the place where
you live. A tax return for a decedent cannot
be electronically filed.
Request for prompt assessment (charge)
of tax.The IRS ordinarily has 3 years from
the date an income tax return is filed, or its
due date, whichever is later, to charge any
additional tax that is due. However, as a
personal representative, you may request
a prompt assessment of tax after the return
has been filed. This reduces the time for
making the assessment to 18 months from
the date the written request for prompt as-
sessment was received. This request can
be made for any income tax return of the
decedent and for the income tax return of
the decedent's estate. This may permit a
quicker settlement of the tax liability of the
estate and an earlier final distribution of the
assets to the beneficiaries.
You can request prompt assessment of
any of the decedent's taxes (other than
federal estate taxes) for any years for which
the statutory period for assessment is open.
This applies even though the returns were
filed before the decedent's death.
Form 4810. You can use Form 4810,
to make this request. It must be filed sepa-
rately from any other document. The re-
quest should be filed with the IRS office
where the return was filed. If Form 4810 is
not used, you must clearly indicate that you
are making a request for prompt assess-
ment under section 6501(d) of the Internal
Revenue Code. You must identify the type
of tax and the tax period for which the
prompt assessment is requested.
Failure to report income.If you or the
decedent failed to report substantial
amounts of gross income (more than 25%
of the gross income reported on the return)
or filed a false or fraudulent return, your re-
quest for prompt assessment will not
shorten the period during which the IRS
Page 34 Chapter 4  Decedents

may assess the additional tax. However,
such a request may relieve you of personal
liability for the tax if you did not have
knowledge of the unpaid tax.
Request for discharge from personal li-
ability for tax.  An executor can make a
written request for a discharge from per-
sonal liability for a decedent's income and
gift taxes. The request must be made after
the returns for those taxes are filed. For this
purpose an executor is an executor or ad-
ministrator that is appointed, qualified, and
acting within the United States.
Within 9 months after receipt of the re-
quest, the IRS will notify the executor of the
amount of taxes due. If this amount is paid,
the executor will be discharged from per-
sonal liability for any future deficiencies. If
the IRS has not notified the executor, he or
she will be discharged from personal liability
at the end of the 9-month period. 
CAUTION
!
Even if the executor is discharged
from personal liability, the IRS still
will be able to assess tax deficien-
cies against the executor to the extent that
he or she still has any of the decedent's
property.
Form 5495. You can use Form 5495 to
make this request. If Form 5495 is not used,
you must clearly indicate that the request is
for discharge from personal liability under
section 6905 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Joint return.Generally, the personal rep-
resentative and the surviving spouse can
file a joint return for the decedent and the
surviving spouse. However, the surviving
spouse alone can file the joint return if no
personal representative has been appointed
before the due date for filing the final joint
return for the year of death. This also ap-
plies to the return for the preceding year if
the decedent died after the close of the
preceding tax year and before the due date
for filing that return. The income of the de-
cedent that was includible on his or her re-
turn for the year up to the date of death (see
Determining income and deductions, ear-
lier) and the income of the surviving spouse
for the entire year must be included in the
final joint return.
A final joint return with the decedent
cannot be filed if the surviving spouse re-
married before the end of the year of the
decedent's death. The filing status of the
decedent in this instance is “married filing
separate return.”
Personal representative may revoke
joint return election.A court-appointed
personal representative may revoke an
election to file a joint return that was previ-
ously made by the surviving spouse alone.
This is done by filing a separate return for
the decedent within one year from the due
date of the return (including any exten-
sions). The joint return made by the surviv-
ing spouse will then be regarded as the
separate return of that spouse by excluding
the decedent's items and refiguring the tax
liability.
How To Report
Certain Income
This section explains how to report certain
types of income on the final return. The
rules on income discussed in the other
chapters of this publication also apply to a
decedent's final return. See chapters 6
through 17, if they apply. 
Interest and Dividend Income
(Forms 1099)
A Form 1099 should be received for the
decedent reporting interest and dividends
earned before death and included on the
decedent's final return. A separate Form
1099 should show the interest and divi-
dends earned after the date of the dece-
dent's death and paid to the estate or other
recipient that must include those amounts
on its return. You can request corrected
Forms 1099 if these forms do not properly
reflect the right recipient or amounts.
The amount reported on Form
1099–INT, Interest Income, or Form
1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions, may
not necessarily be the correct amount that
should be properly reported on each income
tax return. For example, a Form 1099–INT
reporting interest paid to a decedent may
include income that should be reported on
the final income tax return of the decedent,
as well as income that the estate or other
recipient should report, either as income
earned after death or as income in respect
of the decedent (discussed later). For in-
come earned after death, you should ask
the payer for a Form 1099–INT that properly
identifies the recipient (by name and iden-
tification number) and the proper amount.
If that is not possible, or if the form includes
an amount that represents income in re-
spect of the decedent, include an explana-
tion, as shown next under How to report,
describing the amounts that are properly
reported on the decedent's final return.
See U.S. savings bonds acquired from
decedent in Publication 559 for information
on savings bond interest that may have to
be reported on the final return.
How to report. If you are preparing the
decedent's final return and you have re-
ceived a Form 1099–INT for the decedent
that includes amounts belonging to the de-
cedent and to another recipient (the dece-
dent's estate or another beneficiary), report
the total interest shown on Form 1099–INT
on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or on Sched-
ule B (Form 1040). Next, enter a subtotal
of the interest shown on Forms 1099 and
the interest reportable from other sources
for which you did not receive Forms 1099.
Show any interest (including any interest
you receive as a nominee) belonging to
another recipient separately and subtract it
from the subtotal. Identify this adjustment
as a “Nominee Distribution” or other appro-
priate designation. 
Report dividend income for which you
received a Form 1099–DIV on the appro-
priate schedule using the same procedure.
Note. If the decedent received amounts
as a nominee, you must give the actual
owner a Form 1099, unless the owner is the
decedent's spouse. See General In-
structions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and
W –2G, for more information on filing forms
1099.
Accelerated Death Benefits 
Accelerated death benefits are amounts re-
ceived under a life insurance contract be-
fore the death of the insured individual.
These benefits also include amounts re-
ceived on the sale or assignment of the
contract to a viatical settlement provider.
Generally, if the decedent received ac-
celerated death benefits either on his or her
own life or on the life of another person,
those benefits are not included in the de-
cedent's income. This exclusion applies
only if the insured was a terminally or
chronically ill individual. For more informa-
tion, see Accelerated death benefits under
Gifts, Insurance, and Inheritances in Publi-
cation 559.
Business Income
This section discusses some of the busi-
ness income which may have to be included
on the final return.
Partnership income.The death of a part-
ner closes the partnership's tax year for that
partner. Generally, it does not close the
partnership's tax year for the remaining
partners. The decedent's distributive share
of partnership items must be figured as if
the partnership's tax year ended on the date
the partner died. To avoid an interim closing
of the partnership books, the partners can
agree to estimate the decedent's distributive
share by prorating the amounts the partner
would have included for the entire partner-
ship tax year.
On the decedent's final return, include
the decedent's distributive share of partner-
ship items for the following periods.
1) The partnership tax year that ended
within or with the decedent's last tax
year (the year ending on the date of
death).
2) The period, if any, from the end of the
partnership tax year in (1) to the de-
cedent's date of death.
S corporation income. If the decedent
was a shareholder in an S corporation, in-
clude on the final return the decedent's
share of the S corporation's items of in-
come, loss, deduction, and credit for the
following periods.
1) The corporation's tax year that ended
within or with the decedent's last tax
year (the year ending on the date of
death).
2) The period, if any, from the end of the
corporation's tax year in (1) to the de-
cedent's date of death.
Self-employment income. Include self-
employment income actually or construc-
tively received or accrued, depending on the
decedent's accounting method. (See Con-
structive receipt of income, under Income
To Include, in Publication 559 for an expla-
nation of the concept.) For self-employment
tax purposes only, the decedent's self-
employment income will include the dece-
dent's distributive share of a partnership's
income or loss through the end of the month
in which death occurred. For this purpose,
the partnership income or loss is considered
to be earned ratably over the partnership's
tax year. For more information on how to
compute self-employment income, see
Publication 533, Self-Employment Tax.
Chapter 4 Decedents Page 35

Education IRA
Generally, the balance in an education in-
dividual retirement account (education IRA)
must be distributed within 30 days after the
individual for whom the account was estab-
lished reaches age 30, or dies, whichever
is earlier. The treatment of the education
IRA at the death of an individual under age
30 depends on who acquires the interest in
the account. If the decedent's estate ac-
quires the interest, the earnings on the ac-
count must be included on the final income
tax return of the decedent. The estate tax
deduction, discussed later, does not apply
to this amount. If a beneficiary acquires the
interest, see the discussion under Income
in Respect of the Decedent, later.
For more information on education IRAs,
see Publication 590, Individual Retirement
Arrangements (IRAs) (Including Roth IRAs
and Education IRAs).
Roth IRA
This discussion only applies if the decedent:
 Withdrew an amount from a traditional
IRA in 1998,
 Converted the amount to a Roth IRA,
and
 Was including the taxable conversion
amount in income over the 4-year pe-
riod beginning in 1998.
In this situation, any amount not previously
reported generally must be included on the
decedent's final return. However, if the de-
cedent's spouse receives the entire interest
in all the decedent's Roth IRAs, the spouse
can choose to continue to include the
amounts in income ratably over the re-
maining years in the 4-year period. If the
spouse makes this choice, the amount
includible under the 4-year rule for the year
of death is included on the decedent's final
return. For more information on making this
choice, see the discussion under Income
To Include, under Final Return for Dece-
dent, in Publication 559.
For more information on Roth IRAs, see
Publication 590.
Medical Savings Account (MSA)
The treatment of a medical savings account
(MSA), including a Medicare+Choice MSA,
at the death of the account holder depends
on who acquires the interest in the account.
If the decedent's estate acquires the inter-
est, the fair market value of the assets in the
account on the date of death is included in
gross income on the decedent's final return.
The estate tax deduction, discussed later,
does not apply to this amount.
If a beneficiary acquires the interest, see
the discussion under Income in Respect of
the Decedent, later. For more information
on MSAs, see Publication 969, Medical
Savings Accounts (MSAs).
Exemptions, Deductions,
and Credits
Generally, the rules for exemptions, de-
ductions, and credits allowed to an individ-
ual also apply to the decedent's final income
tax return. Show on the final return deduct-
ible items the decedent paid before death
(or accrued, if the decedent reported de-
ductions on an accrual method).
Exemptions
You can claim the decedent's personal ex-
emption on the final income tax return. If the
decedent was another person's dependent
(for example, a parent's), you cannot claim
the personal exemption on the decedent's
final return.
Standard Deduction
If you do not itemize deductions on the final
return, the full amount of the appropriate
standard deduction is allowed regardless
of the date of death. For information on the
appropriate standard deduction, see chap-
ter 21.
Itemized Deductions
If the total of the decedent's itemized de-
ductions is more than the decedent's
standard deduction, the federal income tax
will generally be less if you claim itemized
deductions on the final return. See chapters
23 through 30 for the types of expenses that
are allowed as itemized deductions.
Medical expenses.Medical expenses paid
before death by the decedent are deduct-
ible, subject to limits, on the final income tax
return if deductions are itemized. This in-
cludes expenses for the decedent as well
as for the decedent's spouse and depen-
dents.
CAUTION
!
Qualified medical expenses paid
before death by the decedent are
not deductible if paid with a tax-free
distribution from any medical savings ac-
count.
For information on certain medical ex-
penses that were not paid before death, see
Decedents in chapter 23.
Unrecovered investment in pension.If
the decedent was receiving a pension or
annuity and died without a surviving
annuitant, you can take a deduction on the
decedent's final return for the amount of the
decedent's investment in the pension or
annuity contract that remained unrecovered
at death. The deduction is a miscellaneous
itemized deduction that is not subject to the
2% limit on adjusted gross income. See
chapter 30.
Deduction for Losses
A decedent's net operating loss deduction
from a prior year and any capital losses
(capital losses include capital loss carry-
overs) can be deducted only on the dece-
dent's final income tax return. A net operat-
ing loss on the decedent's final income tax
return can be carried back to prior years.
You cannot deduct any unused net operat-
ing loss or capital loss on the estate's in-
come tax return.
Credits
Any of the tax credits discussed in this
publication also apply to the final return if
the decedent was eligible for the credits at
the time of death. These credits are dis-
cussed in chapters 33 through 38 of this
publication. 
Tax withheld and estimated payments.
There may have been income tax withheld
from the decedent's pay, pensions, or an-
nuities before death, and the decedent may
have paid estimated income tax. To get
credit for these tax payments, you must
claim them on the decedent's final return.
For more information, see Credit for With-
holding and Estimated Tax in chapter 5.
Tax Effect on Others
This section contains information about the
effect of an individual's death on the income
tax liability of the survivors (including the
widow or widower and the beneficiaries)
and the estate. Any survivor should coordi-
nate the filing of his or her own tax return
with the personal representative handling
the decedent's estate. The personal repre-
sentative can coordinate filing status, ex-
emptions, income, and deductions so that
the final return and the income tax returns
of the survivors and the estate are all filed
correctly. 
Gifts and inheritances.Property received
as a gift, bequest, or inheritance is not in-
cluded in your income. However, if property
you receive in this manner later produces
income, such as interest, dividends, or
rents, that income is taxable to you. If the
gift, bequest, or inheritance you receive is
the income from property, that income is
taxable to you.
If you inherited the right to receive in-
come in respect of the decedent, see In-
come in Respect of the Decedent, later. 
Joint return by surviving spouse.A sur-
viving spouse can file a joint return for the
year of death and may qualify for special tax
rates for the following 2 years. For more
information, see Qualifying Widow(er) With
Dependent Child in chapter 2.
Decedent as your dependent. If the de-
cedent qualified as your dependent for the
part of the year before death, you can claim
the exemption for the dependent on your tax
return, regardless of when death occurred
during the year.
If the decedent was your qualifying child,
you may be able to claim the child tax credit.
See chapter 35.
Income in Respect
of the Decedent 
All gross income that the decedent would
have received had death not occurred and
that was not properly includible on the final
return, discussed earlier, is income in re-
spect of the decedent.
How To Report
Income in respect of a decedent must be
included in the gross income of one of the
following.
 The decedent's estate, if the estate re-
ceives it.
 The beneficiary, if the right to income is
passed directly to the beneficiary and
the beneficiary receives it.
 Any person to whom the estate properly
distributes the right to receive it.
Page 36 Chapter 4  Decedents

TIP
If you have to include income in re-
spect of the decedent in your gross
income, you may be able to claim a
deduction for the estate tax paid on that in-
come. For more information, see Estate Tax
Deduction, later.
Example 1. Frank Johnson owned and
operated an apple orchard. He used the
cash method of accounting. He sold and
delivered 1,000 bushels of apples to a can-
ning factory for $2,000, but did not receive
payment before his death. The proceeds
from the sale are income in respect of the
decedent. When the estate was settled,
payment had not been made and the estate
transferred the right to the payment to his
widow. When Frank's widow collects the
$2,000, she must include that amount in her
return. It is not to be reported on the final
return of the decedent or on the return of the
estate.
Example 2. Assume Frank Johnson
used the accrual method of accounting in
Example 1. The amount accrued from the
sale of the apples would be included on his
final return. Neither the estate nor the widow
will realize income in respect of the dece-
dent when the money is later paid.
Example 3. Bob Clark was entitled to
a large salary payment at the date of his
death. The amount was to be paid in five
annual installments. The estate, after col-
lecting two installments, distributed the right
to the remaining installments to you, the
beneficiary. The payments are income in
respect of the decedent. None of the pay-
ments were includible in Bob's final return.
The estate must include in its gross income
the two installments it received, and you
must include in your gross income each of
the three installments as you receive them.
Transferring your right to income.If you
transfer your right to income in respect of a
decedent, you must include in your income
the greater of:
1) The amount you receive for the right,
or
2) The fair market value of the right at the
time of the transfer.
Fair market value (FMV).FMV is the
price at which the property would change
hands between a buyer and a seller, neither
having to buy or sell, and both having rea-
sonable knowledge of all necessary facts.
Giving your right to income as a gift.
If you give your right to receive income in
respect of a decedent as a gift, you must
include in your gross income the fair market
value of the right at the time you make the
gift.
Type of income. The character or type of
income that you receive in respect of a de-
cedent is the same as it would be to the
decedent if he or she were alive. If the in-
come would be a capital gain to the dece-
dent, it will be a capital gain to you.
Interest accrued on savings certificates.
The interest accrued on savings certificates
(redeemable after death without forfeiture
of interest) that is for the period from the
date of the last interest payment to the date
of the decedent's death, but not received
as of that date, is income in respect of the
decedent. Interest for a period after the de-
cedent's death that becomes payable on the
certificates after death is not income in re-
spect of the decedent, but is taxable income
includible in the gross income of the re-
spective recipients.
Installment obligations.If the decedent
had sold property using the installment
method and you collect payments on an in-
stallment obligation you acquired from the
decedent, use the same gross profit per-
centage the decedent used to figure the part
of each payment that represents profit. In-
clude in your income the same profit the
decedent would have included had death
not occurred. For more information on in-
stallment sales, see Publication 537, In-
stallment Sales. 
If you dispose of an installment obli-
gation acquired from a decedent (other than
by transfer to the obligor), the rules ex-
plained in Publication 537 for figuring gain
or loss on the disposition apply to you.
Inherited IRAs.If a beneficiary receives a
lump-sum distribution from a traditional IRA
or a Roth IRA he or she inherited, all or
some of it may be taxable. The distribution
is taxable in the year received as income in
respect of the decedent up to the dece-
dent's taxable balance. This is the dece-
dent's balance at the time of death, includ-
ing unrealized appreciation and income
accrued to date of death, minus any basis
(nondeductible contributions). Amounts dis-
tributed that are more than the decedent's
entire IRA balance (includes taxable and
nontaxable amounts) at the time of death
are the income of the beneficiary. See Roth
IRA, next, for determining taxability of Roth
IRA distributions.
If the beneficiary of a traditional IRA is
the decedent's surviving spouse and that
spouse properly rolls over the distribution
into another traditional IRA or to a Roth IRA,
the distribution is not currently taxed.
Example 1. At the time of his death,
Greg owned a traditional IRA. All of the
contributions by Greg to the IRA had been
deductible contributions. Greg's nephew,
Mark, was the sole beneficiary of the IRA.
The entire balance of the IRA, including in-
come accruing before and after Greg's
death, was distributed to Mark in a lump
sum. Mark must include the total amount
received in his gross income. The portion
of the lump-sum distribution that equals the
amount of the balance in the IRA at Greg's
death, including the income earned before
death, is income in respect of the decedent.
Mark may take a deduction for any federal
estate taxes that were paid on the portion
of the IRA that is income in respect of the
decedent.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as
in Example 1, except some of Greg's con-
tributions to the IRA had been nondeduct-
ible contributions. To determine the amount
to include in gross income, Mark must sub-
tract the total nondeductible contributions
made by Greg from the total amount re-
ceived (including the income that was
earned in the IRA both before and after
Greg's death). Income in respect of the de-
cedent is the total amount included in gross
income less the income earned after Greg's
death.
For more information on inherited IRAs,
see Publication 590.
Roth IRA. Qualified distributions from a
Roth IRA are not subject to tax. A distribu-
tion made to a beneficiary or to the Roth IRA
owner's estate on or after the date of death
is a qualified distribution if it is made after
the 5-taxable-year period beginning with the
first tax year in which a contribution was
made to any Roth IRA of the owner.
CAUTION
!
A distribution cannot be a qualified
distribution unless it is made after
2002.
Generally, the entire interest in the Roth
IRA must be distributed by the end of the
fifth calendar year after the year of the
owner's death unless the interest is payable
to a designated beneficiary over his or her
life or life expectancy. If paid as an annuity,
the distributions must begin before the end
of the calendar year following the year of
death. If the sole beneficiary is the dece-
dent's spouse, the spouse can delay the
distributions until the decedent would have
reached age 70
1/2 or can treat the Roth IRA
as his or her own Roth IRA.
A portion of a distribution to a beneficiary
that is not a qualified distribution may be
includible in the beneficiary's gross income.
Generally, the portion includible is the
earnings in the decedent's Roth IRAs.
Earnings attributable to the period ending
with the decedent's date of death are in-
come in respect of the decedent. Additional
taxable amounts are the income of the
beneficiary.
For more information on Roth IRAs, see
Publication 590.
Education IRA. Generally, the balance in
an education IRA must be distributed within
30 days after the individual for whom the
account was established reaches age 30
or dies, whichever is earlier. The treatment
of the education IRA at the death of an in-
dividual under age 30 depends on who ac-
quires the interest in the account. If the de-
cedent's estate acquires the interest, see
the discussion under How To Report Cer-
tain Income, earlier.
If the decedent's spouse or other family
member is the designated beneficiary of the
decedent's account, the education IRA be-
comes that person's education IRA. It is
subject to the rules discussed in Publication
590.
Any other beneficiary (including a
spouse or family member who is not the
designated beneficiary) must include in
gross income the earnings portion of the
distribution. The distribution must be made
within 30 days. Any balance remaining at
the close of the 30-day period is deemed to
be distributed at that time. The amount in-
cluded in gross income is reduced by any
qualified higher education expenses of the
decedent that are paid by the beneficiary
within 1 year after the decedent's date of
death. An estate tax deduction applies to
the amount included in income by a benefi-
ciary other than the decedent's spouse or
family member.
Medical savings account (MSA).  The
treatment of an MSA, including a
Medicare+Choice MSA, at the death of the
account holder depends on who acquires
the interest in the account. If the decedent's
Chapter 4 Decedents Page 37

estate acquires the interest, see the earlier
discussion under How To Report Certain
Income. 
If the decedent's spouse is the desig-
nated beneficiary of the MSA, the MSA be-
comes that spouse's MSA. It is subject to
the rules discussed in Publication 969.
Any other beneficiary (including a
spouse that is not the designated benefi-
ciary) must include in gross income the fair
market value of the assets in the account
on the decedent's date of death. This
amount must be reported for the beneficia-
ry's tax year that includes the decedent's
date of death. The amount included in gross
income is reduced by the qualified medical
expenses for the decedent that are paid by
the beneficiary within 1 year after the de-
cedent's date of death. An estate tax de-
duction, discussed later, applies to the
amount included in income by a beneficiary
other than the decedent's spouse.
Other income. For examples of other in-
come situations concerning decedents, see
Specific Types of Income in Respect of a
Decedent in Publication 559. 
Deductions in Respect
of the Decedent
Items such as business expenses, income-
producing expenses, interest, and taxes, for
which the decedent was liable but that are
not properly allowable as deductions on the
decedent's final income tax return will be
allowed as a deduction to one of the fol-
lowing when paid.
 The estate.
 The person who acquired an interest in
the decedent's property (subject to such
obligations) because of the decedent's
death, if the estate was not liable for the
obligation.
Estate Tax Deduction
Income that a decedent had a right to re-
ceive is included in the decedent's gross
estate and is subject to estate tax. This in-
come in respect of a decedent is also taxed
when received by the recipient (estate or
beneficiary). However, an income tax de-
duction is allowed to the recipient for the
estate tax paid on the income.
The deduction for estate tax can be
claimed only for the same tax year in which
the income in respect of the decedent must
be included in the recipient's gross income.
(This also is true for income in respect of a
prior decedent.)
You can claim the deduction only as a
miscellaneous itemized deduction on
Schedule A (Form 1040). This deduction is
not subject to the 2% limit on miscellaneous
itemized deductions as discussed in chapter
30.
If the income in respect of the decedent
is capital gain income, the gain must be re-
duced, but not below zero, by any estate tax
deduction attributable to that gain when fig-
uring the maximum capital gain tax, the 50%
exclusion for gain on small business stock,
or any net capital loss limitation.
For more information, see Estate Tax
Deduction in Publication 559. 
Page 38 Chapter 4  Decedents

5.
Tax Withholding
and Estimated
Tax
Important Change
for 2000
Excess social security or railroad retire-
ment tax withholding.You can claim a
credit for excess social security or tier 1
railroad retirement tax withholding for 2000
only if your wages from two or more em-
ployers were more than $76,200. See Credit
for Excess Social Security Tax or Railroad
Retirement Tax Withheld in chapter 38.
Important Changes
for 2001
Estimated tax safe harbor for higher in-
come taxpayers.For installment payments
for tax years beginning in 2001, the esti-
mated tax safe harbor for higher income
individuals (other than farmers and fisher-
men) has been modified. If your 2000 ad-
justed gross income was more than
$150,000 ($75,000 if you are married filing
a separate return for 2001), you will have
to deposit the smaller of 90% of your ex-
pected tax for 2001 or 110%  of the tax
shown on your 2000 return to avoid an es-
timated tax penalty.
Tax law changes for 2001. When you
figure how much income tax you want
withheld from your pay and when you figure
your estimated tax for 2001, consider tax
law changes effective in 2001. See Publi-
cation 553, Highlights of 2000 Tax
Changes.
Payment of estimated tax by direct debit.
Beginning in 2001, you may be able to pay
your estimated tax by authorizing an auto-
matic withdrawal from your checking or
savings account. For more information on
this, and other methods of payment, see
How To Pay Estimated Tax.
Important Reminders
Unemployment compensation. You can
choose to have income tax withheld from
your unemployment compensation. See
Unemployment Compensation under With-
holding, later, for more information.
Federal payments. You can choose to
have income tax withheld from certain fed-
eral payments you get. These payments
include social security and tier 1 railroad
retirement benefits. For more information,
see Federal Payments under Withholding,
later.
Claiming withholding and estimated tax
payments. When you file a federal income
tax return, be sure to take credit for all fed-
eral income tax and excess social security
or railroad retirement taxes withheld from
your salary, wages, pensions, etc., and any
backup withholding shown on Forms 1099.
Also take credit for all estimated tax pay-
ments you made for that year. For example,
all estimated tax payments made for 2000
should be claimed on the tax return you file
for the 2000 tax year. You should file a re-
turn and claim these credits even if you do
not owe tax. See Credit for Withholding and
Estimated Tax, later in this chapter.
Introduction
This chapter discusses how to pay your tax
as you earn or receive income during the
year. In general, the federal income tax is
a pay-as-you-go tax. There are two ways to
pay as you go:
 Withholding. If you are an employee,
your employer probably withholds in-
come tax from your pay. Tax may also
be withheld from certain other income
— including pensions, bonuses, com-
missions, and gambling winnings. In
each case, the amount withheld is paid
to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
in your name.
 Estimated tax. If you do not pay your
tax through withholding, or do not pay
enough tax that way, you might have to
pay estimated tax. People who are in
business for themselves generally will
have to pay their tax this way. You may
have to pay estimated tax if you receive
income such as dividends, interest,
capital gains, rent, and royalties. Esti-
mated tax is used to pay not only in-
come tax, but self-employment tax and
alternative minimum tax as well.
This chapter explains both of these
methods. In addition, it explains:
 Credit for withholding and estimated
tax. When you file your 2000 income
tax return, take credit for all the income
tax withheld from your salary, wages,
pensions, etc., and for the estimated tax
you paid for 2000.
 Underpayment penalty. If you did not
pay enough tax during the year either
through withholding or by making esti-
mated tax payments, you may have to
pay a penalty. The IRS usually can fig-
ure this penalty for you. See Under-
payment Penalty, near the end of this
chapter.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554505 Tax Withholding and Estimated
Tax
/H18554553 Highlights of 2000 Tax Changes
/H18554919 How Do I Adjust My Tax With-
holding?
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554W–4 Employee's Withholding Allow-
ance Certificate
/H18554W–4P Withholding Certificate for Pen-
sion or Annuity Payments
/H18554W–4S Request for Federal Income Tax
Withholding From Sick Pay
/H18554W–4V Voluntary Withholding Request
/H185541040–ES  Estimated Tax for Individuals
/H185542210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax
by Individuals, Estates, and
Trusts
Withholding 
This chapter discusses withholding on these
types of income:
 Salaries and wages,
 Tips,
 Taxable fringe benefits,
 Sick pay,
 Pensions and annuities,
 Gambling winnings,
 Unemployment compensation, and
 Certain federal payments.
This chapter explains in detail the rules for
withholding tax from each of these types of
income.
This chapter also covers backup with-
holding on interest, dividends, and other
payments.
Salaries and Wages 
Income tax is withheld from the pay of most
employees. Your pay includes bonuses,
commissions, and vacation allowances, in
addition to your regular pay. It also includes
reimbursements and other expense allow-
ances paid under a nonaccountable plan.
See Supplemental Wages, later.
Military retirees.Military retirement pay is
treated in the same manner as regular pay
for income tax withholding purposes, even
though it is treated as a pension or annuity
for other tax purposes.
Household workers. If you are a house-
hold worker, you can ask your employer to
withhold income tax from your pay. Tax is
withheld only if you want it withheld and
your employer agrees to withhold it. If you
do not have enough income tax withheld,
you may have to make estimated tax pay-
ments, as discussed later under Estimated
Tax.
Farmworkers. Income tax is generally
withheld from your cash wages for work on
a farm unless your employer both:
1) Pays you cash wages of less than
$150 during the year, and 
2) Has expenditures for agricultural labor
totaling less than $2,500 during the
year. 
If you receive either noncash wages or
cash wages not subject to withholding, you
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 39

can ask your employer to withhold income
tax. If your employer does not agree to
withhold tax, or if not enough is withheld,
you may have to make estimated tax pay-
ments, as discussed later under Estimated
Tax.
Determining Amount
of Tax Withheld
The amount of income tax your employer
withholds from your regular pay depends
on two things.
1) The amount you earn.
2) The information you give your em-
ployer on  Form W–4.
Form W–4 includes three types of infor-
mation that your employer will use to figure
your withholding.
1) Whether to withhold at the single rate
or at the lower married rate. 
2) How many withholding allowances you
claim (each allowance reduces the
amount withheld).
3) Whether you want an additional
amount withheld. 
If your income is low enough that you
will not have to pay income tax for the year,
you may be exempt from withholding. See
Exemption From Withholding, later.
Note. You must specify a filing status
and a number of withholding allowances on
Form W–4. You cannot specify only a dollar
amount of withholding.
New job. When you start a new job, you
must fill out Form W–4 and give it to your
employer. Your employer should have
copies of the form. If you later need to
change the information you gave, you must
fill out a new form.
If you work only part of the year (for ex-
ample, you start working after the beginning
of the year), too much tax may be withheld.
You may be able to avoid overwithholding
if your employer agrees to use the part-year
method. See Part-year method in chapter
1 of Publication 505 for more information.
Changing your withholding.Events dur-
ing the year may change your marital status
or the exemptions, adjustments, deductions,
or credits you expect to claim on your re-
turn. When this happens, you may need to
give your employer a new Form W–4 to
change your withholding status or number
of allowances.
You must give your employer a new
Form W–4 within 10 days after either of the
following.
1) Your divorce, if you have been claiming
married status.
2) Any event that decreases the number
of withholding allowances you can
claim. 
Generally, you can submit a new Form
W–4 at any time you wish to change the
number of your withholding allowances for
any other reason.
Changing your withholding for 2002.
If events in 2001 will decrease the number
of your withholding allowances for 2002,
you must give your employer a new Form
W–4 by December 1, 2001. If the event
occurs in December 2001, submit a new
Form W–4 within 10 days.
Cumulative wage method. If you change
the number of your withholding allowances
during the year, too much or too little tax
may have been withheld for the period be-
fore you made the change. You may be able
to compensate for this if your employer
agrees to use the cumulative wage with-
holding method for the rest of the year. You
must ask in writing that your employer use
this method.
To be eligible, you must have been paid
for the same kind of payroll period (weekly,
biweekly, etc.) since the beginning of the
year.
Checking your withholding. After you
have given your employer a Form W–4, you
can check to see whether the amount of tax
withheld from your pay is too little or too
much. See Getting the Right Amount of Tax
Withheld, later. If too much or too little tax
is being withheld, you should give your
employer a new Form W–4 to change your
withholding.
Note. You cannot give your employer
a payment to cover withholding for past pay
periods. Nor can you give your employer a
payment for estimated tax.
Completing Form W–4
Form W–4 has worksheets to help you fig-
ure how many withholding allowances you
can claim. The worksheets are for your own
records. Do not give them to your employer.
You do not have to use the worksheets
if you use a more accurate method of fig-
uring the number of withholding allowances.
See Alternative method of figuring with-
holding allowances under Completing Form
W –4 and Worksheets in chapter 1 of Publi-
cation 505 for more information.
Two jobs. If you have income from two
jobs at the same time, complete only one
set of Form W–4 worksheets. Then split
your allowances between the Forms W–4
for each job. You cannot claim the same
allowances with more than one employer
at the same time. You can claim all your
allowances with one employer and none
with the other, or divide them any other way.
Married individuals.If both you and your
spouse are employed and expect to file a
joint return, figure your withholding allow-
ances using your combined income, ad-
justments, deductions, exemptions, and
credits. Use only one set of worksheets.
You can divide your total allowances any
way, but you cannot claim an allowance that
your spouse also claims.
If you and your spouse expect to file
separate returns, figure your allowances
separately based on your own individual
income, adjustments, deductions, ex-
emptions, and credits.
Personal allowances worksheet.Use the
Personal Allowances Worksheet on page 1
of Form W–4 to figure your withholding al-
lowances for exemptions and any special
allowances that apply.
Deductions and adjustments worksheet.
Fill out this worksheet to adjust the number
of your withholding allowances for de-
ductions, adjustments to income, and tax
credits. The Deductions and Adjustments
Worksheet is on page 2 of Form W–4.
Chapter 1 of Publication 505 explains this
worksheet.
Two-earner/two-job worksheet.You may
need to complete this worksheet if you have
two jobs or a working spouse. You can also
add to the amount, if any, on line 8 of this
worksheet, any additional withholding nec-
essary to cover any amount you expect to
owe other than income tax, such as self-
employment tax.
For more information about Form W–4
and a filled-in example, see chapter 1 of
Publication 505.
Getting the Right Amount
of Tax Withheld
In most situations, the tax withheld from
your pay will be close to the tax you figure
on your return if you follow these two rules.
1) You accurately complete all the Form
W–4 worksheets that apply to you.
2) You give your employer a new Form
W–4 when changes occur.
But because the worksheets and withhold-
ing methods do not account for all possible
situations, you may not be getting the right
amount withheld. This is most likely to hap-
pen in the following situations.
 You are married and both you and your
spouse work.
 You have more than one job at a time.
 You have nonwage income, such as
interest, dividends, alimony, unemploy-
ment compensation, or self-employ-
ment income.
 You will owe additional amounts with
your return, such as self-employment
tax.
 Your withholding is based on obsolete
Form W–4 information for a substantial
part of the year.
 Your earnings are more than $150,000
if you are single or $200,000 if you are
married.
To make sure you are getting the right
amount of tax withheld, get Publication 919.
It will help you compare the total tax to be
withheld during the year with the tax you
can expect to figure on your return. It also
will help you determine how much, if any,
additional withholding is needed each pay-
day to avoid owing tax when you file your
return. If you do not have enough tax with-
held, you may have to make estimated tax
payments, as explained under Estimated
Tax, later.
Rules Your Employer
Must Follow
The following are some of the withholding
rules that can affect how to fill out your Form
W–4 and how you handle problems that
may arise. For other rules, see Rules Your
Employer Must Follow in chapter 1 of Pub-
lication 505.
New Form W–4. When you start a new job,
your employer should give you a Form W–4
to fill out. Your employer will use the infor-
Page 40 Chapter 5  Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

mation you give on the form to figure your
withholding beginning with your first payday.
If you later fill out a new Form W–4, your
employer can put it into effect as soon as
possible. The deadline for putting it into ef-
fect is the start of the first payroll period
ending 30 or more days after you turn it in.
No Form W–4. If you do not give your
employer a completed Form W–4, your
employer must withhold at the highest
rate—as if you were single and claimed no
allowances.
Repaying withheld tax.If you find you are
having too much tax withheld because you
did not claim all the withholding allowances
you are entitled to, you should give your
employer a new Form W–4. Your employer
cannot repay any of the tax previously
withheld.
However, if your employer has withheld
more than the correct amount of tax for the
Form W–4 you have in effect, you do not
have to fill out a new Form W–4 to have
your withholding lowered to the correct
amount. Your employer can repay the
amount that was incorrectly withheld. If you
are not repaid, your Form W-2 will reflect
the full amount actually withheld.
Exemption From Withholding
If you claim exemption from withholding,
your employer will not withhold federal in-
come tax from your wages. The exemption
applies only to income tax, not to social
security or Medicare tax.
You can claim exemption from with-
holding for 2001 only if both the following
situations apply.
1) For 2000 you had a right to a refund
of all federal income tax withheld be-
cause you had no tax liability. 
2) For 2001 you expect a refund of all
federal income tax withheld because
you expect to have no tax liability.
Student. If you are a student, you are not
automatically exempt. See chapter 1 to see
whether you must file a return. If you work
only part time or only during the summer,
you may qualify for exemption from with-
holding.
Age 65 or older or blind.If you are 65 or
older or blind, use one of the worksheets in
chapter 1 of Publication 505, under Ex-
emption From Withholding, to help you de-
cide whether you can claim exemption from
withholding. Do not use either of those
worksheets if you will itemize deductions or
claim dependents or tax credits on your
2001 return. See the following discussion
instead.
Itemizing deductions or claiming depen-
dents or tax credits.If you had no tax
liability for 2000, use the 2001 Estimated
Tax Worksheet in Form 1040–ES (or see
chapter 2 of Publication 505) to figure your
2001 expected tax liability. You can claim
exemption from withholding only if your total
expected tax liability is zero.
Claiming exemption.To claim exemption,
you must give your employer a Form W–4.
Write “EXEMPT” on line 7.
Your employer must send the IRS a
copy of your Form W–4 if you claim ex-
emption from withholding and your pay is
expected to usually be more than $200 a
week. If it turns out that you do not qualify
for exemption, the IRS will send both you
and your employer a written notice.
If you claim exemption, but later your
situation changes so that you will have to
pay income tax after all, you must file a new
Form W–4 within 10 days after the change.
If you claim exemption in 2001, but you ex-
pect to owe income tax for 2002, you must
file a new Form W–4 by December 1, 2001.
An exemption is good for only one
year. You must give your employer a new
Form W–4 by February 15 each year to
continue your exemption.
Supplemental Wages
Supplemental wages include bonuses,
commissions, overtime pay, and certain sick
pay. The payer can also figure withholding
using the same method used for your reg-
ular wages. If these payments are identified
separately from your regular wages, your
employer or other payer of supplemental
wages may withhold income tax from these
wages at a flat rate of 28%.
Also see Sick Pay, later.
Expense allowances. Reimbursements
or other expense allowances paid by your
employer under a nonaccountable plan are
treated as supplemental wages.
Reimbursements or other expense al-
lowances paid under an accountable plan
that are more than your proven expenses
are treated as paid under a nonaccountable
plan. However, this does not apply if you
return the excess payments within a rea-
sonable period of time.
For more information about accountable
and nonaccountable expense allowance
plans, see Reimbursements in chapter 28.
Penalties
You may have to pay a penalty of $500 if
both of the following apply.
1) You make statements or claim with-
holding allowances on your Form W–4
that reduce the amount of tax withheld.
2) You have no reasonable basis for
those statements or allowances at the
time you prepare your Form W–4. 
There is also a criminal penalty for
willfully supplying false or fraudulent infor-
mation on your Form W–4 or for willfully
failing to supply information that would in-
crease the amount withheld. The penalty
upon conviction can be either a fine of up
to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to one
year, or both.
These penalties will apply if you delib-
erately and knowingly falsify your Form W–4
in an attempt to reduce or eliminate the
proper withholding of taxes. A simple error
— an honest mistake — will not result in one
of these penalties. For example, a person
who has tried to figure the number of with-
holding allowances correctly, but claims
seven when the proper number is six, will
not be charged a W–4 penalty.
Tips 
The tips you receive while working on your
job are considered part of your pay. You
must include your tips on your tax return on
the same line as your regular pay. However,
tax is not withheld directly from tip income,
as it is from your regular pay. Nevertheless,
your employer will take into account the tips
you report when figuring how much to with-
hold from your regular pay.
See chapter 7 for information on report-
ing your tips to your employer. For more
information on the withholding rules for tip
income, see Publication 531, Reporting Tip
Income.
How employer figures amount to with-
hold. The tips you report to your employer
are counted as part of your income for the
month you report them. Your employer can
figure your withholding in either of two ways.
1) By withholding at the regular rate on
the sum of your pay plus your reported
tips.
2) By withholding at the regular rate on
your pay plus an amount equal to 28%
of your reported tips.
Not enough pay to cover taxes.If your
regular pay is too low for your employer to
withhold all the tax (including social security
tax, Medicare tax, or railroad retirement tax)
due on your pay plus your tips, you can give
your employer money to cover the shortage.
If you do not give your employer money
to cover the shortage, your employer will
first withhold as much social security tax,
Medicare tax, or railroad retirement tax as
possible, up to the proper amount, and then
withhold income tax up to the full amount
of your pay. If not enough tax is withheld,
you may have to make estimated tax pay-
ments. When you file your return, you also
may have to pay any social security tax,
Medicare tax, or railroad retirement tax your
employer could not withhold.
Allocated tips.Your employer should not
withhold income tax, social security tax,
Medicare tax, or railroad retirement tax on
any allocated tips. Withholding is based only
on your pay plus your reported tips. Your
employer should refund to you any incor-
rectly withheld tax. See Allocated Tips in
chapter 7 for more information.
Taxable Fringe Benefits
The value of certain noncash fringe benefits
you receive from your employer is consid-
ered part of your pay. Your employer gen-
erally must withhold income tax on these
benefits from your regular pay for the period
the benefits are paid or considered paid.
For information on taxable fringe bene-
fits, see Fringe Benefits under Employee
Compensation in chapter 6.
Your employer can choose not to with-
hold income tax on the value of your per-
sonal use of a car, truck, or other highway
motor vehicle provided by your employer.
Your employer must notify you if this choice
is made.
For more information on withholding on
taxable fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of
Publication 505.
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 41

Sick Pay
“Sick pay” is a payment to you to replace
your regular wages while you are tempo-
rarily absent from work due to sickness or
personal injury. To qualify as “sick pay,” it
must be paid under a plan to which your
employer is a party.
If you receive sick pay from your em-
ployer or an agent of your employer, income
tax must be withheld. An agent who does
not pay regular wages to you may choose
to withhold income tax at a flat 28% rate.
However, if you receive sick pay from a
third party who is not acting as an agent of
your employer, income tax will be withheld
only if you choose to have it withheld. See
Form W –4S, later.
If you receive payments under a plan in
which your employer does not participate
(such as an accident or health plan where
you paid all the premiums), the payments
are not sick pay and usually are not taxable.
Union agreements. If you receive sick pay
under a collective bargaining agreement
between your union and your employer, the
agreement may determine the amount of
income tax withholding. See your union
representative or your employer for more
information.
Form W–4S.  If you choose to have income
tax withheld from sick pay paid by a third
party, such as an insurance company, you
must fill out Form W–4S, Request for Fed-
eral Income Tax Withholding From Sick
Pay. Its instructions contain a worksheet
you can use to figure the amount you want
withheld. They also explain restrictions that
may apply.
Give the completed form to the payer of
your sick pay. The payer must withhold ac-
cording to your directions on the form.
If you do not request withholding on
Form W–4S, or if you do not have enough
tax withheld, you may have to make esti-
mated tax payments. If you do not pay
enough estimated tax or have enough in-
come tax withheld, you may have to pay a
penalty.
Pensions and Annuities 
Income tax usually will be withheld from
your pension or annuity distributions, unless
you choose not to have it withheld. This rule
applies to distributions from:
 Certain individual retirement arrange-
ments (IRAs), 
 A life insurance company under an en-
dowment, annuity, or life insurance
contract, 
 A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing
plan, 
 A stock bonus plan, and 
 Any other plan that defers the time you
receive compensation. 
The amount withheld depends on
whether you receive payments spread out
over more than one year (periodic pay-
ments), within one year (nonperiodic pay-
ments), or as an eligible rollover distribution
(ERD). You cannot choose not to have in-
come tax withheld from an ERD.
More information. For more information
on taxation of annuities and distributions
(including eligible rollover distributions) from
qualified retirement plans, see chapter 11.
For information on IRAs, see chapter 18.
For more information on withholding on
pensions and annuities, including a dis-
cussion of  Form W–4P, Withholding Cer-
tificate for Pension or Annuity Payments,
see Pensions and Annuities in chapter 1 of
Publication 505. 
Gambling Winnings
Income tax is withheld from certain kinds
of gambling winnings. The amount withheld
is 28% of the proceeds paid (the amount
of your winnings minus the amount of your
bet).
Gambling winnings of more than $5,000
from the following sources are subject to
income tax withholding.
 Any sweepstakes, wagering pool, or
lottery.
 Any other wager, if the proceeds are at
least 300 times the amount of the bet.
It does not matter whether your winnings
are paid in cash, in property, or as an an-
nuity. Winnings not in money are taken into
account at their fair market value.
Gambling winnings from bingo, keno,
and slot machines are not subject to income
tax withholding. If you receive gambling
winnings not subject to withholding, you
may need to make estimated tax payments.
(See Estimated Tax, later.)
If you do not pay enough tax through
withholding or estimated tax payments, you
may be subject to a penalty. (See Under-
payment Penalty, later.)
Form W–2G. If a payer withholds income
tax from your gambling winnings, you
should receive a Form W–2G, Certain
Gambling Winnings, showing the amount
you won and the amount withheld.
Reporting your winnings. Report your
winnings on line 21 of Form 1040. Report
the tax withheld on line 58 of Form 1040.
Gambling losses are deductible only to the
extent they offset gambling winnings. You
must use Schedule A (Form 1040) to deduct
your losses and to deduct state tax with-
holding.
Unemployment
Compensation
You can choose to have income tax with-
held from unemployment compensation. To
make this choice, you will have to fill out
Form W–4V,  Voluntary Withholding Re-
quest, (or a similar form provided by the
payer) and give it to the payer. The amount
withheld will be 15% of each payment.
Unemployment compensation is taxable.
So, if you do not have income tax withheld,
you may have to make estimated tax pay-
ments. See Estimated Tax, later.
If you do not pay enough tax either
through withholding or estimated tax, you
may have to pay a penalty. See Underpay-
ment Penalty, later, for information.
Federal Payments
You can choose to have income tax with-
held from certain federal payments you re-
ceive. These payments are:
1) Social security benefits,
2) Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits,
3) Commodity credit loans you choose to
include in your gross income, and
4) Payments under the Agricultural Act
of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et. seq.), or title
II of the Disaster Assistance Act of
1988, as amended, that are treated as
insurance proceeds and that you re-
ceive because:
a) Your crops were destroyed or
damaged by drought, flood, or any
other natural disaster, or
b) You were unable to plant crops
because of a natural disaster de-
scribed in (a).
To make this choice, you will have to fill
out Form W–4V,  Voluntary Withholding
Request, (or a similar form provided by the
payer) and give it to the payer. You can
choose to have 7%, 15%, 28%, or 31% of
each payment withheld.
If you do not choose to have income tax
withheld, you may have to make estimated
tax payments. See Estimated Tax, later.
If you do not pay enough tax either
through withholding or estimated tax, you
may have to pay a penalty. See Underpay-
ment Penalty, later, for information.
More information. For more information
about the tax treatment of social security
and railroad retirement benefits, see chapter
12. Get Publication 225, Farmer's Tax
Guide, for information about the tax treat-
ment of commodity credit loans or crop
disaster payments.
Backup Withholding
Banks and other businesses that pay you
certain kinds of income must file an infor-
mation return (Form 1099) with the IRS.
The information return shows how much
you were paid during the year. It also in-
cludes your name and taxpayer identifica-
tion number (TIN). Your TIN generally is
either a social security number or an em-
ployer identification number.
These payments generally are not sub-
ject to withholding. However, “backup”
withholding is required in certain situations.
And, backup withholding can apply to most
kinds of payments that are reported on
Form 1099.
Payments made to you are subject to
backup withholding at a flat 31% rate in the
following situations.
 You do not give the payer your TIN in
the required manner. 
 The IRS notifies the payer that the TIN
you gave is incorrect. 
 You are required, but fail, to certify that
you are not subject to backup with-
holding. 
 The IRS notifies the payer to start
withholding on interest or dividends be-
cause you have underreported interest
or dividends on your income tax return.
The IRS will do this only after it has
Page 42 Chapter 5  Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

mailed you four notices over at least a
120-day period.
See Backup Withholding in chapter 1 of
Publication 505 for more information.
Penalties. There are civil and criminal
penalties for giving false information to
avoid backup withholding. The civil penalty
is $500. The criminal penalty, upon con-
viction, is a fine of up to $1,000, or imprison-
ment of up to one year, or both.
Estimated Tax 
Estimated tax is the method used to pay tax
on income that is not subject to withholding.
This includes income from self-employment,
interest, dividends, alimony, rent, gains from
the sale of assets, prizes, and awards. You
also may have to pay estimated tax if the
amount of income tax being withheld from
your salary, pension, or other income is not
enough.
Estimated tax is used to pay both in-
come tax and self-employment tax, as well
as other taxes and amounts reported on
your tax return. If you do not pay enough
through withholding or by making estimated
tax payments, you may be charged a pen-
alty. If you do not pay enough by the due
date of each payment period (see When To
Pay Estimated Tax, later), you may be
charged a penalty even if you are due a
refund when you file your tax return. For
information on when the penalty applies,
see Underpayment Penalty, later. 
Who Must Make
Estimated Tax Payments
If you had a tax liability for 2000, you may
have to pay estimated tax for 2001.
General rule.You must make estimated
tax payments for 2001 if you expect to owe
at least $1,000 in tax for 2001 after sub-
tracting your withholding and credits, and
you expect your withholding and credits to
be less than the smaller of:
1) 90% of the tax to be shown on your
2001 tax return, or 
2) 100% of the tax shown on your 2000
tax return. Your 2000 tax return must
cover all 12 months.
Note. If all your 2001 income will be
subject to income tax withholding, you
probably do not need to make estimated tax
payments.
Exceptions. There are exceptions to
the general rule for farmers, fishermen, and
certain higher income taxpayers. See Figure
5–A and chapter 2 of Publication 505 for
more information.
CAUTION
!
Resident and nonresident aliens
may also have to make estimated
tax payments. Resident aliens
should follow the rules in this chapter unless
noted otherwise. Nonresident aliens should
get  Form 1040–ES(NR), U.S. Estimated
Tax for Nonresident Alien Individuals.
Avoiding estimated tax.If you also re-
ceive salaries or wages, you can avoid
having to make estimated tax payments by
asking your employer to take more tax out
of your earnings. To do this, file a new Form
W–4 with your employer.
No tax liability last year. You do not have
to pay estimated tax for 2001 if you meet
all three of the following conditions:
1) You had no tax liability for your 2000
tax year.
2) You were a U.S. citizen or resident for
the whole year.
3) Your 2000 tax year covered a
12–month period.
You had no tax liability for 2000 if your
total tax was zero or you did not have to file
an income tax return.
Married taxpayers.To figure whether you
must make estimated tax payments, apply
the rules discussed here to your separate
estimated income. If you can make joint
estimated tax payments, you can apply
these rules on a joint basis.
You and your spouse can make joint
payments of estimated tax even if you are
not living together.
You and your spouse cannot make joint
estimated tax payments if you are legally
separated under a decree of divorce or
separate maintenance. Also, you cannot
make joint estimated tax payments if either
spouse is a nonresident alien or if you have
different tax years.
Whether you and your spouse make
joint estimated tax payments or separate
payments will not affect your choice of filing
a joint tax return or separate returns for
2001.
2000 separate returns and 2001 joint
return.If you plan to file a joint return with
your spouse for 2001, but you filed separate
returns for 2000, your 2000 tax is the total
of the tax shown on your separate returns.
You filed a separate return for 2000 if you
filed as single, head of household, or mar-
ried filing separately.
2000 joint return and 2001 separate
returns.If you plan to file a separate return
for 2001, but you filed a joint return for 2000,
your 2000 tax is your share of the tax on the
joint return. You file a separate return for
2001 if you file as single, head of house-
hold, or married filing separately. To figure
your share, first figure the tax both you and
your spouse would have paid had you filed
separate returns for 2000 using the same
filing status as for 2001. Then multiply your
joint tax liability by the following fraction:
Your separate tax liability
Both spouses’ separate tax liabilities
Example. Joe and Heather filed a joint
return for 2000 showing taxable income of
$48,000 and a tax of $7,747. Of the $48,000
taxable income, $40,000 was Joe's and the
rest was Heather's. For 2001, they plan to
file married filing separately. Joe figures his
share of the tax on the 2000 joint return as
follows:
How To Figure
Estimated Tax
To figure your estimated tax, you must fig-
ure your expected adjusted gross income,
taxable income, taxes, deductions, and
credits for the year.
When figuring your 2001 estimated tax,
it may be helpful to use your income, de-
ductions, and credits for 2000 as a starting
point. Use your 2000 federal tax return as
a guide. You can use Form 1040–ES to
figure your estimated tax.
You must make adjustments both for
changes in your own situation and for recent
changes in the tax law. For 2001, there are
several changes in the law. These changes
are discussed in Publication 553, Highlights
of 2000 Tax Changes.
Form 1040–ES includes a worksheet to
help you figure your estimated tax. Keep the
worksheet for your records.
For more complete information and ex-
amples of how to figure your estimated tax
for 2001, see chapter 2 of Publication 505.
When To Pay
Estimated Tax
For estimated tax purposes, the year is di-
vided into four payment periods. Each pe-
riod has a specific payment due date. If you
do not pay enough tax by the due date of
each of the payment periods, you may be
charged a penalty even if you are due a
refund when you file your income tax return.
The following chart gives the payment peri-
ods and due dates for estimated tax pay-
ments.
Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule.If the due
date for making an estimated tax payment
falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holi-
day, the payment will be on time if you make
it on the next day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday. For example, a
payment due Sunday, April 15, 2001, will
be on time if you make it by Monday, April
16, 2001.
January payment. If you file your 2001
Form 1040 or Form 1040A by January 31,
2002, and pay the rest of the tax you owe,
you do not need to make your estimated tax
payment that would be due on January 15,
2002.
Fiscal year taxpayers.If your tax year
does not start on January 1, see the Form
1040–ES instructions for your payment due
dates.
When To Start
You do not have to make estimated tax
payments until you have income on which
you will owe the tax. If you have income
subject to estimated tax during the first
payment period, you must make your first
payment by the due date for the first pay-
ment period. You can pay all your estimated
For the period: Due date: 
Jan. 1* through Mar. 31 April 15
April 1 through May 31 June 15
June 1 through Aug. 31 September 15
Sept. 1 through Dec. 31 January 15 next year**
*If your tax year does not begin on January 1,
see Fiscal year taxpayers, later.
**See January payment, later.
Tax on $40,000 based on a separate
return ..................................................... $ 8,357
Tax on $8,000 based on a separate
return ..................................................... 1,204
Total ........................................................ $ 9,561
Joe's portion of total ($8,357 ÷ $9,561) 87%
Joe's share of joint return tax
($7,747 × 87%) ..................................... $ 6,740
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 43

Figure 5–A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax?
Do you expect to owe $1,000
or more for 2001 after
subtracting income tax
withholding and credits from
your total tax? (Do not
subtract any estimated tax
payments.)
You MUST make estimated
tax payment(s) by the
required due date(s).
Start Here
No
/H17075
Yes
Yes
Do you expect your income
tax withholding and credits to
be at least 100%* of the tax
shown on your 2000 tax
return?
/H17075
No
/H17075
Do you expect your income
tax withholding and credits to
be at least 90% (66-2/3% for
farmers and fishermen) of
the tax to be shown on your
2001 tax return? Note: Your 2000 return must
have covered a 12-month
period.
You are NOT required to pay
estimated tax.
See When To Pay
Estimated Tax.
/H17075
/H17075
No
Yes
/H17074
* 110% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2000 and 2001 is from farming or fishing and your 2000 adjusted gross in come was more than
$150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2001 is married filing a separate return).
tax at that time, or you can pay it in four
installments. If you choose to pay in install-
ments, make your first payment by the due
date for the first payment period. Make your
remaining installment payments by the due
dates for the later periods.
No income subject to estimated tax dur-
ing first period.If you first have income
subject to estimated tax during a later pay-
ment period, you must make your first pay-
ment by the due date for that period. You
can pay your entire estimated tax by the due
date for that period, or you can pay it in
installments by the due date for that period
and the due dates for the remaining periods.
The following chart shows when to make
installment payments.
Change in estimated tax. After making
your first estimated tax payment, changes
in your income, adjustments, deductions,
credits, or exemptions may make it neces-
sary for you to refigure your estimated tax.
Pay the unpaid balance of your amended
estimated tax by the next payment due date
after the change or in installments by that
date and the due dates for the remaining
payment periods.
How much to pay to avoid a penalty.To
determine how much you should pay by
each payment due date, see How To Figure
Each Payment, next. If the earlier dis-
cussions of No income subject to estimated
tax during first period or Change in esti-
mated tax apply to you, you may need to
read the explanation of the Annualized In-
come Installment Method, in Publication
505, to avoid a penalty.
How To Figure
Each Payment
You should pay enough estimated tax by
the due date of each payment period to
avoid a penalty for that period. You can
figure your required payment for each pe-
riod by using either the regular installment
method or the annualized income install-
ment method. These methods are described
in Publication 505. If you do not pay enough
each payment period, you may be charged
a penalty even if you are due a refund when
you file your tax return. See chapter 4 in
Publication 505.
File Form 2210 to avoid a penalty.If
your estimated tax payment for a previous
period is less than one-fourth of your
amended estimated tax, you may be
charged a penalty for underpayment of es-
timated tax for that period when you file your
tax return. To avoid the penalty, you must
file Form 2210 with your 2001 tax return.
You must also show that the total of your
withholding and estimated tax payment for
the period was at least as much as your
annualized income installment.
Estimated Tax Payments
Not Required
You do not have to make estimated tax
payments if your withholding in each pay-
ment period is at least one-fourth of your
required annual payment or at least your
required annualized income installment for
that period. You also do not have to make
estimated tax payments if you will pay
enough through withholding to keep the
amount you owe with your return under
$1,000.
How To Pay Estimated Tax
There are five ways to pay estimated tax.
1) By crediting an overpayment on your
2000 return to your 2001 estimated tax.
2) By sending in your payment with a
payment-voucher from Form
1040–ES.
3) By paying electronically using the
Electronic Federal Tax Payment Sys-
tem (EFTPS).
4) By direct debit if you are filing Form
1040 or Form 1040A electronically.
5) By credit card using a pay-by-phone
system.
Crediting an Overpayment
When you file your Form 1040 or Form
1040A for 2000 and you have an overpay-
ment of tax, you can apply part or all of it
to your estimated tax for 2001. On line 68
of Form 1040, or line 43 of Form 1040A,
write the amount you want credited to your
estimated tax rather than refunded. The
amount you have credited should be taken
If you first have income
on which you must
pay estimated tax:
Make a
payment
by:
Make later
installments
by:
Before Apr. 1 Apr. 15 June 15
Sep. 15
Jan. 15
next year*
After Mar. 31 and
before June 1
June 15 Sep. 15
Jan. 15
next year*
After May 31 and
before Sep. 1
Sep. 15 Jan. 15
next year*
After Aug. 31 Jan. 15
next
year*
(None)
*See January payment and Saturday, Sunday,
holiday rule under When To Pay Estimated Tax,
earlier. 
Page 44 Chapter 5  Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

into account when figuring your estimated
tax payments.
You can use all the credited amount to-
ward your first payment, or you can spread
it out in any way you choose among any or
all of your payments.
If you ask that an overpayment be
credited to your estimated tax for the next
year, the payment is considered to have
been made on the due date of the first es-
timated tax installment (April 15 for calendar
year taxpayers). You cannot have any of
that amount refunded to you after that due
date until the close of that tax year. You also
cannot use that overpayment in any other
way after that date.
Using the Payment-Vouchers
Each payment of estimated tax must be
accompanied by a payment-voucher from
Form 1040–ES. If you made estimated tax
payments last year, you should receive a
copy of the 2001 Form 1040–ES in the mail.
It will have payment-vouchers preprinted
with your name, address, and social secu-
rity number. Using the preprinted vouchers
will speed processing, reduce the chance
of error, and help save processing costs.
If you did not pay estimated tax last year,
you will have to get a copy of Form
1040–ES from the IRS. After you make your
first payment, a Form 1040–ES package
with the preprinted vouchers will be mailed
to you. Follow the instructions in the pack-
age to make sure you use the vouchers
correctly.
Use the window envelopes that came
with your Form 1040–ES package. If you
use your own envelope, make sure you mail
your payment-vouchers to the address
shown in the Form 1040–ES instructions for
the place where you live. Do not use the
address shown in the Form 1040 or Form
1040A instructions.
If you file a joint return and you are
making joint estimated tax payments,
please enter the names and social security
numbers on the payment voucher in the
same order as they will appear on the joint
return.
Change of address. You must notify the
IRS if you are making estimated tax pay-
ments and you changed your address dur-
ing the year. You must send a clear and
concise written statement to the IRS center
where you filed your last return and provide
all of the following:
 Your full name (and your spouse's full
name), 
 Your signature (and spouse's signa-
ture), 
 Your old address (and spouse's old
address if different), 
 Your new address, and 
 Your social security number (and
spouse's social security number). 
You can use  Form 8822, Change of Ad-
dress, for this purpose.
You can continue to use your old pre-
printed payment-vouchers until the IRS
sends you new ones. However, do not
correct the address on the old voucher.
Payment by Direct Debit
or Credit Card
If you want to make estimated payments by
direct debit or by credit card, see the Form
1040–ES instructions or How To Pay Esti-
mated Tax in Publication 505.
Credit for
Withholding
and Estimated Tax 
When you file your 2000 income tax return,
take credit for all the income tax and excess
social security or railroad retirement tax
withheld from your salary, wages, pensions,
etc. Also, take credit for the estimated tax
you paid for 2000. These credits are sub-
tracted from your tax. You should file a re-
turn and claim these credits even if you do
not owe tax.
If you had two or more employers and
were paid wages of more than $76,200
during 2000, too much social security or
railroad retirement tax may have been
withheld from your wages. See Credit for
Excess Social Security Tax or Railroad Re-
tirement Tax Withheld in chapter 38.
Withholding
If you had income tax withheld during 2000,
you should receive a statement by January
31, 2001, showing your income and the tax
withheld. Depending on the source of your
income, you will receive:
 Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement,
 Form W–2G, Certain Gambling Win-
nings, or
 A form in the 1099 series.
Forms W–2 and W–2G.  You file Form W–2
with your income tax return. File Form
W–2G with your return if it shows any fed-
eral income tax withheld from your win-
nings.
You should get at least two copies of
each form you receive. Attach one copy to
the front of your federal income tax return.
Keep one copy for your records. You should
also receive copies to file with your state
and local returns.
Form W–2
Your employer should give you a Form W–2
for 2000 by January 31, 2001. You should
receive a separate Form W–2 from each
employer you worked for.
If you stop working before the end of the
year, your employer can give you your Form
W–2 at any time after you leave your job.
However, your employer must give it to you
by January 31 of the following year (or the
next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or
holiday if January 31 is a Saturday, Sunday,
or holiday). If you ask for the form, your
employer must give it to you within 30 days
after receiving your written request or within
30 days after your final wage payment,
whichever is later.
If you have not received your Form W–2
by February 1, 2001, you should ask your
employer for it. If you do not receive it by
February 15, call the IRS. The number is
listed in the Form 1040, Form 1040A, and
Form 1040EZ instructions. You will be
asked to give your employer's name, ad-
dress, and telephone number, and, if
known, your employer's identification num-
ber. You will also be asked for your address,
social security number, daytime telephone
number, dates of employment, and your
best estimate of your total wages and fed-
eral income tax withheld.
Form W–2 shows your total pay and
other compensation and the income tax,
social security tax, and Medicare tax that
was withheld during the year. Take credit for
the federal income tax withheld on:
 Line 58 if you file Form 1040, 
 Line 36 if you file Form 1040A, or 
 Line 7 if you file Form 1040EZ. 
Form W–2 is also used to report any
taxable sick pay you received and any in-
come tax withheld from your sick pay.
Form W–2G
If you had gambling winnings, the payer
may have withheld 28% as income tax. If
tax was withheld, the payer will give you a
Form W–2G showing the amount you won
and the amount of tax withheld. Report the
amounts you won on line 21 of Form 1040.
Take credit for the tax withheld on line 58
of Form 1040. If you had gambling win-
nings, you must use Form 1040; you cannot
use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. See
Deductions Not Subject to the 2% Limit in
chapter 30 for information on how to deduct
gambling losses.
The 1099 Series
Most forms in the 1099 series are not filed
with your return. You should receive these
forms by February 1, 2001. Keep these
forms for your records. There are several
different forms in this series, including:
 Form 1099–B, Proceeds From Broker
and Barter Exchange Transactions,
 Form 1099–DIV, Dividends and Distri-
butions,
 Form 1099–G, Certain Government and
Qualified State Tuition Program Pay-
ments,
 Form 1099–INT, Interest Income,
 Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous In-
come,
 Form 1099–OID, Original Issue Dis-
count,
 Form 1099–R, Distributions From Pen-
sions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-
Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-
tracts, etc.,
 Form SSA–1099, Social Security Ben-
efit Statement, and 
 Form RRB–1099, Payments by the
Railroad Retirement Board.
For some types of income reported on
forms in the 1099 series, you may not be
able to use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
See the instructions to these forms for de-
tails.
Form 1099–R. Attach Form 1099–R to your
return if box 4 shows federal income tax
withheld. Include the amount withheld in the
total on line 58 of Form 1040 or line 36 of
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 45

Form 1040A. You cannot use Form 1040EZ
if you received payments reported on Form
1099–R.
Backup withholding. If you were subject
to backup withholding on income you re-
ceived during 2000, include the amount
withheld, as shown on your Form 1099, in
the total on line 58 of Form 1040, or line 36
of Form 1040A.
Form Not Correct
If you receive a form with incorrect infor-
mation on it, you should ask the payer for
a corrected form. Call the telephone number
or write to the address given for the payer
on the form. The corrected Form W–2G or
Form 1099 you receive will be marked
“CORRECTED.” A special form, Form
W–2c, Corrected Wage and Tax Statement,
is used to correct a Form W–2.
Form Received After Filing
If you file your return and you later receive
a form for income that you did not include
on your return, you should report the income
and take credit for any income tax withheld
by filing Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi-
vidual Income Tax Return. See Amended
Returns and Claims for Refund in chapter
1.
Separate Returns
If you are married but file a separate return,
you can take credit only for the tax withheld
from your own income. Do not include any
amount withheld from your spouse's in-
come. However, different rules may apply
if you live in a community property state.
Community property states. Arizona,
California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New
Mexico, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin
are community property states. If you live in
a community property state and file a sep-
arate return, you and your spouse must
each report half of all community income in
addition to your own separate income. Each
of you takes credit for half of all taxes with-
held on the community income. If you were
divorced during the year, each of you gen-
erally must report half the community in-
come and can take credit for half the with-
holding on that community income for the
period before the divorce.
For more information on these rules, and
some exceptions, see Publication 555,
Community Property.
Fiscal Years
If you file your tax return on the basis of a
fiscal year (a 12-month period ending on the
last day of any month except December),
you must follow special rules to determine
your credit for federal income tax withhold-
ing. For a discussion of how to take credit
for withholding on a fiscal year return, see
Fiscal Years in chapter 3 of Publication 505.
Estimated Tax
Take credit for all your estimated tax pay-
ments for 2000 on line 59 of Form 1040 or
line 37 of Form 1040A. Include any over-
payment from 1999 that you had credited
to your 2000 estimated tax. You must use
Form 1040 or Form 1040A if you paid esti-
mated tax. You cannot use Form 1040EZ.
Name changed. If you changed your
name, and you made estimated tax pay-
ments using your old name, attach a brief
statement to the front of your tax return in-
dicating:
 When you made the payments, 
 The amount of each payment, 
 Which IRS address you sent the pay-
ments to, 
 Your name when you made the pay-
ments, and 
 Your social security number. 
The statement should cover payments you
made jointly with your spouse as well as any
you made separately.
Separate Returns
If you and your spouse made separate es-
timated tax payments for 2000 and you file
separate returns, you can take credit only
for your own payments.
If you made joint estimated tax pay-
ments, you must decide how to divide the
payments between your returns. One of you
can claim all of the estimated tax paid and
the other none, or you can divide it in any
other way you agree on. If you cannot
agree, you must divide the payments in
proportion to each spouse's individual tax
as shown on your separate returns for 1999.
Divorced Taxpayers
If you made joint estimated tax payments for
2000, and you were divorced during the
year, either you or your former spouse can
claim all of the joint payments, or you each
can claim part of them. If you cannot agree
on how to divide the payments, you must
divide them in proportion to each spouse's
individual tax as shown on your separate
returns for 2000.
If you claim any of the joint payments
on your tax return, enter your former
spouse's social security number (SSN) in
the space provided on the front of Form
1040 or Form 1040A. If you divorced and
remarried in 2000, enter your present
spouse's SSN in that space and write your
former spouse's SSN, followed by “DIV,” to
the left of line 59, Form 1040, or line 37,
Form 1040A.
Underpayment
Penalty 
If you did not pay enough tax either through
withholding or by making estimated tax
payments, you will have an underpayment
of estimated tax and you may have to pay
a penalty. Generally, you will not have to
pay a penalty for 2000 if any of the following
situations apply to you.
 The total of your withholding and esti-
mated tax payments was at least as
much as your 1999 tax, you are not
subject to the special rule limiting use
of the prior year's tax, and you paid all
required estimated tax payments on
time.
 The tax balance due on your return is
no more than 10% of your total 2000
tax, and you paid all required estimated
tax payments on time.
 Your total 2000 tax (defined later) minus
your withholding is less than $1,000.
 You did not have a tax liability for 1999.
 You did not have any withholding taxes
and your current year tax less any
household employment taxes is less
than $1,000.
Special rules apply if you are a farmer or
fisherman. See Farmers and Fishermen in
chapter 4 of Publication 505 for more infor-
mation.
IRS can figure the penalty for you.If you
think you owe the penalty but you do not
want to figure it yourself when you file your
tax return, you may not have to. Generally,
the IRS will figure the penalty for you and
send you a bill. However, you must com-
plete Form 2210 and file it with your return
if you have a reason that may reduce or
eliminate your penalty. Exceptions to the
penalty are explained in chapter 4 of Publi-
cation 505.
Page 46 Chapter 5  Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

The eight chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income. They
explain which income is and is not taxed. See Part Three for information
on gains and losses you report on Schedule D (Form 1040) and for
information on selling your home.
Part Two.
Income
6.
Wages, Salaries,
and Other
Earnings
Important Reminder
Foreign source income.If you are a U.S.
citizen or resident alien, you must report
income from sources outside the United
States (foreign income) on your tax return
unless it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true
whether you reside inside or outside the
United States and whether or not you re-
ceive a Form W–2 Wage and Tax State-
ment, or 1099 from the foreign payer. This
applies to earned income (such as wages
and tips) as well as unearned income (such
as interest, dividends, capital gains, pen-
sions, rents and royalties).
If you reside outside the United States,
you may be able to exclude part or all of
your foreign source earned income. For
details, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for
U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad. 
Introduction
This chapter discusses wages, salaries,
fringe benefits, and other compensation re-
ceived for services as an employee. The
topics include:
 Bonuses and awards, 
 Sickness and injury benefits, and
 Special rules for certain employees.
The chapter also explains what income
is included in the employee's gross income
and what is not included.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and
Car Expenses 
/H18554503 Child and Dependent Care Ex-
penses 
/H18554505 Tax Withholding and Estimated
Tax 
/H18554525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Employee
Compensation
This section discusses many types of em-
ployee compensation followed by a detailed
explanation of Fringe Benefits.
If you are an employee, you should re-
ceive Form W–2 from your employer show-
ing the pay you received for your services.
Include your pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or
Form 1040A, or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ,
even if you do not receive a Form W–2.
Child-care providers. If you provide child
care, either in the child's home or in your
home or other place of business, the pay
you receive must be included in your in-
come. If you are not an employee, you are
probably self-employed and must include
payments for your services on Schedule C,
Profit or Loss from Business, or Schedule
C–EZ, Net Profit or Loss from Business, of
Form 1040. You are generally not an em-
ployee unless you are subject to the will and
control of the person who employs you as
to what you are to do and how you are to
do it.
Baby sitting. If you baby sit for relatives
or neighborhood children, whether on a
regular basis or only periodically, the rules
for child-care providers apply to you.
Miscellaneous
Compensation
This section discusses many types of em-
ployee compensation. The subjects are
arranged in alphabetical order.
Advance commissions and other
earnings. If you receive advance commis-
sions or other amounts for services to be
performed in the future and you are a cash
method taxpayer, you must include these
amounts in your income in the year you re-
ceive them.
If you repay unearned commissions or
other amounts in the same year you receive
them, reduce the amount to include in your
income by the repayment. However, if you
repay the unearned commissions or other
amounts in a later tax year, you can deduct
the repayment as an itemized deduction on
your Schedule A (Form 1040), or you may
be able to take a credit for that year. See 
Repayments in chapter 13.
Allowances and reimbursements. if you
receive travel, transportation, or other busi-
ness expense allowances or reimburse-
ments from your employer, get Publication
463. If you are reimbursed for moving ex-
penses, get Publication 521, Moving Ex-
penses.
Back pay awards.  Include in income
amounts you are awarded in a settlement
or judgment for back pay. These include
payments made to you for damages, unpaid
life insurance premiums, and unpaid health
insurance premiums. They should be re-
ported to you by your employer on Form
W–2.
Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awards
you receive for outstanding work are in-
cluded in your income and should be shown
on your Form W–2. These include prizes
such as vacation trips for meeting sales
goals. If the prize or award you receive is
goods or services, you must include the fair
market value of the goods or services in
your income. However, if your employer
merely promises to pay you a bonus or
award at some future time, it is not taxable
until you receive it or it is made available to
you.
Employee achievement award. If you
receive tangible personal property (other
than cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent
item) as an award for length of service or
safety achievement, you can exclude its
value from your income to the extent of your
employer's cost for all such awards you re-
ceive during the year up to $1,600 ($400 for
awards that are not qualified plan awards).
Your employer can tell you whether your
award is a qualified plan award. Your em-
ployer must make the award as part of a
meaningful presentation, under conditions
and circumstances that do not create a
significant likelihood of it being disguised
pay.
However, the exclusion does not apply
to the following awards.
 A length-of-service award if you re-
ceived it for fewer than 5 years of ser-
vice or if you received another length-
of-service award during the year or the
previous 4 years.
 A safety achievement award if you are
a manager, administrator, clerical em-
ployee, or other professional employee
or if more than 10% of eligible employ-
ees previously received safety
achievement awards during the year.
Example. Ben Green received three
employee achievement awards during the
year: a nonqualified plan award of a watch
valued at $250, and two qualified plan
awards of a stereo valued at $1,000 and a
set of golf clubs valued at $500. Assuming
that the requirements for qualified plan
awards are otherwise satisfied, each award
by itself would be excluded from income.
However, since the $1,750 total value of the
awards is more than $1,600, Ben must in-
clude $150 ($1,750 – $1,600) in his income.
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 47

Government cost-of-living allowances. 
Cost-of-living allowances are generally in-
cluded in your income. However, these al-
lowances are generally not included in your
income if you are a federal civilian employee
or a federal court employee who is stationed
in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United
States.
Allowances and differentials that in-
crease your basic pay as an incentive for
taking a less desirable post of duty are part
of your compensation and must be included
in income. For example, your compen-
sation includes Foreign Post, Foreign Ser-
vice, and Overseas Tropical differentials.
For more information, get Publication
516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad.
Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you a
turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value
at Christmas or other holidays, do not in-
clude the value of the gift in your income.
However, if your employer gives you cash,
a gift certificate, or a similar item that you
can easily exchange for cash, include the
value of that gift as extra salary or wages
regardless of the amount involved.
Note received for services. If your em-
ployer gives you a secured note as payment
for your services, you must include the fair
market value (usually the discount value)
of the note in your income for the year you
receive it. When you later receive payments
on the note, a proportionate part of each
payment is the recovery of the fair market
value that you previously included in your
income. Do not include that part again in
your income. Include the rest of the pay-
ment in your income in the year of payment.
If your employer gives you an unsecured
note as payment for your services, pay-
ments on the note that are credited toward
the principal amount of the note are com-
pensation income when you receive them.
Retirement plan contributions.You must
include in income amounts you pay into a
retirement plan through payroll deductions.
You recover your contributions tax free
when you retire and receive benefits from
the plan. See chapter 11 for more infor-
mation about the tax treatment of retirement
plan benefits.
Employer's contributions to qualified
plan. Your employer's contributions to a
qualified retirement plan for you are not in-
cluded in income at the time contributed.
(Your employer can tell you whether your
retirement plan is qualified.) However, the
cost of life insurance coverage included in
the plan may have to be included. See
Group-Term Life Insurance Premiums, later,
under Fringe Benefits.
Elective deferrals.If you chose to set
aside part of your pay for retirement under
a qualified deferred compensation arrange-
ment (for example, a section 401(k) plan),
the amount you set aside is treated as an
employer contribution to a qualified plan,
subject to a limit. For 2000, this limit is
$10,500 for all elective deferrals. If you set
aside more than $10,500, the excess must
be included in your income for that year.
See Publication 525 for a discussion of the
tax treatment of corrective distributions of
excess deferrals.
Elective deferrals are not excluded from
wages for social security and Medicare
taxes and benefits.
If you are a federal employee, this
treatment applies to your contributions to
the Thrift Savings Plan.
Employer's contributions to nonqualified
plan. If your employer pays into a non-
qualified plan for you, you generally must
include the contributions in your income as
wages for the tax year in which the contri-
butions are made. However, if your interest
in the plan is subject to a substantial risk
of forfeiture (you have a good chance of
losing it) at the time of contribution, do not
include the value of your interest in your
income until it is no longer subject to a
substantial risk of forfeiture.
Severance pay. Amounts you receive as
severance pay are taxable. A lump-sum
payment for cancellation of your employ-
ment contract is income in the tax year you
receive it and must be reported in gross in-
come.
Accrued leave payment. If you are a
federal employee and receive a lump-sum
payment for accrued annual leave when you
retire or resign, this amount will be included
on your Form W–2.
If you resign from one agency and are
reemployed by another agency, you may
have to repay part of your lump-sum annual
leave payment to the second agency. You
can reduce gross wages by the amount you
repaid in the same tax year in which you
received it. You should attach to your tax
return a copy of the receipt or statement
given to you by the agency to which you
make repayment to explain the difference
between the wages on the return and the
wages on your Forms W–2.
Outplacement services.If you choose
to accept a reduced amount of severance
pay so that you can receive outplacement
services (such as training in resumé writing
and interview techniques), you must include
the unreduced amount of the severance pay
in income.
However, you can deduct the value of
these outplacement services (up to the dif-
ference between the severance pay in-
cluded in income and the amount actually
received) as a miscellaneous deduction
(subject to the 2% limit) on Schedule A
(Form 1040).
Sick pay. Pay you receive from your em-
ployer while you are sick or injured is part
of your salary or wages. In addition, you
must include in your income any of the fol-
lowing sick pay benefits received from
payers.
1) A welfare fund.
2) A state sickness or disability fund.
3) An association of employers or em-
ployees.
4) An insurance company, if your em-
ployer paid for the plan.
However, if you paid the premiums on an
accident or health insurance policy, the
benefits you receive under the policy are
not taxable.
Social security and Medicare taxes paid
by employer. If you and your employer
have an agreement that your employer pays
your social security and Medicare taxes
without deducting them from your gross
wages, you must report the amount of tax
paid for you as taxable wages on your tax
return. The payment is also treated as
wages for figuring your social security and
Medicare taxes and your social security and
Medicare benefits. However, these pay-
ments are not treated as social security and
Medicare wages if you are a household
worker or a farm worker.
Stock appreciation rights. Do not include
a stock appreciation right granted by your
employer in income until you exercise (use)
the right. When you use the right, you are
entitled to a cash payment equal to the fair
market value of the corporation's stock on
the date of use minus the fair market value
on the date the right was granted. You in-
clude the cash payment in your income in
the year you use the right.
Stock options. If you receive a nonstatu-
tory option to buy or sell stock or other
property as payment for your services, you
will usually have income either when you
receive the option or when you exercise the
option (use it to buy or sell the stock or other
property). However, if your option is a stat-
utory stock option you usually will not have
any income until you sell or exchange your
stock. Your employer can tell you which kind
of option you hold. For details, get Publica-
tion 525.
Restricted property. Generally, if you re-
ceive property for your services, you must
include its fair market value in your income
in the year you receive the property. How-
ever, if you receive stock or other property
that has certain restrictions that affect its
value, you may not have to include the
value of the property in your income in the
year you receive it. For details, see Re-
stricted Property in Publication 525.
Dividends you receive on restricted
stock are extra compensation to you. Your
employer should include these payments
on your Form W–2.
Stock you chose to include in in-
come. Dividends you receive on restricted
stock you chose to include in your income
in the year transferred are treated the same
as any other dividends. Report them on your
return as dividends. For a discussion of
dividends, see chapter 9.
For information on how to treat dividends
reported on both your Form W–2 and Form
1099–DIV, see Dividends received on re-
stricted stockin Publication 525.
Fringe Benefits 
Fringe benefits you receive in connection
with the performance of your services are
included in your income as compensation
unless you pay fair market value for them
or they are specifically excluded by law.
Abstaining from the performance of services
(for example, under a covenant not to
compete) is treated as the performance of
services for purposes of these rules.
Accounting period. You must use the
same accounting period your employer uses
to report your taxable noncash fringe bene-
fits. Your employer has the option to report
taxable fringe benefits by using either of the
following rules.
1) The general rule: benefits are reported
for a full calendar year (January 1–
December 31).
Page 48 Chapter 6  Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

2) The special accounting period rule:
benefits provided during the last 2
months of the calendar year (or any
shorter period) are treated as paid
during the following calendar year. For
example, each year your employer re-
ports the value of benefits provided
during the last 2 months of the prior
year and the first 10 months of the
current year.
Your employer does not have to use the
same accounting period for each fringe
benefit, but must use the same period for
all employees who receive a particular
benefit.
You must use the same accounting pe-
riod that you use to report the benefit to
claim an employee business deduction (for
use of a car, for example).
Form W–2. Your employer reports your
taxable fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips,
other compensation) of Form W–2. The total
value of your fringe benefits may also be
noted in box 12. The value of your fringe
benefits may be added to your other com-
pensation on one Form W–2, or you may
receive a separate Form W–2 showing just
the value of your fringe benefits in box 1
with a notation in box 12.
Accident or Health Plan 
Generally, the value of accident or health
plan coverage provided to you by your em-
ployer is not included in your income. Ben-
efits you receive from the plan are generally
taxable, as explained later under Sickness
and Injury Benefits.
Long-term care coverage. Contributions
by your employer to provide coverage for
long-term care services are generally not
included in income. However, contributions
made through a flexible spending or similar
arrangement (such as a cafeteria plan) must
be included in your income. This amount
will be reported as wages in box 1 of your
Form W–2.
Contributions you make to the plan are
discussed in Publication 502, Medical and
Dental Expenses. 
Medical savings account contributions.
Contributions by your employer to your
medical savings account are not included in
your income. Their total will be reported in
box 13 of Form W–2 with code R designat-
ing that it is excludable from income. You
must report this amount on Form 8853,
Medical Savings Accounts and Long-Term
Care Insurance Contracts, and attach the
form to your return. 
If your employer does not make contri-
butions to your MSA, you can make your
own contributions to your MSA. These con-
tributions are discussed in Publication 969,
Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs). Also,
see Form 8853.
Adoption Assistance
You may be able to exclude from income
amounts paid or expenses incurred by your
employer for qualified adoption expenses in
connection with your adoption of an eligible
child. The amounts must be paid or the ex-
penses must be incurred before January 1,
2002, as part of an adoption assistance
program. See Publication 968, Tax Benefits
for Adoption, for more information.
Adoption benefits are reported by your
employer in box 13 of Form W–2 with code
T. They are also included as social security
and Medicare wages in boxes 3 and 5.
However, they are not included as wages
in box 1. To determine the taxable and
nontaxable amounts, you must complete
Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adoption
Expenses. Attach the form to your return.
Educational Assistance.
You can exclude from income up to $5,250
of qualified employer-provided educational
assistance. The exclusion applies to
courses beginning before 2002. The exclu-
sion does not apply to graduate-level
courses. For more information, see Publi-
cation 508, Tax Benefits for Work-Related
Education.
Transportation
If your employer provides you with a qual-
ified transportation fringe benefit, it can be
excluded from your income, up to certain
limits. A qualified transportation fringe ben-
efit is:
1) Transportation in a commuter highway
vehicle (such as a van) between your
home and work place, 
2) A transit pass, or 
 3) Qualified parking.
Cash reimbursement by your employer for
these expenses under a bona fide re-
imbursement arrangement is also
excludable. However, cash reimbursement
for a transit pass is excludable only if a
voucher or similar item that can be ex-
changed only for a transit pass is not readily
available for direct distribution to you.
Exclusion limit. The exclusion for
commuter highway vehicle transportation
and transit pass fringe benefits cannot be
more than a total of $65 a month, regardless
of the total value of both benefits.
The exclusion for the qualified parking
fringe benefit cannot be more than $175 a
month, regardless of its value.
If the benefits have a value that is more
than these limits, the excess must be in-
cluded in your income.
Commuter highway vehicle. This is a
highway vehicle that seats at least six adults
(not including the driver). At least 80% of the
vehicle's mileage must reasonably be ex-
pected to be:
1) For transporting employees between
their homes and work place, and
2) On trips during which employees oc-
cupy at least half of the vehicle's adult
seating capacity (not including the
driver).
Transit pass.This is any pass, token,
farecard, voucher, or similar item entitling a
person to ride mass transit (whether public
or private) free or at a reduced rate or to ride
in a commuter highway vehicle operated by
a person in the business of transporting
persons for compensation.
Qualified parking.This is parking pro-
vided to an employee at or near the em-
ployer's place of business. It also includes
parking provided on or near a location from
which the employee commutes to work in
a commuter highway vehicle or carpool. It
does not include parking at or near the
employee's home.
Group-Term Life Insurance
Premiums 
Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 of
group-term life insurance coverage provided
to you by your employer (or former em-
ployer) is not included in your income.
However, you must include in income the
cost of employer-provided insurance to the
extent it is more than the cost of $50,000
of coverage reduced by any amount you
pay towards the purchase of the insurance.
The amount included in your income is
reported as part of your wages in box 1 of
your Form W–2. It is also shown separately
in box 13 with code C. See Your payment,
later.
Group-term life insurance.This insurance
is term life insurance protection (insurance
for a fixed period of time) that:
1) Provides a general death benefit, 
2) Is provided to a group of employees, 
3) Is provided under a policy carried by
the employer, and 
4) Provides an amount of insurance for
each employee based on a formula
that prevents individual selection.
Your payment. If you pay any part of
the cost of the insurance, your entire pay-
ment reduces, dollar for dollar, the amount
you would otherwise include in your income.
However, you cannot reduce the amount to
include in your income by:
1) Payments for coverage in a different
tax year,
2) Payments for coverage through a caf-
eteria plan, unless the payments are
after-tax contributions, or 
3) Payments for coverage not taxed to
you because of the exceptions dis-
cussed later in Entire cost excluded.
Permanent benefits.If your group-term
life insurance policy includes permanent
benefits, such as a paid-up or cash surren-
der value, you must include in your income,
as wages, the cost of the permanent bene-
fits minus the amount you pay for them.
Your employer should be able to tell you the
amount to include in your income.
Accidental or other death benefits.
Insurance that provides accidental or other
death benefits but does not provide general
death benefits (travel insurance, for exam-
ple) is not group-term life insurance.
Entire cost excluded.You are not taxed
on the cost of group-term life insurance if
any of the following circumstances apply.
1) You are permanently and totally disa-
bled and have ended your employ-
ment.
2) Your employer is the beneficiary of the
policy for the entire period the insur-
ance is in force during the tax year.
3) A charitable organization (defined in
chapter 26) is the only beneficiary of
the policy for the entire period the in-
surance is in force during the tax year.
(You are not entitled to a deduction for
a charitable contribution for naming a
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 49

charitable organization as the benefi-
ciary of your policy.)
Entire cost taxed.You are taxed on the
entire cost of group-term life insurance if
either of the following circumstances apply.
1) The insurance is provided by your
employer through a qualified employ-
ees' trust, such as a pension trust or a
qualified annuity plan.
2) You are a key employee and your
employer's plan discriminates in favor
of key employees.
Life insurance agents.Full-time life in-
surance agents who are considered em-
ployees for social security and Medicare tax
withholding purposes are treated as em-
ployees in applying the provisions relating
to group-term life insurance under a policy
carried by their employer.
More than $50,000 from one employer.
If you have only one employer and you were
insured at any time during the tax year for
more than $50,000 under a group-term life
insurance policy, your taxable income from
this source is included as other compen-
sation on the Form W–2 you receive.
More than $50,000 from two or more
employers. If two or more employers pro-
vide you group-term life insurance coverage
totaling more than $50,000, you must figure
how much to include in your income. You
must include the cost of life insurance pro-
vided to you during the tax year, regardless
of when your employers paid the premiums.
Figuring the taxable cost.You figure the
taxable cost for each month of coverage by
multiplying the number of thousands of dol-
lars of insurance coverage for the month
(figured to the nearest tenth), less 50, by the
cost from the following table. Use your age
on the last day of the tax year. You must
prorate the cost from the table if less than
a full month of coverage is involved.
Example. You are 51 years old and
work for employers A and B. Both employ-
ers provide group-term life insurance cov-
erage for you for the entire year. Your cov-
erage is $35,000 with employer A and
$45,000 with employer B. You pay premi-
ums of $4.15 a month under the employer
B group plan. You figure the amount to in-
clude in your income as follows:
Employer-provided vehicles.If your em-
ployer provides a car (or other highway
motor vehicle) to you, your personal use of
the car is usually a taxable noncash fringe
benefit.
Your employer must determine the ac-
tual value of this fringe benefit to include in
your income.
TIP
Certain employer-provided trans-
portation can be excluded from
gross income. See the discussion
on Transportation, earlier.
Special Rules for
Certain Employees
This section deals with special rules for
people in certain types of employment:
members of the clergy, members of reli-
gious orders, people working for foreign
employers, military personnel, veterans,
and Peace Corps volunteers.
Clergy 
If you are a member of the clergy, you must
include in your income offerings and fees
you receive for marriages, baptisms, funer-
als, masses, etc., in addition to your salary.
If the offering is made to the religious insti-
tution, it is not taxable to you.
If you are a member of a religious or-
ganization and you give your outside
earnings to the organization, you still must
include the earnings in your income. How-
ever, you may be entitled to a charitable
contribution deduction for the amount paid
to the organization. See chapter 26.
Housing.  Special rules apply to members
of the clergy. Under these rules, you do not
include in your income the rental value of a
home (including utilities) or a housing al-
lowance provided to you as part of your pay.
The home or allowance must be provided
as compensation for your duties as an or-
dained, licensed, or commissioned minister.
However, you must include the rental value
of the home, or the housing allowance as
earnings from self-employment on Schedule
SE (Form 1040) if you are subject to the
self-employment tax. For more information,
see Publication 517, Social Security and
Other Information for Members of the Clergy
and Religious Workers.
Expenses of providing a home include
rent, house payments, furniture payments,
costs for a garage, and utilities. They do not
include the cost of food or servants.
Designation requirement.The church
or organization that employs you must offi-
cially designate the payment as a housing
allowance before the payment is made. A
Employer A coverage (in thousands) ..... $35 definite amount must be designated; the
amount of the housing allowance cannot be
determined at a later date.
If you are employed and paid by a local
congregation, a resolution by a national
church agency of your denomination does
not effectively designate a housing allow-
ance for you. The local congregation must
officially designate the part of your salary
that is to be a housing allowance. However,
a resolution of a national church agency can
designate your housing allowance if you are
directly employed by the agency. If no part
has been officially designated, you must in-
clude your total salary in your income.
Homeowner. If you own your home or
are buying it, you can exclude your housing
allowance from your income if you spend it
for the down payment on the home, for
mortgage payments, or for interest, taxes,
utilities, repairs, etc. However, you cannot
exclude more than the fair rental value of
the home plus the cost of utilities, even if a
larger amount is designated as a housing
allowance. The fair rental value of a home
includes the fair rental value of the fur-
nishings in it.
You can deduct on Schedule A (Form
1040) the qualified mortgage interest and
real estate taxes you pay on your home
even if you use nontaxable housing allow-
ance funds to make the payments. See
chapters 24 and 25.
Teachers or administrators.If you are a
minister employed as a teacher or adminis-
trator by a church school, college, or uni-
versity, you are performing ministerial ser-
vices for purposes of the rental exclusion.
However, if you perform services as a
teacher or administrator on the faculty of a
nonchurch college, you cannot exclude from
your income a housing allowance or the
value of a home that is provided to you.
TIP
If you live in faculty housing as an
employee of an educational institu-
tion or an academic health center,
all or part of the value of that lodging may
be nontaxable under a different rule. See
Faculty lodging in Publication 525.
If you serve as a minister of music or
minister of education or serve in an admin-
istrative or other function of your religious
organization, but are not authorized to per-
form substantially all of the religious duties
of an ordained minister in your church (even
if you are commissioned as a “minister of
the gospel”), the exclusion does not apply
to you.
Theological students. The housing exclu-
sion does not apply if you are a theological
student serving a required internship as an
assistant pastor, unless you are ordained,
commissioned, or licensed as a minister.
Traveling evangelists.If you are an or-
dained minister and are providing
evangelistic services, you can exclude
amounts received from out-of-town
churches that are designated as a housing
allowance, provided you actually use them
to maintain your permanent home.
Retired members of the clergy. The
rental value of a home provided rent free
by your church for your past services is not
income if you are a retired minister. In ad-
dition, a housing allowance paid to you is
Employer B coverage (in thousands) ..... + 45
Total coverage (in thousands) ................ $80
Minus: Exclusion (in thousands) .............− 50
Excess amount (in thousands) ............... $30
Multiply by cost per $1,000 per month,
age 51 (from table) ...............................× .23
Cost of excess insurance for 1 month ... $6.90
Multiply by number of full months
coverage at this cost ............................× 12
Cost of excess insurance for tax year .... $82.80
Minus: Premiums you paid .....................−49.80
Cost to include in income
as wages $33.00
COST PER $1,000 OF PROTECTION
FOR ONE MONTH
 Age Cost
Under 25 .............................................. $ .05
25 through 29 ....................................... .06
30 through 34 ....................................... .08
35 through 39 ....................................... .09
40 through 44 ....................................... .10
45 through 49 ....................................... .15
50 through 54 ....................................... .23
55 through 59 ....................................... .43
60 through 64 ....................................... .66
65 through 69 ....................................... 1.27
70 and older ......................................... 2.06
Page 50 Chapter 6  Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

not income to the extent you spend it for
utilities, maintenance, repairs, and similar
expenses that are directly related to pro-
viding a home. These amounts are also not
included in net earnings from self-employ-
ment.
The general convention of a national
religious denomination can designate a
housing allowance for retired ministers that
can be excluded from income. This applies
if the local congregations authorize the
general convention to establish and main-
tain a unified pension system for all retired
clergy members of the denomination for
their past services to the local churches.
A surviving spouse of a retired minister
cannot exclude a housing allowance from
income. If these payments were reported to
you on Form 1099–R, include them on lines
16a and 16b of Form 1040, or on lines 12a
and 12b of Form 1040A. Otherwise, include
them on line 21 of Form 1040.
Pension. A pension or retirement pay
for a member of the clergy is usually treated
the same as any other pension or annuity.
It must be reported on lines 16a and 16b
of Form 1040 or on lines 12a and 12b of
Form 1040A.
Members of Religious
Orders
If you are a member of a religious order who
has taken a vow of poverty, how you treat
earnings that you renounce and turn over
to the order depends on whether your ser-
vices are performed for the order.
Services performed for the order.If you
are performing the services as an agent of
the order in the exercise of duties required
by the order, do not include in your income
the amounts turned over to the order.
If your order directs you to perform ser-
vices for another agency of the supervising
church or an associated institution, you are
considered to be performing the services
as an agent of the order. Any wages you
earn as an agent of an order that you turn
over to the order are not included in your
gross income.
Example. You are a member of a
church order and have taken a vow of pov-
erty. You renounce any claims to your
earnings and turn over to the order any
salaries or wages you earn. You are a reg-
istered nurse, so your order assigns you to
work in a hospital that is an associated in-
stitution of the church. However, you re-
main under the general direction and control
of the order. You are considered to be an
agent of the order and any wages you earn
at the hospital that you turn over to your
order are not included in your income.
Services performed outside the order.
If you are directed to work outside the order,
your services are not an exercise of duties
required by the order unless they meet both
of the following requirements.
1) They are the kind of services that are
ordinarily the duties of members of the
order.
2) They are part of the duties that must
be exercised for, or on behalf of, the
religious order as its agent. 
If you are an employee of a third party, the
services you perform for the third party will
not be considered directed or required of
you by the order. Amounts you receive for
these services are included in your income,
even if you have taken a vow of poverty.
Example. Mark Brown is a member of
a religious order and has taken a vow of
poverty. He renounces all claims to his
earnings and turns over his earnings to the
order.
Mark is a school teacher. He was in-
structed by the superiors of the order to get
a job with a private tax-exempt school.
Mark became an employee of the school,
and, at his request, the school made the
salary payments directly to the order.
Because Mark is an employee of the
school, he is performing services for the
school rather than as an agent of the order.
The wages Mark earns working for the
school are included in his income.
Foreign Employer
Special rules apply if you work for a foreign
employer.
U.S. citizen.If you are a U.S. citizen who
works in the United States for a foreign
government, an international organization,
a foreign embassy, or any foreign employer,
you must include your salary in your in-
come.
Social security and Medicare taxes.
You are exempt from social security and
Medicare taxes if you are employed in the
United States by an international organiza-
tion or a foreign government. However, you
must pay self-employment tax on your
earnings from services performed in the
United States, even though you are not
self-employed. This rule also applies if you
are an employee of a qualifying wholly-
owned instrumentality of a foreign govern-
ment.
Non-U.S. citizen.If you are not a U.S. cit-
izen, or if you are a U.S. citizen but also a
citizen of the Philippines, and you work for
an international organization in the United
States, your salary from that source is ex-
empt from tax. If you work for a foreign
government in the United States, your sal-
ary from that source is exempt from tax if
your work is like the work done by employ-
ees of the United States in that foreign
country and the foreign government gives
an equal exemption to employees of the
United States in that country.
Waiver of alien status.If you are an
alien who works for a foreign government
or international organization and you file a
waiver under section 247(b) of the Immi-
gration and Nationality Act to keep your
immigrant status, different rules may apply.
See Foreign Employer in Publication 525.
Employment abroad.  For information on
income earned abroad, get Publication 54,
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident
Aliens Abroad.
Military
Payments you receive as a member of a
military service generally are taxed as
wages except for retirement pay, which is
taxed as a pension. Allowances generally
are not taxed. For more information on the
tax treatment of military allowances and
benefits, get Publication 3, Armed Forces'
Tax Guide.
Military retirement pay.  If your retirement
pay is based on age or length of service, it
is taxable and must be included in your
gross income as a pension on lines 16a and
16b of Form 1040, or on lines 12a and 12b
of Form 1040A. Do not include in your in-
come the amount of reduction in retirement
or retainer pay to provide a survivor annuity
for your spouse or children under the Re-
tired Serviceman's Family Protection Plan
or the Survivor Benefit Plan.
For more information on survivor annui-
ties, see chapter 11.
Disability.If you are retired on disabil-
ity, see  Military and Certain Government
Disability Pensions under Sickness and In-
jury Benefits, later.
Veteran's benefits.Veterans' benefits paid
under any law, regulation, or administrative
practice administered by the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA), are not included in
gross income. The following amounts paid
to veterans or their families are not taxable.
1) Education, training, and subsistence
allowances. 
2) Disability compensation and pension
payments for disabilities paid either to
veterans or their families.
3) Grants for homes designed for wheel-
chair living. 
4) Grants for motor vehicles for veterans
who lost their sight or the use of their
limbs. 
5) Veterans' insurance proceeds and div-
idends paid either to veterans or their
beneficiaries, including the proceeds
of a veteran's endowment policy paid
before death.
6) Interest on insurance dividends you
leave on deposit with the VA.
Rehabilitative program payments.VA
payments to hospital patients and resident
veterans for their services under the VA's
therapeutic or rehabilitative programs are
included as income other than wages.
These payments are reported on line 21 of
Form 1040.
Volunteers
The tax treatment of amounts you receive
as a volunteer worker for the Peace Corps
or similar agency is covered in the following
discussions.
Peace Corps. Living allowances you re-
ceive as a Peace Corps volunteer or vol-
unteer leader for housing, utilities, house-
hold supplies, food, and clothing are exempt
from tax.
Taxable allowances.The following al-
lowances must be included in your income
and reported as wages.
1) Allowances paid to your spouse and
minor children while you are a volun-
teer leader training in the United
States. 
2) Living allowances designated by the
Director of the Peace Corps as basic
compensation. These are allowances
for personal items such as domestic
help, laundry and clothing mainte-
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 51

nance, entertainment and recreation,
transportation, and other miscella-
neous expenses.
 3) Leave allowances.
4) Readjustment allowances or “termi-
nation payments.” These are consid-
ered received by you when credited to
your account.
Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace
Corps volunteer, gets $175 a month as a
readjustment allowance during his period
of service, to be paid to him in a lump sum
at the end of his tour of duty. Although the
allowance is not available to him until the
end of his service, Gary must include it in
his income on a monthly basis as it is
credited to his account.
Volunteers in Service to America
(VISTA). If you are a VISTA volunteer, you
must include meal and lodging allowances
paid to you in your income as wages.
National Senior Services Corps pro-
grams. Do not include in your income
amounts you receive for supportive services
or reimbursements for out-of-pocket ex-
penses from the following programs.
 Retired Senior Volunteer Program
(RSVP).
 Foster Grandparent Program.
 Senior Companion Program.
Service Corps of Retired Executives
(SCORE). If you receive amounts for sup-
portive services or reimbursements for out-
of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not
include these amounts in income.
Volunteer tax counseling.You do not in-
clude in your income any reimbursements
you receive for transportation, meals, and
other expenses you have in training for, or
actually providing, volunteer federal income
tax counseling for the elderly (TCE).
You can deduct as a charitable contri-
bution your unreimbursed out-of-pocket ex-
penses in taking part in the volunteer in-
come tax assistance (VITA) program.
Sickness and Injury
Benefits
This section discusses many types of sick-
ness and injury benefits including disability
benefits and military and government disa-
bility pensions.
Disability Income
Generally, if you retire on disability you must
report your pension or annuity as income.
There is a tax credit for people who are
permanently and totally disabled. For infor-
mation on this credit and the definition of
permanent and total disability, see chapter
34.
Disability pensions.Generally, you must
report as income any amount you receive
for personal injury or sickness through an
accident or health plan that is paid for by
your employer. If both you and your em-
ployer pay for the plan, only the amount you
receive that is due to your employer's pay-
ments is reported as income. However,
certain payments may not be taxable to you.
Your employer should be able to give you
specific details about your pension plan and
tell you the amount you paid for your disa-
bility pension. In addition to disability pen-
sions and annuities, you may be receiving
other payments for sickness and injury.
Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire
cost of a health or accident insurance plan,
do not include any amounts you receive
from the plan for personal injury or sickness
as income on your tax return. If your plan
reimbursed you for medical expenses you
deducted in an earlier year, you may have
to include some, or all, of the reimburse-
ment in your income. See  Reimbursement
in a later year in chapter 23.
Cafeteria plans.Generally, if you are
covered by an accident or health insurance
plan through a cafeteria plan, and the
amount of the insurance premiums was not
included in your income, you are not con-
sidered to have paid the premiums and you
must include any benefits you receive in
your income. If the amount of the premiums
was included in your income, you are con-
sidered to have paid the premiums, and any
benefits you receive are not taxable.
Accrued leave payment. If you retire on
disability, any lump-sum payment you re-
ceive for accrued annual leave is a salary
payment. The payment is not a disability
payment. Include it in your income in the tax
year you receive it.
Retirement and profit-sharing plans.If
you receive payments from a retirement or
profit-sharing plan that does not provide for
disability retirement, do not treat the pay-
ments as a disability pension. The pay-
ments must be reported as a pension or
annuity. For more information on pensions,
see chapter 11.
How to report.If you retired on disability,
you must include in income any disability
pension you receive under a plan that is
paid for by your employer. You must report
your taxable disability payments as wages
on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, until
you reach minimum retirement age. Mini-
mum retirement age generally is the age at
which you can first receive a pension or
annuity if you are not disabled.
Beginning on the day after you reach
minimum retirement age, payments you re-
ceive are taxable as a pension or annuity.
Report the payments on lines 16a and 16b
of Form 1040, or on lines 12a and 12b of
Form 1040A. The rules for reporting pen-
sions are explained in How To Report in
chapter 11.
Military and Certain Government
Disability Pensions 
Certain military and government disability
pensions are not taxable.
You may be able to exclude from income
amounts you receive as a pension, annuity,
or similar allowance for personal injury or
sickness resulting from active service in one
of the following government services.
1) The armed forces of any country. 
2) The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.
3) The Public Health Service.
4) The Foreign Service. 
Conditions for exclusion.Do not in-
clude the disability payments in your income
if any of the following conditions apply.
1) You were entitled to receive a disability
payment before September 25, 1975. 
2) You were a member of a listed gov-
ernment service or its reserve compo-
nent, or were under a binding written
commitment to become a member, on
September 24, 1975. 
3) You receive the disability payments for
a combat-related injury. This is a per-
sonal injury or sickness that:
a) Results directly from armed con-
flict, 
b) Takes place while you are en-
gaged in extra-hazardous service,
c) Takes place under conditions
simulating war, including training
exercises such as maneuvers, or
d) Is caused by an instrumentality of
war.
4) You would be entitled to receive disa-
bility compensation from the Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) if you
filed an application for it. Your exclu-
sion under this condition is equal to the
amount you would be entitled to re-
ceive from the VA.
Pension based on years of service. If
you receive a disability pension based on
years of service, you generally must include
it in your income. But if it is a result of active
service in one of the listed government
services and one of the listed conditions
applies, do not include in income the part
of your pension that you would have re-
ceived if the pension had been based on a
percentage of disability. You must include
the rest of your pension in your income.
Terrorist attack. D not include in your
income disability payments you receive for
injuries resulting directly from a violent at-
tack that occurs while you are a U.S. gov-
ernment employee performing official duties
outside the United States. For your disability
payments to be tax exempt, the Secretary
of State must determine the attack was a
terrorist attack.
VA disability benefits.Disability benefits
you receive from the VA are not included in
your income. If you are a military retiree and
you receive disability benefits from other
than the VA, do not include in your income
the amount of disability benefits equal to the
VA benefits to which you are entitled.
Retroactive VA determination.If you
retire from the armed services based on
years of service and are later given a ret-
roactive service-connected disability rating
by the VA, your retirement pay for the ret-
roactive period is excluded from income up
to the amount of VA disability benefits, you
would have been entitled to receive. You
can claim a refund of any tax paid on the
excludable amount (subject to the statute
of limitations) by filing an amended return
on Form 1040X for each previous year
during the retroactive period.
Page 52 Chapter 6  Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

If you receive a lump-sum disability
severance payment and are later awarded
VA disability benefits, do not include in your
income the portion of the severance pay-
ment equal to the VA benefit you would
have been entitled to receive in that same
year. However, you must include in your
income any lump-sum readjustment or other
nondisability severance payment you re-
ceived on release from active duty, even if
you are later given a retroactive disability
rating by the VA.
Long-Term Care
Insurance Contracts
Long-term care insurance contracts are
generally treated as accident and health in-
surance contracts. Amounts you receive
from them (other than policyholder divi-
dends or premium refunds) generally are
excludable from income as amounts re-
ceived for personal injury or sickness. To
claim an exclusion for payments made on
a per diem or other periodic basis under a
long-term care insurance contract, you must
file Form 8853 with your return.
A long-term care insurance contract is
any insurance contract that only provides
coverage for qualified long-term care ser-
vices. The contract:
1) Must be guaranteed renewable,
2) Must not provide for a cash surrender
value or other money that can be paid,
assigned, pledged, or borrowed,
3) Must provide that refunds, other than
refunds on the death of the insured or
complete surrender or cancellation of
the contract, and dividends under the
contract may be used only to reduce
future premiums or increase future
benefits, and
4) Generally must not pay or reimburse
expenses incurred for services or items
that would be reimbursed under Medi-
care, except where Medicare is a sec-
ondary payer or the contract makes per
diem or other periodic payments with-
out regard to expenses.
Qualified long-term care services. Qual-
ified long-term care services are:
1) Necessary diagnostic, preventive,
therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating,
and rehabilitative services, and
2) Maintenance or personal care services
required by a chronically ill individual
as prescribed by a licensed health care
practitioner.
Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill
individual is one who has been certified as
one of the following.
1) An individual who, for at least 90 days,
is unable to perform at least two activ-
ities of daily living without substantial
assistance due to loss of functional
capacity. Activities of daily living are
eating, toileting, transferring, bathing,
dressing, and continence.
2) An individual who requires substantial
supervision to be protected from
threats to health and safety due to se-
vere cognitive impairment. 
The certification must have been made
by a licensed health care practitioner within
the previous 12 months.
Limit on exclusion. You can generally ex-
clude from gross income up to $190 a day
($69,350 a year) for 2000. The $190 is in-
dexed for inflation. See Limit on exclusion,
under Long-Term Care Insurance Con-
tracts, under Sickness and Injury Benefits
in Publication 525 for more information.
Workers' Compensation.
Amounts you receive as workers' compen-
sation for an occupational sickness or injury
are fully exempt from tax if they are paid
under a workers' compensation act or a
statute in the nature of a workers' compen-
sation act. The exemption also applies to
your survivors. The exemption, however,
does not apply to retirement plan benefits
you receive based on your age, length of
service, or prior contributions to the plan,
even if you retired because of occupational
sickness or injury.
CAUTION
!
If part of your workers' compen-
sation reduces your social security
or equivalent railroad retirement
benefits received, that part is considered
social security (or equivalent railroad retire-
ment) benefits and may be taxable. For
more information, see Publication 915, So-
cial Security and Equivalent Railroad Re-
tirement Benefits.
Return to work.If you return to work after
qualifying for workers' compensation, pay-
ments you continue to receive while as-
signed to light duties are taxable. Report
these payments as wages on line 7 of Form
1040 or Form 1040A, or on line 1 of Form
1040EZ.
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits
In addition to welfare or insurance benefits,
you may receive other payments for sick-
ness or injury.
Railroad sick pay.Payments you re-
ceive as sick pay under the Railroad Un-
employment Insurance Act are taxable and
you must include them in your income.
However, do not include them in your in-
come if they are for an on-the-job injury.
If you received income because of a
disability, see Sickness and Injury Benefits,
earlier.
Federal Employees' Compensation Act
(FECA). Payments received under this Act
for personal injury or sickness, including
payments to beneficiaries in case of death,
are not taxable. However, you are taxed on
amounts you receive under this Act as
“continuation of pay” for up to 45 days while
a claim is being decided. Report this income
on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or
on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sick
leave while a claim is being processed is
taxable and must be included in your in-
come as wages.
You can deduct the amount you spend
to “buy back” sick leave for an earlier year
to be eligible for nontaxable FECA benefits
for that period. It is a miscellaneous de-
duction subject to the 2% limit on Schedule
A (Form 1040). If you buy back sick leave
in the same year you use it, the amount
reduces your taxable sick leave pay. Do not
deduct it separately.
Other compensation. Many other
amounts you receive as compensation for
sickness or injury are not taxable. These
include the following amounts.
 Compensatory damages you receive for
physical injury or physical sickness,
whether paid in a lump sum or in peri-
odic payments.
 Benefits you receive under an accident
or health insurance policy  on which ei-
ther you paid the premiums or your
employer paid the premiums but you
had to include them in your gross in-
come,
 Disability benefits you receive for loss
of income or earning capacity as a re-
sult of injuries under a “no-fault” car in-
surance policy
 Compensation you receive for perma-
nent loss or loss of use of a part or
function of your body, or for your per-
manent disfigurement. This compen-
sation must be based only on the injury
and not on the period of your absence
from work. These benefits are not tax-
able even if your employer pays for the
accident and health plan that provides
these benefits.
Reimbursement for medical care.A re-
imbursement for medical care is generally
not taxable. However, this reimbursement
may reduce your medical expense de-
duction. For more information, see chapter
23.
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 53

7.
Tip Income
Introduction
This chapter is for employees who receive
tips from customers. If you are self-
employed and receive tip income, see
Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Busi-
ness (For Individuals Who Use Schedule C
or C–EZ), for more information.
All tips you receive are income and are
subject to federal income tax. You must in-
clude in gross income all tips you receive
directly from customers, tips from charge
customers that are paid to you by your em-
ployer, and your share of any tips you re-
ceive under a tip-splitting or tip-pooling ar-
rangement.
The value of noncash tips, such as tick-
ets, passes, or other items of value are also
income and subject to tax.
Reporting your tip income correctly is not
difficult. You must do three things.
1) Keep a daily tip record.
2) Report tips to your employer.
3) Report all your tips on your income tax
return.
This chapter will show you how to do these
three things, and what to do on your tax
return if you have not done the first two.
This chapter will also show you how to treat
allocated tips.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554 531Reporting Tip Income
/H185541244 Employee's Daily Record of Tips
and Report to Employer
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554 4137 Social Security and Medicare
Tax on Unreported Tip Income
/H18554 4070 Employee's Report of Tips to
Employer
Keeping a Daily Tip
Record
Why keep a daily tip record?You must
keep a daily tip record so you can:
 Report your tips accurately to your em-
ployer,
 Report your tips accurately on your tax
return, and
 Prove your tip income if your return is
ever questioned.
How to keep a daily tip record.There are
two ways to keep a daily tip record. You can
either:
1) Write information about your tips in a
tip diary, or
2) Keep copies of documents that show
your tips, such as restaurant bills and
credit card charge slips. 
You should keep your daily tip record with
your personal records. You must keep your
records for as long as they are important for
administration of the federal tax law.
If you keep a tip diary, you can use Form
4070A, Employee's Daily Record of Tips.
To get a year's supply of the form, ask the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) or your
employer for Publication 1244. Each day,
write in the information asked for on the
form.
If you do not use Form 4070A, start your
records by writing your name, your em-
ployer's name, and the name of the busi-
ness if it is different from your employer's
name. Then, each workday, write the date
and the following information.
 Cash tips you get directly from custom-
ers or from other employees.
 Tips from credit card charge customers
that your employer pays you.
 The value of any noncash tips you get,
such as tickets, passes, or other items
of value.
 The amount of tips you paid out to other
employees through tip pools or tip
splitting, or other arrangements, and the
names of the employees to whom you
paid the tips.
CAUTION
!
Do not write in your tip diary the
amount of any service charge that
your employer adds to a customer's
bill and then pays to you and treats as
wages. This is part of your wages, not a tip.
Electronic tip record.You may use an
electronic system provided by your em-
ployer to record your daily tips. You must
receive and keep a paper copy of this rec-
ord.
Reporting Tips to
Your Employer
Why report tips to your employer?You
must report tips to your employer so that:
 Your employer can withhold federal in-
come tax and social security and Medi-
care taxes, or railroad retirement tax, 
 Your employer can report the correct
amount of your earnings to the Social
Security Administration or Railroad Re-
tirement Board (which affects your
benefits when you retire or if you be-
come disabled, or your family's benefits
if you die), and
 You can avoid the penalty for not re-
porting tips to your employer (explained
later).
What tips to report.Report to your em-
ployer only cash, check, or credit card tips
you receive. If your total tips for any one
month from any one job are less than $20,
do not report them to your employer. Do not
report the value of any noncash tips, such
as tickets or passes, to your employer. You
do not pay social security and Medicare
taxes, or railroad retirement tax on these
tips.
How to report. You can use Form 4070.
To get a year's supply of the form, ask the
IRS or your employer for Publication 1244.
Fill in the information asked for on the form,
sign and date the form, and give it to your
employer.
If you do not use Form 4070, give your
employer a statement with the following in-
formation.
 Your name, address, and social secu-
rity number.
 Your employer's name, address, and
business name (if it is different from the
employer's name).
 The month (or the dates of any shorter
period) in which you received tips.
 The total tips required to be reported for
that period.
You must sign and date the statement. You
should keep a copy with your personal rec-
ords.
Your employer may require you to report
your tips more than once a month. However,
the statement cannot cover a period of more
than one calendar month.
Electronic tip statement.Your em-
ployer can have you furnish your tip state-
ments electronically.
When to report.Give your report for each
month to your employer by the 10th of the
next month. If the 10th falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, give your em-
ployer the report by the next day that is not
a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
Example 1. You must report your tips
received in June 2001 by July 10, 2001.
Example 2. You must report your tips
received in January 2001 by February 12,
2001. February 10 is on a Saturday, and the
12th is the next day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday.
Final report.If your employment ends
during the month, you can report your tips
when your employment ends.
Penalty for not reporting tips.If you do
not report tips to your employer as required,
you may be subject to a penalty equal to
50% of the social security and Medicare
taxes or railroad retirement tax you owe on
the unreported tips. (For information about
these taxes, see Reporting social security
and Medicare taxes on tips not reported to
your employer under Reporting Tips on
Your Tax Return, later.) The penalty
amount is in addition to the taxes you owe.
You can avoid this penalty if you can
show reasonable cause for not reporting the
tips to your employer. To do so, attach a
statement to your return explaining why you
did not report them.
Giving your employer money for taxes.
Your regular pay may not be enough for
your employer to withhold all the taxes you
owe on your regular pay plus your reported
tips. If this happens, you can give your em-
ployer money until the close of the calendar
year to pay the rest of the taxes.
Page 54 Chapter 7  Tip Income

If you do not give your employer enough
money, your employer will apply your regu-
lar pay and any money you give to the
taxes, in the following order:
1) All taxes on your regular pay.
2) Social security and Medicare taxes or
railroad retirement tax on your reported
tips.
3) Federal, state, and local income taxes
on your reported tips.
Any taxes that remain unpaid can be
collected by your employer from your next
paycheck. If withholding taxes remain un-
collected at the end of the year, you may
be subject to a penalty for underpayment
of estimated taxes. See Publication 505,
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax, for
more information.
CAUTION
!
You must report on your tax return
any social security and Medicare
taxes or railroad retirement tax that
remained uncollected at the end of 2000.
See Reporting uncollected social security
and Medicare taxes on tips under Reporting
Tips on Your Tax Return, later. These un-
collected taxes will be shown in box 13 of
your Form W–2 (codes A and B).
Tip Rate Determination and
Education Program
Your employer may participate in the Tip
Rate Determination and Education Pro-
gram. The program was developed to help
employees and employers understand and
meet their tip reporting responsibilities. 
There are two agreements under the
program — the Tip Rate Determination
Agreement (TRDA) and the Tip Reporting
Alternative Commitment (TRAC). Your em-
ployer can provide you with a copy of these
agreements. To find out more about this
program, contact the Tip Coordinator for
your local IRS office.
Reporting Tips on
Your Tax Return
How to report tips.Report your tips with
your wages on line 1, Form 1040EZ, or line
7, Form 1040A or Form 1040.
What tips to report.You must report all
tips you received in 2000, including both
cash tips and noncash tips, on your tax re-
turn. Any tips you reported to your employer
for 2000 are included in the wages shown
in box 1 of your Form W–2. Add to the
amount in box 1 only the tips you did not
report to your employer.
CAUTION
!
If you received $20 or more in cash
and charge tips in a month and did
not report all of those tips to your
employer, see Reporting social security and
Medicare taxes on tips not reported to your
employer, later.
CAUTION
!
If you did not keep a daily tip record
as required and an amount is shown
in box 8 of your Form W–2, see Al-
located Tips, later.
If you kept a daily tip record and reported
tips to your employer as required under the
rules explained earlier, add the following
tips to the amount in box 1 of your Form
W–2:
 Cash and charge tips you received that
totaled less than $20 for any month,
and
 The value of noncash tips, such as
tickets, passes, or other items of value.
Example. John Allen began working at
the Diamond Restaurant (his only employer
in 2000) on June 30 and received $10,000
in wages during the year. John kept a daily
tip record showing that his tips for June
were $18 and his tips for the rest of the year
totaled $7,000. He was not required to re-
port his June tips to his employer, but he
reported all of the rest of his tips to his em-
ployer as required.
John's Form W–2 from Diamond Res-
taurant shows $17,000 ($10,000 wages plus
$7,000 reported tips) in box 1. He adds the
$18 unreported tips to that amount and re-
ports $17,018 as wages on his tax return. 
Reporting social security and Medicare
taxes on tips not reported to your em-
ployer. If you received $20 or more in cash
and charge tips in a month from any one job
and did not report all of those tips to your
employer, you must report the social secu-
rity and Medicare taxes on the unreported
tips as additional tax on your return. To re-
port these taxes, you must file a return even
if you would not otherwise have to file. You
must use Form 1040. (You cannot file Form
1040EZ or Form 1040A.)
Use Form 4137 to figure these taxes.
Enter the tax on line 53, Form 1040, and
attach Form 4137 to your return.
Reporting uncollected social security
and Medicare taxes on tips. If your em-
ployer could not collect all the social security
and Medicare taxes or railroad retirement
tax you owe on tips reported for 2000, the
uncollected taxes will be shown in box 13
of your Form W–2 (codes A and B). You
must report these amounts as additional tax
on your return. You may have uncollected
taxes if your regular pay was not enough for
your employer to withhold all the taxes you
owe and you did not give your employer
enough money to pay the rest of the taxes.
To report these uncollected taxes, you
must file a return even if you would not
otherwise have to file. You must use Form
1040. (You cannot file Form 1040EZ or
Form 1040A.) Include the taxes in your total
tax amount on line 57, and write “UT” and
the total of the uncollected taxes on the
dotted line next to line 57.
Allocated Tips
If your employer allocated tips to you, they
are shown separately in box 8 of your Form
W–2. They are not included in box 1 with
your wages and reported tips. If box 8 is
blank, this discussion does not apply to you.
What are allocated tips?These are tips
that your employer assigned to you in ad-
dition to the tips you reported to your em-
ployer for the year. Your employer will have
done this only if:
 You worked in a restaurant, cocktail
lounge, or similar business that must
allocate tips to employees, and
 The tips you reported to your employer
were less than your share of 8% of food
and drink sales.
How were your allocated tips figured?
The tips allocated to you are your share of
an amount figured by subtracting the re-
ported tips of all employees from 8% (or an
approved lower rate) of food and drink sales
(other than carryout sales and sales with a
service charge of 10% or more). Your share
of that amount was figured using either a
method provided by an employer-employee
agreement or a method provided by IRS
regulations based on employees' sales or
hours worked. For information about the
exact allocation method used, ask your
employer.
Must you report your allocated tips on
your return? You must report allocated
tips on your tax return unless either of the
following exceptions applies.
1) You kept a daily tip record, or other
evidence that is as credible and as re-
liable as a daily tip record, as required
under rules explained earlier.
2) Your tip record is incomplete, but it
shows that your actual tips were more
than the tips you reported to your em-
ployer plus the allocated tips.
If either exception applies, report your ac-
tual tips on your return. Do not report the
allocated tips. See What tips to report under
Reporting Tips on Your Tax Return, earlier.
How to report allocated tips.If you must
report allocated tips on your return, add the
amount in box 8 of your Form W–2 to the
amount in box 1. Report the total as wages
on line 7 of Form 1040. (You cannot file
Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A.)
Because social security and Medicare
taxes were not withheld from the allocated
tips, you must report those taxes as addi-
tional tax on your return. Complete Form
4137,  and include the allocated tips on line
1 of the form. See Reporting social security
and Medicare taxes on tips not reported to
your employer under Reporting Tips on
Your Tax Return, earlier.
Chapter 7 Tip Income Page 55

8.
Interest Income
Important Reminder
Foreign source income.If you are a U.S.
citizen with investment income from sources
outside the United States (foreign income),
you must report that income on your tax
return unless it is exempt by U.S. law. This
is true whether you reside inside or outside
the United States and whether or not you
receive a Form 1099 from the foreign payer.
Introduction
This chapter discusses:
 Different types of interest income,
 What interest is taxable and what inter-
est is nontaxable,
 When to report interest income, and
 How to report interest income on your
tax return.
In general, any interest that you receive
or that is credited to your account and can
be withdrawn is taxable income. (It does
not have to be entered in your passbook.)
Exceptions to this rule are discussed later
in this chapter.
You may be able to deduct expenses
you have in earning this income on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040) if you itemize your de-
ductions. See chapter 30.
RECORDS
Recordkeeping. You should keep
a list showing sources and amounts
of interest received during the year.
Also, keep the forms you receive that show
your interest income (Forms 1099–INT, for
example) as an important part of your rec-
ords.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554 537 Installment Sales
/H18554550 Investment Income and Ex-
penses
/H185541212 List of Original Issue Discount
Instruments
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
/H18554Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest
and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
/H185543115 Application for Change in Ac-
counting Method
/H185548815 Exclusion of Interest From Se-
ries EE and I U.S. Savings
Bonds Issued After 1989
/H185548818 Optional Form To Record Re-
demption of Series EE and I
U.S. Savings Bonds Issued Af-
ter 1989
General Information
A few items of general interest are covered
here.
Tax on investment income of a child un-
der age 14. Part of a child's 2000 invest-
ment income may be taxed at the parent's
tax rate. This may happen if all the following
are true.
1) The child was under age 14 on Janu-
ary 1, 2001. 
2) The child had more than $1,400 of in-
vestment income (such as taxable in-
terest and dividends) and has to file a
tax return.
3) Either parent was alive at the end of
2000. 
If all these statements are true, Form 8615,
Tax for Children Under Age 14 Who Have
Investment Income of More Than $1,400,
must be completed and attached to the
child's tax return. If any of these statements
is not true, Form 8615 is not required and
the child's income is taxed at his or her own
tax rate.
However, the parent can choose to in-
clude the child's interest and dividends on
the parent's return if certain requirements
are met. Use  Form 8814, Parents' Election
To Report Child's Interest and Dividends, for
this purpose.
For more information about the tax on
investment income of children and the par-
ents' election, see chapter 32.
Beneficiary of an estate or trust.  Interest,
dividends, and other investment income you
receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust
is generally taxable income. You should re-
ceive a Schedule K–1 (Form 1041), Bene-
ficiary's Share of Income, Deductions,
Credits, etc., from the fiduciary. Your copy
of Schedule K–1 and its instructions will tell
you where to report the income on your
Form 1040.
Social security number (SSN).You must
give your name and SSN to any person re-
quired by federal tax law to make a return,
statement, or other document that relates
to you. This includes payers of interest.
SSN for joint account.If the funds in
a joint account belong to one person, list
that person's name first on the account and
give that person's SSN to the payer. (For
information on who owns the funds in a joint
account, see Joint accounts, later.) If the
joint account contains combined funds, give
the SSN of the person whose name is listed
first on the account.
These rules apply both to joint owner-
ship by a married couple and to joint own-
ership by other individuals. For example, if
you open a joint savings account with your
child using funds belonging to the child, list
the child's name first on the account and
give the child's SSN.
Custodian account for your child.If
your child is the actual owner of an account
that is recorded in your name as custodian
for the child, give the child's SSN to the
payer. For example, you must give your
child's SSN to the payer of dividends on
stock owned by your child, even though the
dividends are paid to you as custodian.
Penalty for failure to supply SSN.If
you do not give your SSN to the payer of
interest, you may have to pay a penalty.
See Failure to supply social security number
under Penalties in chapter 1. Backup with-
holding also may apply.
Backup withholding.Your investment in-
come is generally not subject to regular
withholding. However, it may be subject to
backup withholding to ensure that income
tax is collected on the income. Under
backup withholding, the payor of interest
must withhold, as income tax, 31% of the
amount you are paid.
Backup withholding may also be re-
quired if the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
has determined that you underreported your
interest or dividend income. For more infor-
mation, see Backup Withholding in chapter
5.
Reporting backup withholding. If
backup withholding is deducted from your
interest income, the payer must give you a
Form 1099–INT for the year that indicates
the amount withheld. The Form 1099–INT
will show any backup withholding as “Fed-
eral income tax withheld.”
Joint accounts.In a joint account, two or
more persons hold property as joint tenants,
tenants by the entirety, or tenants in com-
mon.  That property can include a savings
account or bond. Each person may receive
a share of any interest from the property as
determined by local law.
Income from property given to a child.
Property you give as a parent to your child
under the Model Gifts of Securities to Mi-
nors Act, the Uniform Gifts to Minors Act,
or any similar law, becomes the child's
property.
Income from the property is taxable to
the child, except that any part used to sat-
isfy a legal obligation to support the child is
taxable to the parent or legal guardian hav-
ing that legal obligation.
Savings account with parent as trus-
tee.Interest income from a savings account
opened for a child who is a minor, but
placed in the name and subject to the order
of the parents as trustees, is taxable to the
child if, under the law of the state in which
the child resides, both of the following are
true.
1) The savings account legally belongs to
the child.
2) The parents are not legally permitted
to use any of the funds to support the
child.
Form 1099–INT. Interest income is gener-
ally reported to you on Form 1099–INT, In-
terest Income, or a similar statement, by
banks, savings and loans, and other payers
of interest. This form shows you the interest
you received during the year. Keep this form
for your records. You do not have to attach
it to your tax return.
Page 56 Chapter 8  Interest Income

Report on your tax return the total
amount of interest income that you receive
for the tax year. This includes amounts re-
ported to you on Form 1099–INT and
amounts for which you did not receive a
Form 1099–INT.
Nominees. Generally, if someone re-
ceives interest as a nominee for you, that
person will give you a Form 1099–INT
showing the interest received on your be-
half.
If you receive a Form 1099–INT that in-
cludes amounts belonging to another per-
son, see the discussion on nominee distri-
butions under How To Report Interest
Income in chapter 1 of Publication 550, or
see the Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or
Schedule B (Form 1040) instructions.
Incorrect amount. If you receive a
Form 1099–INT that shows an incorrect
amount (or other incorrect information), you
should ask the issuer for a corrected form.
The new Form 1099–INT you receive will
be marked “CORRECTED.”
Form 1099–OID. Reportable interest in-
come may also be shown on Form
1099–OID, Original Issue Discount. For
more information about amounts shown on
this form, see Original Issue Discount (OID),
later in this chapter.
Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-
interest dividends you receive from a regu-
lated investment company (mutual fund) are
not included in your taxable income.
(However, see Information reporting re-
quirement, next.) You will receive a notice
from the mutual fund telling you the amount
of the exempt-interest dividends that you
received. Exempt-interest dividends are not
shown on Form 1099–DIV or Form
1099–INT.
Information reporting requirement.
Although exempt-interest dividends are not
taxable, you must show them on your tax
return if you have to file. This is an infor-
mation reporting requirement and does not
change the exempt-interest dividends to
taxable income.
Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid
from specified private activity bonds may
be subject to the alternative minimum tax.
See Alternative Minimum Tax in chapter 31
for more information. Chapter 1 of Publica-
tion 550 contains a discussion on private
activity bonds, under State or Local Gov-
ernment Obligations.
Interest on VA dividends.Interest on in-
surance dividends that you leave on deposit
with the Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA) is not taxable. This includes interest
paid on dividends on converted United
States Government Life Insurance and on
National Service Life Insurance policies.
Taxable Interest
Taxable interest includes interest you re-
ceive from bank accounts, loans you make
to others, and other sources. The following
are some other sources of taxable interest.
Dividends that are actually interest.
Certain distributions commonly called divi-
dends are actually interest. You must report
as interest so-called “dividends” on deposits
or on share accounts in:
 Cooperative banks,
 Credit unions,
 Domestic building and loan associ-
ations,
 Domestic savings and loan associ-
ations,
 Federal savings and loan associations,
and
 Mutual savings banks.
Money market funds. Generally, amounts
you receive from money market funds
should be reported as dividends, not as in-
terest.
Money market certificates, savings cer-
tificates, and other deferred interest ac-
counts.  If you open any of these accounts,
interest may be paid at fixed intervals of 1
year or less during the term of the account.
You generally must include this interest in
your income when you actually receive it
or are entitled to receive it without paying a
substantial penalty. The same is true for
accounts that mature in 1 year or less and
pay interest in a single payment at maturity.
If interest is deferred for more than 1 year,
see Original Issue Discount (OID), later.
Interest subject to penalty for early
withdrawal. If you withdraw funds from a
deferred interest account before maturity,
you may have to pay a penalty. You must
report the total amount of interest paid or
credited to your account during the year,
without subtracting the penalty. See Penalty
on early withdrawal of savings in chapter 1
of Publication 550, for more information on
how to report the interest and deduct the
penalty.
Money borrowed to invest in money
market certificate.The interest you pay
on money borrowed from a bank or savings
institution to meet the minimum deposit re-
quired for a money market certificate from
the institution and the interest you earn on
the certificate are two separate items. You
must report the total interest you earn on the
certificate in your income. If you itemize
deductions, you can deduct the interest you
pay as investment interest, up to the amount
of your net investment income. See Interest
Expenses in chapter 3 of Publication 550.
Example. You deposited $5,000 with a
bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank
to make up the $10,000 minimum deposit
required to buy a 6–month money market
certificate. The certificate earned $575 at
maturity in 2000, but you received only
$265, which represented the $575 you
earned minus $310 interest charged on your
$5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form
1099–INT for 2000 showing the $575 inter-
est you earned. The bank also gives you a
statement showing that you paid $310 in-
terest for 2000. You must include the $575
in your income. If you itemize your de-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you
can deduct $310, subject to the net invest-
ment income limit.
Gift for opening account.If you receive
noncash gifts or services for making de-
posits or for opening an account in a
savings institution, you may have to report
the value as interest.
For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts
or services valued at more than $10 must
be reported as interest. For deposits of
$5,000 or more, gifts or services valued at
more than $20 must be reported as interest.
The value is determined by the cost to the
financial institution.
Example. You open a savings account
at your local bank and deposit $800. The
account earns $20 interest. You also re-
ceive a $15 calculator. If no other interest
is credited to your account during the year,
the Form 1099–INT you receive will show
$35 interest for the year. You must report
$35 interest income on your tax return.
Interest on insurance dividends.Interest
on insurance dividends left on deposit with
an insurance company that can be with-
drawn annually is taxable to you in the year
it is credited to your account. However, if
you can withdraw it only on the anniversary
date of the policy (or other specified date),
the interest is taxable in the year that date
occurs.
Prepaid insurance premiums.  Any in-
crease in the value of prepaid insurance
premiums, advance premiums, or premium
deposit funds is interest if it is applied to the
payment of premiums due on insurance
policies or made available for you to with-
draw.
U.S. obligations.Interest on U.S. obli-
gations, such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes,
and bonds, issued by any agency or instru-
mentality of the United States is taxable for
federal income tax purposes.
Treasury bills generally have a
13-week, 26-week, or 52-week maturity pe-
riod. They are issued at a discount in the
amount of $1,000 and multiples of $1,000.
The difference between the discounted
price you pay for the bills and the face value
you receive at maturity is interest income.
Generally, you report this interest income
when the bill is paid at maturity.
Treasury notes have maturity periods
of more than 1 year, ranging up to 10 years.
Maturity periods for Treasury bonds are
longer than 10 years. Both notes and bonds
generally pay interest every 6 months.
Generally, you report this interest for the
year paid. For more information, see U.S.
Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds in chapter
1 of Publication 550.
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 57

For other information on Treasury
notes or bonds, write to:
Bureau of the Public Debt
Attn: Customer Service and
Current Income Branch
Parkersburg, WV 26106–2186
Or, on the Internet, visit:
 www. publicdebt.treas.gov
For information on series EE, series I,
and series HH savings bonds, see U.S.
Savings Bonds, later.
Interest on tax refunds.Interest you re-
ceive on tax refunds is taxable income.
Interest on condemnation award.If the
condemning authority pays you interest to
compensate you for a delay in paying an
award, the interest is taxable.
Installment sale payments.If a contract
for the sale or exchange of property pro-
vides for deferred payments, it also usually
provides for interest payable with the de-
ferred payments. That interest is taxable
when you receive it. If little or no interest is
provided for in a deferred contract, part of
each payment may be treated as interest.
See Unstated Interest and Original Issue
Discount in Publication 537, Installment
Sales.
Interest on annuity contract.Accumu-
lated interest on an annuity contract you sell
before its maturity date is taxable.
Usurious interest.Usurious interest is in-
terest charged at an illegal rate. This inter-
est is taxable unless state law automatically
changes it to a payment on the principal.
Individual retirement arrangements
(IRAs).Interest on a Roth IRA or education
IRA generally is not taxable. Interest on a
traditional IRA is tax deferred. You gener-
ally do not include it in your income until you
make withdrawals from the IRA. See chap-
ter 18.
Interest income on frozen deposits.Ex-
clude from your gross income interest on
frozen deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the
end of the year, you cannot withdraw any
part of the deposit because:
1) The financial institution is bankrupt or
insolvent, or
2) The state where the institution is lo-
cated has placed limits on withdrawals
because other financial institutions in
the state are bankrupt or insolvent.
The amount of interest you must exclude
is the interest that was credited on the fro-
zen deposits minus the sum of:
1) The net amount you withdrew from
these deposits during the year, and
2) The amount you could have withdrawn
as of the end of the year (not reduced
by any penalty for premature with-
drawals of a time deposit).
If you receive a Form 1099–INT for interest
income on deposits that were frozen at the
end of 2000, see Frozen deposits under
How To Report Interest Income in chapter
1 of Publication 550, for information about
reporting this interest income exclusion on
your 2000 tax return.
The interest you exclude must be re-
ported in the later tax year when you can
withdraw it from your account.
Example. $100 of interest was credited
on your frozen deposit during the year. You
withdrew $80 but could not withdraw any
more as of the end of the year. You must
include $80 in your income for the year. You
must exclude $20.
Bonds traded flat.If you buy a bond when
interest has been defaulted or when the in-
terest has accrued but has not been paid,
that interest is not income and is not taxable
as interest if paid later. When you receive
a payment of that interest, it is a return of
capital that reduces the remaining cost ba-
sis. Interest that accrues after the date of
purchase, however, is taxable interest in-
come for the year it is received or accrued.
See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates,
later, for more information.
Below-market loans.A below-market loan
is a loan on which no interest is charged or
on which interest is charged at a rate below
the applicable federal rate. See Below-
Market Loans in chapter 1 of Publication
550 for more information.
U.S. Savings Bonds
This section provides tax information on
U.S. savings bonds. It explains how to re-
port the interest income on these bonds and
how to treat transfers of these bonds.
For other information on U.S.
savings bonds, write to:
Bureau of the Public Debt
Attn: Savings Bond Operations Office
P.O. Box 1328
Parkersburg, WV 26106–1328
Or, on the Internet, visit:
www.publicdebt.treas.gov
Cash method taxpayers. If you use the
cash method of accounting, as most indi-
vidual taxpayers do, you generally report
the interest on U.S. savings bonds when
you receive it. The cash method of ac-
counting is explained in chapter 1 under
Accounting Methods.
Accrual method taxpayers.If you use an
accrual method of accounting, you must
report interest on U.S. savings bonds each
year as it accrues. You cannot postpone
reporting interest until you receive it or the
bonds mature. Accrual methods of ac-
counting are explained in chapter 1 under
Accounting Methods.
Series HH Bonds.These bonds are issued
at face value. Interest is paid twice a year
by direct deposit to your bank account. If
you are a cash method taxpayer, you must
report interest on these bonds as income in
the year you receive it.
Series HH Bonds were first offered in
1980. Before 1980, series H bonds were
issued. Series H bonds are treated the
same as series HH bonds. If you are a cash
method taxpayer, you must report the in-
terest when you receive it.
Series H bonds have a maturity period
of 30 years. Series HH bonds mature in 20
years.
Series EE and series I bonds.Interest on
these bonds is payable when you redeem
the bonds. The difference between the
purchase price and the redemption value is
taxable interest.
Series EE bonds were first offered in
July 1980. They have a maturity period of
30 years. Before July 1980, series E bonds
were issued. The original 10-year maturity
period of series E bonds has been extended
to 40 years for bonds issued before De-
cember 1965 and 30 years for bonds issued
after November 1965. Series EE and series
E bonds are issued at a discount. The face
value is payable to you at maturity.
Series I bonds were first offered in 1998.
These are inflation-indexed bonds issued
at their face amount with a maturity period
of 30 years. The face value plus accrued
interest is payable to you at maturity.
If you use the cash method of reporting
income, you can report the interest on se-
ries EE, series E, and series I bonds in ei-
ther of the following ways.
1) Method 1. Postpone reporting the in-
terest until the earlier of the year you
cash or dispose of the bonds or the
year they mature. (However, see
Savings bonds traded, later.) Note.
Series E bonds issued in 1960 and
1970 matured in 2000. If you have
used method 1, you generally must
report the interest on these bonds on
your 2000 return.
2) Method 2. Choose to report the in-
crease in redemption value as interest
each year.
You must use the same method for all se-
ries EE, series E, and series I bonds you
own. If you do not choose method 2 by re-
porting the increase in redemption value as
interest each year, you must use method
1.
TIP
If you plan to cash your bonds in the
same year that you will pay for
higher education expenses, you
may want to use method 1 because you
may be able to exclude the interest from
your income. To learn how, see Education
Savings Bond Program, later.
Change from method 1. If you want to
change your method of reporting the inter-
est from method 1 to method 2, you can do
so without permission from the IRS. In the
year of change you must report all interest
accrued to date and not previously reported
for all your bonds.
Once you choose to report the interest
each year, you must continue to do so for
all series EE, series E, and series I bonds
you own and for any you get later, unless
you request permission to change, as ex-
plained next.
Change from method 2. To change
from method 2 to method 1, you must re-
quest permission from the IRS. Permission
for the change is automatically granted if
you send the IRS a statement that meets
all the following requirements.
Page 58 Chapter 8  Interest Income

1) You have typed or printed at the top,
“Change in Method of Accounting Un-
der Section 6.01 of the Appendix of
Rev. Proc. 99–49 (or later update).”
2) It includes your name and social se-
curity number under the label in (1).
3) It identifies the savings bonds for which
you are requesting this change.
4) It includes your agreement to:
a) Report all interest on any bonds
acquired during or after the year
of change when the interest is re-
alized upon disposition, redemp-
tion, or final maturity, whichever
is earliest, and 
b) Report all interest on the bonds
acquired before the year of
change when the interest is real-
ized upon disposition, redemption,
or final maturity, whichever is
earliest, with the exception of the
interest reported in prior tax years.
5) It includes your signature.
You must attach this statement to your tax
return for the year of change, which you
must file by the due date (including exten-
sions).
You can have an automatic extension
of 6 months from the due date of your return
(including extensions) to file the statement
with an amended return. To get this exten-
sion, you must have filed your original return
by the due date (including extensions). At
the top of the statement, write “Filed Pur-
suant To Reg. 301.9100–2.”
By the date you file the original
statement, you must also send a
copy to the address below.
Commissioner of Internal Revenue
Attention: CC:DOM:IT&A (Automatic
Rulings Branch)
P.O. Box 7604
Benjamin Franklin Station
Washington, DC 20044
(If you use a private delivery service,
send the copy to the Commissioner of
Internal Revenue, Attention: CC:DOM:IT&A
(Automatic Rulings Branch), 1111 Constitu-
tion Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20224.)
Instead of filing this statement, you can
request permission to change from method
2 to method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that
case, follow the form instructions for an au-
tomatic change. No user fee is required.
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is is-
sued in the names of co-owners, such as
you and your child or you and your spouse,
interest on the bond is generally taxable to
the co-owner who bought the bond.
One co-owner's funds used. If you
used your funds to buy the bond, you must
pay the tax on the interest. This is true even
if you let the other co-owner redeem the
bond and keep all the proceeds. Under
these circumstances, since the other co-
owner will receive a Form 1099–INT at the
time of redemption, the other co-owner must
provide you with another Form 1099–INT
showing the amount of interest from the
bond that is taxable to you. The co-owner
who redeemed the bond is a “nominee.”
See Nominee distributions, under How To
Table 8–1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
IF ...
You buy a bond in your name and the name of
another person as co-owners, using only your
own funds
You.
THEN the tax on the bond interest
must be paid by ...
You buy a bond in the name of another person,
who is the sole owner of the bond
You and another person buy a bond as
co-owners, each contributing part of the
purchase price
The person for whom you bought the
bond.
Both you and the other co-owner,
in proportion to the amount each
paid for the bond.
You and your spouse, who live in a community
property state, buy a bond that is community
property
You and your spouse. If you file
separate returns, both you and your
spouse generally pay tax on one-half
of the interest.
Report Interest Income in chapter 1 of
Publication 550, for more information about
how a person who is a nominee reports in-
terest income belonging to another person.
Both co-owners' funds used. If you
and the other co-owner each contribute part
of the bond's purchase price, the interest is
generally taxable to each of you, in propor-
tion to the amount each of you paid.
Community property. If you and your
spouse live in a community property state
and hold bonds as community property,
one-half of the interest is considered re-
ceived by each of you. If you file separate
returns, each of you generally must report
one-half of the bond interest. For more in-
formation about community property, see
Publication 555, Community Property.
Table 8–1.These rules are also shown
in Table 8–1.
Ownership transferred.If you bought se-
ries E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely
with your own funds and had them reis-
sued in your co-owner's name or beneficia-
ry's name alone, you must include in your
gross income for the year of reissue all in-
terest that you earned on these bonds and
have not previously reported. But, if the
bonds were reissued in your name alone,
you do not have to report the interest ac-
crued at that time.
This same rule applies when bonds
(other than bonds held as community prop-
erty) are transferred between spouses inci-
dent to divorce.
Purchased jointly.If you and a co-
owner each contributed funds to buy series
E, series EE, or series I bonds jointly and
later have the bonds reissued in the co-
owner's name alone, you must include in
your gross income for the year of reissue
your share of all the interest earned on the
bonds that you have not previously re-
ported. At the time of reissue, the former
co-owner does not have to include in gross
income his or her share of the interest
earned that was not reported before the
transfer. This interest, however, as well as
all interest earned after the reissue, is in-
come to the former co-owner.
This income-reporting rule also applies
when the bonds are reissued in the name
of your former co-owner and a new co-
owner. But the new co-owner will report
only his or her share of the interest earned
after the transfer.
If bonds that you and a co-owner bought
jointly are reissued to each of you sepa-
rately in the same proportion as your con-
tribution to the purchase price, neither you
nor your co-owner has to report at that time
the interest earned before the bonds were
reissued.
Example 1. You and your spouse each
spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 se-
ries EE savings bond. The bond was issued
to you and your spouse as co-owners. You
both postpone reporting interest on the
bond. You later have the bond reissued as
two $500 bonds, one in your name and one
in your spouse's name. At that time neither
you nor your spouse has to report the in-
terest earned to the date of reissue.
Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series
EE savings bond entirely with your own
funds. The bond was issued to you and your
spouse as co-owners. You both postpone
reporting interest on the bond. You later
have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds,
one in your name and one in your spouse's
name. You must report half the interest
earned to the date of reissue.
Transfer to a trust.If you own series E,
series EE, or series I bonds and transfer
them to a trust, giving up all rights of own-
ership, you must include in your income for
that year the interest earned to the date of
transfer if you have not already reported it.
However, if you are considered the owner
of the trust and if the increase in value both
before and after the transfer continues to
be taxable to you, you can continue to defer
reporting the interest earned each year. You
must include the total interest in your in-
come in the year you cash or dispose of the
bonds or the year the bonds finally mature,
whichever is earlier.
The same rules apply to previously
unreported interest on series EE or series
E bonds if the transfer to a trust consisted
of series HH or series H bonds you acquired
in a trade for the series EE or series E
bonds. See Savings bonds traded, later.
Decedents. The manner of reporting inter-
est income on series E, series EE, or series
I bonds, after the death of the owner, de-
pends on the accounting and income-
reporting method previously used by the
decedent. This is explained in chapter 1 of
Publication 550.
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 59

Savings bonds traded. If you postponed
reporting the interest on your series EE or
series E bonds, you did not recognize tax-
able income when you traded the bonds for
series HH or series H bonds, unless you
received cash in the trade. (You cannot
trade series I bonds for series HH bonds.)
Any cash you received is income up to the
amount of the interest earned on the bonds
traded. When your series HH or series H
bonds mature, or if you dispose of them
before maturity, you report as interest the
difference between their redemption value
and your cost. Your cost is the sum of the
amount you paid for the traded series EE
or series E bonds plus any amount you had
to pay at the time of the trade.
Example. You own series E bonds with
accrued interest of $523 and a redemption
value of $2,723 and have postponed re-
porting the interest. You trade the bonds for
$2,500 in series HH bonds and $223 in
cash. You must report the $223 as taxable
income in the year of the trade.
Choice to report interest in year of
trade. You can choose to treat all of the
previously unreported accrued interest on
the series EE or series E bonds traded for
series HH bonds as income in the year of
the trade. If you make this choice, it is
treated as a change from method 1. See
Change from method 1 under Series EE
and series I bonds, earlier.
Form 1099–INT for U.S. savings bonds
interest.When you cash a bond, the bank
or other payer that redeems it must give you
a Form 1099–INT if the interest part of the
payment you receive is $10 or more. Box 3
of your Form 1099–INT should show the
interest as the difference between the
amount you received and the amount paid
for the bond. However, your Form 1099–INT
may show more interest than you have to
include on your income tax return. For ex-
ample, this may happen if any of the fol-
lowing are true.
1) You chose to report the increase in the
redemption value of the bond each
year. The interest shown on your Form
1099–INT will not be reduced by
amounts previously included in in-
come.
2) You received the bond from a dece-
dent. The interest shown on your Form
1099–INT will not be reduced by any
interest reported by the decedent be-
fore death, or on the decedent's final
return, or by the estate on the estate's
income tax return.
3) Ownership of the bond was trans-
ferred. The interest shown on your
Form 1099–INT will not be reduced by
interest that accrued before the trans-
fer.
4) You were named as a co-owner and
the other co-owner contributed funds
to buy the bond. The interest shown
on your Form 1099–INT will not be re-
duced by the amount you received as
nominee for the other co-owner. (See
Co-owners, earlier in this chapter, for
more information about the reporting
requirements.)
5) You received the bond in a taxable
distribution from a retirement or profit-
sharing plan. The interest shown on
your Form 1099–INT will not be re-
duced by the interest portion of the
amount taxable as a distribution from
the plan and not taxable as interest.
(This amount is generally shown on
Form 1099–R, Distributions From
Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance
Contracts, etc., for the year of distri-
bution.)
For more information on including the
correct amount of interest on your return for
(1), (2), (3), and (4) above, see How To
Report Interest Income, later. Publication
550 includes examples showing how to re-
port these amounts.
If you received a taxable distribution of
bonds from a retirement or profit-sharing
plan ((5) above), see How To Report Inter-
est Income in Publication 550 for informa-
tion on how to report the interest.
TIP
Interest on U.S. savings bonds is
exempt from state and local taxes.
The Form 1099–INT you receive will
indicate the amount that is for U.S. savings
bond interest in box 3. Do not include this
amount on your state or local income tax
return.
Education Savings Bond
Program
You may be able to exclude from income
all or part of the interest you receive on the
redemption of qualified U.S. savings bonds
during the year if you pay qualified higher
educational expenses during the same year.
This exclusion is known as the Education
Savings Bond Program.
If you are married, you can qualify for
this exclusion only if you file a joint return
with your spouse.
Form 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure
your exclusion. Attach the form to your Form
1040 or Form 1040A.
Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A
qualified U.S. savings bond is a series EE
bond issued after 1989 or a series I bond.
The bond must be issued either in your
name (sole owner) or in your and your
spouse's names (co-owners). You must be
at least 24 years old before the bond's issue
date.
CAUTION
!
The date a bond is issued may be
earlier than the date the bond is
purchased because bonds are is-
sued as of the first day of the month in
which they are purchased. 
Beneficiary.You can designate any indi-
vidual (including a child) as a beneficiary of
the bond.
Verification by IRS.If you claim the
exclusion, the IRS will check it by using
bond redemption information from the De-
partment of the Treasury.
Qualified expenses. Qualified higher
educational expenses are tuition and fees
required for you, your spouse, or your de-
pendent (for whom you can claim an ex-
emption) to attend an eligible educational
institution.
Qualified expenses include any contri-
bution you make to a qualified state tuition
program or to an education IRA.
Qualified expenses do not include ex-
penses for room and board or for courses
involving sports, games, or hobbies that are
not part of a degree program.
Eligible educational institutions.
These institutions include most public, pri-
vate, and nonprofit universities, colleges
and vocational schools that are accredited
and are eligible to participate in student aid
programs run by the Department of Educa-
tion.
Reduction for certain benefits.You
must reduce your qualified higher educa-
tional expenses by certain benefits the stu-
dent may have received. These benefits in-
clude:
1) Qualified scholarships that are exempt
from tax (see chapter 13 for informa-
tion on qualified scholarships), and
2) Any other nontaxable payments (other
than gifts, bequests, or inheritances)
received for educational expenses,
such as:
a) Veterans' educational assistance
benefits,
b) Benefits under a qualified state
tuition program, or
c) Certain employer-provided edu-
cational assistance benefits.
Effect of other tax benefits. Do not in-
clude in your qualified expenses any ex-
penses used to:
1) Figure an education credit on Form
8863, or 
2) Figure how much of a distribution from
an education IRA you can exclude from
your income.
Amount excludable. If the total pro-
ceeds (interest and principal) from the
qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem
during the year are not more than your
qualified higher educational expenses for
the year, you can exclude all of the interest.
If the proceeds are more than the expenses,
you can exclude only part of the interest.
To determine the excludable amount,
multiply the interest part of the proceeds by
a fraction. The numerator (top part) of the
fraction is the qualified higher educational
expenses you paid during the year. The
denominator (bottom part) of the fraction is
the total proceeds you received during the
year.
Example. In February 2000, Mark and
Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified
series EE U.S. savings bond they bought in
November 1992. They received proceeds
of $7,564, representing principal of $5,000
and interest of $2,564. In 2000, they paid
$4,000 of their daughter's college tuition.
They are not claiming an education credit
for that amount, and they do not have an
education IRA. They can exclude $1,356
($2,564 × ($4,000 ÷ $7,564)) of interest in
2000. They must pay tax on the remaining
$1,208 ($2,564 − $1,356) interest.
Modified adjusted gross income limit.
The interest exclusion is limited if your
modified adjusted gross income (modified
AGI) is:
 $54,100 to $69,100 for taxpayers filing
single or head of household, and
 $81,100 to $111,100 for married tax-
payers filing jointly or for a qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child.
Page 60 Chapter 8  Interest Income

You do not qualify for the interest exclusion
if your modified AGI is equal to or more than
the upper limit for your filing status.
Modified AGI, for purposes of this ex-
clusion, is adjusted gross income (line 19
of Form 1040A or line 34 of Form 1040)
figured before the interest exclusion, and
modified by adding back any:
1) Foreign earned income exclusion,
2) Foreign housing exclusion or de-
duction,
3) Exclusion of income for bona fide resi-
dents of American Samoa,
4) Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,
5) Exclusion for adoption benefits re-
ceived under an employer's adoption
assistance program, and
6) Deduction for student loan interest.
Use the worksheet in the instructions for
line 9, Form 8815, to figure your modified
AGI. If you claim any of the exclusion or
deduction items listed above, add the
amount of the exclusion or deduction to the
amount on line 5 of the worksheet, and en-
ter the total on Form 8815, line 9, as your
modified AGI.
If you have investment interest expense
incurred to earn royalty income, see Edu-
cation Savings Bond Program in chapter 1
of Publication 550.
RECORDS
Recordkeeping. If you claim the
interest exclusion, you must keep a
written record of the qualified U.S.
savings bonds you redeem. Your record
must include the serial number, issue date,
face value, and total redemption proceeds
(principal and interest) of each bond. You
can use  Form 8818, Optional Form To
Record Redemption of Series EE and I U.S.
Savings Bonds Issued After 1989, to record
this information. You should also keep bills,
receipts, canceled checks, or other doc-
umentation that shows you paid qualified
higher educational expenses during the
year.
Bonds Sold Between
Interest Dates
If you sell a bond between interest payment
dates, part of the sales price represents in-
terest accrued to the date of sale. You must
report that part of the sales price as interest
income for the year of sale.
If you buy a bond between interest pay-
ment dates, part of the purchase price rep-
resents interest accrued before the date of
purchase. When that interest is paid to you,
treat it as a return of your capital invest-
ment, rather than interest income, by re-
ducing your basis in the bond. See Accrued
interest on bonds under How To Report In-
terest Income in chapter 1 of Publication
550 for information on reporting the pay-
ment.
Insurance 
Life insurance proceeds paid to you as
beneficiary of the insured person are usually
not taxable. But if you receive the proceeds
in installments, you must usually report a
part of each installment payment as interest
income.
For more information about insurance
proceeds received in installments, see
Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable
Income.
Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life in-
surance proceeds, the annuity payments
you receive are taxed as pension and an-
nuity income, not as interest income. See
chapter 11 for information on pension and
annuity income.
Original Issue
Discount (OID)
Original issue discount (OID) is a form of
interest. You generally include OID in your
income as it accrues over the term of the
debt instrument, whether or not you receive
any payments from the issuer.
A debt instrument generally has OID
when the instrument is issued for a price
that is less than its stated redemption price
at maturity. OID is the difference between
the stated redemption price at maturity and
the issue price.
All instruments that pay no interest be-
fore maturity are presumed to be issued at
a discount. Zero coupon bonds are one ex-
ample of these instruments.
The OID accrual rules generally do not
apply to short-term obligations (those with
a fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from
date of issue). See Discount on Short-Term
Obligations in chapter 1 of Publication 550.
De minimis OID. You can treat the dis-
count as zero if it is less than one-fourth of
1% (.0025) of the stated redemption price
at maturity multiplied by the number of full
years from the date of original issue to ma-
turity. This small discount is known as “de
minimis” OID.
Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond,
with a stated redemption price at maturity
of $1,000, issued at $980 with OID of $20.
One-fourth of 1% of $1,000 (stated re-
demption price) times 10 (the number of full
years from the date of original issue to ma-
turity) equals $25. Because the $20 dis-
count is less than $25, the OID is treated
as zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity,
you will recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of
capital gain.)
Example 2. The facts are the same as
in Example 1, except that the bond was is-
sued at $950. The OID is $50. Because the
$50 discount is more than the $25 figured
in Example 1, you must include the OID in
income as it accrues over the term of the
bond.
Debt instrument bought after original
issue.If you buy a debt instrument with de
minimis OID at a premium, the discount is
not includible in income. If you buy a debt
instrument with de minimis OID at a dis-
count, the discount is reported under the
market discount rules. See Market Discount
Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Exceptions to reporting OID.The OID
rules discussed in this chapter do not apply
to the following debt instruments.
1) Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see
Stripped tax-exempt obligations under
Stripped Bonds and Coupons in chap-
ter 1 of Publication 550).
2) U.S. savings bonds.
3) Short-term debt instruments (those
with a fixed maturity date of not more
than 1 year from the date of issue).
4) Obligations issued by an individual
before March 2, 1984.
5) Loans between individuals, if all the
following are true.
a) The lender is not in the business
of lending money.
b) The amount of the loan, plus the
amount of any outstanding prior
loans between the same individ-
uals, is $10,000 or less.
c) Avoiding any federal tax is not one
of the principal purposes of the
loan.
Form 1099–OID. The issuer of the debt in-
strument (or your broker, if you held the in-
strument through a broker) should give you
Form 1099–OID, Original Issue Discount,
or a similar statement, if the total OID for the
calendar year is $10 or more. Form
1099–OID will show, in box 1, the amount
of OID for the part of the year that you held
the bond. It also will show, in box 2, other
interest that you must include in your in-
come. A copy of Form 1099–OID will be
sent to the IRS. Do not file your copy with
your return. Keep it for your records.
In most cases, you must report the entire
amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099–OID
as interest income. But see Refiguring OID
shown on Form 1099–OID, later in this dis-
cussion, for more information.
Nominee. If someone else is the holder
of record (the registered owner) of an OID
instrument that belongs to you and receives
a Form 1099–OID on your behalf, that per-
son must give you a Form 1099–OID.
Refiguring OID shown on Form
1099–OID. You must refigure the OID
shown in box 1 of Form 1099–OID if either
of the following apply.
1) You bought the debt instrument after
its original issue and paid a premium
or an acquisition premium.
2) The debt instrument is a stripped bond
or a stripped coupon (including certain
zero coupon instruments).
For information about figuring the correct
amount of OID to include in your income,
see Figuring OID on Long-Term Debt In-
struments in Publication 1212.
Form 1099–OID not received.If you had
OID for the year but did not receive a Form
1099–OID, see Publication 1212, which lists
total OID on certain debt instruments and
has information that will help you figure OID.
If your debt instrument is not listed in Pub-
lication 1212, consult the issuer for infor-
mation about the accrued OID for the year.
Refiguring periodic interest shown on
Form 1099–OID. If you disposed of a debt
instrument or acquired it from another
holder during the year, see Bonds Sold
Between Interest Dates, earlier, for infor-
mation about the treatment of periodic in-
terest that may be shown in box 2 of Form
1099–OID for that instrument. 
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 61

Certificates of deposit (CDs).If you buy
a CD with a maturity of more than 1 year,
you must include in income each year a part
of the total interest due and report it in the
same manner as other OID.
This also applies to similar deposit ar-
rangements with banks, building and loan
associations, etc., including:
 Time deposits,
 Bonus plans,
 Savings certificates,
 Deferred income certificates,
 Bonus savings certificates, and
 Growth savings certificates.
Bearer CDs. These are not issued in
the depositor's name and are transferable
from one individual to another.
Banks must provide the IRS and the
person redeeming the bearer certificate with
a Form 1099–INT.
CDs issued after 1982 generally must
be in registered form. For more information
about this requirement, see Bearer Obli-
gations under Capital Gains and Losses in
chapter 4 of Publication 550.
More information.See chapter 1 of Pub-
lication 550 for more information about OID
and related topics, such as market discount
bonds.
State or Local
Government Obligations
Generally, interest on obligations used to
finance government operations is not taxa-
ble if the obligations are issued by a state, 
the District of Columbia, a possession of the
United States, or any of their political sub-
divisions. This includes interest on certain
obligations issued after 1982 by an Indian
tribal government treated as a state.
Interest on arbitrage bonds issued by
state or local governments after October 9,
1969, and interest on private activity bonds
generally is taxable.
For more information on whether such
interest is taxable or tax exempt, see State
or Local Government Obligations in chapter
1 of Publication 550.
Information reporting requirement.If you
must file a tax return, you are required to
show any tax-exempt interest you received
on your return. This is an information-
reporting requirement only. It does not
change tax-exempt interest to taxable in-
terest.
When To Report
Interest Income
When you report your interest income de-
pends on whether you use the cash method
or an accrual method to report income.
Cash method. Most individual taxpayers
use the cash method. If you use this
method, you generally report your interest
income in the year in which you actually or
constructively receive it. However, there are
special rules for reporting the discount on
certain debt instruments. See U.S. Savings
Bonds, and Original Issue Discount, earlier.
Example. On September 1, 1998, you
loaned another individual $2,000 at 12%,
compounded annually. You are not in the
business of lending money. The note stated
that principal and interest would be due on
August 31, 2000. In 2000, you received
$2,508.80 ($2,000 principal and $508.80
interest). If you use the cash method, you
must include in income on your 1999 return
the $508.80 interest you received in that
year.
Constructive receipt.You construc-
tively receive income when it is credited to
your account or made available to you. You
do not need to have physical possession
of it. For example, you are considered to
receive interest, dividends, or other
earnings on any deposit or account in a
bank, savings and loan, or similar financial
institution, or interest on life insurance policy
dividends left to accumulate, when they are
credited to your account and subject to your
withdrawal. This is true even if they are not
yet entered in your passbook.
You constructively receive income on
the deposit or account even if you must:
1) Make withdrawals in multiples of even
amounts,
2) Give a notice to withdraw before mak-
ing the withdrawal,
3) Withdraw all or part of the account to
withdraw the earnings, or
4) Pay a penalty on early withdrawals,
unless the interest you are to receive
on an early withdrawal or redemption
is substantially less than the interest
payable at maturity.
Accrual method. If you use an accrual
method, you report your interest income
when you earn it, whether or not you have
received it. Interest is earned over the term
of the debt instrument.
Example. If, in the previous example,
you use an accrual method, you must in-
clude the interest in your income as you
earn it. You would report the interest as
follows: 1998, $80; 1999, $249.60; and
2000, $179.20.
Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds
is taxable in the year the coupon becomes
due and payable. It does not matter when
you mail the coupon for payment.
How To Report
Interest Income
Generally, you report all of your taxable in-
terest income on line 8a, Form 1040; line
8a, Form 1040A; or line 2, Form 1040EZ.
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your
interest income is more than $400. Instead,
you must use Form 1040A or Form 1040.
Form 1040A. You must complete Part I of
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) if you file Form
1040A and any of the following are true.
1) Your taxable interest income is more
than $400.
2) You are claiming the interest exclusion
under the Education Savings Bond
Program (discussed earlier).
3) You received interest from a seller-
financed mortgage, and the buyer used
the property as a home.
4) You received a Form 1099–INT for
tax-exempt interest.
5) You received a Form 1099–INT for
U.S. savings bond interest that in-
cludes amounts you reported before
2000.
6) You received, as a nominee, interest
that actually belongs to someone else.
7) You received a Form 1099–INT for in-
terest or frozen deposits.
List each payer's name and the amount of
interest income received from each payer
on line 1. If you received a Form 1099–INT
or Form 1099–OID from a brokerage firm,
list the brokerage firm as the payer.
You cannot use Form 1040A if you must
use Form 1040, as described next.
Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 in-
stead of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:
1) You forfeited interest income because
of the early withdrawal of a time de-
posit,
2) You received or paid accrued interest
on securities transferred between in-
terest payment dates,
3) You had a financial account in a for-
eign country, unless the combined
value of all foreign accounts was
$10,000 or less during all of 2000or the
accounts were with certain U.S. military
banking facilities,
4) You acquired taxable bonds after 1987
and choose to reduce interest income
from the bonds by any amortizable
bond premium (see Bond Premium
Amortization in chapter 3 of Publication
550), or
5) You are reporting OID in an amount
more or less than the amount shown
on Form 1099–OID.
Schedule B. You must complete Part I
of Schedule B (Form 1040) if you file Form
1040 and any of the following apply.
1) Your taxable interest income is more
than $400.
2) You are claiming the interest exclusion
under the Education Savings Bond
Program (discussed earlier).
3) You had a foreign account. 
4) You received interest from a seller-
financed mortgage and the buyer used
the property as a home.
5) You received a Form 1099–INT for
tax-exempt interest.
6) You received a Form 1099–INT for
U.S. savings bond interest that in-
cludes amounts you reported before
2000.
7) You received, as a nominee, interest
that actually belongs to someone else.
8) You received a Form 1099–INT for in-
terest on a bond that you bought be-
tween interest payment dates.
9) Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding
list is true.
Page 62 Chapter 8  Interest Income

On line 1, Part I, list each payer's name and
the amount received from each. If you re-
ceived a Form 1099–INT or Form 1099–OID
from a brokerage firm, list the brokerage
firm as the payer.
Form 1099–INT. Your taxable interest in-
come, except for interest from U.S. savings
bonds and Treasury obligations, is shown
in box 1 of Form 1099–INT. Add this amount
to any other taxable interest income you
received. You must report all of your taxable
interest income even if you do not receive
a Form 1099–INT.
If you forfeited interest income because
of the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the
deductible amount will be shown on Form
1099–INT in box 2. See Penalty on early
withdrawal of savings in chapter 1 of Publi-
cation 550.
Box 3 of Form 1099–INT shows the
amount of interest income you received
from U.S. savings bonds, Treasury bills,
Treasury notes, and Treasury bonds. Add
the amount shown in box 3 to any other
taxable interest income you received, un-
less part of the amount in box 3 was previ-
ously included in interest income. If part of
the amount shown in box 3 was previously
included in your interest income, see U.S.
savings bond interest previously reported,
later.
Box 4 of Form 1099–INT (federal income
tax withheld) will contain an amount if you
were subject to backup withholding. Report
the amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ,
line 7, on Form 1040A, line 36, or on Form
1040, line 58 (federal income tax withheld).
Box 5 of Form 1099–INT shows invest-
ment expenses you may be able to deduct
as an itemized deduction. See chapter 3 of
Publication 550 for more information about
investment expenses.
U.S. savings bond interest previously
reported.If you received a Form 1099–INT
for U.S. savings bond interest, the form may
show interest you do not have to report. See
Form 1099–INT for U.S. savings bonds in-
terest, earlier, under U.S. Savings Bonds.
On line 1, Part I of Schedule B (Form
1040), or on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1
(Form 1040A), report all the interest shown
on your Form 1099–INT. Then follow these
steps.
1) Several lines above line 2, enter a
subtotal of all interest listed on line 1.
2) Below the subtotal write “U.S. Savings
Bond Interest Previously Reported”
and enter amounts previously reported
or interest accrued before you received
the bond.
3) Subtract these amounts from the sub-
total and enter the result on line 2.
More information. For more information
about how to report interest income, see
chapter 1 of Publication 550 or the in-
structions for the form you must file.
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 63

9.
Dividends and
Other Corporate
Distributions
Important Reminder
Foreign source income.If you are a U.S.
citizen with investment income from sources
outside the United States (foreign income),
you must report that income on your tax
return unless it is exempt by U.S. law. This
is true whether you reside inside or outside
the United States and whether or not you
receive a Form 1099 from the foreign payer.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of:
 Ordinary dividends,
 Capital gain distributions,
 Nontaxable distributions, and
 Other distributions you may receive
from a corporation or a mutual fund.
This chapter also explains how to report
dividend income on your tax return.
Dividends are distributions of money,
stock, or other property paid to you by a
corporation. You also may receive dividends
through a partnership, an estate, a trust, or
an association that is taxed as a corpo-
ration. However, some amounts you receive
that are called dividends are actually inter-
est income. (See Dividends that are actually
interest under Taxable Interest in chapter
8.)
Most distributions that you receive are
paid in cash (or check). However, you may
receive more stock, stock rights, other
property, or services. These distributions
are also discussed in this chapter.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individ-
uals
/H18554550 Investment Income and Ex-
penses
/H18554564 Mutual Fund Distributions
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
/H18554Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest
and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
General Information
This section discusses general rules on
dividend income.
Tax on investment income of a child un-
der age 14. Part of a child's 2000 invest-
ment income may be taxed at the parent's
tax rate. This may happen if all of the fol-
lowing are true.
1) The child was under age 14 on Janu-
ary 1, 2001.
2) The child had more than $1,400 of in-
vestment income (such as taxable in-
terest and dividends) and has to file a
tax return.
3) Either parent was alive at the end of
2000.
If all of these statements are true, Form
8615, Tax for Children Under Age 14 Who
Have Investment Income of More Than
$1,400, must be completed and attached to
the child's tax return. If any of these state-
ments is not true, Form 8615 is not required
and the child's income is taxed at his or her
own tax rate.
However, the parent can choose to in-
clude the child's interest and dividends on
the parent's return if certain requirements
are met. Use Form 8814, Parents' Election
To Report Child's Interest and Dividends, for
this purpose.
For more information about the tax on
investment income of children and the par-
ents' election, see chapter 32.
Beneficiary of an estate or trust.Interest,
dividends, and other investment income you
receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust
is generally taxable income. You should re-
ceive a  Schedule K–1 (Form 1041), Ben-
eficiary's Share of Income, Deductions,
Credits, etc., from the fiduciary. Your copy
of Schedule K–1 and its instructions will tell
you where to report the income on your
Form 1040.
Social security number (SSN). You must
give your name and SSN (or individual tax-
payer identification number (ITIN)) to any
person required by federal tax law to make
a return, statement, or other document that
relates to you. This includes payers of divi-
dends. If you do not give your SSN or ITIN
to the payer of dividends, you may have to
pay a penalty.
For more information on SSNs and
ITINs, see Social security number (SSN) in
chapter 8.
Backup withholding. Your investment in-
come is generally not subject to regular
withholding. However, it may be subject to
backup withholding to ensure that income
tax is collected on the income. Under
backup withholding, the payor of interest
must withhold, as income tax, 31% of the
amount you are paid.
Backup withholding may also be re-
quired if the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
has determined that you underreported your
interest or dividend income. For more infor-
mation, see Backup Withholding in chapter
5.
Stock certificate in two or more names.
If two or more persons hold stock as joint
tenants, tenants by the entirety, or tenants
in common, each person may receive a
share of any dividends from the stock. Each
person's share is determined by local law.
Form 1099–DIV.  Most corporations use
Form 1099–DIV, Dividends and Distribu-
tions, to show you the distributions you re-
ceived from them during the year. Keep this
form with your records. You do not have to
attach it to your tax return. Even if you do
not receive Form 1099–DIV, you must still
report all of your taxable dividend income.
Reporting tax withheld.If tax is with-
held from your dividend income, the payer
must give you a Form 1099–DIV that indi-
cates the amount withheld.
Nominees. If someone receives distri-
butions as a nominee for you, that person
will give you a Form 1099–DIV, which will
show distributions received on your behalf.
Form 1099–MISC.  Certain substitute pay-
ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt in-
terest that are received by a broker on your
behalf must be reported to you on Form
1099–MISC, Miscellaneous Income, or a
similar statement. See Reporting Substitute
Payments under Short Sales in chapter 4
of Publication 550 for more information
about reporting these payments.
Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099.
If you receive a Form 1099 that shows an
incorrect amount (or other incorrect infor-
mation), you should ask the issuer for a
corrected form. The new Form 1099 you
receive will be marked “CORRECTED.”
Dividends on stock sold.If stock is sold,
exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after
a dividend is declared, but before it is paid,
the owner of record (usually the payee
shown on the dividend check) must include
the dividend in income.
Dividends received in January.If a reg-
ulated investment company (mutual fund)
or real estate investment trust (REIT) de-
clares a dividend (including any exempt-
interest dividend) in October, November, or
December payable to shareholders of rec-
ord on a specified date in one of those
months but actually pays the dividend dur-
ing January of the next calendar year, you
are considered to have received the divi-
dend on December 31. You report the divi-
dend in the year it was declared.
Ordinary Dividends
Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most
common type of distribution from a corpo-
ration. They are paid out of the earnings and
profits of a corporation and are ordinary in-
come to you. This means they are not cap-
ital gains. You can assume that any divi-
dend you receive on common or preferred
stock is an ordinary dividend unless the
paying corporation tells you otherwise. Or-
dinary dividends will be shown in box 1 of
the Form 1099–DIV you receive.
Dividends used to buy more stock.The
corporation in which you own stock may
have a dividend reinvestment plan. This
plan lets you choose to use your dividends
Page 64 Chapter 9  Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

to buy (through an agent) more shares of
stock in the corporation instead of receiving
the dividends in cash. If you are a member
of this type of plan and you use your divi-
dends to buy more stock at a price equal to
its fair market value, you still must report the
dividends as income.
If you are a member of a dividend rein-
vestment plan that lets you buy more stock
at a price less than its fair market value, you
must report as dividend income the fair
market value of the additional stock on the
dividend payment date.
You also must report as dividend income
any service charge subtracted from your
cash dividends before the dividends are
used to buy the additional stock. But you
may be able to deduct the service charge.
See chapter 30 for more information about
deducting expenses of producing income.
In some dividend reinvestment plans,
you can invest more cash to buy shares of
stock at a price less than fair market value.
If you choose to do this, you must report as
dividend income the difference between the
cash you invest and the fair market value
of the stock you buy. When figuring this
amount, use the fair market value of the
stock on the dividend payment date.
Money market funds.Report amounts you
receive from money market funds as divi-
dend income. Money market funds are a
type of mutual fund and should not be con-
fused with bank money market accounts
that pay interest.
Capital Gain
Distributions
Capital gain distributions (also called capital
gain dividends) are paid to you or credited
to your account by regulated investment
companies (commonly called mutual
funds) and real estate investment trusts
(REITs). They will be shown in box 2a of the
Form 1099–DIV you receive from the mu-
tual fund or REIT. Report capital gain dis-
tributions as long-term capital gains re-
gardless of how long you owned your
shares in the mutual fund or REIT.
If you receive capital gain distributions
on mutual fund or REIT stock you hold 6
months or less and sell at a loss, see Loss
on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6 months
or less under Holding Period in chapter 15.
Undistributed capital gains of mutual
funds and REITs. Some mutual funds and
REITs keep their long-term capital gains
and pay tax on them. You must treat your
share of these gains as distributions, even
though you did not actually receive them.
However, they are not included on Form
1099–DIV. Instead, they are reported to
you on Form 2439,  Notice to Shareholder
of Undistributed Long-Term Capital Gains.
Report undistributed capital gains as
long-term capital gains in column (f) on line
11 of Schedule D (Form 1040). The tax paid
on these gains by the mutual fund or REIT
is shown in box 2 of Form 2439. You take
credit for this tax by including it on line 64,
Form 1040, and checking box a on that line.
Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return,
and keep Copy C for your records.
Basis adjustment.Increase your basis
in your mutual fund or your interest in a
REIT, by the difference between the gain
you report and the credit you claim for the
tax paid.
Additional information.For more infor-
mation on the treatment of distributions from
mutual funds, see Publication 564.
Nontaxable
Distributions
You may receive a return of capital or a
tax-free distribution of more shares of stock
or stock rights. These distributions are not
treated the same as ordinary dividends or
capital gain distributions.
Return of Capital
A return of capital is a distribution that is not
paid out of the earnings and profits of a
corporation. It is a return of your investment
in the stock of the company. You should
receive a Form 1099–DIV or other state-
ment from the corporation showing you
what part of the distribution is a return of
capital. On Form 1099–DIV, a nontaxable
return of capital will be shown in box 3. If
you do not receive such a statement, you
report the distribution as an ordinary divi-
dend.
Basis adjustment.A return of capital re-
duces the basis of your stock. It is not taxed
until your basis in the stock is fully recov-
ered. If you buy stock in a corporation in
different lots at different times, and you
cannot definitely identify the shares subject
to the return of capital, reduce the basis of
your earliest purchases first.
When the basis of your stock has been
reduced to zero, report any additional return
of capital that you receive as a capital gain.
Whether you report it as a long-term or
short-term capital gain depends on how
long you have held the stock. See Holding
Period in chapter 15.
Example. You bought stock in 1988 for
$100. In 1990, you received a return of
capital of $80. You did not include this
amount in your income, but you reduced the
basis of your stock to $20. You received a
return of capital of $30 in 2000. The first
$20 of this amount reduced your basis to
zero. You report the other $10 as a long-
term capital gain for 2000. You must report
as a long-term capital gain any return of
capital you receive on this stock in later
years.
Liquidating distributions. Liquidating dis-
tributions, sometimes called liquidating divi-
dends, are distributions you receive during
a partial or complete liquidation of a corpo-
ration. These distributions are, at least in
part, one form of a return of capital. They
may be paid in one or more installments.
You will receive a Form 1099–DIV from the
corporation showing you the amount of the
liquidating distribution in box 8 or 9.
For more information on liquidating dis-
tributions, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Distributions of Stock
and Stock Rights
Distributions by a corporation of its own
stock are commonly known as stock divi-
dends. Stock rights (also known as “stock
options”) are distributions by a corporation
of rights to acquire the corporation's stock.
Generally, stock dividends and stock rights
are not taxable to you, and you do not report
them on your return.
Taxable stock dividends and stock
rights.Distributions of stock dividends and
stock rights are taxable to you if any of the
following apply.
1) You or any other shareholder has the
choice to receive cash or other prop-
erty instead of stock or stock rights.
2) The distribution gives cash or other
property to some shareholders and an
increase in the percentage interest in
the corporation's assets or earnings
and profits to other shareholders.
3) The distribution is in convertible pre-
ferred stock and has the same result
as in (2).
4) The distribution gives preferred stock
to some common stock shareholders
and common stock to other common
stock shareholders.
5) The distribution is on preferred stock.
(The distribution, however, is not taxa-
ble if it is an increase in the conversion
ratio of convertible preferred stock
made solely to take into account a
stock dividend, stock split, or similar
event that would otherwise result in
reducing the conversion right.)
The term “stock” includes rights to ac-
quire stock, and the term “shareholder” in-
cludes a holder of rights or of convertible
securities.
If you receive taxable stock dividends
or stock rights, include their fair market
value at the time of the distribution in your
income.
Preferred stock redeemable at a pre-
mium. If you hold preferred stock having
a redemption price higher than its issue
price, the difference (the redemption pre-
mium) generally is taxable as a constructive
distribution of additional stock on the pre-
ferred stock. For more information, see
chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights
received in a taxable distribution is their fair
market value when distributed. If you re-
ceive stock or stock rights that are not tax-
able to you, see Stocks and Bonds under
Basis of Investment Property in chapter 4
of Publication 550 for information on how to
figure their basis.
Fractional shares. You may not own
enough stock in a corporation to receive a
full share of stock if the corporation declares
a stock dividend. However, with the ap-
proval of the shareholders, the corporation
may set up a plan in which fractional shares
are not issued, but instead are sold, and the
cash proceeds are given to the sharehold-
ers. Any cash you receive for fractional
shares under such a plan is treated as an
amount realized on the sale of the fractional
shares. You must determine your gain or
Chapter 9 Dividends and Other Corporate DistributionsPage 65

loss and report it as a capital gain or loss
on Schedule D (Form 1040). Your gain or
loss is the difference between the cash you
receive and the basis of the fractional
shares sold.
Example. You own one share of com-
mon stock that you bought on January 3,
1992, for $100. The corporation declared a
common stock dividend of 5% on June 30,
2000. The fair market value of the stock at
the time the stock dividend was declared
was $200. You were paid $10 for the
fractional-share stock dividend under a plan
described in the above paragraph. You fig-
ure your gain or loss as follows:
Because you had held the share of stock
for more than 1 year at the time the stock
dividend was declared, your gain on the
stock dividend is a long-term capital gain.
Scrip dividends. A corporation that
declares a stock dividend may issue you a
scrip certificate that entitles you to a frac-
tional share. The certificate is generally
nontaxable when you receive it. If you
choose to have the corporation sell the
certificate for you and give you the pro-
ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference
between the proceeds and the portion of
your basis in the corporation's stock that is
allocated to the certificate.
However, if you receive a scrip certif-
icate that you can choose to redeem for
cash instead of stock, the certificate is tax-
able when you receive it. You must include
its fair market value in income on the date
you receive it.
Other Distributions
You may receive any of the following distri-
butions during the year.
Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-
interest dividends you receive from a regu-
lated investment company (mutual fund) are
not included in your taxable income. You
will receive a notice from the mutual fund
telling you the amount of the exempt-
interest dividends you received. Exempt-
interest dividends are not shown on Form
1099–DIV or Form 1099–INT.
Information reporting requirement.
Although exempt-interest dividends are not
taxable, you must show them on your tax
return if you have to file a return. This is an
information reporting requirement and does
not change the exempt-interest dividends to
taxable income.
Alternative minimum tax treatment.
Exempt-interest dividends paid from speci-
fied private activity bonds may be subject
to the alternative minimum tax. See Alter-
native Minimum Tax in chapter 31 for more
information.
Dividends on insurance policies. Insur-
ance policy dividends that the insurer keeps
and uses to pay your premiums are not
taxable. However, you must report as taxa-
ble interest income the interest that is paid
or credited on dividends left with the insur-
ance company.
If dividends on an insurance contract
(other than a modified endowment contract)
are distributed to you, they are a partial re-
turn of the premiums you paid. Do not in-
clude them in your gross income until they
are more than the total of all net premiums
you paid for the contract. (For information
on the treatment of a distribution from a
modified endowment contract, see Distribu-
tion Before Annuity Starting Date From a
Nonqualified Plan under Taxation of Non-
periodic Payments in Publication 575, Pen-
sion and Annuity Income.) Report any tax-
able distributions on insurance policies on
line 16b (Form 1040) or line 12b (Form
1040A).
Dividends on veterans' insurance.Divi-
dends you receive on veterans' insurance
policies are not taxable. In addition, interest
on dividends left with the Department of
Veterans Affairs is not taxable.
Patronage dividends. Generally, patron-
age dividends you receive in money from a
cooperative organization are included in
your income.
Do not include in your income patronage
dividends you receive on:
1) Property bought for your personal use,
or
2) Capital assets or depreciable property
bought for use in your business. But
you must reduce the basis (cost) of the
items bought. If the dividend is more
than the adjusted basis of the assets,
you must report the excess as income.
These rules are the same whether the
cooperative paying the dividend is a taxable
or tax-exempt cooperative.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do
not report these amounts as dividends. In-
stead, report these amounts on line 21 of
Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line
3 of Form 1040EZ.
How To Report
Dividend Income
Generally, you can use either Form 1040
or Form 1040A to report your dividend in-
come. Report the total of your ordinary div-
idends on line 9 of Form 1040 or Form
1040A.
If you receive capital gain distributions,
you may be able to use Form 1040A or you
may have to use Form 1040. See Capital
gain distributions only in chapter 17.
If you receive nontaxable distributions
required to be reported as capital gains, you
must use Form 1040. You cannot use Form
1040EZ if you receive any dividend income.
Form 1099–DIV. If you owned stock on
which you received $10 or more in divi-
dends and other distributions, you should
receive a Form 1099–DIV. Even if you do
not receive Form 1099–DIV, you must re-
port all of your taxable dividend income.
See Form 1099–DIV for more informa-
tion on how to report dividend income.
Form 1040A.  You must complete Part II
of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) and attach it
to your Form 1040A, if:
1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1 of Form
1099–DIV) are more than $400, or
2) You received, as a nominee, dividends
that actually belong to someone else.
List on line 5 each payer's name and the
amount of ordinary dividends you received.
If you received a Form 1099–DIV from a
brokerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the
payer.
Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts
listed on line 5. Also enter this total on line
9, Form 1040A.
Form 1040.  You must fill in Part II of
Schedule B and attach it to your Form 1040,
if:
1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1 of Form
1099–DIV) are more than $400, or
2) You received, as a nominee, dividends
that actually belong to someone else.
If your ordinary dividends are more than
$400, you must also complete Part III of
Schedule B.
List on line 5, Part II of Schedule B, each
payer's name and the amount of ordinary
dividends you received. If your securities
are held by a brokerage firm (in “street
name”), list the name of the brokerage firm
that is shown on Form 1099–DIV as the
payer. If your stock is held by a nominee
who is the owner of record, and the nomi-
nee credited or paid you dividends on the
stock, show the name of the nominee and
the dividends you received or for which you
were credited.
Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts
listed on line 5. Also enter this total on line
9, Form 1040.
Expenses related to dividend income.
You may be able to deduct expenses re-
lated to dividend income if you itemize your
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
See chapter 30 for general information
about deducting expenses of producing in-
come.
More information. For more information
about how to report dividend income, see
chapter 1 of Publication 550 or the in-
structions for the form you must file.
Fair market value of old stock ................ $200.00
Fair market value of stock dividend
(cash received) ..................................... 10.00
Fair market value of old stock and
stock dividend ....................................... $210.00
Basis (cost) of old stock after the
stock dividend (($200 ÷ $210) × $100) . $95.24
Basis (cost) of stock dividend
(($10 ÷ $210) × $100) .......................... + 4.76
Total ........................................................ $100.00
Cash received ......................................... $10.00
Basis (cost) of stock dividend ................. 4.76
Gain $5.24
Page 66 Chapter 9  Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

10.
Rental Income
and Expenses
Introduction
This chapter discusses rental income and
expenses. It covers the following topics.
 Rental income.
 Rental expenses.
 Vacation homes and other dwelling
units.
 Depreciation.
 Limits on rental losses.
 How to report your rental income and
expenses.
If you sell or otherwise dispose of your
rental property, see Publication 544, Sales
and Other Dispositions of Assets.
If you have a loss from damage to, or
theft of, rental property, see Publication 547,
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts (Business
and Nonbusiness).
If you rent out a condominium or a co-
operative apartment, some special rules
apply to you even though you receive the
same tax treatment as other owners of
rental property. See Publication 527, Resi-
dential Rental Property for more informa-
tion.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554527 Residential Rental Property
/H18554534 Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
/H18554 535 Business Expenses
/H18554925 Passive Activity and At-Risk
Rules
/H18554946 How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
/H185544562 Depreciation and Amortization
/H18554 6251 Alternative Minimum
Tax—Individuals
/H185548582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
/H18554Schedule E (Form 1040) Supple-
mental Income and Loss
Rental Income
You generally must include in your gross
income all amounts you receive as rent.
Rental income is any payment you receive
for the use or occupation of property. In
addition to amounts you receive as normal
rent payments, there are other amounts that
may be rental income.
When to report.Report rental income on
your return for the year you actually or
constructively receive it, if you are a cash-
basis taxpayer. You are a cash basis tax-
payer if you report income in the year you
receive it, regardless of when it was earned.
You constructively receive income when it
is made available to you, for example, by
being credited to your bank account.
For more information about when you
constructively receive income, see Ac-
counting Methods in chapter 1.
Advance rent.Advance rent is any amount
you receive before the period that it covers.
Include advance rent in your rental income
in the year you receive it regardless of the
period covered or the method of accounting
you use.
Example. You sign a 10-year lease to
rent your property. In the first year, you re-
ceive $5,000 for the first year's rent and
$5,000 as rent for the last year of the lease.
You must include $10,000 in your income
in the first year.
Security deposits.Do not include a se-
curity deposit in your income when you re-
ceive it if you plan to return it to your tenant
at the end of the lease. But if you keep part
or all of the security deposit during any year
because your tenant does not live up to the
terms of the lease, include the amount you
keep in your income for that year.
If an amount called a security deposit is
to be used as a final payment of rent, it is
advance rent. Include it in your income
when you receive it.
Payment for canceling a lease.  If your
tenant pays you to cancel a lease, the
amount you receive is rent. Include the
payment in your income in the year you re-
ceive it regardless of your method of ac-
counting.
Expenses paid by tenant.If your tenant
pays any of your expenses, the payments
are rental income. You must include them
in your income. You can deduct the ex-
penses if they are deductible rental ex-
penses. See Rental Expenses, later, for
more information.
Property or services.If you receive prop-
erty or services, instead of money, as rent,
include the fair market value of the property
or services in your rental income.
If the services are provided at an agreed
upon or specified price, that price is the fair
market value unless there is evidence to the
contrary.
Rental of property also used as a home.
If you rent property that you also use as
your home and you rent it for fewer than 15
days during the tax year, do not include the
rent you receive in your gross income. You
cannot deduct rental expenses. However,
you can include the interest, taxes, and
casualty and theft losses that are allowed
for nonrental property on Schedule A of
Form 1040. See Personal Use of Vacation
Home or Dwelling Unit, later.
Part interest.If you own a part interest in
rental property, you must report your part
of the rental income from the property.
Rental Expenses
This part discusses repairs and certain
other expenses of renting property that you
ordinarily can deduct from your gross rental
income. It includes information on the ex-
penses you can deduct if you rent part of
your property, or if you change your prop-
erty to rental use. Depreciation, which you
can also deduct from your gross rental in-
come, is discussed later.
When to deduct. You generally deduct
your rental expenses in the year you pay
them.
Vacant rental property.If you hold prop-
erty for rental purposes, you may be able
to deduct your ordinary and necessary ex-
penses for managing, conserving, or main-
taining the property while the property is
vacant. However, you cannot deduct any
loss of rental income for the period the
property is vacant.
Pre-rental expenses.You can deduct
your ordinary and necessary expenses for
managing, conserving, or maintaining rental
property from the time you make it available
for rent.
Depreciation. You can begin to depre-
ciate rental property when it is available and
ready for rent. See Placed-in Service Date
under Depreciation, later.
Expenses for rental property sold.If
you sell property you held for rental pur-
poses, you can deduct the ordinary and
necessary expenses for managing, con-
serving, or maintaining the property until it
is sold.
Personal use of rental property.If you
sometimes use your rental property for
personal purposes, you must divide your
expenses between rental and personal use.
Also, your rental expense deductions may
be limited. See Personal Use of Vacation
Home or Dwelling Unit, later.
Part interest.If you own a part interest in
rental property, you can deduct your part
of the expenses that you paid.
Repairs and Improvements
You can deduct the cost of repairs to your
rental property. You cannot deduct the cost
of improvements. You recover the cost of
improvements by taking depreciation (ex-
plained later).
RECORDS
Separate the costs of repairs and
improvements, and keep accurate
records. You will need to know the
cost of improvements when you sell or de-
preciate your property.
Repairs. A repair keeps your property in
good operating condition. It does not
materially add to the value of your property
or substantially prolong its life. Repainting
your property inside or out, fixing gutters or
floors, fixing leaks, plastering, and replacing
broken windows are examples of repairs.
If you make repairs as part of an exten-
sive remodeling or restoration of your prop-
erty, the whole job is an improvement.
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 67

Improvements. An improvement adds to
the value of your property, prolongs its
useful life, or adapts it to new uses. Im-
provements include the following items.
 Putting a recreation room in an unfin-
ished basement.
 Paneling a den.
 Adding a bathroom or bedroom. 
 Putting decorative grillwork on a bal-
cony. 
 Putting up a fence.
 Putting in new plumbing or wiring.
 Putting in new cabinets. 
 Putting on a new roof.
 Paving a driveway.
If you make an improvement to property,
the cost of the improvement must be capi-
talized. The capitalized cost can generally
be depreciated as if the improvement were
separate property.
Other Expenses
Other expenses you can deduct from your
gross rental income include advertising,
cleaning and maintenance services, utilities,
fire and liability insurance, taxes, interest,
commissions for the collection of rent, ordi-
nary and necessary travel and transporta-
tion, and other expenses, discussed next.
Rental payments for property.You can
deduct the rent you pay for property that you
use for rental purposes. If you buy a
leasehold for rental purposes, you can de-
duct an equal part of the cost each year
over the term of the lease.
Rental of equipment.You can deduct the
rent you pay for equipment that you use for
rental purposes. However, in some cases,
lease contracts are actually purchase con-
tracts. If so, you cannot deduct these pay-
ments. You can recover the cost of pur-
chased equipment through depreciation.
Insurance premiums paid in advance.If
you pay an insurance premium for more
than one year in advance, each year you
can deduct the part of the premium payment
that will apply to that year. You cannot de-
duct the total premium in the year you pay
it.
Local benefit taxes.Generally, you cannot
deduct charges for local benefits that in-
crease the value of your property, such as
charges for putting in streets, sidewalks, or
water and sewer systems. These charges
are nondepreciable capital expenditures.
You must add them to the basis of your
property. You can deduct local benefit taxes
if they are for maintaining, repairing, or
paying interest charges for the benefits.
Travel expenses.You can deduct the or-
dinary and necessary expenses of traveling
away from home if the primary purpose of
the trip was to collect rental income or to
manage, conserve, or maintain your rental
property. You must properly allocate your
expenses between rental and nonrental ac-
tivities. For information on travel expenses,
see chapter 28.
RECORDS
To deduct travel expenses, you
must keep records that follow the
rules in chapter 28.
Local transportation expenses. You can
deduct your ordinary and necessary local
transportation expenses if you incur them
to collect rental income or to manage, con-
serve, or maintain your rental property. 
Generally, if you use your personal car,
pickup truck, or light van for rental activities,
you can deduct the expenses using one of
two methods: actual expenses or the
standard mileage rate. For 2000, the
standard mileage rate for all business miles
is 32.5 cents a mile. For more information,
see chapter 28.
RECORDS
To deduct car expenses under ei-
ther method, you must keep records
that follow the rules in chapter 28.
In addition, you must complete Part V of
Form 4562 and attach it to your tax return.
Tax return preparation.You can deduct,
as a rental expense, the part of the tax re-
turn preparation fees you paid to prepare
Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). You can
also deduct, as a rental expense, any por-
tion of the total expense you paid to resolve
a tax underpayment related to your rental
activities. On your 2000 Schedule E, you
can deduct fees paid in 2000 to prepare
Part I of your 1999 Schedule E.
Not Rented for Profit
If you do not rent your property to make a
profit, you can deduct your rental expenses
only up to the amount of your rental income.
You cannot carry forward any of your rental
expenses that are more than your rental
income. For more information about the
rules for an activity not engaged in for profit,
see chapter 1 of Publication 535.
Where to report.Report your not-for-profit
rental income on line 21, Form 1040. You
can include your mortgage interest (if you
can use the property as your main home
or second home), real estate taxes, and
casualty losses on the appropriate lines of
Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized De-
ductions.
Claim your other expenses, subject to
the rules explained in chapter 1 of Publica-
tion 535, as miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions on line 22 of Schedule A (Form
1040). You can deduct these expenses only
if they, together with certain other miscella-
neous itemized deductions, total more than
2% of your adjusted gross income. For more
information about miscellaneous de-
ductions, see chapter 30.
Property Changed
to Rental Use
If you change your home or other property,
(or a part of it), to rental use at any time
other than at the beginning of your tax year,
you must divide yearly expenses, such as
depreciation, taxes, and insurance, between
rental use and personal use.
You can deduct as rental expenses only
the part of the expense that is for the part
of the year the property was used or held
for rental purposes.
You cannot deduct depreciation or in-
surance for the part of the year the property
was held for personal use. However, you
can include the home mortgage interest and
real estate tax expenses for the part of the
year the property was held for personal use
as an itemized deduction on Schedule A
(Form 1040).
Example. Your tax year is the calendar
year. You moved from your home in May
and started renting it out on June 1. You can
deduct as rental expenses seven-twelfths
of your yearly expenses, such as taxes and
insurance.
Starting with June, you can deduct as
rental expenses, the amounts you pay for
items generally billed monthly, such as util-
ities.
Renting Part of
Property
If you rent part of your property, you must
divide certain expenses between the part
of the property used for rental purposes and
the part of the property used for personal
purposes as though you actually had two
separate pieces of property.
You can deduct the expenses related to
the part of the property used for rental pur-
poses, such as home mortgage interest and
real estate taxes, as rental expenses. You
can deduct the expenses for the part of the
property used for personal purposes, sub-
ject to certain limitations, only if you itemize
your deductions on Schedule A (Form
1040). You can also deduct as a rental ex-
pense a part of other expenses that
normally are nondeductible personal ex-
penses, such as expenses for electricity or
painting the outside of your house. You
cannot deduct any part of the cost of a sin-
gle phone line even if your tenants have
unlimited use of it.
You do not have to divide the expenses
that belong only to the rental part of your
property. For example, if you paint a room
that you rent, or if you pay premiums for
liability insurance in connection with renting
a room in your home, your entire cost is a
rental expense. If you install a second
phone line strictly for your tenants' use, all
of the cost of the second line is deductible
as a rental expense. You can deduct de-
preciation, discussed later, on the part of the
property used for rental purposes as well
as on the furniture and equipment you use
for rental purposes.
How to divide expenses.If an expense is
for both rental use and personal use, such
as mortgage interest or heat for the entire
house, you must divide the expense be-
tween the rental use and the personal use.
You can use any reasonable method for
dividing the expense. It may be reasonable
to divide the cost of some items (for exam-
ple, water) based on the number of people
using them. However, the two most com-
mon methods for dividing an expense are
one based on the number of rooms in your
home and one based on the square footage
of your home.
Page 68 Chapter 10  Rental Income and Expenses

Personal Use of
Vacation Home or
Dwelling Unit
If you have any personal use of a vacation
home or other dwelling unit that you rent
out, you must divide your expenses be-
tween the rental use and the personal use.
See Figuring Days of Personal Use and 
How To Divide Expenses, later.
 If your expenses for rental use are more
than your rental income, you may not be
able to deduct all of the rental expenses.
See How To Figure Rental Income and
Deductions, later.
Exception for minimal rental use.If you
use the dwelling unit as a home and you
rent it for fewer than 15 days during the
year, do not include any of the rent in your
income and do not deduct any of the rental
expenses. See Dwelling Unit Used as
Home, later.
Dwelling unit. The rules in this section ap-
ply to vacation homes and other dwelling
units. A dwelling unit includes a house,
apartment, condominium, mobile home ,
boat, or similar property. A dwelling unit has
basic living accommodations, such as
sleeping space, a toilet, and cooking facili-
ties. A dwelling unit does not include prop-
erty used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or
similar establishment.
Property is used solely as a hotel, motel,
inn, or similar establishment if it is regularly
available for occupancy by paying custom-
ers and is not used by an owner as a home
during the year.
Example. You rent out a room in your
home that is always available for short-term
occupancy by paying customers. You do not
use the room yourself, and you allow only
paying customers to use the room. The
room is used solely as a hotel, motel, inn,
or similar establishment and is not a dwell-
ing unit.
Dwelling Unit
Used as Home
The tax treatment of rental income and ex-
penses for a dwelling unit that you also use
for personal purposes depends on whether
you use it as a home. (See How To Figure
Rental Income and Deductions, later.)
You use a dwelling unit as a home dur-
ing the tax year if you use it for personal
purposes more than the greater of:
1) 14 days, or 
2) 10% of the total days it is rented to
others at a fair rental price.
See Figuring Days of Personal Use, later.
If a dwelling unit is used for personal
purposes on a day it is rented at a fair rental
price, do not count that day as a day of
rental in applying (2) above. Instead, count
it as a day of personal use in applying both
(1) and (2) above. This rule does not apply
when dividing expenses between rental and
personal use.
Fair rental price.A fair rental price for your
property generally is an amount that a per-
son who is not related to you would be
willing to pay. The rent you charge is not a
fair rental price if it is substantially less than
the rents charged for other properties that
are similar to your property.
Examples
The following examples show how to de-
termine whether you used your rental prop-
erty as a home.
Example 1. You converted the base-
ment of your home into an apartment with
a bedroom, a bathroom, and a small
kitchen. You rented the basement apart-
ment at a fair rental price to college students
during the regular school year. You rent to
them on a 9-month lease (273 days).
During June, your brothers stayed with
you and lived in the basement apartment
rent free.
Your basement apartment was used as
a home because you used it for personal
purposes for 30 days. Rent-free use by your
brother is considered personal use. Your
personal use (30 days) is more than the
greater of 14 days or 10% of the total days
it is rented (27 days).
Example 2. You rented out the guest
bedroom in your home at a fair rental price
during the local college's homecoming,
commencement, and football weekends (a
total of 27 days). Your sister-in-law stayed
in the room, rent free, for the last 3 weeks
(21 days) in July.
The room was used as a home because
you used it for personal purposes for 21
days. That is more than the greater of 14
days or 10% of the 27 days it is rented (3
days).
Example 3. You own a cottage in a re-
sort area. You rented it out at a fair rental
price for a total of 170 days during the year.
For 12 of these days, the tenant was not
able to use the cottage and allowed you to
use it even though you did not refund any
of the rent. Your family actually used the
cottage for 10 of those days. Therefore, the
cottage is treated as having been rented for
160 (170 − 10) days. Your family also used
the cottage for 7 other days during the year.
You used the cottage as a home be-
cause you used it for personal purposes for
17 days. That is more than the greater of
14 days or 10% of the 160 days it was
rented (16 days).
Use As Main Home Before or
After Renting
 Do not count as days of personal use the
days you used the property as your main
home before or after renting it or offering it
for rent in either of the following circum-
stances.
1) You rented or tried to rent the property
for 12 or more consecutive months.
2) You rented or tried to rent the property
for a period of less than 12 consecutive
months and the period ended because
you sold or exchanged the property.
This special rule does not apply when di-
viding expenses between rental and per-
sonal use.
Figuring Days
of Personal Use
A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is
any day that it is used by any of the follow-
ing persons.
1) You or any other person who has an
interest in it, unless you rent it to an-
other owner as his or her main home
under a shared equity financing
agreement (defined later).
2) A member of your family or a member
of the family of any other person who
has a financial interest in it, unless the
family member uses the dwelling unit
as his or her main home and pays a fair
rental price. Family includes only
brothers and sisters, half-brothers and
half-sisters, spouses, ancestors (par-
ents, grandparents, etc.) and lineal
descendants (children, grandchildren,
etc.).
3) Anyone under an arrangement that lets
you use some other dwelling unit.
4) Anyone at less than a fair rental price.
Main home. If the other person or member
of the family in (1) or (2) above has more
than one home, his or her main home is the
one lived in most of the time.
Shared equity financing agreement.This
is an agreement under which two or more
persons acquire undivided interests for
more than 50 years in an entire dwelling
unit, including the land, and one or more of
the co-owners is entitled to occupy the unit
as his or her main home upon payment of
rent to the other co-owner or owners.
Donation of use of property.You use a
dwelling unit for personal purposes if:
 You donate the use of the unit to a
charitable organization,
 The organization sells the use of the
unit at a fund-raising event, and
 The “purchaser” uses the unit.
Examples
The following examples show how to de-
termine days of personal use.
Example 1. You and your neighbor are
co-owners of a condominium at the beach.
You rent the unit out to vacationers when-
ever possible. The unit is not used as a
main home by anyone. Your neighbor uses
the unit for two weeks every year.
Because your neighbor has an interest
in the unit, both of you are considered to
have used the unit for personal purposes
during those 2 weeks.
Example 2. You and your neighbors are
co-owners of a house under a shared equity
financing agreement. Your neighbors live in
the house and pay you a fair rental price.
Even though your neighbors have an
interest in the house, the days your neigh-
bors live there are not counted as days of
personal use by you. This is because your
neighbors rent the house as their main
home under a shared equity financing
agreement.
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 69

Example 3. You own a rental property
that you rent to your son. Your son has no
interest in this dwelling unit. He uses it as
his main home. He pays you a fair rental
price for the property.
Your son's use of the property is not
personal use by you because your son is
using it as his main home, he has no inter-
est in the property, and he is paying you a
fair rental price.
Example 4. You rent your beach house
to Joshua. Joshua rents his house in the
mountains to you. You each pay a fair rental
price.
You are using your house for personal
purposes on the days that Joshua uses it
because your house is used by Joshua un-
der an arrangement that allows you to use
his house.
Days Not Counted
as Personal Use
Some days you spend at the dwelling unit
are not counted as days of personal use.
Repairs and maintenance. Any day that
you spend working substantially full time
repairing and maintaining your property is
not counted as a day of personal use. Do
not count such a day as a day of personal
use even if family members use the property
for recreational purposes on the same day.
How To Divide Expenses
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and
personal purposes, divide your expenses
between the rental use and the personal
use based on the number of days used for
each purpose. Expenses for the rental use
of the unit are deductible under the rules
explained in How To Figure Rental Income
and Deductions, next.
 When dividing your expenses follow
these rules.
 Any day that the unit is rented at a fair
rental price is a day of rental use even
if you used the unit for personal pur-
poses that day. This rule does not apply
when determining whether you used the
unit as a home.
 Any day that the unit is available for rent
but not actually rented is not a day of
rental use.
Example. You offer your beach cottage
for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92
days). Your family uses the cottage during
the last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were
unable to find a renter for the first week in
August (7 days). The person who rented the
cottage for July allowed you to use it over
a weekend (2 days) without any reduction
in or refund of rent. The cottage was not
used at all before May 17 or after August
31.
You figure the part of the cottage ex-
penses to treat as rental expenses as fol-
lows.
1) The cottage was used for rental a total
of 85 days (92 − 7). The days it was
available for rent but not rented (7
days) are not days of rental use. The
July weekend (2 days) you used it is
rental use because you received a fair
rental price for the weekend.
2) You used the cottage for personal
purposes for 14 days (the last 2 weeks
in May).
3) The total use of the cottage was 99
days (14 days personal use + 85 days
rental use). 
4) Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%)
of the cottage expenses.
When determining whether you used the
cottage as a home, the July weekend (2
days) you used it is personal use even
though you received a fair rental price for
the weekend. Therefore, you had 16 days
of personal use and 83 days of rental use
for this purpose. Because you used the
cottage for personal purposes more than
14 days and more than 10% of the days of
rental use, you used it as a home. If you
have a net loss, you may not be able to
deduct all of the rental expenses. See
Property Used as a Home in the following
discussion.
How To Figure Rental
Income and Deductions
How you figure your rental income and de-
ductions depends on whether the dwelling
unit was used as a home and, if used as a
home, how many days the property was
rented.
Property Not Used As a Home
If you do not use a dwelling unit as a home,
report all the rental income and deduct all
the rental expenses. See How To Report
Rental Income and Expenses, later.
Your deductible rental expenses can be
more than your gross rental income. How-
ever, see Limits on Rental Losses, later.
Property Used As a Home
If you use a dwelling unit as a home during
the year (see Dwelling Unit Used as Home,
earlier), how you figure your rental income
and deductions depends on how many days
the unit was rented.
Rented fewer than 15 days.If you use a
dwelling unit as a home and you rent it for
fewer than 15 days during the year, do not
include in income any of the rental income.
Also, you cannot deduct any expenses as
rental expenses.
Rented 15 days or more. If you use a
dwelling unit as a home and rent it for 15
days or more during the year, you include
all your rental income in your gross income.
See How To Report Rental Income and
Expenses, later. If you had a net profit from
the rental property for the year (that is, if
your rental income is more than the total of
your rental expenses, including depreci-
ation), deduct all of your rental expenses.
However, if you had a net loss, you may not
be able to deduct all of your rental ex-
penses.
Use Table 10–1 to figure your deductible
expenses.
Depreciation
When you use your property to produce in-
come, such as rents, you can recover (get
back) some or all of what you paid for the
property through tax deductions. You do this
by depreciating the property; that is, by
deducting some of your cost on your tax
return each year.
Several factors determine how much
depreciation you can deduct. The main
factors are: (1) your basis in the property,
(2) the recovery period for the property, and
(3) the depreciation method used.
You can deduct depreciation only on the
part of your property used for rental pur-
poses. Depreciation reduces your basis for
figuring gain or loss on a later sale or ex-
change.
 You may have to use Form 4562 to
figure and report your depreciation. See
How To Report Rental Income and Ex-
penses, later.
Claiming the correct amount of depreci-
ation.You should claim the correct amount
of depreciation each tax year. If, in an ear-
lier year, you did not claim depreciation that
you were entitled to deduct, you must still
reduce your basis in the property by the
amount of depreciation that you should
have deducted. You generally cannot de-
duct the unclaimed depreciation in the cur-
rent year or any later tax year. However,
you may be able to claim the correct amount
of depreciation on an amended return (Form
1040X) for the earlier year. See Claiming
the correct amount of depreciation in Publi-
cation 527 for more information.
Changing your accounting method to
deduct unclaimed depreciation.If you
claimed less depreciation than allowable in
an earlier year, you can change your ac-
counting method to take a deduction in the
current year for the unclaimed depreciation.
To change your accounting method, you
must have the consent of the IRS. In some
instances, you can receive automatic con-
sent. For more information, see chapter 1
of Publication 946.
Land. You can never depreciate land. The
costs of clearing, grading, planting, and
landscaping are usually all part of the cost
of land and are not depreciable.
Depreciation Systems
There are three ways to figure depreciation.
The depreciation system you use depends
on the type of property and when the prop-
erty was placed in service. For property
used in rental activities you use:
 Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
Systems (MACRS) if placed in service
after 1986.
 Accelerated Cost Recovery Systems
(ACRS) if placed in service after 1980
but before 1987.
 Useful lives and either straight line or
an accelerated method of depreciation,
such as the declining balance method,
if placed in service before 1981.
Page 70 Chapter 10  Rental Income and Expenses

Table 10–1. Worksheet for Figuring the Limit on Rental Deductions for a Dwelling Unit Used as a Home
Use this worksheet only if you answer “yes” to all of the following questions.
● Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home. )
1. Enter rents received
2.a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest (see instructions)
● Did you rent the dwelling unit 15 days or more this year?
● Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions)
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions)
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a–2d
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter zero
4.a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining the dwelling unit (such as
repairs, insurance, and utilities)
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest (see instructions)
c. Add lines 4a and 4b
d. Allowable operating expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4c
5. Subtract line 4d from line 3. If zero or less, enter zero
6.a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions)
b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit
c. Add lines 6a and 6b
d. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6c
7.a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4d from line 4c
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 6d
from line 6c
Enter the amounts on lines 2e, 4d, and 6d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I.
Worksheet Instructions
Follow these instructions for the worksheet
above. If you were unable to deduct all your
expenses last year because of the rental
income limit, add these unused amounts to
your expenses for this year.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the
dwelling unit that you could deduct on
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had not
rented the unit. Do not include interest on
a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit.
For example, do not include interest on a
home equity loan used to pay off credit
cards or other personal loans, buy a car, or
pay college tuition. Include interest on a loan
used to buy, build, or improve the dwelling
unit, or to refinance such a loan. Enter the
rental portion of this interest on line 2a of
the worksheet.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses
related to the dwelling unit that you could
deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you
had not rented the dwelling unit. To do this,
complete Section A of Form 4684, treating
the losses as personal losses. On line 17 of
Form 4684, enter 10% of your adjusted
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental
expenses that are directly related only to the
rental activity. These include interest on
loans used for rental activities other than to
buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also
include rental agency fees, advertising,
office supplies, and depreciation on office
equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental
portion of the mortgage interest you could
deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented
out the dwelling unit. Enter on line 4b of this
worksheet the rental portion of the
mortgage interest you could not deduct on
Schedule A because it is more than the limit
on home mortgage interest. Do not include
interest on a loan that did not benefit the
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess
casualty and theft losses, use the Form
4684 you prepared for line 2c of this
worksheet.
Allocating the limited deduction. If you
cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4c
or 6c this year, you can allocate the
allowable deduction in any way you wish
among the expenses included on line 4c or
6c. Enter the amount you allocate to each
expense on the appropriate line of Schedule
E, Part I.
A. Enter the amount from line 10
of Form 4684
B. Enter the rental portion of A
C. Enter the amount from line 2c
of this worksheet
D. Subtract C from B. Enter the
result here and on line 6a of
this worksheet
gross income figured without your rental
income and expenses from the dwelling
unit. Enter the rental portion of the result
from line 18 of Form 4684 on line 2c of this
worksheet. Note. Do not file this Form 4684
or use it to figure your personal losses on
Schedule A. Instead, figure the personal
portion on a separate Form 4684.
dwelling unit (as explained in the line 2a
instructions).
CAUTION
!
This chapter discusses MACRS
only. If you are depreciating prop-
erty placed in service before 1987,
see Publication 534.
If you placed property in service before
2000, continue to use the same method of
figuring depreciation that you used in the
past.
Section 179 election.You cannot claim
the section 179 deduction for property held
to produce rental income (unless renting
property is your trade or business). See
chapter 2 of Publication 946.
Cannot be more than basis.The total of
all your yearly depreciation deductions
cannot be more than the cost or other basis
of the property. For this purpose, your yearly
depreciation deductions include any depre-
ciation that you were allowed to claim, even
if you did not claim it.
Cooperative apartments.If you rent your
cooperative apartment to others, you can
deduct your share of the cooperative hous-
ing corporation's depreciation. See Cooper-
ative apartments in Publication 527 for in-
formation on how to figure your depreciation
deduction.
MACRS
In general the modified accelerated cost
recovery system (MACRS) applies to all
tangible property placed in service during
2000.
MACRS consists of two systems that
determine how you depreciate your prop-
erty. The main system is called the General
Depreciation System (GDS). The second
system is called the Alternative Depreci-
ation System (ADS). GDS is used to figure
your depreciation deduction for property
used in most rental activities, unless you
elect ADS.
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 71

Table 10–2. MACRS Recovery Periods for Property
Used in Rental Activities
Type of Property
General
Depreciation
System
Computers and their peripheral
equipment
5 years 5 years
Alternative
Depreciation
System
MACRS Recovery Period To UseOffice machinery, such as:
Typewriters
Calculators
Copiers
5 years 6 years
Automobiles 5 years 5 years
Light trucks 5 years 5 years
Office furniture and equipment, such as:
Desks
Files
7 years 10 years
Appliances, such as:
Stoves
Refrigerators
5 years 9 years
Carpets 5 years 9 years
Furniture used in rental property 5 years 9 years
Any property that does not have a class
life and that has not been
designated by law as being in
any other class
7 years 12 years
Fences 15 years 20 years
Roads 15 years 20 years
Shrubbery 15 years 20 years
Residential rental property (buildings or
structures) and structural
components such as furnaces,
water pipes, venting, etc.
27.5 years 40 years
Improvements and additions, such as a
new roof
The recovery period of the property to
which the addition or improvement is
made, determined as if the property were
placed in service at the same time as the
improvement or addition.
1) The date the addition or improvement
is placed in service, or
2) The date the property to which the ad-
dition or improvement was made is
placed in service.
The class and recovery period of the
addition or improvement is the one that
would apply to the underlying property if it
were placed in service at the same time as
the addition or improvement.
Example. You own a residential rental
house that you have been renting out since
1980 and are depreciating under ACRS. If
you put an addition onto the house, and you
place the improvement in service after
1986, you use MACRS for the addition.
Under MACRS, the addition would be de-
preciated as residential rental property.
Placed-in-Service Date
You can begin to depreciate property when
you place it in service in your trade or
business or for the production of income.
Property is considered placed in service in
a rental activity when it is ready and avail-
able for a specific use in that activity.
Cost Basis
To deduct the proper amount of depreci-
ation each year, you must first determine
your basis in the property you intend to de-
preciate. The basis used for figuring depre-
ciation is your original basis in the property
increased by any improvements made to
the property. Your original basis is usually
your cost. However, if you acquire the
property in some other way, such as by in-
heriting it, getting it as a gift, or building it
yourself, you may have to figure your ori-
ginal basis in another way. Other adjust-
ments could also affect your basis. See
chapter 14.
Conventions
In the year that you place property in service
or in the year that you dispose of property,
you are allowed to claim depreciation for
only part of the year. The part of the year
(or convention) depends on the class of the
property.
There are three types of conventions.
 1) Mid-month convention.
 2) Half-year convention.
 3) Mid-quarter convention.
Mid-month convention. A mid month con-
vention is used for residential rental prop-
erty in all situations. Under a mid-month
convention, residential rental property
placed in service, or disposed of, during any
month is treated as placed in service, or
disposed of, in the middle of that month.
Half-year convention.The half-year con-
vention is used in rental activities other than
residential rental property. The half-year
convention treats all property placed in ser-
vice, or disposed of, during a tax year as
placed in service, or disposed of, in the
middle of that tax year.
A half year of depreciation is allowable
for the first year property is placed in ser-
vice, regardless of when the property is
placed in service during the tax year. For
each of the remaining years of the recovery
To figure your MACRS deduction, you
need to know the following information
about your property:
1) Its recovery period,
2) Its placed-in-service date, and
3) Its depreciable basis.
Personal home changed to rental use.
You must use MACRS to figure the depre-
ciation on property you used as your home
and changed to rental property in 2000.
Excluded property. You cannot use
MACRS for certain personal property placed
in service before 1987 (before August 1,
1986, if election made) that is transferred
after 1986 (after July 31, 1986, if election
made). However, you generally must use
MACRS to depreciate property you or a re-
lated party used before 1987, or that you
acquired from a related party, if the property
had previously been depreciated under
ACRS and the MACRS deduction would be
less than the deduction under ACRS.
 In addition, you may elect to exclude
certain property from the application of
MACRS. See Publication 534 for more in-
formation. Property that does not come un-
der MACRS must be depreciated under
ACRS or one of the other methods of de-
preciation, such as straight line or declining
balance.
Recovery Periods Under GDS
Each item of property that can be depreci-
ated is assigned to a property class. The
recovery period of the property depends on
the class the property is in. The property
classes are:
 3-year property,
 5-year property,
 7-year property,
 10-year property,
 15-year property,
 20-year property,
 Nonresidential real property, and
 Residential rental property.
Recovery periods for property used in
rental activities are shown in Table 10–2.
The class to which property is assigned
is determined by its class life. For more in-
formation on class lives and recovery peri-
ods, see Publication 946.
Additions or improvements to property.
Treat depreciable additions or improve-
ments you make to any property as sepa-
rate property items for depreciation pur-
poses. The recovery period for an addition
or improvement begins on the later of:
Page 72 Chapter 10  Rental Income and Expenses

period, you will take a full year of depreci-
ation. If you hold the property for the entire
recovery period, a half year of depreciation
is allowable for the year in which the re-
covery period ends. If you dispose of the
property before the end of the recovery pe-
riod, a half year of depreciation is allowable
for the year of disposition.
Mid-quarter convention. A mid-quarter
convention must be used in certain circum-
stances for property used in rental activities,
other than residential rental property. This
convention applies if the total basis of such
property that is placed in service in the last
3 months of a tax year is more than 40%
of the total basis of all such property you
place in service during the year.
Under a mid-quarter convention, all
property placed in service, or disposed of,
during any quarter of a tax year is treated
as placed in service, or disposed of, in the
middle of the quarter.
Do not include in the total basis any
property placed in service and disposed of
during the same tax year.
Example. During the tax year, Jordan
Gregory purchased the following items to
use in his rental property.
 A dishwasher for $400, that he placed
in service in January.
 Used furniture for $100, that he placed
in service in September.
 A refrigerator for $500, that he placed
in service in October.
Jordan uses the calendar year as his tax
year. The total basis of all property placed
in service in that year is $1,000. The $500
basis of the refrigerator placed in service
during the last 3 months of his tax year ex-
ceeds $400 (40% × $1,000). Jordan must
use the mid-quarter convention for all three
items.
MACRS Depreciation
Under GDS
You can figure your MACRS depreciation
deduction under GDS in one of two ways.
The deduction is substantially the same
both ways. (The difference, if any, is slight.)
You can either:
1) Use the percentage from the optional
MACRS tables, or
2) Actually figure the deduction using the
depreciation method and convention
that apply over the recovery period of
the property.
 Publication 946 discusses computing de-
preciation using the proper method and
convention.
Using the Optional Tables
You can use the tables in Table 10–3 to
compute annual depreciation under
MACRS. The tables show the percentages
for the first 6 years. The percentages in
Tables 10–3–A, 10–3–B, and 10–3–C make
the change from declining balance to
straight line in the year that straight line will
yield a larger deduction. See Appendix A
of Publication 946 for complete tables. 
If you elect to use the straight line
method for 5-, 7-, or 15-year property, or the
Table 10–3. Optional MACRS Tables
Year First
quarter
1
Third
quarter
Mid-quarter convention
2
3
4
Table 10–3–A. MACRS 5-Year property
Half-year convention
Second
quarter
Fourth
quarter
20.00%
5
6
32.00
19.20
11.52
11.52
5.76
35.00%
26.00
15.60
11.01
11.01
1.38
25.00%
30.00
18.00
11.37
11.37
4.26
15.00%
34.00
20.40
12.24
11.30
7.06
5.00%
38.00
22.80
13.68
10.94
9.58
Year First
quarter
1
Third
quarter
Mid-quarter convention
2
3
4
Table 10–3–B. MACRS 7-Year property
Half-year convention
Second
quarter
Fourth
quarter
14.29%
5
6
24.49
17.49
12.49
8.93
8.92
25.00%
21.43
15.31
10.93
8.75
8.74
17.85%
23.47
16.76
11.97
8.87
8.87
10.71%
25.51
18.22
13.02
9.30
8.85
3.57%
27.55
19.68
14.06
10.04
8.73
Year First
quarter
1
Third
quarter
Mid-quarter convention
2
3
4
Table 10–3–C. MACRS 15-Year property
Half-year convention
Second
quarter
Fourth
quarter
5.00%
5
6
9.50
8.55
7.70
6.93
6.23
8.75%
9.13
8.21
7.39
6.65
5.99
6.25%
9.38
8.44
7.59
6.83
6.15
3.75%
9.63
8.66
7.80
7.02
6.31
1.25%
9.88
8.89
8.00
7.20
6.48
Year 1
Jan.
Feb.
March
Apr.
Table 10–3–D. Residential Rental Property (27.5-year)
Use the row for the month of the taxable year placed in service.
3.485%
May
3.182
2.879
2.576
2.273
Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
3.636%
3.636
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
1.970
Oct.
1.667
1.364
1.061
0.758
Nov.
Dec.
0.455
0.152
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
150% declining balance method for 5- or
7-year property, use the tables in Appendix
A of Publication 946.
How to use the tables. The following
section explains how to use the optional
tables. 
Figure the depreciation deduction by
multiplying your unadjusted basis in the
property by the percentage shown in the
appropriate table. Your unadjusted basis
is your depreciable basis without reduction
for depreciation previously claimed.
Once you begin using an optional table
to figure depreciation, you must continue to
use it for the entire recovery period unless
there is an adjustment to the basis of your
property for a reason other than:
1) Depreciation allowed or allowable, or
2) An addition or improvement that is de-
preciated as a separate item of prop-
erty.
If there is an adjustment for any other rea-
son (for example, because of a deductible
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 73

casualty loss), you can no longer use the
table. For the year of the adjustment and for
the remaining recovery period, figure de-
preciation using the property's adjusted ba-
sis at the end of the year and the appropri-
ate depreciation method, as explained in
MACRS Depreciation Under GDS in Publi-
cation 527.
Tables 10–3–A, 10–3–B, and 10–3–C.
The percentages in these tables take into
account the half-year and mid-quarter con-
ventions. Use Table 10–3–A for 5-year
property, Table 10–3–B for 7-year property,
and Table 10–3–C for 15-year property. Use
the percentage in the second column (half-
year convention) unless you must use the
mid-quarter convention (explained earlier).
If you must use the mid-quarter convention,
use the column that corresponds to the
calendar year quarter in which you placed
the property in service.
Example 1. You purchased a stove and
refrigerator and placed them in service in
February. Your basis in the stove is $300,
and your basis in the refrigerator is $500.
Assume that both are 5-year property. Us-
ing the half-year convention column in Table
10–3–A, you find the depreciation percent-
age for year 1 is 20%. For that year, your
depreciation deduction is $60 ($300 × .20)
for the stove, and is $100 ($500 × .20) for
the refrigerator.
For the second tax year, you find your
depreciation percentage is 32%. That year's
depreciation deduction will be $96 ($300 ×
.32) for the stove and $160 ($500 × .32) for
the refrigerator.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as
in Example 1, except you buy the
refrigerator in October instead of February.
You must use the mid-quarter convention
to figure depreciation on the stove and
refrigerator. The refrigerator was placed in
service in the last 3 months of the tax year
and its basis ($500) is more than 40% of the
total basis of all property placed in service
during the year ($800 × .40 = $320).
Because you placed the stove in service
in February, you use the first quarter column
of Table 10–3–A and find that the depreci-
ation percentage for year 1 is 35%. For that
year, your depreciation deduction for the
stove is $105 ($300 × .35).
Because you placed the refrigerator in
service in October, you use the fourth
quarter column of Table 10–3–A and find
that the depreciation percentage for year 1
is 5%. Your depreciation deduction for the
refrigerator is $25 ($500 × .05).
Table 10–3–D.Use this table for residential
rental property. Find the row for the month
that you placed the property in service. Use
the percentages listed for that month to fig-
ure your depreciation deduction. The mid-
month convention is taken into account in
the percentages shown in the table.
Example. You purchased a single
family rental house and placed it in service
in February. Your basis in the house is
$80,000. Using Table 10–3–D, you find that
the percentage for property placed in ser-
vice in February of year 1 is 3.182%. That
year's depreciation deduction is $2,546
($80,000 × .03182).
MACRS Depreciation
Under ADS
If you choose, you can use the ADS method
for most property. Under ADS, you use the
straight line method of depreciation.
Table 10–2 shows the recovery periods
for property used in rental activities that you
depreciate under ADS. See Appendix B in
Publication 946 for other property. If your
property is not listed, it is considered to
have no class life.
Use the mid-month convention for resi-
dential rental property. For all other prop-
erty, use the half-year or mid-quarter con-
vention.
Election.You choose to use ADS by en-
tering the depreciation on line 16, Part II of
Form 4562.
The election of ADS for one item in a
class of property generally applies to all
property in that class that is placed in ser-
vice during the tax year of the election.
However, the election applies on a
property-by-property basis for residential
rental property.
Once you choose to use ADS, you can-
not change your election.
Other Rules About
Depreciable Property
In addition to the rules about what methods
you can use, there are other rules you
should be aware of with respect to depre-
ciable property.
Gain disposition. If you dispose of
depreciable property at a gain, you may
have to report, as ordinary income, all or
part of the gain. See Publication 544, Sales
and Other Dispositions of Assets. 
Alternative minimum tax.If you use ac-
celerated depreciation, you may have to file
Form 6251 . Accelerated depreciation in-
cludes MACRS and ACRS and any other
method that allows you to deduct more de-
preciation than you could deduct using a
straight line method.
Limits on
Rental Losses
Rental real estate activities are generally
considered passive activities, and the
amount of loss you can deduct is limited.
Generally, you cannot deduct losses from
rental real estate activities unless you have
income from other passive activities. See
Passive Activity Limits, later.
Losses from passive activities are first
subject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit
the amount of deductible losses from hold-
ing most real property placed in service after
1986.
Exception. If your rental losses are less
than $25,000 ($12,500 if married filing sep-
arately), the passive activity limits probably
do not apply to you. See Losses From
Rental Real Estate Activities, later.
Property used as a home.If you used the
rental property as a home during the year,
the passive activity rules do not apply to that
home. Instead, you must follow the rules
explained earlier under Personal Use of
Vacation Home or Dwelling Unit.
At-Risk Rules
The at-risk rules place a limit on the amount
you can deduct as losses from activities of-
ten described as tax shelters. Losses from
holding real property (other than mineral
property) placed in service before 1987 are
not subject to the at-risk rules.
Generally, any loss from an activity
subject to the at-risk rules is allowed only
to the extent of the total amount you have
at risk in the activity at the end of the tax
year. You are considered at risk in an ac-
tivity to the extent of cash and the adjusted
basis of other property you contributed to
the activity and certain amounts borrowed
for use in the activity. See Publication 925
for more information.
Passive Activity Limits
In general, rental activities (except those
meeting the exception for real estate pro-
fessionals, below) are passive activities.
For this purpose, a rental activity is an ac-
tivity from which you receive income mainly
for the use of tangible property, rather than
for services.
Limits on passive activity deductions
and credits. Deductions for losses from
passive activities are limited. You generally
cannot offset income, other than passive
income, with losses from passive activities.
Nor can you offset taxes on income, other
than passive income, with credits resulting
from passive activities. Any excess loss or
credit is carried forward to the next tax year.
For a detailed discussion of these rules,
see Publication 925.
You may have to complete  Form 8582,
Passive Activity Loss Limitations, to figure
the amount of any passive activity loss for
the current year for all activities and the
amount of the passive activity loss allowed
on your tax return.
Exception for real estate professionals.
Rental activities in which you materially
participated during the year are not pas-
sive activities if, during that year, you were
a real estate professional because you met
two requirements. For a detailed discussion
of these requirements, see Publication 527.
Losses From Rental Real Estate
Activities
If you actively participated in a passive
rental real estate activity, you may be able
to deduct up to $25,000 of loss from the
activity from nonpassive income. This spe-
cial allowance cannot be more than $12,500
if you were married, file a separate return,
and lived apart from your spouse at all times
during the year. It is not available if you
were married, file a separate return, and did
not live apart from your spouse at all times
during the year.
The maximum amount of the special al-
lowance is reduced if your modified ad-
justed gross income is more than $100,000
($50,000 if married filing separately).
Active participation.You actively partic-
ipated in a rental real estate activity if you
(and your spouse) owned at least 10% of
the rental property and you made manage-
Page 74 Chapter 10  Rental Income and Expenses

ment decisions in a significant and bona fide
sense. Management decisions include ap-
proving new tenants, deciding on rental
terms, approving expenditures, and similar
decisions.
More information.See Publication 925 for
more information on the passive loss limits,
including information on the treatment of
unused disallowed passive losses and
credits and the treatment of gains and
losses realized on the disposition of a pas-
sive activity.
How To Report
Rental Income
and Expenses
If you rent out buildings, rooms, or apart-
ments, and provide only heat and light, trash
collection, etc., you normally report your
rental income and expenses in Part I of
Schedule E (Form 1040). However, do not
use that schedule to report a not-for-profit
activity. See Not Rented for Profit, earlier.
If you provide significant services that
are primarily for your tenant's convenience,
such as regular cleaning, changing linen,
or maid service, you report your rental in-
come and expenses on Schedule C (Form
1040), Profit or Loss From Business or
Schedule C–EZ, Net Profit From Business
(Sole Proprietorship). Significant services
do not include the furnishing of heat and
light, cleaning of public areas, trash col-
lection, etc. For information, see Publication
334,Tax Guide for Small Business (For In-
dividuals Who Use Schedule C or C–EZ).
You also may have to pay self-employment
tax on your rental income. See Publication
533, Self-Employment Tax. 
Form 1098. If you paid $600 or more of
mortgage interest on your rental property to
any one person, you should receive a Form
1098, Mortgage Interest Statement, or sim-
ilar statement showing the interest you paid
for the year. If you and at least one other
person (other than your spouse if you file a
joint return) were liable for, and paid interest
on the mortgage, and the other person re-
ceived the Form 1098, report your share of
the interest on line 13 of Schedule E (Form
1040). Attach a statement to your return
showing the name and address of the other
person. In the left margin of Schedule E
(Form 1040), next to line 13, write “See at-
tached.”
Schedule E
Use Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040) to
report your rental income and expenses.
List your total income, expenses, and de-
preciation for each rental property. Be sure
to answer the question on line 2.
If you have more than three rental or
royalty properties, complete and attach as
many Schedules E as are needed to list the
properties. Complete lines 1 and 2 for each
property. However, fill in the “Totals” column
on only one Schedule E. The figures in the
“Totals” column on that Schedule E should
be the combined totals of all Schedules E.
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report
income or loss from partnerships, S corpo-
rations, estates, trusts, and real estate
mortgage investment conduits. If you need
to use page 2 of Schedule E, use page 2
of the same Schedule E you used to enter
the combined totals in Part I.
On page 1, line 20 of Schedule E, enter
the depreciation you are claiming. You must
complete and attach Form 4562 for rental
activities only if you are claiming:
 Depreciation on property placed in ser-
vice during 2000,
 Depreciation on any property that is
listed property (such as a car), regard-
less of when it was placed in service,
or
 Any car expenses (actual or the stand-
ard mileage rate).
Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your
own worksheet. You do not have to attach
these computations to your return.
Example. On January 1, Justin Cole
bought a townhouse and placed it in service
as residential rental property. He receives
$1,100 a month rental income. His rental
expenses for the year are as follows:
Justin's basis for depreciation of the
townhouse is $65,000. He is using MACRS
with a 27.5-year recovery period. On April
1, Justin bought a new refrigerator for the
rental property at a cost of $425. He uses
the MACRS method with a 5-year recovery
period.
Justin uses the percentage for January
in Table 10–3–D to figure his depreciation
deduction for the townhouse. He uses the
percentage under “Half-year convention” in
Table 10–3–A to figure his depreciation de-
duction for the refrigerator. He must report
the depreciation on Form 4562.
Justin figures his net rental income or
loss for the townhouse as follows:
Fire insurance (1-year policy) ................... $200
Mortgage interest ...................................... 5,000
Fee paid to real estate company for
collecting monthly rent ............................ 572
General repairs ......................................... 175
Real estate taxes imposed and paid ........ 800
Total rental income received
($1,100 × 12) ...................................... $13,200
Minus Expenses:
Fire insurance (1-year policy) . $200
Mortgage interest ................... 5,000
Rent collection fee ................. 572
General repairs ...................... 175
Real estate taxes ................... 800
Total expenses ................................... 6,747
Balance ................................................... $6,453
Minus Depreciation:
On townhouse
($65,000 × 3.485%) ............... $2,265
On refrigerator
($425 × 20%) ......................... 85
Total depreciation ............................... 2,350
Net rental income for townhouse $4,103
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 75

11.
Retirement
Plans, Pensions,
and Annuities
Important Change
5-year tax option repealed.The 5-year tax
option for figuring the tax on lump-sum dis-
tributions from a qualified retirement plan
has been repealed. However, a plan partic-
ipant can continue to choose the 10-year tax
option or capital gain treatment for a lump-
sum distribution that qualifies for the special
treatment.
Important Reminder
Hardship distributions no longer treated
as eligible rollover distributions. Hard-
ship distributions from 401(k) plans and
similar employer-sponsored retirement
plans will no longer be treated as eligible
rollover distributions.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of
distributions you receive from:
1) An employee pension or annuity from
a qualified plan,
2) A disability retirement, and
3) A purchased commercial annuity.
What is not covered in this chapter. The
following topics are not discussed in this
chapter:
1) The General Rule. This is the method
generally used to determine the tax
treatment of pension and annuity in-
come from nonqualified plans. If your
annuity starting date is after November
18, 1996, you generally cannot use the
General Rule for a qualified plan. For
more information about the General
Rule, see Publication 939.
2) Civil service retirement benefits. If
you are retired from the federal gov-
ernment (either regular or disability re-
tirement), see Publication 721, Tax
Guide to U.S. Civil Service Retirement
Benefits. Publication 721 also covers
the information that you need if you are
the survivor or beneficiary of a federal
employee or retiree who died.
3) Individual retirement arrangements
(IRAs). Information on the tax treat-
ment of amounts you receive from an
individual retirement arrangement
(IRA), as well as general information
on traditional and Roth IRAs, is in
chapter 18.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publications
/H18554 575 Pension and Annuity Income 
/H18554 721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
/H18554 939 General Rule for Pensions and
Annuities
Form and Instructions
/H18554 W–4P  Withholding Certificate for Pen-
sion or Annuity Payments
/H18554 1099–R Distributions From Pensions,
Annuities, Retirement or Profit-
Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance
Contracts, etc.
/H18554 4972 Tax on Lump-Sum Distributions
/H18554 5329 Additional Taxes Attributable to
IRAs, Other Qualified Retire-
ment Plans, Annuities, Modified
Endowment Contracts, and
MSAs
Employee Pensions
and Annuities
Generally, if you did not pay any part of the
cost of your employee pension or annuity
and your employer did not withhold part of
the cost from your pay while you worked,
the amounts you receive each year are fully
taxable. You must report them on your in-
come tax return.
Partly taxable payments.  If you paid part
of the cost of your annuity, you are not taxed
on the part of the annuity you receive that
represents a return of your cost. The rest
of the amount you receive is taxable. Your
annuity starting date (defined later) deter-
mines which method you must or may use.
If you contributed to your pension or
annuity plan, you figure the tax-free and the
taxable parts of your annuity payments un-
der either the Simplified Method or the
General Rule. If your annuity starting date
is after November 18, 1996, and your
payments are from a qualified plan, you
must use the Simplified Method. Generally,
you must use the General Rule only for
nonqualified plans.
If your annuity starting date is after July
1, 1986, but before November 19, 1996,
you can use either the General Rule or, if
you qualify, the Simplified Method.
More than one program. If you receive
benefits from more than one program, such
as a pension plan and a profit-sharing plan,
you must figure the taxable part of each
separately. Make separate computations
even if the benefits from both are included
in the same check. For example, benefits
from one of your programs could be fully
taxable, while the benefits from your other
program could be taxable under the General
Rule or the Simplified Method. Your former
employer or the plan administrator should
be able to tell you if you have more than one
pension or annuity contract.
Railroad retirement benefits.Part of the
railroad retirement benefits you receive is
treated for tax purposes like social security
benefits, and part is treated like an em-
ployee pension. For information about rail-
road retirement benefits treated as social
security benefits, see Publication 915, So-
cial Security and Equivalent Railroad Re-
tirement Benefits. For information about
railroad retirement benefits treated as an
employee pension, see Railroad Retirement
in Publication 575.
Credit for the elderly or the disabled.If
you receive a pension or annuity, you may
be able to take the credit for the elderly or
the disabled. See chapter 34.
Withholding and estimated tax. The payer
of your pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus,
annuity, or deferred compensation plan will
withhold income tax on the taxable parts of
amounts paid to you. You can choose not
to have tax withheld except for amounts
paid to you that are eligible rollover distri-
butions. See Eligible rollover distributions
under Rollovers, later. You make this choice
by filing  Form W–4P.
For payments other than eligible rollover
distributions, you can tell the payer how to
withhold by filing Form W–4P. If an eligible
rollover distribution is paid directly to you,
20% will generally be withheld. There is no
withholding on a direct rollover of an eligible
rollover distribution. See Direct rollover
option under Rollovers, later. If you choose
not to have tax withheld or you do not have
enough tax withheld, you may have to pay
estimated tax.
For more information, see Pensions and
Annuities under Withholding in chapter 5.
Loans. If you borrow money from your
qualified pension or annuity plan, tax-
sheltered annuity program, government
plan, or contract purchased under any of
these plans, you may have to treat the loan
as a nonperiodic distribution. This means
that you may have to include in income all
or part of the amount borrowed unless cer-
tain exceptions apply. Even if you do not
have to treat the loan as a nonperiodic dis-
tribution, you may not be able to deduct the
interest on the loan in some situations. For
details, see Loans Treated as Distributions
in Publication 575. For information on the
deductibility of interest, see chapter 25.
Qualified plans for self-employed indi-
viduals. Qualified plans set up by self-
employed individuals are sometimes called
Keogh or H.R. 10 plans. Qualified plans can
be set up by sole proprietors, partnerships
(but not a partner), and corporations. They
can cover self-employed persons, such as
the sole proprietor or partners, as well as
regular (common-law) employees.
Distributions from a qualified plan are
usually fully taxable because most recipi-
ents have no cost basis. If you have an in-
vestment (cost) in the plan, however, your
pension or annuity payments from a qual-
ified plan are taxed under the Simplified
Method. For more information about qual-
ified plans, see Publication 560, Retirement
Plans for Small Business.
Deferred compensation plans of state
and local governments and tax-exempt
organizations. If you participate in one of
these nonqualified plans (known as  sec-
Page 76 Chapter 11  Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

tion 457 plans), you will not be taxed cur-
rently on your pay that is deferred under the
plan. You or your beneficiary will be taxed
on this deferred pay only when it is distrib-
uted or otherwise made available to either
of you.
For information on the limits on deferrals
under section 457 plans and how to treat
excess deferrals, see Retirement Plan
Contributions under Employee Compen-
sation in Publication 525.
Distributions of deferred pay are not eli-
gible for the 10-year tax option and rollover
treatment (discussed later). Distributions
are, however, subject to the tax for failure
to make minimum distributions, discussed
later.
For general information on these de-
ferred compensation plans, see Section 457
Deferred Compensation Plans in Publica-
tion 575.
Cost (Investment in the
Contract)
Before you can figure how much, if any, of
your pension or annuity benefits is taxable,
you must determine your cost in the plan
(your investment). Your total cost in the plan
includes everything that you paid. It also
includes amounts your employer paid that
were taxable at the time paid. Cost does not
include any amounts you deducted or ex-
cluded from income.
From this total cost paid or considered
paid by you, subtract any refunds of premi-
ums, rebates, dividends, unrepaid loans, or
other tax-free amounts you received by the
later of the annuity starting date or the date
on which you received your first payment.
The annuity starting date is the later
of the first day of the first period for which
you receive a payment from the plan or the
date on which the plan's obligation becomes
fixed.
Your employer or the organization that
pays you the benefits (plan administrator)
should show your cost in Box 5 of your Form
1099–R.
Foreign employment contributions. If
you worked in a foreign country and your
employer contributed to your retirement
plan, a part of those payments may be
considered part of your cost. This applies
to contributions that were made:
 1) Before 1963,
2) After 1962 for work if you performed
the services under a plan that existed
on March 12, 1962, or
3) After 1996 if you performed the ser-
vices of a foreign missionary.
For details, see Foreign employment
contributions under Cost (Investment in the
Contract) in Publication 575.
Simplified Method
Under the Simplified Method, you figure the
tax-free part of each monthly annuity pay-
ment by dividing your cost by the total
number of expected monthly payments. For
an annuity that is payable for the lives of the
annuitants, this number is based on the
annuitants' ages on the annuity starting date
and is determined from a table. For any
other annuity, this number is the number of
monthly annuity payments under the con-
tract.
Who must use the Simplified Method.
You must use the Simplified Method if your
annuity starting date is after November 18,
1996, and you receive pension or annuity
payments from a qualified plan or annuity
unless you were at least 75 years old and
entitled to annuity payments from a qualified
plan that are guaranteed for 5 years or
more.
Who must use the General Rule. You
must use the General Rule if you receive
pension or annuity payments from:
1) A nonqualified plan (such as a private
annuity, a purchased commercial an-
nuity, or a nonqualified employee
plan), or
2) A qualified plan if you are age 75 or
older on your annuity starting date and
your annuity payments are guaranteed
for at least 5 years.
You can use the General Rule for a
qualified plan if your annuity starting date is
before November 19, 1996 (but after July
1, 1986), and you do not qualify to use, or
choose not to use, the Simplified Method.
You cannot use the General Rule for
a qualified plan if your annuity starting date
is after November 18, 1996. Complete in-
formation on the General Rule, including the
tables you need, is contained in Publication
939.
TIP
If you are age 75 or older, and your
annuity starting date is after No-
vember 18, 1996, you must use the
General Rule if the payments are guaran-
teed for at least 5 years. You must use the
Simplified Method if the payments are
guaranteed for fewer than 5 years.
Note. If you are not sure whether your
retirement plan is a qualified plan (that
meets certain Internal Revenue Code re-
quirements), ask your employer or plan ad-
ministrator.
Guaranteed payments.  Your annuity
contract provides guaranteed payments if a
minimum number of payments or a mini-
mum amount (for example, the amount of
your investment) is payable even if you and
any survivor annuitant do not live to receive
the minimum. If the minimum amount is
less than the total amount of the payments
you are to receive, barring death, during the
first 5 years after payments begin (figured
by ignoring any payment increases), you
are entitled to fewer than 5 years of guar-
anteed payments.
If you are the survivor of a deceased
retiree, you can use the Simplified Method
if the retiree used it.
Exclusion limit.Your annuity starting date
determines the total amount that you can
exclude from your taxable income over the
years.
If your annuity starting date is after 1986,
your exclusion is limited to your cost. If it
was before January 1, 1987, you can con-
tinue to take your monthly exclusion for as
long as you receive your annuity.
If your annuity starting date is after 1986,
any unrecovered cost at your (or the last
annuitant's) death is allowed as a miscella-
neous itemized deduction on the final return
of the decedent. This deduction is not sub-
ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
limit.
How to use it. Complete the Simplified
Method Worksheet to figure your taxable
annuity for 2000. If the annuity is payable
only over your life, use your age at the
birthday preceding your annuity starting
date. For annuity starting dates beginning
in 1998, if your annuity is payable over your
life and the lives of other individuals, use
your combined ages at the birthdays pre-
ceding the annuity starting date.
CAUTION
!
If your annuity starting date begins
in 1998 and your annuity is payable
over the lives of more than one
annuitant, the total number of monthly an-
nuity payments expected to be received is
based on the combined ages of the
annuitants at the annuity starting date.
However, if your annuity starting date began
before January 1, 1998, the total number
of monthly annuity payments expected to
be received is based on the primary
annuitant's age at the annuity starting date.
TIP
Be sure to keep a copy of the com-
pleted worksheet; it will help you
figure your taxable annuity in later
years.
Example. Bill Kirkland, age 65, began
receiving retirement benefits on January 1,
2000, under a joint and survivor annuity.
Bill's annuity starting date is January 1,
2000. The benefits are to be paid for the
joint lives of Bill and his wife, Kathy, age 65.
Bill had contributed $31,000 to a qualified
plan and had received no distributions be-
fore the annuity starting date. Bill is to re-
ceive a retirement benefit of $1,200 a
month, and Kathy is to receive a monthly
survivor benefit of $600 upon Bill's death.
Bill must use the Simplified Method to
figure his taxable annuity because his pay-
ments are from a qualified plan and he is
under age 75. Because his annuity is pay-
able over the lives of more than one
annuitant, he uses his and Kathy's com-
bined ages and Table 2 at the bottom of the
worksheet in completing line 3 of the work-
sheet. His completed worksheet is shown
in Table 11–1.
Bill's tax-free monthly amount is $100
($31,000 ÷ 310 as shown on line 4 of the
worksheet). Upon Bill's death, if Bill has not
recovered the full $31,000 investment,
Kathy will also exclude $100 from her $600
monthly payment. The full amount of any
annuity payments received after 310 pay-
ments are paid must be included in gross
income.
If Bill and Kathy die before 310 pay-
ments are made, a miscellaneous itemized
deduction will be allowed for the unre-
covered cost on the final income tax return
of the last to die. This deduction is not
subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
limit.
TIP
Had Bill's retirement annuity pay-
ments been from a nonqualified
plan, he would have used the Gen-
eral Rule. He uses the Simplified Method
Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 77

Table 11–1. Simplified Method Worksheet
(Keep for Your Records)
Enter the total pension or annuity payments received this
year. Also, enter this amount on Form 1040, line 16a, or
Form 1040A, line 12a
1.
Enter your cost in the plan at the
annuity starting date plus any death
benefit exclusion
2.
IF the age at annuity
starting date was...
3.
before November 19,
1996, enter on line 3...
30055 or under
26056–60
24061–65
17066–70
12071 or older
Divide line 2 by the number on line 34.
Multiply line 4 by the number of months
for which this year ’s payments were
made. If your annuity starting date was
before 1987, skip lines 6 and 7 and
enter this amount on line 8. Otherwise,
go to line 6
5.
Enter the amount, if any, recovered tax
free in years after 1986
6.
Subtract line 6 from line 27.
Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 78.
Taxable amount. Subtract line 8 from line 1. Enter the
result, but not less than zero. Also, enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b. If your Form
1099–R shows a larger amount, use the amount on this
line instead of the amount from Form 1099 –R
9.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Enter the appropriate number from
Table 1 below. But if your annuity
starting date was after 1997 and the
payments are for your life and that of
your beneficiary, enter the appropriate
number from Table 2 below
TABLE 1 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE
AND your annuity starting date was —
after November 18,
1996, enter on line 3...
360
310
260
210
160
IF the combined ages
at annuity starting
date were...
THEN enter
on line 3...
410110 or under
360111–120
310121–130
260131–140
210141 or older
TABLE 2 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE
14,400
31,000
310
100
1,200
-0-
31,000
1,200
13,200
Estate tax. If your annuity was a joint and
survivor annuity that was included in the
decedent's estate, an estate tax may have
been paid on it. You can deduct, as a mis-
cellaneous itemized deduction, the part of
the total estate tax that was based on the
annuity. This deduction is not subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. The de-
ceased annuitant must have died after the
annuity starting date. (For details, see sec-
tion 1.691(d)-1 of the regulations.) This
amount cannot be deducted in one year. It
must be deducted in equal amounts over
your remaining life expectancy.
How To Report
If you file Form 1040, report your total an-
nuity on line 16a and the taxable part on line
16b. If your pension or annuity is fully taxa-
ble, enter it on line 16b; do not make an
entry on line 16a.
If you file Form 1040A, report your total
annuity on line 12a and the taxable part on
line 12b. If your pension or annuity is fully
taxable, enter it on line 12b; do not make
an entry on line 12a.
More than one annuity. If you receive
more than one annuity and at least one of
them is not fully taxable, enter the total
amount received from all annuities on line
16a, Form 1040, or line 12a, Form 1040A,
and enter the taxable part on line 16b, Form
1040, or line 12b, Form 1040A. If all the
annuities you receive are fully taxable, enter
the total of all of them on line 16b, Form
1040, or line 12b, Form 1040A.
Joint return.If you file a joint return and
you and your spouse each receive one or
more pensions or annuities, report the total
of the pensions and annuities on line 16a,
Form 1040, or line 12a, Form 1040A, and
report the taxable part on line 16b, Form
1040, or line 12b, Form 1040A.
Lump-Sum Distributions
If you receive a lump-sum distribution from
a qualified retirement plan (a qualified em-
ployee plan or qualified employee annuity)
and the plan participant was born before
1936, you may be able to elect optional
methods of figuring the tax on the distribu-
tion. The part from active participation in the
plan before 1974 may qualify as capital gain
subject to a 20% tax rate. The part from
participation after 1973 (and any part from
participation before 1974 that you do not
report as capital gain) is ordinary income.
You may be able to use the 10-year tax
option, discussed later, to figure tax on the
ordinary income part.
CAUTION
!
The 5-year tax option for figuring the
tax on lump-sum distributions has
been repealed.
Use Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum
Distributions, to figure the separate tax on
a lump-sum distribution using the optional
methods. The tax figured on Form 4972 is
added to the regular tax figured on your
other income. This may result in a smaller
tax than you would pay by including the
taxable amount of the distribution as ordi-
nary income in figuring your regular tax.
Worksheet because his annuity payments
are from a qualified plan.
Survivors
If you receive a survivor annuity because
of the death of a retiree who had reported
the annuity under the Three-Year Rule, in-
clude the total received in income. (The
retiree's cost has already been recovered
tax free.)
If the retiree was reporting the annuity
payments under the General Rule, apply
the same exclusion percentage the retiree
used to your initial payment called for in the
contract. The resulting tax-free amount will
then remain fixed. Any increases in the
survivor annuity are fully taxable.
If the retiree was reporting the annuity
payments under the Simplified Method,
the part of each payment that is tax free is
the same as the tax-free amount figured by
the retiree at the annuity starting date. See
Simplified Method, earlier.
In any case, if the annuity starting date
is after 1986, the total exclusion over the
years cannot be more than the cost.
If you are the survivor of an employee,
or former employee, who died before be-
coming entitled to any annuity payments,
you must figure the taxable and tax-free
parts of your annuity payments.
Page 78 Chapter 11  Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Lump-sum distribution defined. A lump-
sum distribution is the distribution or pay-
ment of a plan participant's entire balance
(within a single tax year) from all of the
employer's qualified plans of one kind
(pension, profit-sharing, or stock bonus
plans). A distribution from a nonqualified
plan (such as a privately purchased com-
mercial annuity or a section 457 deferred
compensation plan of a state or local gov-
ernment or tax-exempt organization) cannot
qualify as a lump-sum distribution.
The participant's entire balance from a
plan does not include certain forfeited
amounts. It also does not include any
deductible voluntary employee contributions
allowed by the plan after 1981 and before
1987. For more information about distribu-
tions that do not qualify as lump-sum distri-
butions, see Distributions that do not qualify
under Lump-Sum Distributions in Publica-
tion 575.
How to treat the distribution.If you re-
ceive a lump-sum distribution from a qual-
ified retirement plan, you may have the fol-
lowing options for how you treat the taxable
part.
1) Report the part of the distribution from
participation before 1974 as a capital
gain (if you qualify) and the part from
participation after 1973 as ordinary in-
come.
2) Report the part of the distribution from
participation before 1974 as a capital
gain (if you qualify) and use the
10-year tax option to figure the tax on
the part from participation after 1973
(if you qualify).
3) Use the 10-year tax option to figure the
tax on the total taxable amount (if you
qualify).
4) Roll over all or part of the distribution.
See Rollovers, later. No tax is currently
due on the part rolled over. Report any
part not rolled over as ordinary income.
5) Report the entire taxable part of the
distribution as ordinary income on your
tax return.
The first three options are explained in
the following discussions.
Electing optional lump-sum treatment.
You can choose to use the 10-year tax op-
tion or capital gain treatment only once after
1986 for any plan participant. If you make
this choice, you cannot use either of these
optional treatments for any future distribu-
tions for the participant.
Taxable and tax-free parts of the distri-
bution. The taxable part of a lump-sum
distribution is the employer's contributions
and income earned on your account. You
may recover your cost in the lump sum and
any net unrealized appreciation (NUA) in
employer securities tax free.
Cost. In general, your cost is the total
of:
1) The plan participant's nondeductible
contributions to the plan,
2) The plan participant's taxable costs of
any life insurance contract distributed,
3) Any employer contributions that were
taxable to the plan participant, and 
4) Repayments of any loans that were
taxable to the plan participant.
You must reduce this cost by amounts pre-
viously distributed tax free.
NUA. The NUA in employer securities
(box 6 of Form 1099–R) received as part
of a lump-sum distribution is generally tax
free until you sell or exchange the securi-
ties. (For more information, see Distribu-
tions of employer securities under Taxation
of Nonperiodic Payments, in Publication
575.)
Capital Gain Treatment  
Capital gain treatment applies only to the
taxable part of a lump-sum distribution re-
sulting from participation in the plan before
1974. The amount treated as capital gain is
taxed at a 20% rate. You can elect this
treatment only once for any plan participant,
and only if the plan participant was born
before 1936.
Complete Part II of Form 4972 to choose
the 20% capital gain election. For more in-
formation, see Capital Gain Treatment un-
der Lump-Sum Distributions in Publication
575.
10-Year Tax Option  
The 10-year tax option is a special formula
used to figure a separate tax on the ordinary
income part of a lump-sum distribution. You
pay the tax only once, for the year in which
you receive the distribution, not over the
next 10 years. You can elect this treatment
only once for any plan participant, and only
if the plan participant was born before 1936.
The ordinary income part of the distri-
bution is the amount shown in box 2a of the
Form 1099–R given to you by the payer,
minus the amount, if any, shown in box 3.
You can also treat the capital gain part of
the distribution (box 3 of Form 1099–R) as
ordinary income for the 10-year tax option
if you do not choose capital gain treatment
for that part.
Complete Part III of Form 4972 to
choose the 10-year tax option. You must
use the special tax rates shown in the in-
structions for part III to figure the tax. Pub-
lication 575 illustrates how to complete
Form 4972 to figure the separate tax.
Rollovers
If you withdraw cash or other assets from
a qualified retirement plan in an eligible
rollover distribution, you can defer tax on the
distribution by rolling it over to another
qualified retirement plan or a traditional IRA.
A qualified retirement plan is an IRA, a
qualified pension, profit-sharing, or stock
bonus plan, or a qualified annuity plan. See
chapter 18 for information on rollovers from
an IRA.
CAUTION
!
This discussion applies only to tra-
ditional IRAs.
In general, the most you can roll over is
the part that would be taxable if you did not
roll it over. You cannot roll over your con-
tributions, other than your deductible em-
ployee contributions. You do not pay tax on
the amount that you roll over. This amount,
however, is generally taxable later when it
is paid to you or your survivor.
You must complete the rollover by the
60th day following the day on which you
receive the distribution. (This 60-day period
is extended for the period during which the
distribution is in a frozen deposit in a finan-
cial institution.) For all rollovers to an IRA,
you must irrevocably elect rollover treatment
by written notice to the trustee or issuer of
the IRA.
Eligible rollover distributions.Generally,
you can roll over any part of the taxable
portion of most nonperiodic distributions
from a qualified retirement plan, unless it is
a required minimum distribution.
Hardship distributions. Hardship dis-
tributions from 401(k) plans and similar
employer-sponsored retirement plans are
no longer treated as eligible rollover distri-
butions. 
Direct rollover option.You can choose to
have the administrator of your old plan
transfer the distribution directly from your
old plan to the new plan (if permitted) or
traditional IRA. If you decide on a rollover,
it is generally to your advantage to choose
this direct rollover option. Under this option,
the plan administrator would not withhold
tax from your distribution.
Withholding tax.If you choose to have the
distribution paid to you, it is taxable in the
year distributed unless you roll it over to a
new plan or IRA within 60 days. The plan
administrator must withhold income tax of
20% from the taxable distribution paid to
you. (See Pensions and Annuities under
Withholding in chapter 5.)
CAUTION
!
If you decide to roll over an amount
equal to the distribution before
withholding, your contribution to the
new plan or IRA must include other money
(for example, from savings or amounts bor-
rowed) to replace the amount withheld.
The administrator should give you a
written explanation of your distribution
options within a reasonable period of time
before making an eligible rollover distribu-
tion.
Deductible voluntary employee contri-
butions. If you receive an eligible rollover
distribution from your employer's qualified
plan of a part of the balance of your accu-
mulated deductible voluntary employee
contributions, you can roll over tax free any
part of this distribution. The rollover can be
either to a traditional IRA or to certain other
qualified plans.
Rollover by surviving spouse or other
beneficiary.You may be entitled to roll
over into a traditional IRA part or all of a
retirement plan distribution you receive as
the surviving spouse of a deceased em-
ployee. The rollover rules apply to you as if
you were the employee. However, you
cannot roll it over to another qualified re-
tirement plan.
A beneficiary other than the employee's
surviving spouse generally cannot roll over
a distribution.
Alternate payee under qualified domestic
relations order. You may be able to roll
over all or any part of a distribution from a
qualified employer plan that you receive
under a qualified domestic relations order
(QDRO). If you receive the distribution as
an employee's spouse or former spouse
Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 79

under a QDRO, the rollover rules apply to
you (the alternate payee) as if you were the
employee. You can rollover the distribution
from the plan into a traditional IRA or to
another eligible retirement plan. See Publi-
cation 575 for more information on benefits
received under a QDRO.
Retirement bonds. If you redeem a retire-
ment bond, you can defer the tax on the
amount received by rolling it over to an IRA
or qualified employer plan as discussed in
Publication 590.
For more information on the rules for roll-
ing over distributions, see Publication 575.
Special Additional Taxes
To discourage the use of pension funds for
purposes other than normal retirement, the
law imposes additional taxes on certain
distributions of those funds and on failures
to withdraw the funds timely. Ordinarily, you
will not be subject to these taxes if you roll
over all early distributions you receive, as
explained earlier, and begin drawing out the
funds at a normal retirement age, in rea-
sonable amounts over your life expectancy.
These special additional taxes are the taxes
on:
 Early distributions, and
 Excess accumulation (not receiving
minimum distributions).
These taxes are discussed in the following
sections.
If you must pay either of these taxes,
report them on Form 5329 , Additional
Taxes Attributable to IRAs, Other Qualified
Retirement Plans, Annuities, Modified En-
dowment Contracts, and MSAs. However,
you do not have to file Form 5329 if you owe
only the tax on early distributions and your
Form 1099–R shows a “1” in box 7. Instead,
enter 10% of the taxable part of the distri-
bution on line 54 of Form 1040 and write
“No” on the dotted line next to line 54.
Even if you do not owe any of these
taxes, you may have to complete Form
5329 and attach it to your Form 1040. This
applies if you received an early distribution
and your Form 1099–R does not show dis-
tribution code “2,” “3,” or “4” in box 7 (or the
code number shown is incorrect).
Tax on Early Distributions
Distributions you receive from your qual-
ified retirement plan or deferred annuity
contract before you reach age 59
1/2 (and
amounts you receive when you cash in re-
tirement bonds before you reach age 59
1/2)
are usually subject to an additional tax of
10%. The tax applies to the taxable part of
the distribution.
For this purpose, a qualified retirement
plan is:
1) A qualified employee plan,
2) A qualified employee annuity plan,
3) A tax-sheltered annuity plan for em-
ployees of public schools or tax-
exempt organizations, or
4) An IRA (other than an education (Ed)
IRA).
25% rate on certain early distributions
from SIMPLE IRA plans. An early distri-
bution from a SIMPLE IRA is generally
subject to the 10% additional tax. However,
if the distribution is made within the first two
years of participation in the SIMPLE plan,
the additional tax is 25%. Your Form
1099–R should show distribution code “S”
in box 7 if the 25% rate applies. On line 4
of Form 5329, multiply by 25% instead of
10%.
5% rate on certain early distributions
from deferred annuity contracts. If an
early withdrawal from a deferred annuity is
otherwise subject to the 10% additional tax,
a 5% rate may apply instead. A 5% rate
applies to distributions under a written
election providing a specific schedule for the
distribution of your interest in the contract
if, as of March 1, 1986, you had begun re-
ceiving payments under the election. On
line 4 of Form 5329, multiply by 5% instead
of 10%. Attach an explanation to your re-
turn.
Exceptions to tax. Certain early distribu-
tions are excepted from the early distribu-
tion tax. If the payer knows that an excep-
tion applies to your early distribution,
distribution code “2,” “3,” or “4” should be
shown in box 7 of your Form 1099–R and
you do not have to report the distribution
on Form 5329. If an exception applies but
distribution code “1” (early distribution, no
known exception) is shown in box 7, you
must file Form 5329. Enter the taxable
amount of the distribution shown in box 2a
of your Form 1099–R on line 1 of Form
5329. On line 2, enter the amount that can
be excluded and the exception number
shown in the Form 5329 instructions.
TIP
If distribution code “1” is incorrectly
shown on your Form 1099–R for a
distribution received when you were
age 591 / 2 or older, include that distribution
on Form 5329. Enter exception number
“11” on line 2.
The early distribution tax does not apply
to any distribution that meets one of the
following exceptions.
General exceptions. The tax does not
apply to distributions that are:
 Made as part of a series of substantially
equal periodic payments (made at least
annually) for your life (or life expect-
ancy) or the joint lives (or joint life ex-
pectancies) of you and your beneficiary
(but, if from a qualified retirement plan
other than an IRA, only if the payments
begin after your separation from ser-
vice),
 Made because you are totally and per-
manently disabled, or
 Made on or after the death of the plan
participant or contract holder.
Additional exceptions for qualified
retirement plans.The tax does not apply
to distributions that are:
 From a qualified retirement plan (other
than an IRA) after your separation from
service in or after the year you reached
age 55,
 From a qualified retirement plan (other
than an IRA) to an alternate payee un-
der a qualified domestic relations order,
 From a qualified retirement plan to the
extent you have deductible medical ex-
penses (medical expenses that exceed
7.5% of your adjusted gross income),
whether or not you itemize your de-
ductions for the year,
 From an employer plan under a written
election that provides a specific sched-
ule for distribution of your entire interest
if, as of March 1, 1986, you had sepa-
rated from service and had begun re-
ceiving payments under the election,
 From an employee stock ownership
plan for dividends on employer securi-
ties held by the plan, or
 From a qualified retirement plan due to
an IRS levy of the plan.
Additional exceptions for IRAs. The
tax does not apply to distributions that are:
 From an IRA for medical insurance
premiums if you are unemployed,
 From an IRA to the extent of your higher
education expenses, or
 From an IRA for first home purchases.
For detailed information about the ex-
ceptions that apply only to IRAs, see When
Can I Withdraw or Use IRA Assets in
chapter 1 of Publication 590.
Additional exceptions for nonqual-
ified annuity contracts. The tax does not
apply to distributions that are:
 From a deferred annuity contract to the
extent allocable to investment in the
contract before August 14, 1982,
 From a deferred annuity contract under
a qualified personal injury settlement,
 From a deferred annuity contract pur-
chased by your employer upon termi-
nation of a qualified employee plan or
qualified annuity plan and held by your
employer until your separation from
service, or
 From an immediate annuity contract (a
single premium contract providing sub-
stantially equal annuity payments that
start within one year from the date of
purchase and are paid at least annu-
ally).
Tax on Excess Accumulation
To make sure that most of your retirement
benefits are paid to you during your lifetime,
rather than to your beneficiaries after your
death, the payments that you receive from
qualified retirement plans must begin no
later than on your required beginning date
(defined next).
Unless the rule for 5% owners or IRAs
applies, you must begin to receive distribu-
tions from your qualified retirement plan by
April 1 of the year that follows the later of:
1) The calendar year in which you reach
age 70
1 / 2,o r
2) The calendar year in which you retire.
The additional tax applies to qualified
employee plans, qualified employee annuity
plans, section 457 deferred compensation
Page 80 Chapter 11  Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

plans, tax-sheltered annuity plans (for ben-
efits accruing after 1986), and IRAs (other
than education (Ed) IRAs and Roth IRAs).
Age 70
1 / 2. You reach age 701 / 2 on the date
that is 6 calendar months after the date of
your 70th birthday.
For example, if you are retired and your
70th birthday was on July 1, 1999, you were
age 70
1 / 2 on January 1, 2000. Your required
beginning date is April 1, 2001. If your 70th
birthday was on June 30, 1999, you were
age 70
1 / 2 on December 30, 1999, and your
required beginning date is April 1, 2000,
unless you had not yet retired.
Exception (5% owners). If you are a
5% (or more) owner of the company main-
taining the plan, you must begin to receive
distributions by April 1 of the calendar year
after the year in which you reach age 70
1/2,
regardless of when you retire.
Minimum distributions.These are regular
periodic distributions that are large enough
to use up your entire interest in the plan
over your life expectancy or over the joint
life expectancies of you and a designated
surviving beneficiary (or over a shorter pe-
riod).
Additional information.For more in-
formation on this rule and how to figure the
required amount to be distributed, see Tax
on Excess Accumulation in Publication 575.
Minimum distributions not made. If
you do not receive required minimum dis-
tributions, you are subject to an additional
excise tax. The tax equals 50% of the dif-
ference between the amount that must be
distributed and the amount that was distrib-
uted during the tax year. You can get this
excise tax waived if you establish that the
shortfall in distributions was due to reason-
able error and that you are taking reason-
able steps to remedy the shortfall.
State insurer delinquency pro-
ceedings. You might not receive the mini-
mum distribution because of state insurer
delinquency proceedings for an insurance
company. If your payments are reduced
below the minimum due to these pro-
ceedings, you should contact your plan ad-
ministrator. Under certain conditions, you
will not have to pay the excise tax.
Form 5329. You must file a Form 5329
if you owe a tax because you did not receive
a minimum required distribution from your
qualified retirement plan.
Disability Income 
Generally, if you retire on disability, you
must report your pension or annuity as or-
dinary income.
If you were 65 or older at the end of the
tax year, or if you were under 65, retired on
permanent and total disability, and you re-
ceived taxable disability income, you may
be able to claim the credit for the elderly or
the disabled. See chapter 34 for more in-
formation about the credit.
How to report. You must report all your
taxable disability income on line 7, Form
1040, or line 7, Form 1040A, until you reach
minimum retirement age.
Generally, minimum retirement age is
the age at which you would have first re-
ceived a pension or annuity were you not
disabled.
If you made contributions to your pen-
sion or annuity plan, your payments are
taxable under the rules discussed earlier,
beginning with the day after you reach the
minimum retirement age.
For more information on how to report
disability pensions, including military and
certain government disability pensions, see
chapter 6.
Purchased Annuities
If you privately purchased an annuity con-
tract from a commercial organization, such
as an insurance company, you generally
must use the General Rule to figure the
tax-free part of each annuity payment. For
more information about the General Rule,
get Publication 939. Also, see Variable An-
nuities in Publication 575 for the special
provisions of the General Rule that apply to
these annuity contracts.
Sale of annuity.Gain on the exchange of
an annuity contract is ordinary income to the
extent that the gain is due to interest accu-
mulated on the contract and the exchange
is for a life insurance or endowment con-
tract. You do not recognize gain or loss on
an exchange of an annuity contract solely
for another annuity contract if the insured
or annuitant remains the same. See Trans-
fers of Annuity Contracts in Publication 575
for more information about exchanges of
annuity contracts.
Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 81

12.
Social Security
and Equivalent
Railroad
Retirement
Benefits
Introduction
This chapter explains the federal income tax
rules for social security benefits and equiv-
alent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It
also explains:
 How to figure whether your benefits are
taxable, 
 How to use the social security benefits
worksheet (with examples),
 How to report your taxable benefits on
Form 1040 and Form 1040A (with ex-
amples), and 
 How to treat repayments that are more
than the benefits you received during
the year.
Social security benefits include monthly
survivor and disability benefits. They do not
include supplemental security income (SSI)
payments, which are not taxable.
Equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement
benefits are the part of tier 1 benefits that
a railroad employee or beneficiary would
have been entitled to receive under the so-
cial security system. They are commonly
called the social security equivalent benefit
(SSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits.
If you received these benefits during
2000, you should have received a Form
SSA–1099 or Form RRB–1099 (Form
SSA–1042S or Form RRB–1042S if you are
a nonresident alien) showing the amount.
Note. When the term “benefits” is used
in this chapter, it applies to both social se-
curity benefits and equivalent tier 1 railroad
retirement benefits.
What is not covered in this chapter.This
chapter does not cover the tax rules for the
following railroad retirement benefits:
 Non-social security equivalent benefit
(NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits,
 Tier 2 benefits,
 Vested dual benefits, and
 Supplemental annuity benefits.
For information on these benefits see Pub-
lication 575, Pension and Annuity Income.
This chapter also does not cover the tax
rules for foreign social security or railroad
retirement benefits. These benefits are tax-
able as annuities, unless they are exempt
from U.S. tax under a treaty.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554575 Pension and Annuity Income
/H18554590 Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs) (Including Roth
IRAs and Education IRAs)
/H18554915 Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
Forms (and Instructions)
/H185541040–ES  Estimated Tax for Individuals
/H18554W–4V Voluntary Withholding Request
Are Any of Your
Benefits Taxable?
To find out whether any of your benefits are
taxable, compare the base amount for your
filing status with the total of:
1) One-half of your benefits, plus
2) All your other income, including tax-
exempt interest. 
Exclusions. When making this compar-
ison, do not reduce your income by any
exclusions for:
 Interest from qualified U.S. savings
bonds,
 Employer-provided adoption benefits,
 Foreign earned income or foreign
housing, or
 Income earned in American Samoa or
Puerto Rico by bona fide residents.
TIP
The Railroad Retirement Board
(RRB) issues Form RRB–1099 and
Form RRB –1042S while the Social
Security Administration (SSA) issues Form
SSA –1099 and Form SSA –1042S. These
forms (tax statements) report the amounts
paid and repaid, and taxes withheld for a tax
year. You may receive more than one Form
RRB –1099, Form RRB –1042S, Form
SSA –1099, and/or Form SSA–1042S for the
same tax year. You should add the amounts
shown on all forms you receive from the
SSA and/or RRB for the same tax year to
determine the “total” amounts paid and re-
paid, and taxes withheld for that tax year.
See the Appendix at the end of Publication
915 for more information on these forms.
Figuring total income.To figure the total
of one-half of your benefits plus your other
income, use the worksheet later in this dis-
cussion. If the total is more than your base
amount, part of your benefits may be taxa-
ble.
TIP
If the only income you received
during 2000 was your social security
or the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad
retirement benefits, your benefits generally
are not taxable and you probably do not
have to file a return. If you have income in
addition to your benefits, you may have to
file a return even if none of your benefits
are taxable. 
If you are married and file a joint return
for 2000, you and your spouse must com-
bine your incomes and your benefits to fig-
ure whether any of your combined benefits
are taxable. Even if your spouse did not
receive any benefits, you must add your
spouse's income to yours to figure whether
any of your benefits are taxable.
Base amount. Your base amount is:
 $25,000 if you are single, head of
household, or qualifying widow(er),
 $25,000 if you are married filing sepa-
rately and lived apart from your spouse
for all of 2000,
 $32,000 if you are married filing jointly,
or
 $–0– if you are married filing separately
and lived with your spouse at any time
during 2000.
Worksheet. You can use the fol-
lowing worksheet to figure the
amount of income to compare with
your base amount. This is a quick way to
check whether some of your benefits may
be taxable.
Example. You and your spouse are fil-
ing a joint return for 2000, and you both re-
ceived social security benefits during the
year. In January 2001, you received a Form
SSA–1099 showing net benefits of $6,600
in box 5. Your spouse received a Form
SSA–1099 showing net benefits of $2,400
in box 5. You also received a taxable pen-
sion of $10,000 and interest income of
$500. You did not have any tax-exempt in-
terest income. Your benefits are not taxable
for 2000 because your income, as figured
A. Write in the amount from box 5 of
all your Forms SSA–1099 and
RRB–1099. Include the full amount
of any lump-sum benefit payments
received in 2000, for 2000 and
earlier years. (If you received more
than one form, combine the
amounts from box 5 and write in the
total.) A.
Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop
here; none of your benefits are taxable this year.
B.  Enter one-half of the amount on
line A .............................................. B.
C. Add your taxable pensions, wages,
interest, dividends, and other taxa-
ble income and write in the total ... C.
D. Write in any tax-exempt interest
income (such as interest on mu-
nicipal bonds) plus any exclusions
from income shown in the list under
Exclusions, earlier. ........................ D.
E. Add lines B, C, and D and write in
the total .......................................... E.
Note. Compare the amount on line E to your base
amount for your filing status. If the amount on line
E equals or is less than the base amount for your
filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this
year. If the amount on line E is more than your
base amount, some of your benefits may be tax-
able. You need to complete Worksheet 1 in Pub-
lication 915 (or in your tax form instruction booklet)
to find out if they are.
Page 82 Chapter 12  Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

in the following worksheet, is not more than
your base amount ($32,000).
Who is taxed. The person who has the
legal right to receive the benefits must de-
termine whether the benefits are taxable.
For example, if you and your child receive
benefits, but the check for your child is
made out in your name, you must use only
your part of the benefits to see whether any
benefits are taxable to you. The part that
belongs to your child must be added to your
child's other income to see whether any of
those benefits are taxable to the child.
Repayment of benefits. Any repayment
of benefits you made during 2000 must be
subtracted from the gross benefits you re-
ceived in 2000. It does not matter whether
the repayment was for a benefit you re-
ceived in 2000 or in an earlier year. If you
repaid more than the gross benefits you
received in 2000, see Repayments More
Than Gross Benefits, later. 
Your gross benefits are shown in box 3
of Form SSA–1099 or RRB–1099. Your re-
payments are shown in box 4. The amount
in box 5 shows your net benefits for 2000
(box 3 minus box 4). Use the amount in box
5 to figure whether any of your benefits are
taxable. 
Tax withholding and estimated tax.You
can choose to have federal income tax
withheld from your social security benefits
and/or the SSEB portion of your tier 1 rail-
road retirement benefits. If you choose to
do this, you must complete a Form W–4V.
You can choose withholding at 7%, 15%,
28%, or 31% of your total benefit payment.
CAUTION
!
If you do not choose to have income
tax withheld, you may have to re-
quest additional withholding from
other income or pay estimated tax during
the year. For details, get Publication 505,
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax, or the
instructions for Form 1040–ES.
How To Report
Your Benefits
If part of your benefits are taxable, you must
use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot
use Form 1040EZ.
Reporting on Form 1040.Report your net
benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Form
SSA–1099 or Form RRB–1099) on line 20a
and the taxable part on line 20b. If you are
married filing separately and you lived apart
from your spouse for all of 2000, also enter
“D” to the left of line 20a.
Reporting on Form 1040A. Report your
net benefits (the amount in box 5 of your
Form SSA–1099 or Form RRB–1099) on
line 14a and the taxable part on line 14b. If
you are married filing separately and you
lived apart from your spouse for all of 2000,
also enter “D” to the right of the word “ben-
efits” on line 14a.
Benefits not taxable.If none of your ben-
efits are taxable, do not report any of them
on your tax return. But if you are married
filing separately and you lived apart from
your spouse for all of 2000, make the fol-
lowing entries. On Form 1040, enter “D” to
the left of line 20a and “–0–” on line 20b.
On Form 1040A, enter “D” to the right of the
word “benefits” on line 14a and “–0–” on line
14b.
How Much Is Taxable?
If part of your benefits are taxable, how
much is taxable depends on the total
amount of your benefits and other income.
Generally, the higher that total amount, the
greater the taxable part of your benefits.
Maximum taxable part. The taxable part
of your benefits cannot usually be more than
50%. However, up to 85% of your benefits
can be taxable if either of the following sit-
uations applies to you.
1) The total of one-half of your benefits
and all your other income is more than
$34,000 ($44,000 if you are married
filing jointly).
2) You are married filing separately and
lived with your spouse at any time
during 2000.
Which worksheet to use.A worksheet to
figure your taxable benefits is in the in-
structions for your Form 1040 or Form
1040A. You can use either that worksheet
or Worksheet 1 in Publication 915, unless
any of the following situations applies to
you.
1) You contributed to a traditional individ-
ual retirement arrangement (IRA) and
your IRA deduction is limited because
you or your spouse is covered by a
retirement plan at work. In this situation
you must use the special worksheets
in Appendix B of Publication 590 to
figure both your IRA deduction and
your taxable benefits.
2) Situation (1) does not apply and you
take an exclusion for interest from
qualified U.S. savings bonds (Form
8815), for adoption benefits (Form
8839), for foreign earned income or
housing (Form 2555 or Form
2555–EZ), or for income earned in
American Samoa (Form 4563) or
Puerto Rico by bona fide residents. In
this situation, you must use Worksheet
1 in Publication 915 to figure your tax-
able benefits.
3) You received a lump-sum payment for
an earlier year. In this situation, also
complete Worksheet 2 or 3 and Work-
sheet 4 in Publication 915. See Lump-
sum election. 
Lump-sum election.You must include the
taxable part of a lump-sum (retroactive)
payment of benefits received in 2000 in your
2000 income, even if the payment includes
benefits for an earlier year.
TIP
This type of lump-sum benefit pay-
ment should not be confused with
the lump-sum death benefit that
both the SSA and RRB pay to many of their
beneficiaries. No part of the lump-sum
death benefit is subject to tax.
Generally, you use your 2000 income to
figure the taxable part of the total benefits
received in 2000. However, you may be
able to figure the taxable part of a lump-sum
payment for an earlier year separately, us-
ing your income for the earlier year. You can
elect this method if it lowers your taxable
benefits.
Making the election.If you received a
lump-sum benefit payment in 2000 that in-
cludes benefits for one or more earlier
years, follow the instructions in Publication
915 under Lump-Sum Election to see
whether making the election will lower your
taxable benefits. That discussion also ex-
plains how to make the election.
CAUTION
!
Since the earlier year's taxable
benefits are included in your 2000
income, no adjustment is made to
the earlier year's return. Do not file an
amended return for the earlier year.
A. Write in the amount from box 5 of
all your Forms SSA–1099 and
RRB–1099. Include the full amount
of any lump-sum benefit payments
received in 2000, for 2000 and
earlier years. (If you received more
than one form, combine the
amounts from box 5 and write in the
total.) A. $ 9,000
Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop
here; none of your benefits are taxable this year.
B.  Enter one-half of the amount on
line A .............................................. B. 4,500
C. Add your taxable pensions, wages,
interest, dividends, and other taxa-
ble income and write in the total ... C.  10,500
D.  Write in any tax-exempt interest
income (such as interest on mu-
nicipal bonds) plus any exclusions
from income shown in the list under
Exclusions, earlier. ........................ D. –0–
E. Add lines B, C, and D and write in
the total .......................................... E. $15,000
Note. Compare the amount on line E to your base
amount for your filing status. If the amount on line
E equals or is less than the base amount for your
filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this
year. If the amount on line E is more than your
base amount, some of your benefits may be tax-
able. You need to complete Worksheet 1 in Pub-
lication 915 (or in your tax form instruction booklet)
to find out if they are.
Chapter 12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement BenefitsPage 83

Examples
Following are a few examples you can use
as a guide to figure the taxable part of your
benefits.
Example 1. George White is single and
files Form 1040 for 2000. He received the
following income in 2000:
George also received social security
benefits during 2000. The Form SSA–1099
he received in January 2000 shows $5,980
in box 5. To figure his taxable benefits,
George completes the worksheet shown
here.
The amount on line 18 of George's work-
sheet shows that $2,990 of his social secu-
rity benefits is taxable. On line 20a of his
Form 1040, George enters his net benefits
of $5,980. On line 20b, he enters his taxa-
ble part of $2,990. 
Example 2. Ray and Alice Hopkins file
a joint return on Form 1040A for 2000. Ray
is retired and received a fully taxable pen-
sion of $15,500. He also received social
security benefits, and his Form SSA–1099
for 2000 shows net benefits of $5,600 in box
5. Alice worked during the year and had
wages of $14,000. She made a deductible
payment to her IRA account of $1,000. Ray
and Alice have two savings accounts with
a total of $250 in interest income. They
complete Worksheet 1 and find that none
of Ray's social security benefits are taxable.
They leave lines 14a and 14b of their Form
1040A blank. Example 3. Joe and Betty Johnson file
a joint return on Form 1040 for 2000. Joe
is a retired railroad worker and in 2000 re-
ceived the social security equivalent benefit
(SSEB) portion of tier 1 railroad retirement
benefits. Joe's Form RRB–1099 shows
$10,000 in box 5. Betty is a retired govern-
ment worker and receives a fully taxable
pension of $38,000. They had $2,300 in in-
terest income plus interest of $200 on a
qualified U.S. savings bond. The savings
bond interest qualified for the exclusion.
Thus, they have a total income of $40,300
($38,000 + $2,300). They figure their taxa-
ble benefits by completing Worksheet 1.
11.  Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero
or less, enter –0– ............................... –0–
8.  Enter $25,000 ($32,000 if married fil-
ing jointly; $0 if married filing sepa-
rately and you lived with your spouse
at any time during 2000) .................... 32,000
12.  Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10
6,980
13.  Enter one-half of line 12 ...................
3,490
9.  Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or
less, enter –0– ................................... –0–
14.  Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13
2,990 Note. If line 9 is zero or less, stop
here; none of your benefits are taxa-
ble. (Do not enter any amounts on
Form 1040, line 20a or 20b, or on
Form 1040A, line 14a or 14b. But if
you are married filing separately and
you lived apart from your spouse for
all of 2000, enter “D ” to the left of line
20a, Form 1040, or to the right of the
word “benefits” on line 14a, Form
1040A. Also enter –0– on Form 1040,
line 20b or on Form 1040A, line 14b.)
Otherwise, go on to line 10.
15.  Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line
11 is zero, enter –0– .......................... –0–
16.  Add lines 14 and 15 ..........................
2,990
17.  Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ..............
5,083Fully taxable pension .............................. $18,60018.  Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller
of line 16 or line 17 ............................ 2,990Wages from part-time job .......................  9,400
Taxable Interest income ......................... 990
• Enter the amount from line 1 above
on Form 1040, line 20a or on Form
1040A, line 14a.
Total ........................................................ $28,990
• Enter the amount from line 18 above
on Form 1040, line 20b or on Form
1040A, line 14b
10. Enter $9,000 ($12,000 if married filing
jointly; $0 if married filing separately
and you lived with your spouse at any
time in 2000) ......................................
11.  Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero
or less, enter –0– ...............................
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10
Worksheet 1. Social Security
and Equivalent Railroad Retirement
Benefits
13.  Enter one-half of line 12 ...................
14. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13
1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of
ALL your Forms SSA–1099 and
RRB–1099  ........................................  5,980
15.  Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line
11 is zero, enter –0– ..........................
16.  Add lines 14 and 15 ..........................Note. If line 1 is zero or less, stop here;
none of your benefits are taxable. Other-
wise, go on to line 2. 17.  Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ..............
2.  Enter one-half of line 1 ..................... 2,990 18.  Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller
of line 16 or line 17 ............................3. Enter the total of the amounts from:
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b,
9–14, 15b, 16b, 17–19, and 21. • Enter the amount from line 1 above
on Form 1040, line 20a or on Form
1040A, line 14a.Form 1040A: lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9,
10, 11b, 12b, and 13 ................. 28,990
• Enter the amount from line 18 above
on Form 1040, line 20b or on Form
1040A, line 14b
4. Form 1040A filers: Enter the total of
any exclusions for qualified U.S.
savings bond interest (Form 8815, line
14) or for adoption benefits (Form
8839, line 26).
Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of
any exclusions/adjustments for:
• Qualified U.S. savings bond
interest (Form 8815, line 14),
Worksheet 1. Social Security
and Equivalent Railroad Retirement
Benefits• Adoption benefits (Form 8839,
line 26),
• Foreign earned income or
housing (Form 2555, lines 43
and 48, or Form 2555–EZ, line
18), and
1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of
ALL your Forms SSA–1099 and
RRB–1099  ........................................  5,600
Note. If line 1 is zero or less, stop here;
none of your benefits are taxable. Other-
wise, go on to line 2. 
• Certain income of bona fide
residents of American Samoa
(Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto
Rico ............................................ –0–
2.  Enter one-half of line 1 ..................... 2,800
3. Enter the total of the amounts from:5.  Add lines 2, 3, and 4 ........................ 31,980Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b,
9–14, 15b, 16b, 17–19, and 21.6.  Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount
from Form 1040A, line 16 Form 1040A: lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9,
10, 11b, 12b, and 13 ................. 29,750Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount
from Form 1040, line 32, minus any
amount on Form 1040, line 24 .......... –0–
4. Form 1040A filers: Enter the total of
any exclusion for qualified U.S.
savings bond interest (Form 8815, line
14) or for adoption benefits (Form
8839, line 26).
Worksheet 1. Social Security
and Equivalent Railroad Retirement
Benefits
7.  Subtract line 6 from line 5 ................ 31,980
8.  Enter $25,000 ($32,000 if married fil-
ing jointly; $0 if married filing sepa-
rately and you lived with your spouse
at any time during 2000) .................... 25,000
1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of
ALL your Forms SSA–1099 and
RRB–1099  ........................................ 10,000
Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of
any exclusions/adjustments for:9.  Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or
less, enter –0– ................................... 6,980• Qualified U.S. savings bond
interest (Form 8815, line 14), Note. If line 1 is zero or less, stop here;
none of your benefits are taxable. Other-
wise, go on to line 2. 
Note. If line 9 is zero or less, stop
here; none of your benefits are taxa-
ble. (Do not enter any amounts on
Form 1040, line 20a or 20b, or on
Form 1040A, line 14a or 14b. But if
you are married filing separately and
you lived apart from your spouse for
all of 2000, enter “D ” to the left of line
20a, Form 1040, or to the right of the
word “benefits” on line 14a, Form
1040A. Also enter –0– on Form 1040,
line 20b or on Form 1040A, line 14b.)
Otherwise, go on to line 10.
• Adoption benefits (Form 8839,
line 26),
• Foreign earned income or
housing (Form 2555, lines 43
and 48, or Form 2555–EZ, line
18), and
2.  Enter one-half of line 1 ..................... 5,000
3. Enter the total of the amounts from:
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b,
9–14, 15b, 16b, 17–19, and 21.
• Certain income of bona fide
residents of American Samoa
(Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto
Rico ............................................ –0–
Form 1040A: lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9,
10, 11b, 12b, and 13 ................. 40,300
4. Form 1040A filers: Enter the total of
any exclusion for qualified U.S.
savings bond interest (Form 8815, line
14) or for adoption benefits (Form
8839, line 26).
5.  Add lines 2, 3, and 4 ........................ 32,550
6.  Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount
from Form 1040A, line 16
10. Enter $9,000 ($12,000 if married filing
jointly; $0 if married filing separately
and you lived with your spouse at any
time in 2000) ...................................... 9,000
Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount
from Form 1040, line 32, minus any
amount on Form 1040, line 24 .......... 1,000
Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of
any exclusions/adjustments for:
• Qualified U.S. savings bond
interest (Form 8815, line 14),7. Subtract line 6 from line 5 31,550
Page 84 Chapter 12  Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

More than 50% of Joe's net benefits are
taxable because the income on line 7 of the
worksheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000.
Joe and Betty enter $10,000 on line 20a,
Form 1040, and $6,275 on line 20b, Form
1040.
Deductions Related
to Your Benefits
You may be entitled to deduct certain
amounts related to the benefits you receive.
Disability payments.You may have re-
ceived disability payments from your em-
ployer or an insurance company that you
included as income on your tax return in an
earlier year. If you received a lump-sum
payment from SSA or RRB, and you had to
repay the employer or insurance company
for the disability payments, you can take an
itemized deduction for the part of the pay-
ments you included in gross income in the
earlier year. If the amount you repay is more
than $3,000, you may be able to claim a tax
credit instead. Claim the deduction or credit
in the same way explained under Repay-
ments More Than Gross Benefits, later.
Legal expenses. You can usually deduct
legal expenses that you pay or incur to
produce or collect taxable income or in
connection with the determination, col-
lection, or refund of any tax.
Legal expenses for collecting the taxa-
ble part of your benefits are deductible as
a miscellaneous itemized deduction on line
22, Schedule A (Form 1040).
Repayments More Than
Gross Benefits 
In some situations, your Form SSA–1099
or Form RRB–1099 will show that the total
benefits you repaid (box 4) are more than
the gross benefits (box 3) you received. If
this occurred, your net benefits in box 5 will
be a negative figure (a figure in parenthe-
ses) and none of your benefits will be taxa-
ble. If you receive more than one form, a
negative figure in box 5 of one form is used
to offset a positive figure in box 5 of another
form for that same year.
If you have any questions about this
negative figure, contact your local SSA of-
fice or your local U.S. RRB field office.
Joint return.If you and your spouse file a
joint return, and your Form SSA–1099 or
RRB–1099 has a negative figure in box 5,
but your spouse's does not, subtract the
amount in box 5 of your form from the
amount in box 5 of your spouse's form. You
do this to get your net benefits when figuring
if your combined benefits are taxable.
Example. John and Mary file a joint
return for 2000. John received Form
SSA–1099 showing $3,000 in box 5. Mary
also received Form SSA–1099 and the
amount in box 5 was ($500). John and Mary
will use $2,500 ($3,000 minus $500) as the
amount of their net benefits when figuring
if any of their combined benefits are taxable.
Repayment of benefits received in an
earlier year.If the total amount shown in
box 5 of all of your Forms SSA–1099 and
RRB–1099 is a negative figure, you can
take an itemized deduction for the part of
this negative figure that represents benefits
you included in gross income in an earlier
year.
If this deduction is $3,000 or less, it
is subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-
come limit that applies to certain miscella-
neous itemized deductions. Claim it on line
22, Schedule A (Form 1040).
If this deduction is more than $3,000,
you should figure your tax two ways:
1) Figure your tax for 2000 with the item-
ized deduction. This more-than-$3,000
deduction is not subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that
applies to certain miscellaneous item-
ized deductions.
2) Figure your tax for 2000 in the following
steps.
a) Figure the tax without the itemized
deduction.
b) For each year after 1983 for which
part of the negative figure repre-
sents a repayment of benefits,
refigure your taxable benefits as
if your total benefits for the year
were reduced by that part of the
negative figure. Then refigure the
tax for that year.
c) Subtract the total of the refigured
tax amounts in (b) from the total
of your actual tax amounts.
d) Subtract the result in (c) from the
result in (a).
Compare the tax figured in methods (1) and
(2). Your tax for 2000 is the smaller of the
two amounts. If method (1) results in less
tax, take the itemized deduction on line 27,
Schedule A (Form 1040). If method (2) re-
sults in less tax, claim a credit for the ap-
plicable amount on line 64 of Form 1040
and write “I.R.C. 1341” in the margin to the
left of line 64. If both methods produce the
same tax, deduct the repayment on line 27,
Schedule A (Form 1040).
• Adoption benefits (Form 8839,
line 26),
• Foreign earned income or
housing (Form 2555, lines 43
and 48, or Form 2555–EZ, line
18), and
• Certain income of bona fide
residents of American Samoa
(Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto
Rico ............................................ 200
5.  Add lines 2, 3, and 4 ........................ 45,500
6.  Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount
from Form 1040A, line 16
Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount
from Form 1040, line 32, minus any
amount on Form 1040, line 24 .......... –0–
7. Subtract line 6 from line 5 45,500
8.  Enter $25,000 ($32,000 if married fil-
ing jointly; $0 if married filing sepa-
rately and you lived with your spouse
at any time during 2000) .................... 32,000
9.  Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or
less, enter –0– ................................... 13,500
Note. If line 9 is zero or less, stop
here; none of your benefits are taxa-
ble. (Do not enter any amounts on
Form 1040, line 20a or 20b, or on
Form 1040A, line 14a or 14b. But if
you are married filing separately and
you lived apart from your spouse for
all of 2000, enter “D ” to the left of line
20a, Form 1040, or to the right of the
word “benefits”on line 14a, Form
1040A. Also enter –0– on Form 1040,
line 20b or on Form 1040A, line 14b.)
Otherwise, go on to line 10.
10. Enter $9,000 ($12,000 if married filing
jointly; $0 if married filing separately
and you lived with your spouse at any
time in 2000) ...................................... 12,000
11.  Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero
or less, enter –0– ............................... 1,500
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10
12,000
13.  Enter one-half of line 12 ...................
6,000
14. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13
5,000
15.  Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line
11 is zero, enter –0– .......................... 1,275
16.  Add lines 14 and 15 ..........................
6,275
17.  Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ..............
8,500
18.  Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller
of line 16 or line 17 ............................ 6,275
• Enter the amount from line 1 above
on Form 1040, line 20a or on Form
1040A, line 14a.
• Enter the amount from line 18 above
on Form 1040, line 20b or on Form
1040A, line 14b.
Chapter 12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement BenefitsPage 85

13.
Other Income
Introduction
This chapter discusses many kinds of in-
come and explains whether they are taxable
or nontaxable.
 Income that is taxable must be reported
on your tax return and is subject to tax.
 Income that is nontaxable may have to
be shown on your tax return, but is not
subject to tax. 
This chapter begins with discussions of
the following income items.
 Bartering.
 Canceled debts.
 Life insurance proceeds.
 Partnership income.
 S Corporation income.
 Recoveries (including state income tax
refunds).
 Rents from personal property.
 Repayments.
 Royalties.
 Unemployment benefits.
 Welfare and other public assistance
benefits.
These discussions are followed by brief
discussions of many income items arranged
in alphabetical order.
You must include on your return all in-
come you receive in the form of money,
property, and services unless the tax law
states that you do not include them. Some
items, however, are only partly excluded
from income. They are listed and discussed
briefly in this chapter.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554520 Scholarships and Fellowships
/H18554525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
/H18554544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
/H18554550 Investment Income and Ex-
penses
Bartering
Bartering is an exchange of property or
services. You must include in your income,
at the time received, the fair market value
of property or services you receive in
bartering. If you exchange services with
another person and you both have agreed
ahead of time as to the value of the ser-
vices, that value will be accepted as fair
market value unless the value can be shown
to be otherwise.
Generally, you report this income on
Schedule C, Profit or Loss from Business,
or Schedule C–EZ, Net Profit or Loss from
Business, (Form 1040). But if the barter in-
volves an exchange of something other than
services such as in Example 3 below, you
may have to use another form or schedule
instead.
Example 1. You are a self-employed
attorney who performs legal services for a
client, a small corporation. The corporation
gives you shares of its stock as payment for
your services. You must include the fair
market value of the shares in your income
on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form
1040) in the year that you receive them.
Example 2. You are self-employed and
a member of a barter club. The club uses
“credit units” as a means of exchange. It
adds credit units to your account for goods
or services you provide to members, which
you can use to purchase goods and ser-
vices offered by other members of the barter
club. The club subtracts credit units from
your account when you receive goods or
services from other members. You must in-
clude in your income the value of the credit
units that are added to your account, even
though you may not actually receive goods
or services from other members until a later
tax year.
Example 3. You own a small apartment
building. In return for 6 months' rent-free
use of an apartment, an artist gives you a
work of art she created. You must report as
rental income on Schedule E, Supplemental
Income and Loss (Form 1040) the fair mar-
ket value of the artwork, and the artist must
report as income on Schedule C or Sched-
ule C–EZ (Form 1040) the fair rental value
of the apartment.
Form 1099–B from barter exchange. If
you exchanged property or services through
a barter exchange, you should receive 
Form 1099–B, Proceeds From Broker and
Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similar
statement from the barter exchange by
January 31, 2001. It should show the value
of cash, property, services, credits, or scrip
you received from exchanges during the
year. The IRS will also receive a copy of
Form 1099–B.
Canceled Debts
Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled or
forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you
must include the canceled amount in your
income. You have no income from the can-
celed debt if it is intended as a gift to you.
A debt includes any indebtedness for which
you are liable or which attaches to property
you hold.
If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report
the canceled amount on line 21 of Form
1040. If it is a business debt, report the
amount on Schedule C or C–EZ (Form
1040) (or on Schedule F, Profit or Loss from
Farming, (Form 1040) if you are a farmer).
Form 1099–C. If a federal government
agency, financial institution, or credit union
cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600
or more, you will receive a Form 1099–C,
Cancellation of Debt. The amount of the
canceled debt is shown in box 2.
Interest included in canceled debt.If
any interest is forgiven and included in the
amount of canceled debt in box 2, the
amount of interest will also be shown in box
3. Whether or not you must include the in-
terest portion of the canceled debt in your
income depends on whether the interest
would be deductible if you paid it. See
Deductible debt, under Exceptions, later.
If the interest would not be deductible
(such as interest on a personal loan), in-
clude in your income the amount from box
2 of Form 1099–C. If the interest would be
deductible (such as on a business loan),
include in your income the net amount of the
canceled debt (the amount shown in box 2
less the interest amount shown in box 3).
Discounted mortgage loan.If your finan-
cial institution offers a discount for the early
payment of your mortgage loan, the amount
of the discount is canceled debt. You must
include the canceled amount in your in-
come.
Stockholder debt.If you are a stockholder
in a corporation and the corporation cancels
or forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt
is dividend income to you.
If you are a stockholder in a corporation
and you cancel a debt owed to you by the
corporation, you generally do not realize
income. This is because the canceled debt
is considered as a contribution to the capital
of the corporation equal to the amount of
debt principal that you canceled.
Exceptions
There are several exceptions to the inclu-
sion of canceled debt in income. These are
explained next.
Nonrecourse debt. If you are not per-
sonally liable for the debt (nonrecourse
debt), different rules apply. You may have
a gain or loss if nonrecourse debt is can-
celed or forgiven in conjunction with the
foreclosure or repossession of property to
which the debt attaches. See Publication
544 for more information.
Student loans.  Certain student loans con-
tain a provision that all or part of the debt
incurred to attend the qualified educational
institution will be canceled if you work for a
certain period of time in certain professions
for any of a broad class of employers.
You do not have income if your student
loan is canceled after you agreed to this
provision and then performed the services
required. To qualify, the loan must have
been made by:
1) The government—federal, state, or lo-
cal, or an instrumentality, agency, or
subdivision thereof, 
2) A tax-exempt public benefit corporation
that has assumed control of a state,
county, or municipal hospital, and
whose employees are considered
public employees under state law, or 
3) An educational institution: 
a) Under an agreement with an en-
tity described in (1) or (2) that
provided the funds to the institu-
tion to make the loan, or 
Page 86 Chapter 13  Other Income

b) As part of a program of the insti-
tution designed to encourage stu-
dents to serve in occupations or
areas with unmet needs and un-
der which the services provided
are for or under the direction of a
governmental unit or a tax-exempt
section 501(c)(3) organization.
A loan to refinance a qualified student
loan will also qualify if it was made by an
educational institution or a tax-exempt
501(c)(3) organization under its program
designed as described in (3)(b) above.
Section 501(c)(3) organizations are de-
fined in Publication 525.
Deductible debt.You do not have income
from the cancellation of a debt if your pay-
ment of the debt would be deductible. This
exception applies only if you use the cash
method of accounting. For more informa-
tion, see chapter 5 of Publication 334, Tax
Guide for Small Business.
Price reduced after purchase.Generally,
if the seller reduces the amount of debt you
owe for property you purchased, you do not
have income from the reduction. The re-
duction of the debt is treated as a purchase
price adjustment and reduces your basis in
the property.
Excluded debt.Do not include a canceled
debt in your gross income in the following
situations.
1) The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy
case under title 11 of the U.S. Code.
See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax
Guide.
2) The debt is canceled when you are in-
solvent. However, this does not apply
to the extent the debt exceeds the
amount by which you are insolvent.
See Publication 908.
3) The debt is qualified farm debt and is
canceled by a qualified person. See
chapter 4 of Publication 225, Farmer's
Tax Guide.
4) The debt is qualified real property
business debt. See chapter 5 of Publi-
cation 334.
Life Insurance
Proceeds
Life insurance proceeds paid to you be-
cause of the death of the insured person
are not taxable unless the policy was turned
over to you for a price. This is true even if
the proceeds were paid under an accident
or health insurance policy or an endowment
contract.
Proceeds not received in installments.
If death benefits are paid to you in a lump
sum or other than at regular intervals, in-
clude in your income only the benefits that
are more than the amount payable to you
at the time of the insured person's death. If
the benefit payable at death is not specified,
you include in your income the benefit pay-
ments that are more than the present value
of the payments at the time of death.
Proceeds received in installments.If you
receive life insurance proceeds in install-
ments, you can exclude part of each in-
stallment from your income.
To determine the excluded part, divide
the amount held by the insurance company
(generally the total lump sum payable at the
death of the insured person) by the number
of installments to be paid. Include anything
over this excluded part in your income as
interest.
Surviving spouse.If your spouse died
before October 23, 1986, and insurance
proceeds paid to you because of the death
of your spouse are received in installments,
you can exclude up to $1,000 a year of the
interest included in the installments. If you
remarry, you can continue to take the ex-
clusion.
More information. For more informa-
tion, see Life Insurance Proceeds in Publi-
cation 525.
Surrender of policy for cash.If you sur-
render a life insurance policy for cash, you
must include in income any proceeds that
are more than the cost of the life insurance
policy. In general, your cost (or investment
in the contract) is the total of premiums that
you paid for the life insurance policy, less
any refunded premiums, rebates, dividends,
or unrepaid loans that were not included in
your income.
You should receive a Form 1099–R
showing the total proceeds and the taxable
part. Report these amounts on lines 16a
and 16b of Form 1040, or lines 12a and 12b
of Form 1040A.
Endowment proceeds. Endowment pro-
ceeds paid in a lump sum to you at maturity
are taxable only if the proceeds are more
than the cost of the policy. To determine
your cost, see Endowment proceeds in
Publication 525.
Deceased public safety officers.If you
are a survivor of a public safety officer who
died in the line of duty, you may be able to
exclude from income certain amounts you
receive.
Bureau of Justice Assistance pay-
ments. If you are a surviving dependent of
a public safety officer (law enforcement of-
ficer or firefighter) who died in the line of
duty, do not include in your income the
death benefit paid to you by the Bureau of
Justice Assistance.
Governmental plan annuity. If you re-
ceive a survivor annuity as the child or
spouse (or former spouse) of a public safety
officer who was killed in the line of duty after
1996, you generally do not have to include
it in income. The annuity is excluded to the
extent it is based on the officer's service as
a public safety officer.
For this purpose, the term “public safety
officer” includes police and law enforcement
officers, firefighters and rescue squad and
ambulance crews. See Publication 525 for
more information.
Accelerated Death Benefits
Certain amounts paid as accelerated death
benefits under a life insurance contract or
viatical settlement before the individual's
death are excluded from income if the in-
sured is terminally or chronically ill.
Viatical settlement.This is the sale or
assignment of any part of the death benefit
under a life insurance contract to a viatical
settlement provider. A viatical settlement
provider is a person who regularly engages
in the business of buying or taking assign-
ment of life insurance contracts on the lives
of insured individuals who are terminally or
chronically ill and who meets the require-
ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
Exclusion for terminal illness.Acceler-
ated death benefits are fully excludable if
the insured is a terminally ill individual. This
is a person who has been certified by a
physician as having an illness or physical
condition that can reasonably be expected
to result in death within 24 months from the
date of the certification.
Exclusion for chronic illness.If the in-
sured is a chronically ill individual who is not
terminally ill, accelerated death benefits
paid on the basis of costs incurred for
qualified long-term care services are fully
excludable. Accelerated death benefits paid
on a per diem or other periodic basis are
excludable up to a limit. This limit applies to
the total of the accelerated death benefits
and any periodic payments received from
long-term care insurance contracts. For in-
formation on the limit and the definitions of
“chronically ill individual” and “long-term
care insurance contracts,” see Long-Term
Care Insurance Contracts under Sickness
and Injury Benefits in chapter 6.
Exception. The exclusion does not apply
to any amount paid to a person (other than
the insured) who has an insurable interest
in the life of the insured because the in-
sured:
 Is a director, officer, or employee of the
other person, or 
 Has a financial interest in the person's
business.
Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for ac-
celerated death benefits made on a per
diem or other periodic basis, you must file
Form 8853, Medical Savings Accounts and
Long-term Care Insurance Contracts, with
your return. You do not have to file Form
8853 to exclude accelerated death benefits
paid on the basis of actual expenses in-
curred.
Partnership Income
A partnership is not a taxable entity. The
income, gains, losses, deductions, and
credits of a partnership are “passed
through” to the partners based on each
partner's distributive share of these items.
Schedule K–1 (Form 1065). Although a
partnership generally pays no tax, it must
file an information return on Form 1065,
U.S. Return of Partnership Income, and
send Schedule K–1 (Form 1065) to each
partner. In addition, the partnership will
send each partner a copy of the Partner's
Instructions for Schedule K–1 (Form 1065)
to help each partner report his or her share
of the partnership's income, deductions,
credits, and tax preference items.
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 87

TIP
Keep Schedule K–1 (Form 1065) for
your records. Do not attach it to your
Form 1040.
For more information on partnerships,
get Publication 541, Partnerships.
S Corporation Income
In general, an S corporation does not pay
tax on its income. Instead, the income,
losses, deductions, and credits of the cor-
poration are “passed through” to the share-
holders.
S corporation return.An S corporation
must file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. In-
come Tax Return for an S Corporation, and
send Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S) to each
shareholder. In addition, the S corporation
will send each shareholder a copy of the
Shareholder's Instructions for Schedule K–1
(Form 1120S) to help each shareholder re-
port his or her share of the S corporation's
income, credits, and deductions.
TIP
Keep Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S)
for your records. Do not attach it to
your Form 1040.
For more information on S corporations
and their shareholders, see the instructions
for Form 1120S.
Recoveries
A recovery is a return of an amount you
deducted or took a credit for in an earlier
year. The most common recoveries are re-
funds, reimbursements, and rebates of de-
ductions itemized on Schedule A (Form
1040). You may also have recoveries of
non-itemized deductions such as payments
on previously deducted bad debts and re-
coveries of items for which you previously
claimed a tax credit.
Tax benefit rule.You must include a re-
covery in your income in the year you re-
ceive it to the extent that the deduction or
credit you took for the recovered amount
reduced your tax in the earlier year. For this
purpose, any increase to an amount carried
over to the current year that resulted from
the deduction or credit is considered to have
reduced your tax in the earlier year. For
more information, get Publication 525.
Federal income tax refund.Refunds of
federal income taxes are not included in
your income because they are never al-
lowed as a deduction from income.
State income tax refund. If you received
a state or local income tax refund (or credit
or offset) in 2000, you must include it in in-
come if you deducted the tax in an earlier
year. You should receive, Form 1099–G,
Certain Government and Qualified State
Tuition Program Payments, from the payer
by January 31, 2001. The IRS will also re-
ceive a copy of the Form 1099–G.
Mortgage interest refund.If you received
a refund or credit in 2000 of mortgage in-
terest paid in an earlier year, the amount
should be shown in box 3 of your Form
1098, Mortgage Interest Statement. Do not
subtract the refund amount from the interest
you paid in 2000. You may have to include
it in your income under the rules explained
in the following discussions.
Interest on recovery.Interest on any of
the amounts you recover must be reported
as interest income in the year received. For
example, report any interest you received
on state or local income tax refunds on line
8a of Form 1040.
Recovery and expense in same year.If
the refund or other recovery and the ex-
pense occur in the same year, the recovery
reduces the deduction or credit and is not
reported as income.
Recovery for 2 or more years.If you re-
ceive a refund or other recovery that is for
amounts you paid in 2 or more separate
years, you must allocate, on a pro rata ba-
sis, the recovered amount between the
years in which you paid it.
This allocation is necessary to determine
the amount of recovery from any earlier
years and to determine the amount, if any,
of your allowable deduction for this item for
the current year. For information on how to
compute the allocation, see Recoveries in
Publication 525.
Itemized Deduction
Recoveries 
If you recover any amount that you de-
ducted in an earlier year on Schedule A
(Form 1040), you must generally include the
full amount of the recovery in your income
in the year you receive it.
Where to report. Enter your state or
local income tax refund on line 10 of Form
1040, and the total of all other recoveries
as other income on line 21 of Form 1040.
You cannot use Form 1040A or Form
1040EZ.
Example. For 1999, you filed a joint
return. Your taxable income was $20,000
and you were not entitled to any tax credits.
Your standard deduction was $7200, and
you had itemized deductions of $9,000. In
2000, you received the following recoveries
for amounts deducted on your 1999 return:
None of the recoveries were more than the
deductions taken for 1999.
Because your total recoveries are less
than the amount by which your itemized
deductions exceeded the standard de-
duction ($9,000 − 7,200 = $1,800), you must
include your total recoveries in your income
for 2000. Report the state and local income
tax refund of $400 on line 10 of Form 1040
and the balance of your recoveries, $525,
on line 21 of Form 1040.
Standard deduction limit. You are gener-
ally allowed to claim the standard deduction
if you do not itemize your deductions. Only
your itemized deductions that are more than
your standard deduction are subject to the
recovery rule (unless you are required to
itemize your deductions). If your total de-
ductions on the earlier year return were not
more than your income for that year, include
in your income this year the smaller of:
1) Your recoveries, or 
2) The amount by which your itemized
deductions exceeded the standard de-
duction. 
Standard deduction for earlier years.To
determine if amounts recovered in 2000
must be included in your income, you must
know the standard deduction for your filing
status for the year the deduction was
claimed. Standard deduction amounts for
1999, 1998, and 1997 are in Publication
525.
Example. You filed a joint return for
1999 with taxable income of $25,000. Your
itemized deductions were $8,700. The
standard deduction that you could have
claimed was $7,200. In 2000 you recover
$2,400 of your 1999 itemized deductions.
None of the recoveries were more than the
actual deductions for 1999. Include $1,500
of the recoveries in your 2000 income. This
is the smaller of your recoveries ($2,400)
or the amount by which your itemized de-
ductions were more than the standard de-
duction ($8,700 − 7,200 = $1,500).
Recovery limited to deduction.You do
not include in your income any amount of
your recovery that is more than the amount
you deducted in the earlier year. The
amount you include in your income is limited
to the smaller of:
1) The amount deducted on Schedule A
(Form 1040), or 
2) The amount recovered. 
Example. During 1999 you paid $1,700
for medical expenses. From this amount
you subtracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of
your adjusted gross income. Your actual
medical expense deduction was $200. In
2000, you received a $500 reimbursement
from your medical insurance for your 1999
expenses. The only amount of the $500 re-
imbursement that must be included in your
income for 2000 is $200—the amount ac-
tually deducted.
Other recoveries. See Recoveries in
Publication 525 if:
1) You have recoveries of items other
than itemized deductions, or
2) You received a recovery for an item for
which you claimed a tax credit (other
than investment credit or foreign tax
credit) in a prior year.
Rents from Personal
Property
If you rent out personal property, such as
equipment or vehicles, how you report your
income and expenses is generally deter-
mined by:
1) Whether or not the rental activity is a
business, and 
2) Whether or not the rental activity is
conducted for profit.
Medical expenses ........................................ $200
State and local income tax refund ............... 400
Refund of mortgage interest ........................ 325
Total recoveries ......................................... $925
Page 88 Chapter 13  Other Income

Generally, if your primary purpose is income
or profit and you are involved in the rental
activity with continuity and regularity, your
rental activity is a business. See Publication
535 for details on deducting expenses for
both business and not-for-profit activities.
Reporting business income and ex-
penses. If you are in the business of rent-
ing personal property, report your income
and expenses on Schedule C or C–EZ. The
form instructions have information on how
to complete them.
Reporting nonbusiness income. If you
are not in the business of renting personal
property, report your rental income on line
21 of Form 1040. List the type and amount
of the income on the dotted line to the left
of the amount you report on line 21.
Reporting nonbusiness expenses.If you
rent personal property for a profit, report
your rental expenses on line 32 of Form
1040. Enter the amount and “PPR” on the
dotted line to the left and include the amount
of your deductible expenses in the total
amount you enter on line 32.
If you do not rent personal property for
a profit, your deductions are limited and you
cannot report a loss to offset other income.
See  Activity not for profit, under Other In-
come, later.
Repayments
If you had to repay an amount that you in-
cluded in your income in an earlier year, you
may be able to deduct the amount repaid
from your income for the year in which you
repaid it. Or, if the amount you repaid is
more than $3,000, you may be able to take
a credit against your tax for the year in
which you repaid it. Generally, you can
claim a deduction or credit only if the re-
payment qualifies as an expense or loss
incurred in your trade or business or in a
for-profit transaction.
Type of deduction.The type of deduction
you are allowed in the year of repayment
depends on the type of income you included
in the earlier year. For instance, if you repay
an amount that you previously reported as
a capital gain, deduct the repayment as a
capital loss.
Repayment– $3,000 or less.If the amount
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it
from your income in the year you repaid it.
If you repaid an amount that you reported
as wages, unemployment compensation,
or other nonbusiness ordinary income, enter
it on line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). If
you repaid an amount that you reported as
a capital gain, deduct it on Schedule D
(Form 1040).
Repayment— over $3,000. If the amount
you repaid was more than $3,000, you can
deduct the repayment, as described earlier.
However, you can instead choose to take
a tax credit for the year of repayment if you
included the income under a claim of
right. This means that at the time you in-
cluded the income, it appeared that you had
an unrestricted right to it. If you qualify for
this choice, figure your tax under both
methods and compare the results. Use the
method (deduction or credit) that results in
less tax.
Method 1. Figure your tax for 2000
claiming a deduction for the repaid amount.
Method 2. Figure your tax for 2000
claiming a credit for the repaid amount.
Follow these steps.
1) Figure your tax for 2000 without de-
ducting the repaid amount.
2) Refigure your tax from the earlier year
without including in income the amount
you repaid in 2000. 
3) Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax
shown on your return for the earlier
year. This is the credit.
4) Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax
for 2000 figured without the deduction
(Step 1).
If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the
amount repaid on the same form or sched-
ule on which you previously reported it. For
example, if you reported it as self-employ-
ment income, deduct it as a business de-
duction on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ
(Form 1040). If you reported it as wages,
deduct it as an individual deduction on line
27 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
If method 2 results in less tax, claim the
credit on line 64 of Form 1040, and write
“I.R.C. 1341” next to line 64.
An example of this computation can be
found in Publication 525.
Repaid social security benefits.If you
repaid social security benefits, see Repay-
ment of benefits in chapter 12.
Royalties
Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil,
gas, and mineral properties are taxable as
ordinary income.
You generally report royalties in Part I
of Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if
you hold an operating oil, gas, or mineral
interest or are in business as a self-
employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., report
your gross income and expenses on
Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form
1040).
Copyrights and patents.Royalties from
copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic
works, and similar property, or from patents
on inventions, are amounts paid to you for
the right to use your work over a specified
period of time. Royalties are generally
based on the number of units sold, such as
the number of books, tickets to a perform-
ance, or machines sold.
Oil, gas, and minerals.Royalty income
from oil, gas, and mineral properties is the
amount you receive when natural resources
are extracted from your property. The roy-
alties are based on units, such as barrels,
tons, etc., and are paid to you by a person
or company who leases the property from
you.
Depletion. If you are the owner of an
economic interest in mineral deposits or oil
and gas wells, you can recover your in-
vestment through the depletion allowance.
For information on this subject, see chapter
10 of Publication 535, Business Expenses.
Coal and iron ore.Under certain cir-
cumstances, you can treat amounts you
receive from the disposal of coal and iron
ore as payments from the sale of a capital
asset, rather than as royalty income. For
information about gain or loss from the sale
of coal and iron ore, get Publication 544.
Interest in the property sold.If you
sell your complete interest in the oil, gas,
or mineral rights, the amount you receive is
considered payment for the sale of your
property, not royalty income. Under certain
circumstances, the sale is subject to capital
gain or loss treatment on Schedule D (Form
1040).
Part of future production sold.If you
own mineral property but sell part of the fu-
ture production, you generally treat the
money you receive from the buyer at the
time of the sale as a loan from the buyer.
Do not include it in your income or take
depletion based on it.
When production begins, you include all
the proceeds in your income, deduct all the
production expenses, and deduct depletion
from that amount to arrive at your taxable
income from the property.
Retained interest.If you retain a roy-
alty, an overriding royalty, or a net profit in-
terest in a mineral property for the life of the
property, you have made a lease or a sub-
lease, and any cash you receive for the
assignment is ordinary income subject to a
depletion allowance.
Unemployment
Benefits
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits
you receive depends on the type of program
paying the benefits.
Unemployment compensation. You must
include in your income all unemployment
compensation you receive. You should re-
ceive a Form 1099–G,Certain Government
and Qualified State Tuition Program Pay-
ments,showing the amount paid to you.
Generally, you enter unemployment com-
pensation on line 19 of Form 1040, line 13
of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.
Types of unemployment compen-
sation. Unemployment compensation
generally includes any amount received
under an unemployment compensation law
of the United States or of a state. It includes
the following benefits.
1) Benefits paid by a state or the District
of Columbia from the Federal Unem-
ployment Trust Fund. 
2) State unemployment insurance bene-
fits. 
3) Railroad unemployment compensation
benefits. 
4) Disability payments from a government
program paid as a substitutefor un-
employment compensation. (Amounts
received as workers' compensation for
injuries or illness are not unemploy-
ment compensation. See chapter 6 for
more information.)
5) Trade readjustment allowances under
the Trade Act of 1974. 
6) Benefits under the Airline Deregulation
Act of 1978. 
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 89

7) Unemployment assistance under the
Disaster Relief Act Amendments of
1974.
Governmental program. If you con-
tribute to a governmental unemployment
compensation program and your contribu-
tions are not deductible, amounts you re-
ceive under the program are not included
as unemployment compensation until you
recover your contributions.
Repayment of unemployment com-
pensation. If you repaid in 2000 unem-
ployment compensation you received in
2000, subtract the amount you repaid from
the total amount you received and enter the
difference on line 19 of Form 1040, line 13
of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.
On the dotted line next to your entry write
“Repaid” and the amount you repaid. If you
repaid unemployment compensation in
2000 that you included in income in an
earlier year, you can deduct the amount
repaid on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you
itemize deductions. For more information,
see  Repayments,earlier.
Tax withholding. You can choose to
have federal income tax withheld from your
unemployment compensation. To make this
choice, complete Form W–4V, Voluntary
Withholding Request, and give it to the
paying office. Tax will be withheld at 15%
of your payment.
CAUTION
!
If you do not choose to have tax
withheld from your unemployment
compensation, you may be liable for
estimated tax. For more information on es-
timated tax, see chapter 5.
Supplemental unemployment bene-
fits.Benefits received from an employer-
financed fund (to which the employees did
not contribute) are not unemployment com-
pensation. They are taxable as wages and
are subject to withholding for income tax
and social security and Medicare taxes.
Report these payments on line 7 of Form
1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form
1040EZ.
Repayment of benefits.You may have to
repay some of your supplemental unem-
ployment benefits to qualify for trade read-
justment allowances under the Trade Act
of 1974. If you repay supplemental unem-
ployment benefits in the same year you re-
ceive them, reduce the total benefits by the
amount you repay. If you repay the benefits
in a later year, you must include the full
amount of the benefits received in your in-
come for the year you received them.
Deduct the repayment in the later year
as an adjustment to gross income on Form
1040. (You cannot use Form 1040A or Form
1040EZ.) Include the repayment on line 32
of Form 1040, and write “Sub-Pay TRA” and
the amount on the dotted line next to line
32. If the amount you repay in a later year
is more than $3,000, you may be able to
take a credit against your tax for the later
year instead of deducting the amount re-
paid. For more information on this, see Re-
payments, earlier.
Private unemployment fund. Unemploy-
ment benefit payments from a private fund
to which you voluntarily contribute are tax-
able only if the amounts you receive are
more than your total payments into the fund.
Report the taxable amount on line 21 of
Form 1040.
Payments by a union.Benefits paid to you
as an unemployed member of a union from
regular union dues are included in your
gross income on line 21 of Form 1040.
Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you
receive from your employer during periods
of unemployment, under a union agreement
that guarantees you full pay during the year,
are taxable as wages. Include them on line
7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line
1 of Form 1040EZ.
State employees. Payments similar to a
state's unemployment compensation may
be made by the state to its employees who
are not covered by the state's unemploy-
ment compensation law. Although the pay-
ments are fully taxable, do not report them
as unemployment compensation. Report
these payments on line 21 of Form 1040.
Welfare and Other
Public Assistance
Benefits
Do not include in your income benefit pay-
ments from a public welfare fund, such as
payments due to blindness. Payments from
a state fund for the victims of crime should
not be included in the victims' incomes if
they are in the nature of welfare payments.
Do not deduct medical expenses that are
reimbursed by such a fund. You must in-
clude in your income any welfare payments
obtained fraudulently.
Alaska residents. Payments the state of
Alaska makes to its citizens who meet cer-
tain age and residency tests that are not
based on need are not welfare benefits. In-
clude them in income on line 21 of Form
1040.
Persons with disabilities.If you have a
disability, you must include in income com-
pensation you receive for services you per-
form unless the compensation is otherwise
excluded. However, you do not include in
income the value of goods, services, and
cash that you receive, not in return for your
services, but for your training and rehabili-
tation because you have a disability.
Excludable amounts include payments for
transportation and attendant care, such as
interpreter services for the deaf, reader
services for the blind, and services to help
mentally retarded persons do their work.
Disaster relief grants.Grants made under
the Disaster Relief Act of 1974 to help vic-
tims of natural disasters are not included in
income. Do not deduct casualty losses or
medical expenses that are specifically re-
imbursed by these disaster relief grants.
Unemployment assistance payments under
the Act are taxable unemployment com-
pensation. See Unemployment compen-
sation,earlier.
Mortgage assistance payments. Pay-
ments made under section 235 of the Na-
tional Housing Act for mortgage assistance
are not included in the homeowner's in-
come. Interest paid for the homeowner un-
der the mortgage assistance program can-
not be deducted.
Nutrition Program for the Elderly.Food
benefits you receive under the Nutrition
Program for the Elderly are not taxable. If
you prepare and serve free meals for the
program, include in your income as wages
the cash pay you receive, even if you are
also eligible for food benefits.
Payments to reduce cost of winter en-
ergy. Payments made by a state to qual-
ified people to reduce their cost of winter
energy use are not taxable.
Other Income
The following brief discussions are arranged
in alphabetical order. Income items that are
discussed in greater detail in another publi-
cation include a reference to that publica-
tion.
Activity not for profit.You must include
on your return income from an activity from
which you do not expect to make a profit.
An example of this type of activity is a hobby
or a farm you operate mostly for recreation
and pleasure. Enter this income on line 21
of Form 1040. Deductions for expenses re-
lated to the activity are limited. They cannot
total more than the income you report, and
can be taken only if you itemize deductions
on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Not-for-
Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publication
535 for information on whether an activity
is considered carried on for a profit.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividend in-
come. If you received a payment from
Alaska's mineral income fund (Alaska Per-
manent Fund dividend), report it as income
on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form
1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. The state
of Alaska sends each recipient a document
that shows the amount of the payment with
the check. The amount is also reported to
IRS.
Alimony. Include in your income on line
11 of Form 1040 any alimony payments you
receive. Amounts you receive for child sup-
port are not income to you. Alimony and
child support payments are discussed in
chapter 20.
Campaign contributions. These contri-
butions are not income to a candidate un-
less they are diverted to his or her personal
use. To be exempt from tax, the contribu-
tions must be spent for campaign purposes
or kept in a fund for use in future cam-
paigns. However, interest earned on bank
deposits, dividends received on contributed
securities, and net gains realized on sales
of contributed securities are taxable and
must be reported on Form 1120–POL, U.S.
Income Tax Return for Certain Political Or-
ganizations. Excess campaign funds trans-
ferred to an office account must be included
in the officeholder's income on line 21 of
Form 1040 in the year transferred.
Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive
from a dealer or manufacturer of an item
you buy is not income.
Page 90 Chapter 13  Other Income

Example. You buy a new car for $9,000
cash and receive a $400 rebate check from
the manufacturer. The $400 is not income
to you. Your cost is $8,600. This is your
basis on which you figure gain or loss if you
sell the car, and depreciation if you use it
for business.
Casualty insurance and other re-
imbursements. You generally should not
report these reimbursements on your return.
Get Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters,
and Thefts (Business and Nonbusiness) for
more information.
Child support payments.You should not
report these payments on your return. Get
Publication 504, Divorced or Separated In-
dividuals, for more information.
Court awards and damages. To deter-
mine if settlement amounts you receive by
compromise or judgment must be included
in your income, you must consider the item
that the settlement replaces. Include the
following as ordinary income.
1) Interest on any award. 
2) Compensation for lost wages or lost
profits in most cases. 
3) Punitive damages. See Punitive dam-
ages, later in this discussion.
4) Amounts received in settlement of
pension rights (if you did not contribute
to the plan). 
5) Damages for: 
a) Patent or copyright infringement, 
b) Breach of contract, or 
c) Interference with business oper-
ations.
6) Back pay and damages for emotional
distress received to satisfy a claim un-
der Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964.
Do not include in your income
compensatory damages for personal phys-
ical injury or physical sickness (whether re-
ceived in a lump sum or installments).
Emotional distress.Damages you re-
ceive for emotional distress due to a phys-
ical injury or sickness are treated as re-
ceived for the physical injury or sickness.
Do not include them in your income. If the
emotional distress is due to a personal in-
jury that is unrelated to a physical injury or
sickness (for example, employment dis-
crimination or injury to reputation), you must
include the damages in your income, except
for any damages you receive for medical
care due to that emotional distress. Emo-
tional distress includes physical symptoms
that result from emotional distress, such as
headaches, insomnia, and stomach disor-
ders.
Punitive damages. Punitive damages
generally are taxable. It does not matter if
they relate to a physical injury or physical
sickness.
For more information on punitive dam-
ages, get Publication 525.
Credit card insurance.Generally, if you
receive benefits under a credit card disabil-
ity or unemployment insurance plan, the
benefits are taxable to you. These plans
make the minimum monthly payment on
your credit card account if you cannot make
the payment due to injury, illness, disability,
or unemployment. Report on line 21 of Form
1040 the amount of benefits you receive
during the year that is more than the amount
of the premiums you paid during the year.
Energy conservation subsidies.You can
exclude from gross income any subsidy
provided, either directly or indirectly, by
public utilities for the purchase or installation
of an energy conservation measure for a
dwelling unit.
Energy conservation measure. This
includes installations or modifications that
are primarily designed to reduce consump-
tion of electricity or natural gas, or improve
the management of energy demand.
Dwelling unit.This includes a house,
apartment, condominium, mobile home,
boat, or similar property. If a building or
structure contains both dwelling and other
units, any subsidy must be properly allo-
cated.
Estate and trust income. An estate or
trust, unlike a partnership, may have to pay
federal income tax. If you are a beneficiary
of an estate or trust, you may be taxed on
your share of its income distributed or re-
quired to be distributed to you. However,
there is never a double tax. Estates and
trusts file their returns on Form 1041, U.S.
Income Tax Return for Estates and Trusts,
and your share of the income is reported to
you on Schedule K–1 of Form 1041.
Current income required to be dis-
tributed.  If you are the beneficiary of a trust
that must distribute all of its current income,
you must report your share of the distribut-
able net income whether or not you have
actually received it.
Current income not required to be
distributed.  If you are the beneficiary of
an estate or trust and the fiduciary has the
choice of whether to distribute all or part of
the current income, you must report:
1) All income that is required to be dis-
tributed to you, whether or not it is ac-
tually distributed, plus
2) All other amounts actually paid or
credited to you, 
up to the amount of your share of distribut-
able net income.
How to report. Treat each item of in-
come the same way that the estate or trust
would treat it. For example, if a trust's divi-
dend income is distributed to you, you report
the distribution as dividend income on your
return. The same rule applies to distribu-
tions of tax-exempt interest and capital
gains.
The fiduciary of the estate or trust must
tell you the type of items making up your
share of the estate or trust income and any
credits you are allowed on your individual
income tax return.
Losses. Losses of estates and trusts
generally are not deductible by the benefi-
ciaries.
Grantor trust. Income earned by a
grantor trust is taxable to the grantor, not
the beneficiary, if the grantor keeps certain
control over the trust. This rule applies if the
property (or income from the property) put
into the trust will or may revert (be returned)
to the grantor or the grantor's spouse. The
grantor is the one who transferred property
to the trust.
Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the
grantor has a reversionary interest valued
(at the date of transfer) at more than 5% of
the value of the transferred property.
Fees for services.Include all fees for your
services in your income. Examples of these
fees are amounts you receive for services
you perform as:
1) A corporate director,
2) An executor or administrator of an es-
tate,
3) A notary public, or 
4) An election precinct official. 
TIP
If you are not an employee and the
fees for your services from the same
payer total $600 or more for the
year, you may receive a Form 1099–MISC.
Corporate director.Corporate director
fees are self-employment income. Report
these payments on Schedule C (Form
1040) or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
Executor or administrator of an es-
tate.If you are not in the trade or business
of being an executor (for instance, you are
the executor of a friend's or relative's es-
tate), report these fees on line 21 of Form
1040. If you provide the services as a trade
or business, report them as self-employ-
ment income on Schedule C (Form 1040)
or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
Notary public. Report payments for
these services on Schedule C (Form 1040)
or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040). These
payments are not subject to self-employ-
ment tax.
Election precinct official.You should
receive a Form W–2 showing payments for
services performed as an election official
or election worker. Report these payments
on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or
on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.
Foster-care providers.Payments you re-
ceive from a state, political subdivision, or
tax-exempt child-placement agency for pro-
viding care to qualified foster individuals in
your home generally are not included in
your income. You must include in your in-
come payments received for the care of
more than 5 individuals age 19 or older and
certain difficulty-of-care payments.
A qualified foster individual is a person
who:
1) Is living in a foster family home, and 
2) Was placed there by: 
a) An agency of a state or one of its
political subdivisions, or 
b) If the individual is under age 19,
a tax-exempt child placement
agency licensed by a state or one
of its political subdivisions.
Difficulty-of-care payments.These
are additional payments that are designated
by the payer as compensation for providing
the additional care that is required for
physically, mentally, or emotionally hand-
icapped qualified foster individuals. A state
must determine that the additional com-
pensation is needed, and the care for which
the payments are made must be provided
in your home.
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 91

You must include in your income
difficulty-of-care payments received for
more than:
1) 10 qualified foster individuals under
age 19, or
2) 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or
older.
Maintaining space in home.If you are
paid to maintain space in your home for
emergency foster-care, you must include
the payment in your income.
Reporting taxable payments. If you
receive payments that you must include in
your income, you are in business as a
foster-care provider and you are self-
employed. Report the payments on Sched-
ule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040). Get
Publication 587, Business Use of Your
Home (Including Use by Day-Care Provid-
ers), to help you determine the amount you
can deduct for the use of your home.
Free tour.If you received a free tour from
a travel agency for organizing a group of
tourists, you must include its value in your
income. Report the fair market value of the
tour on line 21 of Form 1040 if you are not
in the trade or business of organizing tours.
You cannot deduct your expenses in serv-
ing as the voluntary leader of the group at
the group's request. If you organize tours
as a trade or business, report the tour's
value on Schedule C (Form 1040) or
Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
Gambling winnings. You must include
your gambling winnings in income on line
21 of Form 1040. If you itemize your de-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you
can deduct gambling losses you had during
the year, but only up to the amount of your
winnings. See chapter 30 for information on
recordkeeping.
Lotteries and raffles.Winnings from
lotteries and raffles are gambling winnings.
In addition to cash winnings, you must in-
clude in your income the fair market value
of bonds, cars, houses, and other noncash
prizes.
TIP
If you win a state lottery prize pay-
able in installments, see Publication
525 for more information.
Form W –2G. You may have received
a Form W–2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,
showing the amount of your gambling win-
nings and any tax taken out of them. Include
the amount from box 1 on line 21 of Form
1040. Be sure to include any amount from
box 2 on line 58 of Form 1040.
Gifts and inheritances.Generally, prop-
erty you receive as a gift, bequest, or in-
heritance is not included in your income.
However, if property you receive this way
later produces income such as interest,
dividends, or rents, that income is taxable
to you. If property is given to a trust and the
income from it is paid, credited, or distrib-
uted to you, that income is also taxable to
you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the
income from the property, that income is
taxable to you.
Inherited pension or IRA.If you in-
herited a pension or an individual retirement
arrangement (IRA), you may have to include
part of the inherited amount in your income.
See chapter 11 if you inherited a pension.
See chapter 18 if you inherited an IRA.
Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are
not deductible from other income. A hobby
is an activity from which you do not expect
to make a profit. See Activity not for profit,
earlier.
CAUTION
!
If you collect stamps, coins, or other
items as a hobby for recreation and
pleasure, and you sell any of the
items, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.
(See chapter 17.) However, if you sell items
from your collection at a loss, you cannot
deduct a net loss.
Illegal income.Illegal income, such as
stolen or embezzled funds, must be in-
cluded in your gross income on line 21 of
Form 1040, or on Schedule C or Schedule
C–EZ (Form 1040) if from your self-
employment activity.
Indian fishing rights.If you are a member
of a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing
rights secured by treaty, executive order,
or an Act of Congress as of March 17, 1988,
do not include in your income amounts you
receive from activities related to those fish-
ing rights. The income is not subject to in-
come tax, self-employment tax, or employ-
ment taxes.
Interest on frozen deposits.In general,
you exclude from your income the amount
of interest earned on a frozen deposit. See
Interest income on frozen deposits in chap-
ter 8.
Interest on qualified savings bonds.You
may be able to exclude from income the
interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds
you redeem if you pay qualified higher ed-
ucational expenses in the same year. For
more information on this exclusion, see
Education Savings Bond Program under
U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 8.
Job interview expenses.If a prospective
employer asks you to appear for an inter-
view and either pays you an allowance or
reimburses you for your transportation and
other travel expenses, the amount you re-
ceive is generally not taxable. You include
in income only the amount you receive that
is more than your actual expenses.
Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must
be included in your income on line 21 of
Form 1040. If you must give the pay to your
employer because your employer continues
to pay your salary while you serve on the
jury, you can deduct the amount turned over
to your employer as an adjustment to your
income. Include the amount you repay your
employer on line 32 of Form 1040. Write
“Jury Pay” and the amount on the dotted
line next to line 32.
Kickbacks. You must include kickbacks,
side commissions, push money, or similar
payments you receive in your income on
line 21 of Form 1040, or on Schedule C or
Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040), if from your
self-employment activity.
Example. You sell cars and help ar-
range car insurance for buyers. Insurance
brokers pay back part of their commissions
to you for referring customers to them. You
must include the kickbacks in your income.
Medical savings accounts (MSAs) You
do not generally include in income amounts
you withdraw from your MSA or
Medicare+Choice MSA if you use the
money to pay for qualified medical ex-
penses. Generally, qualified medical ex-
penses are those you can deduct on
Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized De-
ductions. For more information about qual-
ified medical expenses, see chapter 23. For
more information about MSAs or
Medicare+Choice MSAs, see Publication
969, Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs).
CAUTION
!
You cannot buy health insurance
with distributions from your MSA
unless you are receiving unemploy-
ment benefits, buying continuation coverage
required by federal law, or buying long-term
care insurance.
Taxable distributions and penalty. If
you use the money from your MSA for any
purpose besides qualified medical ex-
penses, it will be taxable income that you
must report on your tax return. In addition
to the tax, you will be charged a 15% pen-
alty for an early distribution. The penalty
will not be charged if you are disabled or
age 65.
Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in
a lucky number drawing, television or radio
quiz program, beauty contest, or other
event, you must include it in your income.
For example, if you win a $50 prize in a
photography contest, you must report this
income on line 21 of Form 1040. If you re-
fuse to accept a prize, do not include its
value in your income.
Prizes and awards in goods or services
must be included in your income at their fair
market value.
Employee awards or bonuses. Cash
awards or bonuses given to you by your
employer for good work or suggestions
generally must be included in your income
as wages. However, certain noncash em-
ployee achievement awards can be ex-
cluded from income. See Bonuses and
awards in chapter 6.
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.If
you were awarded a prize in recognition of
past accomplishments in religious, charita-
ble, scientific, artistic, educational, literary,
or civic fields, you generally must include
the value of the prize in your income. How-
ever, you do not include this prize in your
income if you meet all of the following re-
quirements.
1) You were selected without any action
on your part to enter the contest or
proceeding. 
2) You are not required to perform sub-
stantial future services as a condition
to receiving the prize or award. 
3) The prize or award is transferred by the
payer directly to a governmental unit
or tax-exempt charitable organization
as designated by you. 
See Publication 525 for more information
about the conditions that apply to the
transfer.
Page 92 Chapter 13  Other Income

Railroad retirement annuities.The fol-
lowing types of payments are treated as
pension or annuity income and are taxable
under the rules explained in chapter 12.
1) Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that
are more than the “social security
equivalent benefit.”
2) Tier 2 benefits.
3) Vested dual benefits.
Sale of home.You may be able to exclude
from income all or part of any gain from the
sale or exchange of a personal residence.
See chapter 16.
Sale of personal items.If you sold an item
you owned for personal use, such as a car,
refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or
silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital
gain. Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040).
You cannot deduct a loss.
However, if you sold an item you held for
investment, such as gold or silver bullion,
coins, or gems, any gain is taxable as a
capital gain and any loss is deductible as a
capital loss.
Scholarships and fellowships.A candi-
date for a degree can exclude amounts re-
ceived as a qualified scholarship or fellow-
ship. A qualified scholarship or fellowship is
any amount you receive that is for:
1) Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend
an educational organization, or 
2) Fees, books, supplies, and equipment
required for courses at the educational
institution. 
Amounts used for room and board do not
qualify. Get Publication 520 for more infor-
mation on qualified scholarships and fel-
lowship grants.
Payments for services.Payments you
receive for services required as a condition
of receiving a scholarship or fellowship
grant must be included in your income, even
if the services are required of all candidates
for the degree. This includes amounts re-
ceived for teaching and research. Include
these payments on line 7 of Form 1040 or
Form 1040A, or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.
For information about the exclusion for
a qualified tuition reduction provided to em-
ployees and their families by an educational
institution, see Publication 520.
VA payments. Allowances paid by the
Department of Veterans Affairs are not in-
cluded in your income. These allowances
are not considered scholarship or fellowship
grants.
Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a
contest are not scholarships or fellowships
if you do not have to use the prizes for ed-
ucational purposes. You must include these
amounts in your income on line 21 of Form
1040, whether or not you use the amounts
for educational purposes.
State tuition programs. If you receive dis-
tributions from a qualified state tuition pro-
gram, only the amount that is more than the
amount contributed to the program is taxa-
ble.
Qualified state tuition programs are de-
fined in Publication 525. For more infor-
mation on a specific program, contact the
state or agency that established and main-
tains it.
Transporting school children. Do not in-
clude in your income a school board mile-
age allowance for taking children to and
from school if you are not in the business
of taking children to school. You cannot
deduct expenses for providing this trans-
portation.
Union benefits and dues. Amounts de-
ducted from your pay for union dues, as-
sessments, contributions, or other pay-
ments to a union cannot be excluded from
your income.
You may be able to deduct some of
these payments as a miscellaneous de-
duction subject to the 2% limit if they are
related to your job and if you itemize your
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). For
more information, see  Union Dues and
Expenses in chapter 30.
Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits
paid to you by a union as strike or lockout
benefits, including both cash and the fair
market value of other property, are usually
included in your income as compensation.
You can exclude these benefits from your
income only when the facts clearly show
that the union intended them as gifts to you.
Utility rebates.If you are a customer
of an electric utility company and you par-
ticipate in the utility's energy conservation
program, you may receive on your monthly
electric bill either:
1) A reduction in the purchase price of
electricity furnished to you (rate re-
duction), or 
2) A nonrefundable credit against the
purchase price of the electricity.
The amount of the rate reduction or
nonrefundable credit is not included in your
income.
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 93

The four chapters in this part discuss investment gains and losses,
including how to figure your basis in property. A gain from selling or
trading stocks, bonds, or other investment property may be taxed or it
may be tax free, at least in part. A loss may or may not be deductible.
These chapters also discuss gains from selling property you personally
use —  including the special rules for selling your home. Nonbusiness
casualty and theft losses are discussed in chapter 27 in Part Five.
Part Three.
Gains and
Losses
14.
Basis of
Property
Introduction
This chapter discusses how to figure your
basis in property and covers the following
topics.
 Cost basis of property you buy.
 Adjustments to basis after you receive
property.
 Basis other than cost.
Basis is the amount of your investment
in property for tax purposes. Use the basis
of property to figure gain or loss on the sale,
exchange, or other disposition of property.
Also use it to figure deductions for depreci-
ation, amortization, depletion, and casualty
losses. You must keep accurate records of
all items that affect the basis of property so
you can make these computations.
If you use property for both business and
personal purposes, you must allocate the
basis based on the use. Only the basis al-
located to the business use of the property
can be depreciated.
Your original basis in property is ad-
justed (increased or decreased) by certain
events. If you make improvements to the
property, increase your basis. If you take
deductions for depreciation or casualty
losses, reduce your basis.
Generally, the higher your basis for an
asset, the less gain you will have to report
on its sale. The higher your basis in a
depreciable asset, the higher your depreci-
ation deductions.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H1855415–B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe
Benefits
/H18554523 Selling Your Home
/H18554525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
/H18554 535 Business Expenses
/H18554 537 Installment Sales
/H18554544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
/H18554550 Investment Income and Ex-
penses
/H18554551 Basis of Assets
/H18554564 Mutual Fund Distributions
/H18554946 How To Depreciate Property
Cost Basis
The basis of property you buy is usually its
cost. The cost is the amount you pay in
cash, debt obligations, or other property.
Your cost also includes amounts you pay for
the following items.
 Sales tax charged on the purchase.
 Freight charges to obtain the property.
 Installation and testing charges.
 Excise taxes.
 Legal and accounting fees (when they
must be capitalized).
 Revenue stamps.
 Recording fees.
 Real estate taxes (if assumed for the
seller).
In addition, the basis of real estate and
business assets may include other items.
Loans with low or no interest. If you buy
property on any time-payment plan that
charges little or no interest, the basis of your
property is your stated purchase price mi-
nus any amount considered to be unstated
interest. You generally have unstated inter-
est if your interest rate is less than the ap-
plicable federal rate.
For more information, see Unstated In-
terest and Original Issue Discount in Publi-
cation 537.
Real Property
Real property, also called real estate, is land
and generally anything built on, growing on,
or attached to land.
If you buy real property, certain fees and
other expenses you pay are part of your
cost basis in the property.
If you buy improvements, such as
buildings, and the land on which they stand
for a lump sum, allocate your cost basis
between the land and improvements to fig-
ure the basis for depreciation of the im-
provements. Allocate the costs according to
the fair market values of the land and im-
provements at the time of purchase.
Fair market value (FMV) is the price at
which the property would change hands
between a buyer and a seller, neither having
to buy or sell, and both having a reasonable
knowledge of all necessary facts. Sales of
similar property on or about the same date
may be helpful in figuring the FMV of the
property.
Assumption of mortgage. If you buy
property and assume (or buy subject to) an
existing mortgage on the property, your ba-
sis includes the amount you pay for the
property plus the amount to be paid on the
mortgage.
Settlement costs. You can include in the
basis of property you buy the settlement
fees and closing costs you pay for buying
the property. (A fee for buying property is
a cost that must be paid even if you buy the
property for cash.) You cannot include fees
and costs for getting a loan on the property.
The following are some of the settlement
fees or closing costs you can include in the
basis of your property.
 Abstract fees (abstract of title fees).
 Charges for installing utility services.
 Legal fees (including title search and
preparation of the sales contract and
deed).
 Recording fees.
 Surveys.
 Transfer taxes.
 Owner's title insurance.
 Any amounts the seller owes that you
agree to pay, such as back taxes or in-
terest, recording or mortgage fees,
charges for improvements or repairs,
and sales commissions.
Settlement costs do not include
amounts placed in escrow for the future
payment of items such as taxes and insur-
ance.
The following are some of the settlement
fees and closing costs you cannot include
in the basis of property.
1) Fire insurance premiums.
2) Rent for occupancy of the property
before closing.
3) Charges for utilities or other services
related to occupancy of the property
before closing.
4) Fees for refinancing a mortgage.
5) Charges connected with getting a loan.
The following are examples of these
charges.
Page 94 Chapter 14  Basis of Property

a) Points (discount points, loan orig-
ination fees).
b) Mortgage insurance premiums.
c) Loan assumption fees.
d) Cost of a credit report.
e) Fees for an appraisal required by
a lender.
Real estate taxes. If you pay real estate
taxes the seller owed on real property you
bought, and the seller did not reimburse
you, treat those taxes as part of your basis.
You cannot deduct them as taxes.
If you reimburse the seller for taxes the
seller paid for you, you can usually deduct
that amount as an expense in the year of
purchase. Do not include that amount in the
basis of your property. If you did not reim-
burse the seller, you must reduce your basis
by those taxes.
Points. If you pay points to get a loan (in-
cluding a mortgage, second mortgage, line
of credit, or a home equity loan), do not add
the points to the basis of the related prop-
erty. Generally, you deduct the points over
the term of the loan. For more information
on how to deduct points, see Points in
chapter 5 of Publication 535.
Points on home mortgage. Special
rules may apply to points you and the seller
pay when you get a mortgage to buy your
main home. If certain requirements are met,
you can fully deduct the points for the year
in which they are paid. Reduce the basis
of your home by any seller-paid points. For
more information, see Points in chapter 25.
Adjusted Basis
Before figuring gain or loss on a sale, ex-
change, or other disposition of property, or
figuring allowable depreciation, depletion,
or amortization, you must usually make
certain adjustments (increases and de-
creases) to the basis of the property. The
result of these adjustments to the basis is
the adjusted basis.
Increases to Basis
Increase the basis of any property by all
items properly added to a capital account.
These include the cost of any improvements
having a useful life of more than 1 year.
Other items added to the basis of property
include the cost of extending utility service
lines to the property and legal fees, such
as the cost of defending and perfecting title.
Improvements. Add the cost of improve-
ments to your basis in the property if they
increase the value of the property, lengthen
its life, or adapt it to a different use. For
example, improvements include putting a
recreation room in your unfinished base-
ment, adding another bathroom or bedroom,
putting up a fence, putting in new plumbing
or wiring, installing a new roof, or paving
your driveway.
Assessments for local improvements.
Add assessments for improvements such
as streets and sidewalks to the basis of the
property assessed if they increase the value
of the property. Do not deduct them as
taxes. However, you can deduct as taxes
assessments for maintenance, repair, or
Table 14–1. Examples of Adjustments to Basis
Increases to Basis Decreases to Basis
Capital improvements:
Putting an addition on your home
Replacing an entire roof
Paving your driveway
Installing central air conditioning
Rewiring your home
Exclusion from income of subsidies for
energy conservation measures
Assessments for local improvements:
Water connections
Sidewalks
Roads
Casualty or theft loss deductions and
insurance reimbursements
Casualty losses:
Restoring damaged property
Credit for qualified electric vehicles
Legal fees:
Cost of defending and perfecting a title
Section 179 deduction
Zoning costs
Deduction for clean-fuel vehicles and
clean-fuel vehicle refueling property
Depreciation
Nontaxable corporate distributions
meeting interest charges on the improve-
ments.
Example. Your city changes the street
in front of your store into an enclosed pe-
destrian mall and assesses you and other
affected property owners for the cost of the
conversion. Add the assessment to your
property's basis. In this example, the as-
sessment is a depreciable asset.
Decreases to Basis
The following items reduce the basis of your
property.
 The section 179 deduction for the cost
of qualifying property acquired for use
in your trade or business.
 The deduction for clean-fuel vehicles
and clean-fuel vehicle refueling prop-
erty.
 Nontaxable corporate distributions (see
chapter 9).
 Deductions previously allowed or al-
lowable for amortization, depreciation,
and depletion.
 Exclusion from income of subsidies for
energy conservation measures (see
Energy conservation subsidies in chap-
ter 13).
 Credit for qualified electric vehicles.
 Gain from the sale of your home on
which tax was postponed.
 Casualty and theft losses and insurance
reimbursements.
 Certain canceled debt excluded from
income.
 Rebates received from a manufacturer
or seller.
 Easements.
 Gas-guzzler tax.
 Adoption tax benefits.
Casualties and thefts.If you have a cas-
ualty or theft loss, decrease the basis of
your property by any insurance proceeds
or other reimbursement. Also decrease it
by any deductible loss not covered by in-
surance. For information about figuring
your casualty or theft loss, see chapter 27.
You must increase your basis in the
property by the amount you spend on re-
pairs that substantially prolong the life of the
property, increase its value, or adapt it to a
different use. To make this determination,
compare the repaired property to the prop-
erty before the casualty.
Easements. The amount you receive for
granting an easement is generally consid-
ered to be from the sale of an interest in
your real property. It reduces the basis of
the affected part of the property. If the
amount received is more than the basis of
the part of the property affected by the
easement, reduce your basis in that part to
zero and treat the excess as a recognized
gain.
If the recognized gain is on a capital
asset, see chapter 17 for information about
how to report it. If the recognized gain is on
property used in a trade or business, see
Publication 544 for information about how
to report this gain.
Depreciation and section 179 deduction.
Decrease the basis of your qualifying busi-
ness property by any section 179 deduction
you take and the depreciation you de-
ducted, or could have deducted, on your tax
returns under the method of depreciation
you selected.
For more information about depreciation
and the section 179 deduction, see Publi-
cation 946.
Credit for qualified electric vehicles.If
you claim the credit for a qualified electric
vehicle, you must reduce your basis in that
vehicle by the lesser of the following
amounts.
 $4,000.
 10% of the vehicle's cost.
This basis reduction rule applies even if the
credit allowed is less than the reduction
amount. For more information on this credit,
see chapter 12 in Publication 535.
Deduction for clean-fuel vehicle and re-
fueling property.If you take the deduction
for clean-fuel vehicles or clean-fuel vehicle
refueling property, decrease the basis of the
property by the deduction. For more infor-
Chapter 14 Basis of Property Page 95

mation about these deductions, see chapter
12 in Publication 535.
Exclusion of subsidies for energy con-
servation measures. You can exclude
from gross income any subsidy provided,
either directly or indirectly, by public utilities
for the purchase or installation of an energy
conservation measure for a dwelling unit.
Reduce the basis of the property for which
you received the subsidy by the excluded
amount. For more information about this
subsidy, see chapter 13.
Gain from sale of home on which tax was
postponed. If you postponed gain from the
sale of your main home before May 7, 1997,
you must reduce the basis of your new
home by the amount of the postponed gain.
For more information on the rules for the
sale of a home, see Publication 523.
Example
You owned a duplex used as rental property
that cost you $40,000, of which $35,000
was allocated to the building and $5,000 to
the land. You added an improvement to the
duplex that cost $10,000. In February last
year the duplex was damaged by fire. Up
to that time you had been allowed depreci-
ation of $23,000. You sold some salvaged
material for $1,300 and collected $19,700
from your insurance company. You de-
ducted a casualty loss of $1,000 on your
income tax return for last year. You spent
$19,000 of the insurance proceeds for res-
toration of the duplex, which was completed
this year. You must use the duplex's ad-
justed basis after the restoration to deter-
mine depreciation for the rest of the prop-
erty's recovery period. Figure the adjusted
basis of the duplex as follows:
Your basis in the land is its original cost of
$5,000.
Other Basis
There are many times when you cannot use
cost as a basis. In these cases, the fair
market value or the adjusted basis of the
property may be used. Fair market value
(FMV) and adjusted basis were discussed
earlier.
Property Received for
Services
Generally, if you receive property for your
services, you must include its FMV in your
income in the year you receive the property.
The amount you include in income becomes
your basis. If the services were performed
for a price agreed on beforehand, it will be
accepted as the FMV of the property if there
is no evidence to the contrary.
Restricted property.If you receive
property for your services and the property
is subject to certain restrictions, your basis
in the property is its FMV when it becomes
substantially vested. However, this rule
does not apply if you make an election to
include in income the FMV of the property
at the time it is transferred to you, less any
amount you paid for it. Property becomes
substantially vested when your rights in the
property or the rights of any person to whom
you transfer the property are not subject to
a substantial risk of forfeiture. For more in-
formation, see Restricted Property in Publi-
cation 525.
Bargain purchases. A bargain pur-
chase is a purchase of an item for less than
its FMV. If, as compensation for services,
you buy goods or other property at less than
FMV, include the difference between the
purchase price and the property's FMV in
your income. Your basis in the property is
its FMV (your purchase price plus the
amount you include in income).
If the difference between your purchase
price and the FMV is a qualified employee
discount, do not include the difference in
income. However, your basis in the property
is still its FMV. See Employee Discounts in
Publication 15–B.
Taxable Exchanges
A taxable exchange is one in which the gain
is taxable or the loss is deductible. A taxable
gain or deductible loss also is known as a
recognized gain or loss. If you receive
property in exchange for other property in
a taxable exchange, the basis of the prop-
erty you receive is usually its FMV at the
time of the exchange.
Involuntary Conversions
If you receive property as a result of an in-
voluntary conversion, such as a casualty,
theft, or condemnation, you can figure the
basis of the replacement property using the
basis of the old property.
Similar or related property.If you receive
property that is similar or related in service
or use to the old property, the replacement
property's basis is the same as the old
property's basis on the date of the conver-
sion, with the following adjustments.
1) Decrease the basis by the following
items.
a) Any loss you recognize on the
conversion.
b) Any money you receive that you
do not spend on similar property.
2) Increase the basis by the following
items.
a) Any gain you recognize on the
conversion.
b) Any cost of acquiring the replace-
ment property.
Money or property not similar or related.
If you receive money or property that is not
similar or related in service or use to the
converted property and you buy replace-
ment property that is similar or related in
service or use to the converted property, the
basis of the replacement property is its cost
decreased by the gain not recognized on
the conversion.
Example. The state condemned your
property. The adjusted basis of the property
was $26,000, and the state paid you
$31,000 for it. You realized a gain of $5,000
($31,000 − $26,000). You bought replace-
ment property similar in use to the con-
verted property for $29,000. You recognize
a gain of $2,000 ($31,000 − $29,000), the
unspent part of the payment from the state.
Your gain not recognized is $3,000, the dif-
ference between the $5,000 realized gain
and the $2,000 recognized gain. You figure
the basis of the replacement property as
follows:
Allocating the basis.If you buy more than
one piece of replacement property, allocate
your basis among the properties based on
their respective costs.
Nontaxable Exchanges
A nontaxable exchange is an exchange in
which you are not taxed on any gain and
you cannot deduct any loss. If you receive
property in a nontaxable exchange, its basis
is generally the same as the basis of the
property you transferred. See Nontaxable
Trades in chapter 15.
Like-Kind Exchanges
The exchange of property for the same kind
of property is the most common type of
nontaxable exchange. To be a like-kind ex-
change, the property traded and the prop-
erty received must be both of the following.
 1) Qualifying property.
 2) Like property.
The basis of the property you receive is
generally the same as the basis of the
property you gave up. If you trade property
in a like-kind exchange and also pay money,
the basis of the property you received is the
basis of the property you gave up increased
by the money you paid.
Qualifying property.In a like-kind ex-
change, you must hold for investment or for
productive use in your trade or business
both the property you give up and the
property you receive.
Like property.There must be an exchange
of like property. The exchange of real estate
for real estate or personal property for sim-
ilar personal property is an exchange of like
property.
Example. You trade in an old truck
used in your business, which has an ad-
justed basis of $1,700, for a new one cost-
ing $6,800. The dealer allows you $2,000
on the old truck, and you pay $4,800. This
is a like-kind exchange. The basis of the
new truck is $6,500 (the adjusted basis of
the old one, $1,700, plus the amount you
paid, $4,800). 
If you sell your old truck to a third party
instead for $2,000 and then buy the new
one from the dealer, you have a taxable
gain of $300 on the sale ($2,000 sale price
minus $1,700 basis). The basis of the new
truck is the price you pay the dealer for it.
Cost of replacement property ................. $29,000
Minus: Gain not recognized .................... 3,000
Basis of replacement property ............$26,000
Original cost of duplex ............................ $35,000
Addition to duplex ................................... 10,000
Total cost of duplex ................................ $45,000
Minus: Depreciation ................................ 23,000
Adjusted basis before casualty ............... $22,000
Minus: Insurance proceeds ..... $19,700
Deducted casualty loss . 1,000
Salvage proceeds ........ 1,300
 22,000
Adjusted basis after casualty .................. $–0–
Add: Cost of restoring duplex ................. 19,000
Adjusted basis after restoration .........$19,000
Page 96 Chapter 14  Basis of Property

Partially nontaxable exchange.A partially
nontaxable exchange is an exchange in
which you receive unlike property or money
in addition to like property. The basis of the
property you receive is the basis of the
property you gave up, with the following
adjustments.
1) Decrease the basis by the following
amounts.
a) Any money you receive in the ex-
change.
b) Any loss you recognize on the
exchange.
2) Increase the basis by the following
amounts.
a) Additional costs you incur for the
exchange.
b) Any gain you recognize on the
exchange.
Allocate the basis among the properties,
other than money, you received in the ex-
change. In making this allocation, the basis
of the unlike property is its FMV on the date
of the exchange. The remainder is the basis
of the like property.
More information. See Like-Kind Ex-
changes in chapter 1 of Publication 544 for
more information.
Property Transferred
From a Spouse
The basis of property your spouse trans-
ferred to you or transferred in trust for your
benefit is the same as your spouse's ad-
justed basis. The same rule applies to a
transfer by your former spouse that is inci-
dent to divorce. However, adjust your basis
for any gain recognized by the transferor
on property transferred in trust. This rule
applies only to a transfer of property in trust
in which the liabilities assumed, plus the li-
abilities to which the property is subject, are
more than the adjusted basis of the property
transferred.
If the property transferred to you is a
series E, series EE, or series I U.S. savings
bond, the transferor must include in income
the interest accrued to the date of transfer.
Your basis in the bond immediately after the
transfer is equal to the transferor's basis
plus the interest income includible in his or
her income. For more information about
these bonds, see chapter 8.
The transferor must give you, at the time
of the transfer, the records needed to de-
termine the adjusted basis and holding pe-
riod of the property as of the date of the
transfer.
For more information about the transfer
of property from a spouse, see chapter 15.
Property Received as a Gift
To figure the basis of property you receive
as a gift, you must know its adjusted basis
to the donor just before it was given to you.
You also must know its FMV at the time it
was given to you and any gift tax paid on it.
FMV less than donor's adjusted basis.
If the FMV of the property at the time of the
gift is less than the donor's adjusted basis,
your basis depends on whether you have a
gain or a loss when you dispose of the
property. Your basis for figuring gain is the
same as the donor's adjusted basis plus or
minus any required adjustment to basis
while you held the property. Your basis for
figuring loss is its FMV when you received
the gift plus or minus any required adjust-
ment to basis while you held the property.
See Adjusted Basis, earlier.
Example. You received an acre of land
as a gift. At the time of the gift, the land had
an FMV of $8,000. The donor's adjusted
basis was $10,000. After you received the
property, no events occurred to increase or
decrease your basis in it. If you later sell the
property for $12,000, you will have a $2,000
gain. You must use the donor's adjusted
basis at the time of the gift ($10,000) as
your basis to figure gain. If you sell the
property for $7,000, you will have a $1,000
loss because you must use the FMV at the
time of the gift ($8,000) as your basis to
figure loss.
If the sales price is between $8,000 and
$10,000, you have neither gain nor loss.
Business property.If you hold the gift
as business property, your basis for figuring
any depreciation, depletion, or amortization
deduction is the same as the donor's ad-
justed basis plus or minus any required ad-
justments to basis while you hold the prop-
erty.
FMV equal to or greater than donor's
adjusted basis.If the FMV of the property
is equal to or greater than the donor's ad-
justed basis, your basis is the donor's ad-
justed basis at the time you received the
gift. Increase your basis by all or part of any
gift tax paid, depending on the date of the
gift.
Also, for figuring gain or loss from a sale
or other disposition or for figuring depreci-
ation, depletion, or amortization deductions
on business property, you must increase or
decrease your basis (the donor's adjusted
basis) by any required adjustments to basis
while you held the property. See Adjusted
Basis, earlier.
Gift received before 1977.If you re-
ceived a gift before 1977, increase your
basis in the gift (the donor's adjusted basis)
by any gift tax paid on it. However, do not
increase your basis above the FMV of the
gift at the time it was given to you.
Gift received after 1976.If you re-
ceived a gift after 1976, increase your basis
in the gift (the donor's adjusted basis) by the
part of any gift tax that is due to the net
increase in value of the gift. Figure the in-
crease by multiplying the gift tax paid by a
fraction. The numerator of the fraction is the
net increase in value of the gift and the de-
nominator is the amount of the gift.
The net increase in value of the gift is the
FMV of the gift minus the donor's adjusted
basis. The amount of the gift is its value for
gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-
nual exclusion and marital or charitable de-
duction that applies to the gift. For informa-
tion on the gift tax, see Publication 950,
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes.
Example. In 2000, you received a gift
of property from your mother that had an
FMV of $50,000. Her adjusted basis was
$20,000. The amount of the gift for gift tax
purposes was $40,000 ($50,000 minus the
$10,000 annual exclusion). She paid a gift
tax of $9,000 on the property. Your basis is
$26,750, figured as follows:
Inherited Property
Your basis in property you inherit from a
decedent is generally one of the following.
1) The FMV of the property at the date
of the individual's death.
2) The FMV on the alternate valuation
date if the personal representative for
the estate chooses to use alternate
valuation.
3) The value under the special-use valu-
ation method for real property used in
farming or another closely held busi-
ness, if chosen for estate tax purposes.
4) The decedent's adjusted basis in land
to the extent of the value excluded
from the decedent's taxable estate as
a qualified conservation easement.
If a federal estate tax return does not
have to be filed, your basis in the inherited
property is its appraised value at the date
of death for state inheritance or trans-
mission taxes.
For more information about the basis of
inherited property, see Inherited Property in
Publication 551.
Property Changed to
Business or Rental Use
When you hold property for personal use
and change it to business use or use it to
produce rent, you must figure its basis for
depreciation. An example of changing
property held for personal use to business
use would be renting out your former per-
sonal residence.
Basis for depreciation.The basis for de-
preciation is the lesser of the following
amounts.
1) The FMV of the property on the date
of the change.
2) Your adjusted basis on the date of the
change.
Example. Several years ago, you paid
$160,000 to have your house built on a lot
that cost $25,000. Before changing the
property to rental use last year, you paid
$20,000 for permanent improvements to the
house and claimed a $2,000 casualty loss
deduction for damage to the house. Be-
cause land is not depreciable, you can only
include the cost of the house when figuring
the basis for depreciation.
Your adjusted basis in the house when
you changed its use was $178,000
($160,000 + $20,000 − $2,000). On the
same date, your property had an FMV of
$180,000, of which $15,000 was for the land
and $165,000 was for the house. The basis
for figuring depreciation on the house is its
FMV on the date of the change ($165,000)
because it is less than your adjusted basis
($178,000).
Fair market value .................................... $50,000
Minus: Adjusted basis .............................−20,000
Net increase in value .............................. $30,000
Gift tax paid ............................................ $9,000
Multiplied by ($30,000 ÷ $40,000) ..........× .75
Gift tax due to net increase in value ...... $6,750
Adjusted basis of property to your mother
 ................................................................. +20,000
Your basis in the property ...................$26,750
Chapter 14 Basis of Property Page 97

Sale of property.If you later sell or dis-
pose of the property, the basis you use will
depend on whether you are figuring gain or
loss.
Gain. The basis for figuring a gain is
your adjusted basis when you sell the
property.
Example. Assume the same facts as
the previous example except that you sell
the property at a gain after being allowed
depreciation deductions of $37,500. The
basis for figuring gain is $165,500
($178,000 + $25,000 (land) − $37,500).
Loss. Figure the basis for a loss starting
with the smaller of your adjusted basis or
the FMV of the property at the time of the
change to business or rental use. Then ad-
just this amount for the period after the
change in the property's use, as discussed
earlier under Adjusted Basis, to arrive at a
basis for loss.
Example. Assume the same facts as in
the previous example, except that you sell
the property at a loss after being allowed
depreciation deductions of $37,500. In this
case, you would start with the FMV on the
date of the change to rental use ($180,000),
because it is less than the adjusted basis
of $203,000 ($178,000 + $25,000) on that
date. Reduce that amount ($180,000) by the
depreciation deductions to arrive at a basis
for loss of $142,500 ($180,000 − $37,500).
Stocks and Bonds
The basis of stocks or bonds you buy gen-
erally is the purchase price plus any costs
of purchase, such as commissions and
recording or transfer fees. If you get stocks
or bonds other than by purchase, your basis
is usually determined by the FMV or the
previous owner's adjusted basis, as dis-
cussed earlier.
You must adjust the basis of stocks for
certain events that occur after purchase. For
example, if you receive additional stock
from nontaxable stock dividends or stock
splits, reduce the basis of your original
stock. Also reduce your basis when you re-
ceive nontaxable distributions. They are a
return of capital.
Example. In 1998 you bought 100
shares of XYZ stock for $1,000 or $10 a
share. In 1999 you bought 100 shares of
XYZ stock for $1,600 or $16 a share. In
2000 XYZ declared a 2-for-1 stock split. You
now have 200 shares of stock with a basis
of $5 a share and 200 shares with a basis
of $8 a share.
Other basis.There are other ways to figure
the basis of stocks or bonds depending on
how you acquired them. For detailed infor-
mation, see Publication 550.
Identifying stocks or bonds sold.If you
can adequately identify the shares of stock
or the bonds you sold, their basis is the cost
or other basis of the particular shares of
stocks or bonds. If you buy and sell securi-
ties at various times in varying quantities
and you cannot adequately identify the
shares you sell, the basis of the securities
you sell is the basis of the securities you
acquired first. For more information about
identifying securities you sell, see Stocks
and Bonds under Basis of Investment
Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550.
Mutual fund shares. If you sell mutual
funds you acquired at various times and
prices, you may be able to use an average
basis. For more information, see Average
Basis in Publication 564.
Bond premium.  If you buy a taxable bond
at a premium and choose to amortize the
premium, reduce the basis of the bond by
the amortized premium you deduct each
year. See Bond Premium Amortization in
chapter 3 of Publication 550 for more infor-
mation. Although you cannot deduct the
premium on a tax-exempt bond, you must
amortize the premium each year and reduce
your basis in the bond by the amortized
amount.
Original issue discount (OID) on debt
instruments.You must increase your ba-
sis in an OID debt instrument by the OID
you include in income for that instrument.
See Original Issue Discount in chapter 8.
Tax-exempt bonds. OID on tax-exempt
bonds is generally not taxable. However,
there are special rules for figuring the basis
of these bonds issued after September 3,
1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984.
See chapter 4 of Publication 550.
Page 98 Chapter 14  Basis of Property

15.
Sale of Property
Important Reminder
Foreign source income.If you are a U.S.
citizen with investment property from
sources outside the United States, you must
report all gains and losses from the sale of
that property on your tax return unless it is
exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether
you reside inside or outside the United
States and whether or not you receive a
Form 1099 from the foreign payer.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax conse-
quences of selling or trading investment
property. It explains:
 What is a sale or trade,
 When you have a nontaxable trade,
 What to do with a related party trans-
action,
 Whether the property you sell is a cap-
ital asset or a noncapital asset,
 Whether you have a capital or ordinary
gain or loss from the sale of property,
 How to determine your holding period,
and
 When you can make a tax-free rollover
of a gain from selling certain securities.
Sales not discussed in this publication.
Certain sales or trades of property are dis-
cussed in other publications.
Installment sales are covered in Publication
537, Installment Sales.
Transfers of property at death are covered
in Publication 559, Survivors, Executors,
and Administrators.
Transactions involving business property
are covered in Publication 544, Sales
and Other Dispositions of Assets.
Dispositions of an interest in a passive ac-
tivity are covered in Publication 925,
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules.
Sales of a main home are covered in
chapter 16.
Publication 550, Investment Income and
Expenses (Including Capital Gains and
Losses), provides more detailed discussion
about sales and trades of investment prop-
erty. Publication 550 includes information
about the rules covering nonbusiness bad
debts, straddles, section 1256 contracts,
puts and calls, commodity futures, short
sales, and wash sales. It also discusses
investment-related expenses.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554504 Divorced or Separated Individ-
uals
/H18554550 Investment Income and Ex-
penses
/H18554564 Mutual Fund Distributions
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital
Gains and Losses
/H18554 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges
Sales and Trades
If you sold property such as stocks, bonds,
or certain commodities through a broker
during the year, you should receive, for
each sale, a Form 1099–B, Proceeds From
Broker and Barter Exchange Transactions,
or an equivalent statement from the broker.
You should receive the statement by Janu-
ary 31 of the next year. It will show the
gross proceeds from the sale. The IRS will
also get a copy of Form 1099–B from the
broker.
Use Form 1099–B (or an equivalent
statement received from your broker) to
complete Schedule D of Form 1040.
What is a Sale or Trade?
This section explains what is a sale or trade.
It also explains certain transactions and
events that are treated as sales or trades.
A sale is generally a transfer of property
for money or a mortgage, note, or other
promise to pay money. A trade is a transfer
of property for other property or services
and may be taxed in the same way as a
sale.
Sale and purchase. Ordinarily, a trans-
action is not a trade when you voluntarily
sell property for cash and immediately buy
similar property to replace it. The sale and
purchase are two separate transactions.
But see Like-kind exchanges under Non-
taxable Trades, later.
Redemption of stock. A redemption of
stock is treated as a sale or trade and is
subject to the capital gain or loss provisions
unless the redemption is a dividend or other
distribution on stock.
Dividend vs. sale or trade.Whether a
redemption is treated as a sale, trade, divi-
dend, or other distribution depends on the
circumstances in each case. Both direct and
indirect ownership of stock will be consid-
ered. The redemption is treated as a sale
or trade of stock if:
1) The redemption is not essentially
equivalent to a dividend (see chapter
9),
2) There is a substantially dispropor-
tionate redemption of stock,
3) There is a complete redemption of all
the stock of the corporation owned by
the shareholder, or
4) The redemption is a distribution in
partial liquidation of a corporation.
Redemption or retirement of bonds. A
redemption or retirement of bonds or notes
at their maturity is generally treated as a
sale or trade.
Surrender of stock.A surrender of stock
by a dominant shareholder who retains
control of the corporation is treated as a
contribution to capital rather than as an im-
mediate loss deductible from taxable in-
come. The surrendering shareholder must
reallocate his or her basis in the surren-
dered shares to the shares he or she re-
tains.
Worthless securities. Stocks, stock rights,
and bonds (other than those held for sale
by a securities dealer) that became
worthless during the tax year are treated as
though they were sold on the last day of the
tax year. This affects whether your capital
loss is long-term or short-term. See Holding
Period, later.
If you are a cash basis taxpayer and
make payments on a negotiable promissory
note that you issued for stock that became
worthless, you can deduct these payments
as losses in the years you actually make the
payments. Do not deduct them in the year
the stock became worthless.
How to report loss.Report worthless
securities on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D
(Form 1040), whichever applies. In columns
(c) and (d), write “Worthless.” Enter the
amount of your loss in parentheses in col-
umn (f).
Filing a claim for refund.If you do not
claim a loss for a worthless security on your
original return for the year it becomes
worthless, you can file a claim for a credit
or refund due to the loss. You must use
Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual In-
come Tax Return, to amend your return for
the year the security became worthless.
You must file it within 7 years from the date
your original return for that year had to be
filed, or 2 years from the date you paid the
tax, whichever is later. For more information
about filing a claim, see Amended Returns
and Claims for Refund in chapter 1.
How To Figure
Gain or Loss
You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade
of property by comparing the amount you
realize with the adjusted basis of the prop-
erty.
Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale
or trade is more than the adjusted basis of
the property you transfer, the difference is
a gain.
Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property
you transfer is more than the amount you
realize, the difference is a loss.
Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of
property is your original cost or other ori-
ginal basis properly adjusted (increased or
decreased) for certain items. See chapter
14 for more information about determining
the adjusted basis of property.
Chapter 15 Sale of Property Page 99

Amount realized.The amount you realize
from a sale or trade of property is everything
you receive for the property. This includes
the money you receive plus the fair market
value of any property or services you re-
ceive.
If you finance the buyer's purchase of
your property and the debt instrument does
not provide for adequate stated interest, the
unstated interest will reduce the amount
realized. For more information, see Publi-
cation 537.
Fair market value. Fair market value is
the price at which the property would
change hands between a buyer and a seller,
neither being forced to buy or sell and both
having reasonable knowledge of all the rel-
evant facts.
The fair market value of notes or other
debt instruments you receive as a part of
the sale price is usually the best amount you
can get from selling them to, or discounting
them with, a bank or other buyer of debt
instruments.
Example. You trade A Company stock
with an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B
Company stock with a fair market value of
$10,000, which is your amount realized.
Your gain is $3,000 ($10,000 minus
$7,000). If you also receive a note for
$6,000 that has a discount value of $4,000,
your gain is $7,000 ($10,000 plus $4,000
minus $7,000).
Debt paid off. A debt against the
property, or against you, that is paid off as
a part of the transaction, or that is assumed
by the buyer, must be included in the
amount realized. This is true even if neither
you nor the buyer is personally liable for the
debt. For example, if you sell or trade
property that is subject to a nonrecourse
loan, the amount you realize generally in-
cludes the full amount of the note assumed
by the buyer even if the amount of the note
is more than the fair market value of the
property.
Example. You sell stock that you had
pledged as security for a bank loan of
$8,000. Your basis in the stock is $6,000.
The buyer pays off your bank loan and pays
you $20,000 in cash. The amount realized
is $28,000 ($20,000 plus $8,000). Your gain
is $22,000 ($28,000 minus $6,000).
Payment of cash.If you trade property
and cash for other property, the amount you
realize is the fair market value of the prop-
erty you receive. Determine your gain or
loss by subtracting the cash you pay plus
the adjusted basis of the property you
traded in from the amount you realize. If the
result is a positive number, it is a gain. If the
result is a negative number, it is a loss.
No gain or loss.You may have to use a
basis for figuring gain that is different from
the basis used for figuring loss. In this case,
you may have neither a gain nor a loss. See
Other Basis in chapter 14.
Nontaxable Trades
This section discusses trades that generally
do not result in a taxable gain or deductible
loss. For more information on nontaxable
trades, see chapter 1 of Publication 544.
Like-kind exchanges. If you trade business
or investment property for other business
or investment property of a like kind, you
do not pay tax on any gain or deduct any
loss until you sell or dispose of the property
you receive. To be nontaxable, a trade must
meet all six of the following conditions.
1) The property must be business or in-
vestment property. You must hold both
the property you trade and the property
you receive for productive use in your
trade or business or for investment.
Neither property may be property used
for personal purposes, such as your
home or family car.
2) The property must not be held primarily
for sale. The property you trade and
the property you receive must not be
property you sell to customers, such
as merchandise.
3) The property must not be stocks,
bonds, notes, choses in action, certif-
icates of trust or beneficial interest, or
other securities or evidences of
indebtedness or interest, including
partnership interests. However, you
can have a nontaxable trade of corpo-
rate stocks under a different rule, as
discussed later.
4) There must be a trade of like property.
The trade of real estate for real estate,
or personal property for similar per-
sonal property, is a trade of like prop-
erty. The trade of an apartment house
for a store building, or a panel truck for
a pickup truck, is a trade of like prop-
erty. The trade of a piece of machinery
for a store building is not a trade of like
property. Real property located in the
United States and real property located
outside the United States are not like
property. Also, personal property used
predominantly within the United States
and personal property used predomi-
nantly outside the United States are
not like property.
5) The property to be received must be
identified within 45 days after the date
you transfer the property given up in
the trade.
6) The property to be received must be
received by the earlier of:
a) The 180th day after the date on
which you transfer the property
given up in the trade, or
b) The due date, including exten-
sions, for your tax return for the
year in which the transfer of the
property given up occurs.
If you trade property with a related party
in a like-kind exchange, a special rule may
apply. See Related Party Transactions, later
in this chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Pub-
lication 544 for more information on ex-
changes of business property and special
rules for exchanges using qualified inter-
mediaries or involving multiple properties.
Partially nontaxable exchange.If you re-
ceive cash or unlike property in addition to
like property, and the above six conditions
are met, you have a partially nontaxable
trade. You are taxed on any gain you real-
ize, but only up to the amount of the cash
and the fair market value of the unlike
property you receive. You cannot deduct a
loss.
Like property and unlike property
transferred.If you give up unlike property
in addition to the like property, you must
recognize gain or loss on the unlike property
you give up. The gain or loss is the differ-
ence between the adjusted basis of the un-
like property and its fair market value.
Like property and money transferred.If
conditions (1) - (6) are met, you have a
nontaxable trade even if you pay money in
addition to the like property.
Basis of property received.To figure the
basis of the property received, see Nontax-
able Exchanges in chapter 14.
How to report. You must report the trade
of like property on Form 8824. If you figure
a recognized gain or loss on Form 8824,
report it on Schedule D of Form 1040 or on
Form 4797, Sales of Business Property,
whichever applies.
For information on using Form 4797, see
chapter 4 of Publication 544.
Corporate stocks. The following trades of
corporate stocks generally do not result in
a taxable gain or a deductible loss.
Stock for stock of the same corpo-
ration.You can exchange common stock
for common stock or preferred stock for
preferred stock in the same corporation
without having a recognized gain or loss.
This is true for a trade between two stock-
holders as well as a trade between a
stockholder and the corporation.
Corporate reorganizations.In some
instances, you can trade common stock for
preferred stock, preferred stock for common
stock, or stock in one corporation for stock
in another corporation without having a
recognized gain or loss. These trades must
be part of mergers, recapitalizations, trans-
fers to controlled corporations, bankrupt-
cies, corporate divisions, corporate acquisi-
tions, or other corporate reorganizations.
Convertible stocks and bonds.You
generally will not have a recognized gain
or loss if you convert bonds into stock or
preferred stock into common stock of the
same corporation according to a conversion
privilege in the terms of the bond or the
preferred stock certificate.
Property for stock of a controlled
corporation.If you transfer property to a
corporation solely in exchange for stock in
that corporation, and immediately after the
trade you are in control of the corporation,
you ordinarily will not recognize a gain or
loss. This rule applies both to individuals
and to groups who transfer property to a
corporation. It does not apply if the corpo-
ration is an investment company.
For this purpose, to be in control of a
corporation, you or your group of transferors
must own, immediately after the exchange,
at least 80% of the total combined voting
power of all classes of stock entitled to vote
and at least 80% of the outstanding shares
of each class of nonvoting stock of the cor-
poration.
Page 100 Chapter 15  Sale of Property

If this provision applies to you, you must
attach to your return a complete statement
of all facts pertinent to the exchange.
Additional information.For more in-
formation on trades of stock, see Nontaxa-
ble Trades in chapter 4 of Publication 550.
Insurance policies and annuities. You will
not have a recognized gain or loss if you
trade:
1) A life insurance contract for another life
insurance contract or for an endow-
ment or annuity contract,
2) An endowment contract for an annuity
contract or for another endowment
contract that provides for regular pay-
ments beginning at a date not later
than the beginning date under the old
contract, or
3) An annuity contract for another annuity
contract.
The insured or annuitant must be the
same under both contracts. Exchanges of
contracts not included in this list, such as
an annuity contract for an endowment con-
tract, or an annuity or endowment contract
for a life insurance contract, are taxable.
U.S. Treasury notes or bonds. You can
trade certain issues of U.S. Treasury obli-
gations for other issues, designated by the
Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or
loss recognized on the trade.
Transfers Between
Spouses
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on
a transfer of property from an individual to
(or in trust for the benefit of) a spouse, or if
incident to a divorce, a former spouse. This
nonrecognition rule does not apply if the
recipient spouse or former spouse is a
nonresident alien. The rule also does not
apply to a transfer in trust to the extent the
adjusted basis of the property is less than
the amount of the liabilities assumed plus
any liabilities on the property.
Any transfer of property to a spouse or
former spouse on which gain or loss is not
recognized is treated by the recipient as a
gift and is not considered a sale or ex-
change. The recipient's basis in the property
will be the same as the adjusted basis of the
giver immediately before the transfer. This
carryover basis rule applies whether the
adjusted basis of the transferred property is
less than, equal to, or greater than either its
fair market value at the time of transfer or
any consideration paid by the recipient. This
rule applies for purposes of determining loss
as well as gain. Any gain recognized on a
transfer in trust increases the basis.
A transfer of property is incident to a di-
vorce if the transfer occurs within one year
after the date on which the marriage ends,
or if the transfer is related to the ending of
the marriage.
For more information, see Publication
504.
Related Party Transactions
Special rules apply to the sale or trade of
property between related parties.
Gain on sale or trade of depreciable
property.Your gain from the sale or trade
of property to a related party may be ordi-
nary income, rather than capital gain, if the
property can be depreciated by the party
receiving it. See chapter 3 of Publication
544 for more information.
Like-kind exchanges. Generally, if you
trade business or investment property for
other business or investment property of a
like kind, no gain or loss is recognized. See
Like-kind exchanges earlier under Nontax-
able Trades.
This rule also applies to trades of prop-
erty between related parties, defined next
under Losses on sales or trades of property.
However, if either you or the related party
disposes of the like property within 2 years
after the trade, you both must report any
gain or loss not recognized on the original
trade on your return filed for the year in
which the later disposition occurs.
Losses on sales or trades of property.
You cannot deduct a loss on the sale or
trade of property, other than a distribution
in complete liquidation of a corporation, if
the transaction is directly or indirectly be-
tween you and the following related par-
ties.
1) Members of your family. This includes
only your brothers and sisters, half-
brothers and half-sisters, spouse, an-
cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),
and lineal descendants (children,
grandchildren, etc.).
2) A partnership in which you directly or
indirectly own more than 50% of the
capital interest or the profits interest.
3) A corporation in which you directly or
indirectly own more than 50% in value
of the outstanding stock (see Con-
structive ownership of stock, later).
4) A tax-exempt charitable or educational
organization that is directly or indirectly
controlled, in any manner or by any
method, by you or by a member of your
family, whether or not this control is
legally enforceable.
In addition, a loss on the sale or trade
of property is not deductible if the trans-
action is directly or indirectly between the
following related parties.
1) A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciary
and beneficiary, of any trust.
2) Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or
the fiduciary and beneficiary of two
different trusts, if the same person is
the grantor of both trusts.
3) A trust fiduciary and a corporation of
which more than 50% in value of the
outstanding stock is directly or indi-
rectly owned by or for the trust, or by
or for the grantor of the trust.
4) A corporation and a partnership if the
same persons own more than 50% in
value of the outstanding stock of the
corporation and more than 50% of the
capital interest, or the profits interest,
in the partnership.
5) Two S corporations if the same per-
sons own more than 50% in value of
the outstanding stock of each corpo-
ration.
6) Two corporations, one of which is an
S corporation, if the same persons own
more than 50% in value of the out-
standing stock of each corporation.
7) An executor and a beneficiary of an
estate (except in the case of a sale or
trade to satisfy a pecuniary bequest).
8) Two corporations that are members of
the same controlled group. (Under
certain conditions, however, these
losses are not disallowed but must be
deferred.)
9) Two partnerships if the same persons
own, directly or indirectly, more than
50% of the capital interests or the profit
interests in both partnerships.
Multiple property sales or trades.If
you sell or trade to a related party a number
of blocks of stock or pieces of property in a
lump sum, you must figure the gain or loss
separately for each block of stock or piece
of property. The gain on each item may be
taxable. However, you cannot deduct the
loss on any item. Also, you cannot reduce
gains from the sales of any of these items
by losses on the sales of any of the other
items.
Indirect transactions.You cannot de-
duct your loss on the sale of stock through
your broker if, under a prearranged plan, a
related party buys the same stock you had
owned. This does not apply to a trade be-
tween related parties through an exchange
that is purely coincidental and is not prear-
ranged.
Constructive ownership of stock. In
determining whether a person directly or
indirectly owns any of the outstanding stock
of a corporation, the following rules apply.
Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly
owned by or for a corporation, partnership,
estate, or trust is considered owned pro-
portionately by or for its shareholders, part-
ners, or beneficiaries.
Rule 2. An individual is considered to
own the stock that is directly or indirectly
owned by or for his or her family. Family
includes only brothers and sisters, half-
brothers and half-sisters, spouse, ances-
tors, and lineal descendants.
Rule 3.An individual owning, other than
by applying rule 2, any stock in a corpo-
ration is considered to own the stock that is
directly or indirectly owned by or for his or
her partner.
Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3,
stock constructively owned by a person un-
der rule 1 is treated as actually owned by
that person. But stock constructively owned
by an individual under rule 2 or rule 3 is not
treated as owned by that individual for again
applying either rule 2 or rule 3 to make an-
other person the constructive owner of the
stock.
Property received from a related party.
If you sell or trade at a gain property that
you acquired from a related party, you rec-
ognize the gain only to the extent it is more
than the loss previously disallowed to the
related party. This rule applies only if you
are the original transferee and you acquired
the property by purchase or exchange. This
Chapter 15 Sale of Property Page 101

rule does not apply if the related party's loss
was disallowed because of the wash sale
rules described in chapter 4 of Publication
550 under Wash Sales.
Example 1. Your brother sells you stock
for $7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your
brother cannot deduct the loss of $2,400.
Later, you sell the same stock to an unre-
lated party for $10,500, realizing a gain of
$2,900. Your reportable gain is $500 — the
$2,900 gain minus the $2,400 loss not al-
lowed to your brother.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold
the stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500,
your recognized loss is only $700 (your
$7,600 basis minus $6,900). You cannot
deduct the loss that was not allowed to your
brother.
Capital Gains
and Losses
This section discusses the tax treatment of
gains and losses from different types of in-
vestment transactions.
Character of gain or loss.You need to
classify your gains and losses as either or-
dinary or capital gains or losses. You then
need to classify your capital gains and
losses as either short-term or long-term. If
you have long-term gains and losses, you
must identify your 28% rate gains and
losses.
The correct classification and identifica-
tion helps you figure the limit on capital
losses and the correct tax on capital gains.
Reporting capital gains and losses is ex-
plained in chapter 17.
Capital or Ordinary
Gain or Loss
If you have a taxable gain or a deductible
loss from a transaction, it may be either a
capital gain or loss or an ordinary gain or
loss, depending on the circumstances.
Generally, a sale or trade of a capital asset
(defined next) results in a capital gain or
loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset
generally results in ordinary gain or loss.
Depending on the circumstances, a gain or
loss on a sale or trade of property used in
a trade or business may be treated as either
capital or ordinary, as explained in Publica-
tion 544. In some situations, part of your
gain or loss may be a capital gain or loss,
and part may be an ordinary gain or loss.
Capital Assets and
Noncapital Assets
For the most part, everything you own and
use for personal purposes, pleasure, or in-
vestment is a capital asset. Some exam-
ples are:
 Stocks or bonds held in your personal
account,
 A house owned and used by you and
your family,
 Household furnishings,
 A car used for pleasure or commuting,
 Coin or stamp collections,
 Gems and jewelry, and
 Gold, silver, or any other metal.
Any property you own is a capital asset,
except the following noncapital assets.
1) Property held mainly for sale to
customers or property that will phys-
ically become a part of the merchan-
dise that is for sale to customers.
2) Depreciable property used in your
trade or business, even if fully depre-
ciated.
3) Real property used in your trade or
business.
4) A copyright, a literary, musical, or
artistic composition, a letter or
memorandum, or similar property:
a) Created by your personal efforts,
b) Prepared or produced for you as
a letter, memorandum, or similar
property, or
c) Acquired under circumstances
(for example, by gift) entitling you
to the basis of the person who
created the property or for whom
it was prepared or produced.
5) Accounts or notes receivable ac-
quired in the ordinary course of a trade
or business for services rendered or
from the sale of any of the properties
described in (1).
6) U.S. Government publications that
you received from the government free
or for less than the normal sales price,
or that you acquired under circum-
stances entitling you to the basis of
someone who received the publica-
tions free or for less than the normal
sales price.
7) Certain commodities derivative fi-
nancial instruments held, acquired,
or entered into by commodities deriva-
tives dealers after December 16, 1999.
8) Hedging transactions entered into
after December 16, 1999, but only if
the transaction is clearly identified as
a hedging transaction before the close
of the day on which it was acquired,
originated, or entered into. 
9) Supplies of a type you regularly use
or consume in the ordinary course of
your trade or business, that you held
or acquired after December 16, 1999.
Investment Property
Investment property is a capital asset. Any
gain or loss from its sale or trade is gener-
ally a capital gain or loss.
Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.
These are capital assets except when they
are held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or
loss you have from their sale or trade gen-
erally is a capital gain or loss.
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds.All of
these (including stock received as a divi-
dend) are capital assets except when held
for sale by a securities dealer. However, if
you own small business stock, see Losses
on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock
and Losses on Small Business Investment
Company Stock in chapter 4 of Publication
550.
Personal use property. Property held for
personal use only, rather than for invest-
ment, is a capital asset, and you must report
a gain from its sale as a capital gain. How-
ever, you cannot deduct a loss from selling
personal use property.
Discounted debt instruments. Treat your
gain or loss on the sale, redemption, or re-
tirement of a bond or other debt instrument
originally issued at a discount or bought at
a discount as capital gain or loss, except
as explained in the following discussions.
Short-term government obligations.
Treat gains on short-term federal, state, or
local government obligations (other than
tax-exempt obligations) as ordinary income
up to your ratable share of the acquisition
discount. This treatment applies to obli-
gations that have a fixed maturity date not
more than 1 year from the date of issue.
Acquisition discount is the stated re-
demption price at maturity minus your basis
in the obligation.
However, do not treat these gains as
income to the extent you previously in-
cluded the discount in income. See Dis-
count on Short-Term Obligations in chapter
1 of Publication 550 for more information.
Short-term nongovernment obli-
gations. Treat gains on short-term non-
government obligations as ordinary income
up to your ratable share of original issue
discount (OID). This treatment applies to
obligations that have a fixed maturity date
of not more than 1 year from the date of
issue.
However, to the extent you previously
included the discount in income, you do not
have to include it in income again. See
Discount on Short-Term Obligations in
chapter 1 of Publication 550 for more infor-
mation.
Tax-exempt state and local govern-
ment bonds. If these bonds were originally
issued at a discount before September 4,
1982, or you acquired them before March
2, 1984, treat your part of the OID as tax-
exempt interest. To figure your gain or loss
on the sale or trade of these bonds, reduce
the amount realized by your part of the OID.
If the bonds were issued after Septem-
ber 3, 1982, and acquired after March 1,
1984, increase the adjusted basis by your
part of the OID to figure gain or loss. For
more information on the basis of these
bonds, see Discounted Debt Instruments in
chapter 4 of Publication 550.
Any gain from market discount is usually
taxable on disposition or redemption of tax-
exempt bonds. If you bought the bonds be-
fore May 1, 1993, the gain from market
discount is capital gain. If you bought the
bonds after April 30, 1993, the gain from
market discount is ordinary income.
You figure the market discount by sub-
tracting the price you paid for the bond from
the sum of the original issue price of the
bond and the amount of accumulated OID
from the date of issue that represented in-
terest to any earlier holders. For more in-
formation, see Market Discount Bonds in
chapter 1 of Publication 550.
A loss on the sale or other disposition
of a tax-exempt state or local government
bond is deductible as a capital loss.
Page 102 Chapter 15  Sale of Property

Redeemed before maturity.If a state
or local bond that was issued before June
9, 1980, is redeemed before it matures, the
OID is not taxable to you.
If a state or local bond issued after June
8, 1980, is redeemed before it matures, the
part of the OID that is earned while you hold
the bond is not taxable to you. However,
you must report the unearned part of the
OID as a capital gain.
Example. On July 1, 1989, the date of
issue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal
bond for $800. The face amount of the bond
was $1,000. The $200 discount was OID.
At the time the bond was issued, the issuer
had no intention of redeeming it before it
matured. The bond was callable at its face
amount beginning 10 years after the issue
date.
The issuer redeemed the bond at the
end of 11 years (July 1, 2000) for its face
amount of $1,000 plus accrued annual in-
terest of $60. The OID earned during the
time you held the bond, $73, is not taxable.
The $60 accrued annual interest also is not
taxable. However, you must report the un-
earned part of the OID ($127) as a capital
gain.
Long-term debt instruments issued
after 1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or
before July 2, 1982, if a government in-
strument). If you sell, trade, or redeem for
a gain one of these debt instruments, the
part of your gain that is not more than your
ratable share of the OID at the time of the
sale or redemption is ordinary income. The
rest of the gain is capital gain. If, however,
there was an intention to call the debt in-
strument before maturity, all of your gain
that is not more than the entire OID is
treated as ordinary income at the time of the
sale. This treatment of taxable gain also
applies to corporate instruments issued af-
ter May 27, 1969, under a written commit-
ment that was binding on May 27, 1969, and
at all times thereafter.
See Original Issue Discount (OID) in
chapter 8 for more information.
Long-term debt instruments issued
after May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982,
if a government instrument). If you hold
one of these debt instruments, you must
include a part of the OID in your gross in-
come each year that you own the instru-
ment. Your basis in that debt instrument is
increased by the amount of OID that you
have included in your gross income. See
Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 8
for information about the OID that you must
report on your tax return.
If you sell or trade the debt instrument
before maturity, your gain is a capital gain.
However, if at the time the instrument was
originally issued there was an intention to
call it before its maturity, your gain generally
is ordinary income to the extent of the entire
OID reduced by any amounts of OID previ-
ously includible in your income. In this case,
the rest of the gain is a capital gain.
Market discount bonds. If the debt
instrument has market discount and you
chose to include the discount in income as
it accrued, increase your basis in the debt
instrument by the accrued discount to figure
capital gain or loss on its disposition. If you
did not choose to include the discount in
income as it accrued, you must report gain
as ordinary interest income up to the in-
strument's accrued market discount. The
rest of the gain is capital gain. See Market
Discount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication
550.
A different rule applies to market dis-
count bonds issued before July 19, 1984,
and purchased by you before May 1, 1993.
See chapter 4 of Publication 550.
Retirement of debt instrument.Any
amount that you receive on the retirement
of a debt instrument is treated in the same
way as if you had sold or traded that in-
strument.
Notes of individuals.If you hold an obli-
gation of an individual that was issued with
OID after March 1, 1984, you generally must
include the OID in your income currently,
and your gain or loss on its sale or retire-
ment is generally capital gain or loss. An
exception to this treatment applies if the
obligation is a loan between individuals and
all of the following requirements are met.
1) The lender is not in the business of
lending money.
2) The amount of the loan, plus the
amount of any outstanding prior loans,
is $10,000 or less.
3) Avoiding federal tax is not one of the
principal purposes of the loan.
If the exception applies, or the obligation
was issued before March 2, 1984, you do
not include the OID in your income cur-
rently. When you sell or redeem the obli-
gation, the part of your gain that is not more
than your accrued share of the OID at that
time is ordinary income. The rest of the
gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the
sale or redemption is capital loss.
Deposit in insolvent or bankrupt finan-
cial institution.  If you lose money you
have on deposit in a qualified financial in-
stitution that becomes insolvent or bankrupt,
you may be able to deduct your loss in one
of three ways.
 1) Ordinary loss,
2) Casualty loss, or
3) Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term
capital loss).
Ordinary loss or casualty loss. If you
can reasonably estimate your loss, you can
choose to treat the estimated loss as either
an ordinary loss or a casualty loss in the
current year. Either way, you claim the loss
as an itemized deduction.
If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as
a miscellaneous itemized deduction on line
22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). The maxi-
mum amount you can claim is $20,000
($10,000 if you are married filing separately)
reduced by any expected state insurance
proceeds. Your loss is subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. You
cannot choose to claim an ordinary loss if
any of the deposit is federally insured.
If you claim a casualty loss, attach Form
4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return.
Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your
total casualty losses for the year are re-
duced by 10% of your adjusted gross in-
come.
You cannot choose either of these
methods if:
1) You own at least 1% of the financial
institution,
2) You are an officer of the institution, or
3) You are related to such an owner or
officer. You are related if you and the
owner or officer are “related parties,”
as defined earlier under Related Party
Transactions, or if you are the aunt,
uncle, nephew, or niece of the owner
or officer.
If the actual loss that is finally deter-
mined is more than the amount you de-
ducted as an estimated loss, you can claim
the excess loss as a bad debt. If the actual
loss is less than the amount deducted as
an estimated loss, you must include in in-
come (in the final determination year) the
excess loss claimed. See Recoveries in
Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable
Income.
Nonbusiness bad debt. If you choose
to treat the loss as a bad debt, see How to
report bad debts, later.
Sale of Annuity
The part of any gain on the sale of an an-
nuity contract before its maturity date that
is based on interest accumulated on the
contract is ordinary income.
Nonbusiness Bad Debts
If someone owes you money that you can-
not collect, you have a bad debt. You may
be able to deduct the amount owed to you
when you figure your tax for the year the
debt becomes worthless. A debt must be
genuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is
genuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor
relationship based on a valid and enforcea-
ble obligation to repay a fixed or determi-
nable sum of money.
Bad debts that you did not get in the
course of operating your trade or business
are nonbusiness bad debts. To be deduct-
ible, nonbusiness bad debts must be totally
worthless. You cannot deduct a partly
worthless nonbusiness debt.
Basis in bad debt required. To deduct a
bad debt, you must have a basis in it — that
is, you must have already included the
amount in your income or loaned out your
cash. For example, you cannot claim a bad
debt deduction for court-ordered child sup-
port not paid to you by your former spouse.
If you are a cash method taxpayer (most
individuals are), you generally cannot take
a bad debt deduction for unpaid salaries,
wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends, and
similar items.
How to report bad debts. Deduct non-
business bad debts as short-term capital
losses on Schedule D (Form 1040).
In Part I, line 1 of Schedule D, enter the
name of the debtor and “statement at-
tached,” in column (a). Enter the amount of
the bad debt in parentheses in column (f).
Use a separate line for each bad debt.
For each bad debt, attach a statement
to your return that contains:
1) A description of the debt, including the
amount, and the date it became due,
2) The name of the debtor, and any
business or family relationship be-
tween you and the debtor,
3) The efforts you made to collect the
debt, and
Chapter 15 Sale of Property Page 103

4) Why you decided the debt was
worthless. For example, you could
show that the borrower has declared
bankruptcy, or that legal action to col-
lect would probably not result in pay-
ment of any part of the debt.
Filing a claim for refund. If you do not
deduct a bad debt on your original return for
the year it becomes worthless, you can file
a claim for a credit or refund due to the bad
debt. To do this, use Form 1040X, Amended
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to
amend your return for the year the debt
became worthless. You must file it within 7
years from the date your original return for
that year had to be filed, or 2 years from the
date you paid the tax, whichever is later.
For more information about filing a claim,
see Amended Returns and Claims for Re-
fund in chapter 1.
Additional information.For more infor-
mation, see Nonbusiness Bad Debts in
Publication 550.
For information on business bad debts,
see chapter 11 of Publication 535, Business
Expenses.
Losses on Small Business Stock
You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather
than as a capital loss, your loss on the sale,
trade, or worthlessness of section 1244
stock. Report the loss on Form 4797, line
10. Any gain on this stock is capital gain and
is reported on Schedule D (Form 1040) if
the stock is a capital asset in your hands.
See Losses on Section 1244 (Small Busi-
ness) Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.
Losses on Small Business
Investment Company Stock 
See Losses on Small Business Investment
Company Stock in chapter 4 of Publication
550.
Holding Period 
If you sold or traded investment property,
you must determine your holding period for
the property. Your holding period deter-
mines whether any capital gain or loss was
a short-term or long-term capital gain or
loss.
Long term or short term.If you hold in-
vestment property more than 1 year, any
capital gain or loss is a long-term capital
gain or loss. If you hold the property 1 year
or less, any capital gain or loss is a short-
term capital gain or loss.
To determine how long you held the in-
vestment property, begin counting on the
date after the day you acquired the property.
The day you disposed of the property is part
of your holding period.
Example. If you bought investment
property on February 5, 1999 and sold it on
February 5, 2000, your holding period is not
more than one year and you will have a
short-term capital gain or loss. If you sold it
on February 6, 2000, your holding period is
more than 1 year and you will have a long-
term capital gain or loss.
Securities traded on established market.
For securities traded on an established se-
curities market, your holding period begins
the day after the trade date you bought the
securities, and ends on the trade date you
sold them.
CAUTION
!
Do not confuse the trade date with
the settlement date, which is the
date by which the stock must be
delivered and payment must be made.
Example. You are a cash method, cal-
endar year taxpayer. You sold stock at a
gain on December 29, 2000. According to
the rules of the stock exchange, the sale
was closed by delivery of the stock three
trading days after the sale, on January 4,
2001. You received payment of the sales
price on that same day. Report your gain
on your 2000 return, even though you re-
ceived the payment in 2001. The gain is
long term or short term depending on
whether you held the stock more than 1
year. Your holding period ended on De-
cember 29. If you had sold the stock at a
loss, you would also report it on your 2000
return.
Nontaxable trades. If you acquire invest-
ment property in a trade for other invest-
ment property and your basis for the new
property is determined, in whole or in part,
by your basis in the old property, your
holding period for the new property begins
on the day following the date you acquired
the old property.
Property received as a gift. If you receive
a gift of property and your basis is deter-
mined by the donor's adjusted basis, your
holding period is considered to have started
on the same day the donor's holding period
started.
If your basis is determined by the fair
market value of the property, your holding
period starts on the day after the date of the
gift.
Inherited property. If you inherit invest-
ment property, your capital gain or loss on
any later disposition of that property is
treated as a long-term capital gain or loss.
This is true regardless of how long you ac-
tually held the property.
Real property bought.To figure how long
you have held real property bought under
an unconditional contract, begin counting
on the day after you received title to it or
on the day after you took possession of it
and assumed the burdens and privileges of
ownership, whichever happened first. How-
ever, taking delivery or possession of real
property under an option agreement is not
enough to start the holding period. The
holding period cannot start until there is an
actual contract of sale. The holding period
of the seller cannot end before that time.
Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held
6 months or less.  If you hold stock in a
mutual fund or real estate investment trust
(REIT) for 6 months or less and then sell it
at a loss, special rules may apply. See
chapter 4 of Publication 550.
Automatic investment service.In deter-
mining your holding period for shares
bought by the bank or other agent, full
shares are considered bought first and any
fractional shares are considered bought
last. Your holding period starts on the day
after the bank's purchase date. If a share
was bought over more than one purchase
date, your holding period for that share is a
split holding period. A part of the share is
considered to have been bought on each
date that stock was bought by the bank with
the proceeds of available funds.
Stock dividends. The holding period for
stock you received as a taxable stock divi-
dend begins on the date of distribution.
The holding period for new stock you
received as a nontaxable stock dividend
begins on the same day as the holding pe-
riod of the old stock. This rule also applies
to stock acquired in a “spin-off,” which is a
distribution of stock or securities in a con-
trolled corporation.
Nontaxable stock rights. Your holding
period for nontaxable stock rights begins on
the same day as the holding period of the
underlying stock. The holding period for
stock acquired through the exercise of stock
rights begins on the date the right was ex-
ercised.
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded Securities
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of
certain gains from the sale of publicly traded
securities. This means that if you buy cer-
tain replacement property and make the
choice described in this section, you post-
pone part or all of your gain. You postpone
the gain by adjusting the basis of the re-
placement property as described in Basis
of replacement property, later. This post-
pones your gain until the year you dispose
of the replacement property.
You qualify to make this choice if you
meet all the following tests.
1) You sell publicly traded securities at a
gain. Publicly traded securities are se-
curities traded on an established se-
curities market.
2) Your gain from the sale is a capital
gain.
3) During the 60-day period beginning on
the date of the sale, you buy replace-
ment property. This replacement prop-
erty must be either common stock or
a partnership interest in a  specialized
small business investment company
(SSBIC). This is any partnership or
corporation licensed by the Small
Business Administration under section
301(d) of the Small Business Invest-
ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May
13, 1993.
Amount of gain recognized.If you make
the choice described in this section, you
must recognize gain only up to the following
amount:
1) The amount realized on the sale, mi-
nus
2) The cost of any common stock or
partnership interest in an SSBIC that
you bought during the 60-day period
beginning on the date of sale (and did
not previously take into account on an
earlier sale of publicly traded securi-
ties).
If this amount is less than the amount of
your gain, you can postpone the rest of your
gain, subject to the limit described next. If
this amount is equal to or more than the
Page 104 Chapter 15  Sale of Property

amount of your gain, you must recognize
the full amount of your gain.
Limit on gain postponed.The amount
of gain you can postpone each year is lim-
ited to the smaller of:
1) $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married
and file a separate return), or
2) $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married
and file a separate return), minus the
amount of gain you postponed for all
earlier years.
Basis of replacement property.You must
subtract the amount of postponed gain from
the basis of your replacement property.
How to report and postpone gain.See
the Schedule D (Form 1040) instructions for
details on how to report and postpone the
gain.
Chapter 15 Sale of Property Page 105

16.
Selling Your
Home
Important Reminders
Change of address. If you change your
mailing address, be sure to notify the IRS
using Form 8822, Change of Address. Mail
it to the Internal Revenue Service Center for
your old address (addresses for the Service
Centers are on the back of the form).
Home sold with undeducted points. If
you have not deducted all the points you
paid to secure a mortgage on your old
home, you may be able to deduct the re-
maining points in the year of the sale. See
Mortgage ending early under Points in
chapter 25.
Introduction
This chapter explains the tax rules that ap-
ply when you sell your main home. Gener-
ally, your main home is the one in which you
live most of the time.
Gain. If you have a gain from the sale of
your main home, you may be able to ex-
clude up to $250,000 of the gain from your
income ($500,000 on a joint return in most
cases). Any gain you cannot exclude is
taxable.
Loss. You cannot deduct a loss from the
sale of your main home.
Worksheets. Publication 523, Selling Your
Home , includes worksheets to help you fig-
ure the adjusted basis of the home you sold,
the gain (or loss) on the sale, and the
amount of the gain that you can exclude.
Reporting the sale.Do not report the sale
of your main home on your tax return unless
you have a gain and at least part of it is
taxable. Report any taxable gain on
Schedule D (Form 1040).
Who may need to read chapter 3 in
Publication 523.Chapter 3 of Publication
523 explains the rules that applied to sales
before May 7, 1997. Those rules may still
apply to you if all three of the following
statements are true.
1) You postponed the gain on the sale.
2) The 2-year period you had to replace
that home (your replacement period)
was suspended while you either:
a) Served in the Armed Forces, or
b) Lived and worked outside the
United States.
3) You have not already reported to the
IRS your purchase of a new home
within your replacement period, or a
taxable gain resulting from the end of
your replacement period.
If these situations apply and you have
questions, see Publication 523.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554523 Selling Your Home 
/H18554530 Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners 
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital
Gains and Losses 
/H185548822 Change of Address 
/H185548828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage
Subsidy 
Main Home
Usually, the home you live in most of the
time is your main home and can be a:
 House,
 Houseboat,
 Mobile home,
 Cooperative apartment, or
 Condominium.
To exclude gain under the rules of this
chapter, you generally must have owned
and lived in the property as your main home
for at least 2 years during the 5-year period
ending on the date of sale.
Land. You may sell the land on which your
main home is located, but not the house it-
self. In this case, you cannot exclude any
gain you have from the sale of the land.
Example. On March 3, 2000, you sell
the land on which your main home is lo-
cated. You buy another piece of land and
move your house to it. This sale is not
considered a sale of your main home, and
you cannot exclude tax on any gain on the
sale.
More than one home. If you have more
than one home, you can exclude gain only
from the sale of your main home. You must
pay tax on the gain from selling any other
home. If you have two homes and live in
both of them, your main home is ordinarily
the one you live in most of the time.
Example 1. You own and live in a
house in the city. You also own a beach
house, which you use during summer
months. The house in the city is your main
home; the beach house is not.
Example 2. You own a house, but you
live in another house that you rent. The
rented house is your main home.
Property used partly as your home.If
you use only part of the property as your
main home, the rules discussed in this
chapter apply only to the gain or loss on the
sale of that part of the property. For details,
see Property used partly as your home and
partly for business or rental during the year
of sale under Business Use or Rental of
Home , later.
How To Figure Gain
or Loss 
To figure the gain or loss on the sale of your
main home, you must know the selling price,
the amount realized, and the adjusted basis.
Selling price.The selling price is the total
amount you receive for your home. It in-
cludes money, all notes, mortgages, or
other debts assumed by the buyer as part
of the sale, and the fair market value of any
other property or any services you receive.
Payment by employer. You may have
to sell your home because of a job transfer.
If your employer pays you for a loss on the
sale or for your selling expenses, do not
include the payment as part of the selling
price. Your employer will include it in box 1
of your Form W–2 and you will include it in
your gross income as wages on line 7 of
Form 1040.
Option to buy. If you grant an option
to buy your home and the option is exer-
cised, add the amount you receive for the
option to the selling price of your home. If
the option is not exercised, you must report
the amount as ordinary income in the year
the option expires. Report this amount on
line 21 of Form 1040.
Form 1099–S.  If you received Form
1099–S, box 2 should show the total
amount you received for your home.
However, box 2 will not include the fair
market value of any property other than
cash or notes, or any services, you received
or will receive. Instead, box 4 will be
checked.
If you can exclude the entire gain, the
person responsible for closing the sale
generally will not have to report it on Form
1099–S. You will use sale documents and
other records to figure the total amount you
received for your home.
Amount realized.The amount realized is
the selling price minus selling expenses.
Selling expenses. Selling expenses
include:
 Commissions,
 Advertising fees, 
 Legal fees, and
 Loan charges paid by the seller, such
as loan placement fees or “points.”
Amount of gain or loss.When you know
the amount realized and the home's ad-
justed basis, you can figure your gain or
loss. If the amount realized is more than the
adjusted basis, the difference is a gain and,
except for any part you can exclude, gen-
erally is taxable.
To figure your home's adjusted basis,
see Basis, later.
Jointly owned home. If you and your
spouse sell your jointly owned home and file
a joint return, you figure your gain or loss
as one taxpayer.
Separate returns.If you file separate
returns, each of you must figure your own
gain or loss according to your ownership
Page 106 Chapter 16  Selling Your Home

interest in the home. Your ownership inter-
est is determined by state law.
Joint owners not married.If you and
a joint owner other than your spouse sell
your jointly owned home, each of you must
figure your own gain or loss according to
your ownership interest in the home. Each
of you applies the rules discussed in this
chapter on an individual basis.
Trading homes. If you trade your old home
for another home, treat the trade as a sale
and a purchase.
Example. You owned and lived in a
home that had an adjusted basis of
$41,000. A real estate dealer accepted your
old home as a trade-in and allowed you
$50,000 toward a new house priced at
$80,000. This is treated as a sale of your
old home for $50,000 with a gain of $9,000
($50,000 – $41,000).
If the dealer had allowed you $27,000
and assumed your unpaid mortgage of
$23,000 on your old home, your sales price
would still be $50,000 (the $27,000 trade-in
allowed plus the $23,000 mortgage as-
sumed).
Foreclosure or repossession.  If your
home was foreclosed on or repossessed,
you have a sale.
Form 1099–A and Form 1099–C. Gen-
erally, you will receive Form 1099–A, Ac-
quisition or Abandonment of Secured Prop-
erty, from your lender. This form will have
the information you need to determine the
amount of your gain or loss and any ordi-
nary income from cancellation of debt. If
your debt is canceled, you may receive
Form 1099–C, Cancellation of Debt.
Abandonment.  If you abandon your home,
you may have ordinary income. If the
abandoned home secures a debt for which
you are personally liable and the debt is
canceled, you have ordinary income equal
to the amount of the canceled debt. If the
home is foreclosed on or repossessed, you
may also have a gain or loss. See Foreclo-
sure or repossession, earlier. Get Publica-
tion 523 for more information.
Transfer to spouse.If you transfer your
home to your spouse, or to your former
spouse incident to your divorce, you gener-
ally have no gain or loss. This is true even
if you receive cash or other consideration
for the home. Therefore, the rules in this
chapter do not apply.
More information. If you need more
information, see Transfer to spouse in
Publication 523 and Property Settlements
in Publication 504, Divorced or Separated
Individuals.
Gain On Sale
You will generally be subject to tax on all
of the gain on the sale of your main home
unless you exclude all or part of the gain
under the rules in this chapter.
Loss on Sale
You cannot deduct a loss on the sale of
your home. It is a personal loss.
Basis
You need to know your basis in your home
to determine any gain or loss when you sell
it. Your basis in your home is determined
by how you got the home. Your basis is its
cost if you bought it or built it. If you got it
in some other way, its basis is either its fair
market value when you got it or the adjusted
basis of the person you got it from.
While you owned your home, you may
have made adjustments (increases or de-
creases) to the basis. This adjusted basis
is used to figure gain or loss on the sale of
your home.
You can find more information on basis
and adjusted basis in chapter 14 of this
publication and in Publication 523.
Settlement fees or closing costs.  When
you bought your home, you may have paid
settlement fees or closing costs in addition
to the contract price of the property. You
can include in your basis the settlement fees
and closing costs you paid for buying the
home. You cannot include in your basis the
fees and costs for getting a mortgage loan.
A fee for buying the home is any fee you
would have had to pay even if you paid cash
for the home.
Chapter 14 lists some of the settlement
fees and closing costs that you can include
in the basis of property, including your
home. It also lists some settlement costs
that cannot be included in basis.
In addition to the items listed in chapter
14, you cannot include in basis:
1) Any fee or cost that you deducted as
a moving expense (allowed for certain
fees and costs before 1994), and
2) VA funding fees.
Adjusted Basis
Adjusted basis is your basis increased or
decreased by certain amounts.
Increases to basis.These include any:
1) Improvements that have a useful life
of more than 1 year,
 2) Additions,
3) Special assessments for local im-
provements, and
4) Amounts you spent after a casualty to
restore damaged property.
Decreases to basis.These include any:
1) Gain you postponed from the sale of
a previous home before May 7, 1997,
2) Deductible casualty losses,
3) Insurance payments you received or
expect to receive for casualty losses,
4) Payments you received for granting an
easement or right-of-way,
5) Depreciation allowed or allowable if
you used your home for business or
rental purposes,
6) Residential energy credit (generally al-
lowed from 1977 through 1987)
claimed for the cost of energy im-
provements that you added to the ba-
sis of your home,
7) Adoption credit you claimed for im-
provements added to the basis of your
home,
8) Nontaxable payments from an
adoption assistance program of your
employer that you used for improve-
ments you added to the basis of your
home,
9) First-time homebuyers credit (allowed
to certain first-time buyers of a home
in the District of Columbia), and
10) Energy conservation subsidy excluded
from your gross income because you
received it (directly or indirectly) from
a public utility after 1992 to buy or in-
stall any energy conservation measure.
An energy conservation measure is an
installation or modification that is pri-
marily designed either to reduce con-
sumption of electricity or natural gas
or to improve the management of en-
ergy demand for a home.
Improvements. These add to the value of
your home, prolong its useful life, or adapt
it to new uses. You add the cost of im-
provements to the basis of your property.
Examples. Putting a recreation room in
your unfinished basement, adding another
bathroom or bedroom, putting up a new
fence, putting in new plumbing or wiring,
putting on a new roof, or paving your un-
paved driveway are improvements.
Repairs. These maintain your home in
good condition but do not add to its value
or prolong its life. You do not add their cost
to the basis of your property.
Examples. Repainting your house in-
side or outside, fixing your gutters or floors,
repairing leaks or plastering, and replacing
broken window panes are examples of re-
pairs.
RECORDS
Recordkeeping. You should keep
records to prove your home's ad-
justed basis. Ordinarily, you must
keep records for 3 years after the due date
for filing your return for the tax year in which
you sold your home. But if you sold your old
home before May 7, 1997, and postponed
tax on any gain, the basis of your old home
affects the basis of your new one. Keep
records proving the basis of both homes as
long as they are needed for tax purposes.
The records you should keep include:
 Proof of the home's purchase price and
purchase expenses,
 Receipts and other records for all im-
provements, additions, and other items
that affect the home's adjusted basis,
 Any worksheets you used to figure the
adjusted basis of the home you sold,
the gain or loss on the sale, the exclu-
sion, and the taxable gain,
 Any Form 2119 that you filed to post-
pone gain from the sale of a previous
home before May 7, 1997, and
 Any worksheets you used to prepare
Form 2119, such as the Adjusted Basis
of Home Sold Worksheet or the Capital
Improvements Worksheet from the
Form 2119 instructions.
Chapter 16 Selling Your Home Page 107

Excluding the Gain
You may qualify to exclude from your in-
come all or part of any gain from the sale
of your main home. This means that, if you
qualify, you will not have to pay tax on the
gain up to the limit described under Maxi-
mum Amount of Exclusion, next. To qualify,
you must meet the ownership and use tests
described later.
You can choose not to take the exclu-
sion. In that case, you will have to pay tax
on your entire gain.
Maximum Amount of
Exclusion
You can exclude the entire gain on the sale
of your main home up to:
 1) $250,000, or
2) $500,000 if all of the following are true.
a) You are married and file a joint
return for the year.
b) Either you or your spouse meets
the ownership test.
c) Both you and your spouse meet
the use test.
d) During the 2-year period ending
on the date of the sale, neither
you nor your spouse excluded
gain from the sale of another
home.
Reduced Maximum
Exclusion
You can claim an exclusion, but the maxi-
mum amount of gain you can exclude will
be reduced, if either of the following is true.
1) You did not meet the ownership and
use tests for a home you sold due to:
a) A change in health, 
b) Place of employment, or 
c) Unforeseen circumstances, to the
extent provided in regulations (as
discussed below).
2) Your exclusion would have been dis-
allowed because of the rule described
in More Than One Home Sold During
2-Year Period, later, except that you
sold the home due to:
a) A change in health, 
b) Place of employment, or 
c) Unforeseen circumstances, to the
extent provided in regulations (as
discussed below).
Use Worksheet 3 on page 13 to figure your
reduced maximum exclusion.
Unforeseen circumstances.The IRS has
not issued regulations defining unforeseen
circumstances. You cannot claim an ex-
clusion based on unforeseen circumstances
until the IRS issues final regulations or other
appropriate guidance.
More Than One Home Sold
During 2-Year Period
You cannot exclude gain on the sale of your
home if, during the 2-year period ending on
the date of the sale, you sold another home
at a gain and excluded all or part of that
gain. If you cannot exclude the gain, you
must include it in your income.
However, you can still claim an exclu-
sion if you sold the home due to:
1) A change in health, 
2) Place of employment, or 
3) Unforeseen circumstances, to the ex-
tent provided in regulations (as dis-
cussed above).
The maximum amount you can exclude is
reduced. See Reduced Maximum Exclu-
sion, earlier.
Ownership and Use Tests
To claim the exclusion you must meet the
ownership and use tests. This means that
during the 5-year period ending on the date
of the sale, you must have:
1) Owned the home for at least 2 years
(the ownership test), and
2) Lived in the home as your main home
for at least 2 years (the use test).
Exception. If you owned and lived in the
property as your main home for less than 2
years, you can still claim an exclusion if you
sold the home due to a change in health or
place of employment. The maximum
amount you can claim will be reduced. See
Reduced Maximum Exclusion, earlier.
Period of ownership and use. The re-
quired 2 years of ownership and use during
the 5-year period ending on the date of the
sale do not have to be continuous. You
meet the tests if you can show that you
owned and lived in the property as your
main home for either 24 full months or 730
days (365 × 2) during the 5-year period
ending on the date of sale. Short temporary
absences for vacations or other seasonal
absences, even if you rent out the property
during the absences, are counted as peri-
ods of use. See Ownership and use tests
met at different times, later.
Example. Professor Paul Beard, who
is single, bought and moved into a house
on August 30, 1997. He lived in it as his
main home continuously until January 5,
1999, when he went abroad for a 1-year
sabbatical leave. During part of the period
of leave, the house was unoccupied, and
during the rest of the period, he rented it out.
On January 5, 2000, he sold the house at
a gain. Because his leave was not a short
temporary absence, he cannot include the
period of leave to meet the 2-year use test.
He cannot exclude any part of his gain, un-
less he sold the house due to a change in
health or place of employment, as explained
under Reduced Maximum Exclusion, ear-
lier. Even if he did sell the house due to a
change in health or place of employment,
he cannot exclude the part of the gain equal
to the depreciation he claimed while renting
the house. See Depreciation for business
use after May 6, 1997, later.
Ownership and use tests met at different
times. You can meet the ownership and
use tests during different 2-year periods.
However, you must meet both tests during
the 5-year period ending on the date of the
sale.
Example. In 1991, Helen Jones lived in
a rented apartment. The apartment building
was later changed to a condominium and
she bought her apartment on December 1,
1997. In 1998, Helen became ill and on April
14 of that year she moved to her daughter's
home. On July 10, 2000, while still living in
her daughter's home, she sold her apart-
ment.
Helen can exclude gain on the sale of
her apartment because she met the owner-
ship and use tests. Her 5-year period is from
July 11, 1995, to July 10, 2000, the date she
sold the apartment. She owned her apart-
ment from December 1, 1997, to July 10,
2000 (over 2 years). She lived in the apart-
ment from July 11, 1995 (the beginning of
the 5-year period), to April 14, 1998 (over
2 years).
Cooperative apartment.If you sold stock
in a cooperative housing corporation, the
ownership and use tests are met if, during
the 5-year period ending on the date of sale,
you:
1) Owned the stock for at least 2 years,
and
2) Lived in the house or apartment that
the stock entitles you to occupy as your
main home for at least 2 years.
Exception for individuals with a disabil-
ity.There is an exception to the use test
if, during the 5-year period before the sale
of your home:
1) You become physically or mentally
unable to care for yourself, and 
2) You owned and lived in your home as
your main home for a total of at least
1 year. 
Under this exception, you are considered to
live in your home during any time that you
own the home and live in a facility (including
a nursing home) that is licensed by a state
or political subdivision to care for persons
in your condition.
If you meet this exception to the use test,
you still have to meet the 2-out-of-5-year
ownership test to claim the exclusion.
Gain postponed on sale of previous
home. For the ownership and use tests,
you may be able to add the time you owned
and lived in a previous home to the time you
lived in the home on which you wish to ex-
clude gain. You can do this if you post-
poned all or part of the gain on the sale of
the previous home because of buying the
home on which you wish to exclude gain.
In addition, if buying the previous home
enabled you to postpone all or part of the
gain on the sale of a home you owned ear-
lier, you can also include the time you
owned and lived in that earlier home.
Previous home destroyed or con-
demned. For the ownership and use tests,
you add the time you owned and lived in a
previous home that was destroyed or con-
demned to the time you owned and lived in
the home on which you wish to exclude
Page 108 Chapter 16  Selling Your Home

gain. This rule applies if any part of the ba-
sis of the home you sold depended on the
basis of the destroyed or condemned home.
Otherwise, you must have owned and lived
in the same home for 2 of the 5 years be-
fore the sale to qualify for the exclusion.
Married Persons
If you and your spouse file a joint return for
the year of sale, you can exclude gain if
either spouse meets the ownership and use
tests. (But see Maximum Amount of Exclu-
sion, earlier.)
Example 1 – one spouse sells a home.
Emily sells her home in June 2000. She
marries Jamie later in the year. She meets
the ownership and use tests, but Jamie
does not. She can exclude up to $250,000
of gain on a separate or joint return for
2000.
Example 2 – each spouse sells a
home. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 1 except that Jamie also sells a
home. He meets the ownership and use
tests on his home. Emily and Jamie can
each exclude up to $250,000 of gain.
Death of spouse before sale. If your
spouse died before the date of sale, you are
considered to have owned and lived in the
property as your main home during any
period of time when your spouse owned and
lived in it as a main home.
Home transferred from spouse. If your
home was transferred to you by your
spouse (or former spouse if the transfer was
incident to divorce), you are considered to
have owned it during any period of time
when your spouse owned it.
Use of home after divorce.You are con-
sidered to have used property as your main
home during any period when:
1) You owned it, and
2) Your spouse or former spouse is al-
lowed to live in it under a divorce or
separation instrument.
Business Use or
Rental of Home
You may be able to exclude your gain from
the sale of a home that you have used for
business or to produce rental income. But
you must meet the ownership and use tests.
Example. On May 30, 1994, Amy
bought a house. She moved in on that date
and lived in it until May 31, 1996, when she
moved out of the house and put it up for
rent. The house was rented from June 1,
1996, to March 31, 1998. Amy moved back
into the house on April 1, 1998, and lived
there until she sold it on January 31, 2000.
During the 5-year period ending on the date
of the sale (February 1, 1995 – January 31,
2000), Amy owned and lived in the house
for more than 2 years as shown in the table
below.
Amy can exclude gain up to $250,000. But
she cannot exclude the part of the gain
equal to the depreciation she claimed for
renting the house after May 6, 1997, as
explained next.
Depreciation for business use after May
6, 1997. If you were entitled to take de-
preciation deductions because you used
your home for business purposes or as
rental property, you cannot exclude the part
of your gain equal to any depreciation al-
lowed or allowable as a deduction for peri-
ods after May 6, 1997. If you can show by
adequate records or other evidence that the
depreciation deduction allowed was less
than the amount allowable, the amount you
cannot exclude is the smaller figure.
Example. Micah sold his main home in
2000 at a $30,000 gain. He meets the use
and ownership tests to exclude the gain
from his income. However, he used part of
the home for business in 1999 and claimed
$500 depreciation. He can exclude $29,500
($30,000 – $500) of his gain. He has a tax-
able gain of $500.
Property used partly as your home and
partly for business or rental during the
year of sale. In the year of sale you may
have used part of your property as your
home and part of it for business or to
produce income. Examples are:
 A working farm on which your house
was located,
 An apartment building in which you
lived in one unit and rented out the
others, 
 A store building with an upstairs apart-
ment in which you lived, or
 A home with a room used for business
or to produce income.
If you sell the entire property you should
consider the transaction as the sale of two
properties. The sale of the part of your
property used for business or rental is re-
ported on Form 4797, Sales of Business
Property. For more information, see Prop-
erty used partly as your home and partly for
business or rental during the year of sale
under Business Use or Rental of Home, in
chapter 2 of Publication 523.
Special Situations
This section explains certain situations that
may affect your exclusion.
Expatriates.You cannot claim the exclu-
sion if the expatriation tax applies to you.
The expatriation tax applies to U.S. citizens
who have renounced their citizenship (and
long-term residents who have ended their
residency) if one of their principal purposes
was to avoid U.S. taxes. See chapter 4 of
Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens,
for more information about expatriation tax.
Five Year
Period
Used as
 Home
Used as
 Rental
Home destroyed or condemned. If your
home was destroyed or condemned, any
gain (for example, because of insurance
proceeds you received) qualifies for the ex-
clusion.
Any part of the gain that cannot be ex-
cluded (because it is more than the limit)
may be postponed under the rules ex-
plained in:
 Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters,
and Thefts (Business and Nonbusi-
ness), in the case of a home that was
destroyed, or
 Chapter 1 of Publication 544, Sales and
Other Dispositions of Assets, in the
case of a home that was condemned.
Sale of remainder interest.Subject to the
other rules in this chapter, you can choose
to exclude gain from the sale of a remainder
interest in your home. If you make this
choice, you cannot choose to exclude gain
from your sale of any other interest in the
home that you sell separately.
Exception for sales to related per-
sons. You cannot exclude gain from the
sale of a remainder interest in your home
to a related person. Related persons include
your brothers and sisters, half-brothers and
half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (parents,
grandparents, etc.), and lineal descendants
(children, grandchildren, etc.). Related per-
sons also include certain corporations,
partnerships, trusts, and exempt organiza-
tions.
Reporting the Gain
Do not report the 2000 sale of your main
home on your tax return unless:
 You have a gain and do not qualify to
exclude all of it, or
 You have a gain and choose not to ex-
clude it.
If you have any taxable gain on the sale
of your main home, report the entire gain
realized on Schedule D (Form 1040). Re-
port it on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,
depending on how long you owned the
home. If you qualify for an exclusion, show
it on the line directly below the line on which
you report the gain. Write “Section 121 ex-
clusion” in column (a) of that line and show
the amount of the exclusion in column (f)
as a loss (in parentheses).
Tax rate on capital gains.Your net capital
gain is taxed at a rate of 10%, 15%, 20%,
25%, or 28%, depending on your situation.
See Chapter 17.
Installment sale. Some sales are made
under arrangements that provide for part or
all of the selling price to be paid in a later
year. These sales are called installment
sales. If you finance the buyer's purchase
of your home yourself, instead of having the
buyer get a loan or mortgage from a bank,
you probably have an installment sale. You
may be able to report the part of the gain
you cannot exclude on the installment basis.
Use Form 6252, Installment Sale
Income, to report the sale.
Seller-financed mortgage. If you sell
your home and hold a note, mortgage, or
other financial agreement, the payments
you receive generally consist of both inter-
 2/1/95 –
5/31/96 16 months
 6/1/96 –
3/31/98  22 months
 4/1/98 –
1/31/00 22 months
38 months 22 months
Chapter 16 Selling Your Home Page 109

est and principal. You must report the in-
terest you receive as part of each payment
separately as interest income. If the buyer
of your home uses the property as a main
or second home, you must also report the
name, address, and social security number
(SSN) of the buyer on line 1 of either
Schedule B (Form 1040) or Schedule 1
(Form 1040A). The buyer must give you
his or her SSN and you must give the buyer
your SSN. Failure to meet these require-
ments may result in a $50 penalty for each
failure. If you or the buyer does not have
and is not eligible to get an SSN, see Social
Security Number in chapter 1.
More information. For more informa-
tion on installment sales, see Publication
537, Installment Sales. 
Recapture of
Federal Subsidy
If you financed your home under a federally
subsidized program (loans from tax-exempt
qualified mortgage bonds or loans with
mortgage credit certificates), you may have
to recapture all or part of the benefit you
received from that program when you sell
or otherwise dispose of your home. You
recapture the benefit by increasing your
federal income tax for the year of the sale.
You may have to pay this recapture tax
even if you can exclude your gain from in-
come; that exclusion does not affect the
recapture tax.
Loans subject to recapture rules.The
recapture applies to loans that:
1) Came from the proceeds of qualified
mortgage bonds, or 
2) Were based on mortgage credit certif-
icates. 
The recapture also applies to assumptions
of these loans.
When the recapture applies.The recap-
ture of the federal mortgage subsidy applies
only if you meet both of the following con-
ditions.
1) You sell or otherwise dispose of your
home: 
a) At a gain, and
b) During the first 9 years after the
date you closed your mortgage
loan.
2) Your income for the year of disposition
is more than that year's adjusted qual-
ifying income for your family size for
that year (related to the income re-
quirements a person must meet to
qualify for the federally subsidized
program). 
When recapture does not apply.The re-
capture does not apply if any of the follow-
ing situations apply to you:
 Your mortgage loan was a qualified
home improvement loan of not more
than $15,000, 
 The home is disposed of as a result of
your death, 
 You dispose of the home more than 9
years after the date you closed your
mortgage loan, 
 You transfer the home to your spouse,
or to your former spouse incident to a
divorce, where no gain is included in
your income, 
 You dispose of the home at a loss, 
 Your home is destroyed by a casualty,
and you repair it or replace it on its ori-
ginal site within 2 years after the end
of the tax year when the destruction
happened, or 
 You refinance your mortgage loan (un-
less you later meet all of the conditions
listed previously under When the re-
capture applies).
Notice of amounts. At or near the time of
settlement of your mortgage loan, you
should receive a notice that provides the
federally subsidized amount and other in-
formation you will need to figure your re-
capture tax.
How to figure and report the recapture.
The recapture tax is figured on Form 8828,
Recapture of Federal Mortgage Subsidy. If
you sell your home and your mortgage is
subject to recapture rules, you must file
Form 8828 even if you do not owe a re-
capture tax. Attach Form 8828 to your Form
1040. For more information, see Form 8828
and its instructions.
Page 110 Chapter 16  Selling Your Home

17.
Reporting Gains
and Losses
Important Change
Reporting capital gain distributions.For
2000, you may be able to report your capital
gain distributions from mutual funds on
Form 1040A, instead of on Form 1040. A
worksheet in the Form 1040A instructions
is used to figure the tax. For details, see
Capital gain distributions only, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses how to report capital
gains and losses from sales, exchanges,
and other dispositions of investment prop-
erty on Schedule D of Form 1040. The dis-
cussion includes:
 How to report short-term gains and
losses,
 How to report long-term gains and
losses,
 How to figure capital loss carryovers,
 How to figure your tax using the lower
tax rates on a net capital gain, and
 An illustrated example of how to com-
plete Schedule D.
If you sell or otherwise dispose of prop-
erty used in a trade or business or for the
production of income, see Publication 544,
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets,
before completing Schedule D.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554537 Installment Sales 
/H18554544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
/H18554550 Investment Income and Ex-
penses
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital
Gains and Losses
/H185544797 Sales of Business Property
/H185546252 Installment Sale Income
/H185548582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
Schedule D
Report capital gains and losses on Sched-
ule D (Form 1040). Enter your sales and
trades of stocks, bonds, etc., and real estate
(if not required to be reported on another
form) on line 1 of Part I or line 8 of Part II,
as appropriate. Include all these trans-
actions even if you did not receive a Form
1099–B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter
Exchange Transactions, or Form 1099–S,
Proceeds From Real Estate Transactions
(or substitute statement). You can use
Schedule D–1 as a continuation schedule
to report more transactions.
Installment sales. If you will receive any
of the proceeds from the sale of your in-
vestment property after the year of sale, you
may have an installment sale. Generally,
you report gain from an installment sale
using the installment method. Under this
method, you report part of the gain each
year that you receive a payment. For infor-
mation, see Form 6252 and Publication 537.
Stock or securities.You cannot use
the installment method to report a gain from
the sale of stock or securities traded on an
established securities market. You must re-
port the entire gain in the year of sale (the
year in which the trade date occurs).
Passive activity gains and losses.If you
have gains or losses from a passive activity,
you may also have to report them on  Form
8582. In some cases, the loss may be lim-
ited under the passive activity rules. Refer
to Form 8582 and its separate instructions
for more information about reporting capital
gains and losses from a passive activity.
Form 1099–B transactions. If you sold
property, such as stocks, bonds, or certain
commodities, through a broker, you should
receive Form 1099–B or equivalent state-
ment from the broker. Use the Form 1099–B
or the equivalent statement to complete
Schedule D.
Report the gross proceeds shown in box
2 of Form 1099–B as the gross sales price
in column (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of
Schedule D, whichever applies. However,
if the broker advises you, in box 2 of Form
1099–B, that gross proceeds (gross sales
price) less commissions and option premi-
ums were reported to the IRS, enter that
net sales price in column (d) of either line
1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever ap-
plies. If the net amount is entered in column
(d), do not include the commissions and
option premiums in column (e).
Form 1099–S transactions.If you sold or
traded reportable real estate, you generally
should receive from the real estate reporting
person a Form 1099–S showing the gross
proceeds.
“Reportable real estate” is defined as
any present or future ownership interest in
any of the following:
1) Improved or unimproved land, includ-
ing air space,
2) Inherently permanent structures, in-
cluding any residential, commercial, or
industrial building,
3) A condominium unit and its accessory
fixtures and common elements, in-
cluding land, and
4) Stock in a cooperative housing corpo-
ration (as defined in section 216 of the
Internal Revenue Code).
A “real estate reporting person” could
include the buyer's attorney, your attorney,
the title or escrow company, a mortgage
lender, your broker, the buyer's broker, or
the person acquiring the biggest interest in
the property.
Your Form 1099–S will show the gross
proceeds from the sale or exchange in box
2. Follow the instructions for Schedule D to
report these transactions and include them
on line 1 or 8 as appropriate.
Reconciling Forms 1099 with Schedule
D. Add the following amounts reported to
you for 2000 on Forms 1099–B and 1099–S
(or on substitute statements):
1) Proceeds from transactions involving
stocks, bonds, and other securities,
and
2) Gross proceeds from real estate
transactions (other than the sale of
your main home if you had no taxable
gain) not reported on another form or
schedule.
If this total is more than the total of lines 3
and 10 of Schedule D, attach a statement
to your return explaining the difference.
Sale of property bought at various times.
If you sell a block of stock or other property
that you bought at various times, report the
short-term gain or loss from the sale on one
line in Part I of Schedule D and the long-
term gain or loss on one line in Part II. Write
“Various” in column (b) for the “Date ac-
quired.” See the Comprehensive Example
later in this chapter.
Sale expenses. Add to your cost or other
basis any expense of sale such as brokers'
fees, commissions, state and local transfer
taxes, and option premiums. Enter this ad-
justed amount in column (e) of either Part I
or Part II of Schedule D, whichever applies,
unless you reported the net sales price
amount in column (d).
For more information about adjustments
to basis, see chapter 14.
Property held for personal use.Property
held for personal use only, rather than for
investment, is a capital asset and you must
report a gain from its sale as a capital gain.
However, you cannot deduct a loss from
selling personal use property.
Short-term gains and losses.Capital gain
or loss on the sale or trade of investment
property held 1 year or less is a short-term
capital gain or loss. You report it in Part I
of Schedule D. If the amount you report in
column (f) is a loss, show it in parentheses.
You combine your share of short-term
capital gains or losses from partnerships, S
corporations, and fiduciaries, and any
short-term capital loss carryover, with your
other short-term capital gains and losses to
figure your net short-term capital gain or
loss on line 7 of Schedule D.
Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 111

Long-term gains and losses. A capital
gain or loss on the sale or trade of property
held more than 1 year is a long-term capital
gain or loss. You report it in Part II of
Schedule D. If the amount in column (f) is
a loss, show it in parentheses.
You also report the following in Part II
of Schedule D:
1) Undistributed long-term capital gains
from a regulated investment company
(mutual fund) or real estate investment
trust (REIT),
2) Your share of long-term capital gains
or losses from partnerships, S corpo-
rations, and fiduciaries,
3) All capital gain distributions from mu-
tual funds and REITs not reported di-
rectly on line 10 of Form 1040A or line
13 of Form 1040, and
4) Long-term capital loss carryovers.
The result after combining these items
with your other long-term capital gains and
losses is your net long-term capital gain or
loss (line 16 of Schedule D).
28% rate gain or loss.Enter in column
(g) the amount, if any, from column (f) that
is a 28% rate gain or loss. Enter any loss
in parentheses.
A 28% rate gain or loss is:
 Any collectibles gain or loss, or
 The part of your gain on qualified small
business stock that is equal to the sec-
tion 1202 exclusion.
For more information, see Capital Gain Tax
Rates, later.
Capital gain distributions only.You
do not have to file Schedule D if all of the
following are true.
1) The only amounts you would have to
report on Schedule D are capital gain
distributions from box 2a of Form
1099–DIV (or substitute statement).
2) You do not have an amount in box 2b,
2c, or 2d of any Form 1099–DIV (or
substitute statement).
3) You do not file Form 4952 or, if you do,
the amount on line 4e of that form is
not more than zero.
If all the above statements are true, report
your capital gain distributions directly on line
13 of Form 1040 and check the box on that
line. Also, use the Capital Gain Tax Work-
sheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure
your tax. 
You can report your capital gain distri-
butions on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead
of on Form 1040, if both of the following are
true.
1) None of the Forms 1099–DIV (or sub-
stitute statements) you received have
an amount in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.
2) You do not have to file Form 1040 for
any other capital gains or any capital
losses.)
Total net gain or loss.To figure your total
net gain or loss, combine your net short-
term capital gain or loss (line 7) with your
net long-term capital gain or loss (line 16).
Enter the result on line 17, Part III of
Schedule D. If your losses are more than
your gains, see Capital Losses, next. If both
lines 16 and 17 are gains and line 39 of
Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital
Gain Tax Rates, later.
Capital Losses
If your capital losses are more than your
capital gains, you can claim a capital loss
deduction. Report the deduction on line 13
of Form 1040, enclosed in parentheses.
Limit on deduction.Your allowable capital
loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is
the lesser of:
1) $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and
file a separate return), or
2) Your total net loss as shown on line
17 of Schedule D.
You can use your total net loss to reduce
your income dollar for dollar, up to the
$3,000 limit.
Capital loss carryover.  If you have a total
net loss on line 17 of Schedule D that is
more than the yearly limit on capital loss
deductions, you can carry over the unused
part to the next year and treat it as if you
had incurred it in that next year. If part of the
loss is still unused, you can carry it over to
later years until it is completely used up.
When you figure the amount of any
capital loss carryover to the next year, you
must take the current year's allowable de-
duction into account, whether or not you
claimed it.
When you carry over a loss, it remains
long term or short term. A long-term capital
loss you carry over to the next tax year will
reduce that year's long-term capital gains
before it reduces that year's short-term
capital gains.
Figuring your carryover.The amount
of your capital loss carryover is the amount
of your total net loss that is more than the
lesser of:
1) Your allowable capital loss deduction
for the year, or
2) Your taxable income increased by your
allowable capital loss deduction for the
year and your deduction for personal
exemptions.
If your deductions are more than your
gross income for the tax year, use your
negative taxable income in computing the
amount in item (2).
Complete the Capital Loss Carryover
Worksheet in the Schedule D (Form 1040)
instructions to determine the part of your
capital loss for 2000 that you can carry over
to 2001.
Example. Bob and Gloria sold securi-
ties in 2000. The sales resulted in a capital
loss of $7,000. They had no other capital
transactions. Their taxable income was
$26,000. On their joint 2000 return, they can
deduct $3,000. The unused part of the loss,
$4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000), can be carried
over to 2001.
If their capital loss had been $2,000,
their capital loss deduction would have been
$2,000. They would have no carryover to
2001.
Use short-term losses first.When you
figure your capital loss carryover, use your
short-term capital losses first, even if you
incurred them after a long-term capital loss.
If you have not reached the limit on the
capital loss deduction after using short-term
losses, use the long-term losses until you
reach the limit.
Decedent's capital loss.A capital loss
sustained by a decedent during his or her
last tax year (or carried over to that year
from an earlier year) can be deducted only
on the final income tax return filed for the
decedent. The capital loss limits discussed
earlier still apply in this situation. The de-
cedent's estate cannot deduct any of the
loss or carry it over to following years.
Joint and separate returns.If you and
your spouse once filed separate returns and
are now filing a joint return, combine your
separate capital loss carryovers. However,
if you and your spouse once filed a joint
return and are now filing separate returns,
any capital loss carryover from the joint re-
turn can be deducted only on the return of
the person who actually had the loss.
Capital Gain Tax Rates 
The 31%, 36%, and 39.6% income tax rates
for individuals do not apply to a net capital
gain. In most cases, the 15% and 28% rates
do not apply either. Instead, your net capital
gain is taxed at a lower capital gain rate.
The term “net capital gain” means the
amount by which your net long-term capital
gain for the year is more than your net
short-term capital loss.
The capital gain rate may be 10%, 15%,
20%, 25%, or 28%, or a combination of
those rates, as shown in Table 17–1.
Investment interest deducted. If you
claim a deduction for investment interest,
you may have to reduce the amount of your
net capital gain that is eligible for the capital
gain tax rates. Reduce it by the amount of
the net capital gain you choose to include
in investment income when figuring the limit
on your investment interest deduction. This
is done on lines 20–22 of Schedule D. For
more information about the limit on invest-
ment interest, see chapter 3 of Publication
550.
Collectibles gain or loss.This is gain
or loss from the sale or trade of a work of
art, rug, antique, metal (such as gold, silver,
and platinum bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or
alcoholic beverage held more than 1 year.
Gain on qualified small business
stock. If you realized a gain from qualified
small business stock that you held more
than 5 years, you generally can exclude
one-half of your gain from income. The
taxable part of your gain equal to your sec-
tion 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain. See
Gains on Qualified Small Business Stock,
in chapter 4 of Publication 550.
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
Generally, this is any part of your capital
gain from selling section 1250 property (real
property) that is due to depreciation (but not
more than your net section 1231 gain), re-
duced by any net loss in the 28% group.
Use the worksheet in the Schedule D in-
structions to figure your unrecaptured sec-
tion 1250 gain. For more information about
section 1250 property and section 1231
gain, see chapter 3 of Publication 544.
Using Schedule D. You apply these rules
by using Part IV of Schedule D (Form 1040)
to figure your tax. You will need to use Part
IV if both of the following are true.
Page 112 Chapter 17  Reporting Gains and Losses

Table 17–1. What Is Your Capital Gain Tax Rate?
IF your net capital gain is from ...
1
15%, if your regular tax rate is 15%.
THEN your capital gain
rate is ...
Collectibles gain
Gain on qualified small business stock equal to the
section 1202 exclusion
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain
Other gain, and your regular tax rate is 28% or higher
Other gain, and your regular tax rate is 15%
28%
1
28%
1
25%
1
20%
10%
2
2
The 10% rate applies only to the part of your net capital gain that would be taxed at 15% if there
were no capital gains rates.
is a long-term loss, regardless of how long
she and her father actually held the stock.
She enters the loss in column (f) of line 8.
In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture
Co. stock for $14,000. She had bought 100
of those shares in 1989, for $1,000. She
had bought 100 more shares in 1991 for
$2,200, and an additional 300 shares in
1993 for $1,500. Her total basis in the stock
is $4,700. She has a $9,300 ($14,000 −
$4,700) gain on this sale, which she enters
in column (f) of line 8.
In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy
Co. for $4,100. This was qualified small
business stock that she had bought in
September 1995. Her basis is $1,100, so
she has a $3,000 gain which she enters in
column (f) of line 8. Because she held the
stock more than 5 years, she has a $1,500
section 1202 exclusion. She enters that
amount in column (g) as a 28% rate gain
and claims the exclusion on the line below
by entering $1,500 as a loss in column (f).
She received a Form 1099–B (not
shown) from her broker for each of these
transactions.
Capital loss carryover from 1999.
Emily has a capital loss carryover to 2000
of $800, of which $300 is short-term capital
loss, and $500 is long-term capital loss. She
enters these amounts on lines 6 and 14 of
Schedule D.
She kept the completed Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet in her 1999 Schedule
D instructions (not shown), so she could
properly report her loss carryover for the
2000 tax year without refiguring it.
Tax computation (Part IV).Because
Emily has gains on both lines 16 and 17 of
Schedule D and has taxable income, she
uses Part IV of Schedule D to figure her tax.
She had already filled out her Form 1040
through line 39 and enters the amount from
that line, $30,000, on line 19 of Schedule
D. After filling out the rest of Part IV, she
finds that her tax is $4,434. This is less than
the tax she would have found using the Tax
Table, $4,995.
Reconciliation of Forms 1099–B. Emily
makes sure that the total of the amounts
reported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of
Schedule D is not less than the total of the
amounts shown on the Forms 1099–B she
received from her broker. For 2000, the total
of each is $23,100.
1) You have a net capital gain. You have
a net capital gain if both lines 16 and
17 of Schedule D are gains. (Line 16
is your net long-term capital gain or
loss. Line 17 is your net long-term
capital gain or loss combined with any
net short-term capital gain or loss.)
2) Your taxable income on Form 1040,
line 39, is more than zero.
See the Comprehensive Example, later,
for an example of how to figure your tax on
Schedule D using the capital gain rates.
Using Capital Gain Tax Worksheet.
If you have capital gain distributions but do
not have to file Schedule D (Form 1040),
figure your tax using the Capital Gain Tax
Worksheet in the instructions for Form
1040A or Form 1040. For more information,
see Capital gain distributions only, earlier.
Changes for years after 2000.Beginning
in the year 2001, the 10% maximum capital
gains rate will be lowered to 8% for “qual-
ified 5-year gain.”
Beginning in the year 2006, the 20%
maximum capital gain rate will be lowered
to 18% for qualified 5-year gain from prop-
erty with a holding period that begins after
2000.
Comprehensive
Example
Emily Jones is single and, in addition to
wages from her job, she has income from
stocks and other securities. For the 2000 tax
year, she had the following capital gains and
losses, which she reports on Schedule D.
All the Forms 1099 she received showed
net sales prices. Her filled-in Schedule D is
shown in this chapter.
Capital gains and losses — Schedule D.
Emily sold stock in two different companies
that she held for less than a year. In June,
she sold 100 shares of Trucking Co. stock
that she had bought in February. She had
an adjusted basis of $650 in the stock and
sold it for $900, for a gain of $250. In July,
she sold 25 shares of Computer Co. stock
that she bought in June. She had an ad-
justed basis in the stock of $2,500 and she
sold it for $2,000, for a loss of $500. She
reports these short-term transactions on line
1 in Part I of Schedule D.
Emily had three other stock sales that
she reports as long-term transactions on
line 8 in Part II of Schedule D. In February,
she sold 60 shares of Car Co. for $2,100.
She had inherited the Car Co. stock from
her father. Its fair market value at the time
of his death was $2,500, which became her
basis. Her loss on the sale is $400. Be-
cause she had inherited the stock, her loss
Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 113

Emily Jones 1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
Car Co.
60 sh
INHERITED 2-3-00 2,100
20,200
2,500
500
Trucking Co.
100 sh
2-12-00 6-12-00 900 650
Computer Co.
25 sh
6-29-00 7-30-00 2,000 2,500
2,900
300
Furniture Co.
500 sh
VARIOUS 6-27-00 14,000 4,700 9,300
9,900
250
500()
550()
400()
Toy Co.
20 sh
9-20-95 12-15-00 4,100 1,100 3,000 1,500
1,000
500
Section 1202
exclusion 1,500()
*28% rate gain or loss includes all “collectibles gains and losses ” (as defined on page D-6) and up to 50% of the eligible gain
on qualified small business stock (see page D-4).
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 for more space to list transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on Form 1040
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses— Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or
other basis
(see page D-6)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts.
Add column (d) of lines 1 and 2
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684,
6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your
1999 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine column (f) of lines 1 through 6 /H17075
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses— Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts.
Add column (d) of lines 8 and 9 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and
long-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-1
15 15
14
16
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter in both columns (f) and (g) the amount, if
any, from line 13 of your 1999 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet ()
Combine column (g) of lines 8 through 14
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine column (f) of lines 8 through 14 /H1707516
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice , see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2000Cat. No. 11338H
()
4
4
Part I
Part II
7
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or
other basis
(see page D-6)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(g) 28% rate gain or
(loss)
(see instr. below)*
Next: Go to Part III on the back.
()
2000
Page 114 Chapter 17  Reporting Gains and Losses

9,350
30,000
9,350
9,350
450
450
450
8,900
21,100
26,250
21,100
20,650
21,100
3,169
30,000
30,000
-0-
26,250
21,100
5,150
8,900
5,150
3,750
750
4,434
4,995
4,434
-0-
515
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2000
Summary of Parts I and II
Combine lines 7 and 16. If a loss, go to line 18. If a gain, enter the gain on Form 1040, line 1317 17
()18
Next: Skip Part IV below. Instead, complete Form 1040 through line 37. Then, complete the
Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet on page D-6 if: 
Part III
● The loss on line 17 or
● ($3,000) or, if married filing separately, ($1,500)
Page 2
18
Next: Complete Form 1040 through line 39. Then, go to Part IV to figure your tax if: 
If line 17 is a loss, enter here and as a (loss) on Form 1040, line 13, the smaller of these losses:
Tax Computation Using Maximum Capital Gains RatesPart IV
20
Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 39
22
Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 23, but not less than zero
23
If you are filing Form 4952, enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e
24
Add lines 24 and 25
25
Subtract line 26 from line 22. If zero or less, enter -0-
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
Subtract line 39 from line 38
/H17075
Add lines 33, 37, 41, 47, and 51
Figure the tax on the amount on line 19. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains). Enter the smaller of line 52 or line 53 here
and on Form 1040, line 40
24
25
19
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
43
44
49
50
51
52
53
54
21
Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17 of Schedule D
Enter your unrecaptured section 1250 gain, if any, from line 17 of the
worksheet on page D-8 
Subtract line 21 from line 20. If zero or less, enter -0-
Combine lines 7 and 15. If zero or less, enter -0-
20
21
22
23
● Both lines 16 and 17 are gains and
● Form 1040, line 39, is more than zero.
● The loss on line 17 exceeds the loss on line 18 or
● Form 1040, line 37, is a loss.
Subtract line 27 from line 19. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the smaller of:
Enter the smaller of line 28 or line 29
Subtract line 22 from line 19. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the larger of line 30 or line 31 /H17075
Figure the tax on the amount on line 32. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
Enter the smaller of line 22 or line 25
Add lines 22 and 32
Enter the amount from line 19
Subtract line 44 from line 43. If zero or less, enter -0-
Subtract line 45 from line 42. If zero or less, enter -0- /H17075
Multiply line 46 by 25% (.25)
Enter the amount from line 19
Add lines 32, 36, 40, and 46
Subtract line 49 from line 48
Multiply line 50 by 28% (.28)
Enter the amount from line 29
Enter the amount from line 30
Subtract line 35 from line 34 /H17075
Multiply line 36 by 10% (.10)
Enter the smaller of line 19 or line 27
Enter the amount from line 36
45
46
47
48
19
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
● The amount on line 19 or
● $26,250 if single; $43,850 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er);
$21,925 if married filing separately; or $35,150 if head of household /H20854
Note. If the amounts on lines 29 and 30 are the same, skip lines 34 through 37 and go to line 38.
41 Multiply line 40 by 20% (.20)
Note. If line 24 is zero or blank, skip lines 48 through 51 and go to line 52.
Note. If line 26 is zero or blank, skip lines 42 through 51 and go to line 52.
Note. If the amounts on lines 19 and 29 are the same, skip lines 38 through 51 and go to line 52.
ScheduleD( Form 1040) 2000
Otherwise, stop here.
-0-
450
-0-
-0-
30,450
30,000
Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 115

The three chapters in this part discuss three of the adjustments to
income that you can deduct in figuring your adjusted gross income.
These chapters cover:
 Contributions you make to traditional individual retirement
arrangements (IRAs) —  chapter 18,
 Moving expenses you pay —  chapter 19, and
 Alimony you pay —  chapter 20.
Other adjustments to income are discussed in other parts of this
publication or in other publications and instructions. They are
deductions for:
 Interest paid on student loans —  instructions for Form 1040, line 24,
or Form 1040A, line 17,
 Contributions to a medical savings account —  chapter 23,
 Self-employment tax —  chapter 24,
 Self-employed health insurance —  chapter 23,
 Payments to SEP, SIMPLE and qualified plans —  Publication 560,
Retirement Plans for Small Business, 
 Penalty on early withdrawal of savings —  chapter 8.
 Amortization of the costs of reforestation —  chapter 9 of Publication
535, Business Expenses,
 Contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18) pension
plans —  Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income,
 Expenses from the rental of personal property —  chapter 13,
 Expenses of fee-basis officials or certain performing artists —
chapter 28,
 Certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment
benefits (sub-pay) —  chapter 13,
 Foreign housing deduction —  chapter 4 of Publication 54, Tax Guide
for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad,
 Jury duty pay given to your employer —  chapter 13, 
 Part of the cost of qualified clean-fuel vehicle property —  chapter
12 of Publication 535, Business Expenses, and
 Contributions by certain chaplains to Internal Revenue Code section
403(b) plans— Publication 517, Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Part Four.
Adjustments
to Income
Page 116 Chapter 17  Reporting Gains and Losses

18.
Individual
Retirement
Arrangements
(IRAs)
Important Change
Modified AGI limit for traditional IRA
contributions increased.For 2000, if you
are covered by a retirement plan at work,
your deduction for contributions to a tradi-
tional IRA will be reduced (phased out) if
your modified adjusted gross income (AGI)
is between:
 $52,000 and $62,000 for a married
couple or a qualifying widow(er) filing a
joint return,
 $32,000 and $42,000 for a single indi-
vidual or head of household, or
 $–0– and $10,000 for a married indi-
vidual filing a separate return.
For all filing statuses other than married fil-
ing a separate return, the upper and lower
limits of the phaseout range increased by
$1,000. See How Much Can I Deduct? later.
Important Reminders
IRA interest earned. Although interest
earned from your IRA is generally not taxed
in the year earned, it is not tax-exempt in-
terest. Do not report this interest on your
tax return as tax-exempt interest.
Penalty for failure to file Form 8606.If
you make nondeductible contributions to a
traditional IRA and you do not file Form
8606, Nondeductible IRAs, with your tax
return, you may have to pay a $50 penalty.
Roth IRA. You may be able to establish
and contribute to a Roth IRA. You cannot
claim a deduction for any contributions to a
Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy the require-
ments, all earnings are tax free and neither
your nondeductible contributions nor any
earnings on them are taxable when you
withdraw them. See Roth IRAs, later.
Contributions to spousal IRAs.In the
case of a married couple filing a joint return,
up to $2,000 can be contributed to IRAs
(other than SIMPLE and education IRAs)
on behalf of each spouse, even if one
spouse has little or no compensation. See
Spousal IRA limit under How Much Can Be
Contributed? and under Can I contribute to
a Roth IRA for my spouse? under Roth
IRAs, later.
CAUTION
!
Employer contributions under a SEP
plan are not counted when figuring
the limits just discussed. SEP plans
are discussed in Publication 590, Individual
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) (Including
Roth IRAs and Education IRAs).
Spouse covered by employer plan.If you
are not covered by an employer retirement
plan and you file a joint return, you may be
able to deduct all of your contributions to a
traditional IRA, even if your spouse is cov-
ered by a plan. See How Much Can I De-
duct?, later. 
No additional tax on early distributions
from traditional or Roth IRAs for higher
education expenses. You can take distri-
butions from your traditional IRA or Roth
IRA for qualified higher education expenses
without having to pay the 10% additional tax
on early distributions. For more information,
see Publication 590.
No additional tax on early distributions
from traditional or Roth IRAs for first
home.  You can take distributions of up to
$10,000 from your traditional or Roth IRA
to buy, build, or rebuild a first home without
having to pay the 10% additional tax on
early distributions. For more information,
see Publication 590.
Education IRA.You may be able to make
nondeductible contributions of up to $500
annually to an education IRA for a child
under age 18. Earnings in the IRA accu-
mulate free of income tax. See Education
IRAs, later.
Introduction
An individual retirement arrangement (IRA)
is a personal savings plan that offers you
tax advantages to set aside money for your
retirement or, in some plans, for certain
education expenses.
This chapter discusses:
1) The rules for a traditional IRA (those
that are not Roth, SIMPLE, or educa-
tion IRAs),
2) The Roth IRA, which features non-
deductible contributions and tax-free
distributions, and
3) The education IRA, which can be set
up to finance higher education ex-
penses.
Simplified Employee Pensions (SEPs)
and Savings Incentive Match Plans for Em-
ployees (SIMPLEs) are not discussed in this
chapter. For more information on these
plans and employees' SEP-IRAs and
SIMPLE IRAs that are part of these plans,
see Publication 590.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554590 Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs) (Including Roth
IRAs and Education IRAs) 
Form (and Instructions)
/H185545329 Additional Taxes Attributable to
IRAs, Other Qualified Retire-
ment Plans, Annuities, Modified
Endowment Contracts, and
MSAs
/H18554 8606 Nondeductible IRAs
Traditional IRAs
In this chapter the original IRA (sometimes
called an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred
to as a “traditional IRA.” Two advantages
of a traditional IRA are:
1) You may be able to deduct some or
all of your contributions to it, depending
on your circumstances, and, 
2) Generally, amounts in your IRA, in-
cluding earnings and gains, are not
taxed until they are distributed.
What Is a Traditional IRA?
A traditional IRA is any IRA that is not a
Roth IRA, a SIMPLE IRA, or an education
IRA.
Who Can Set Up
a Traditional IRA?
You can set up and make contributions to
a traditional IRA if you (or, if you file a joint
return, your spouse) received taxable com-
pensation during the year and you were not
age 70
1 / 2 by the end of the year.
What is compensation? Compensation
includes wages, salaries, tips, professional
fees, bonuses, and other amounts you re-
ceive for providing personal services. The
IRS treats as compensation any amount
properly shown in box 1 (Wages, tips, other
compensation) of Form W–2, Wage and
Tax Statement, provided that amount is re-
duced by any amount properly shown in box
11 (Nonqualified plans). Scholarship and
fellowship payments are compensation for
this purpose only if shown in box 1 of Form
W–2. Compensation also includes commis-
sions and taxable alimony and separate
maintenance payments.
Self-employment income. If you are
self-employed (a sole proprietor or a part-
ner), compensation is the net earnings from
your trade or business (provided your per-
sonal services are a material income-
producing factor) reduced by the deduction
for contributions made on your behalf to
retirement plans and the deduction allowed
for one-half of your self-employment taxes.
Compensation includes earnings from
self-employment even if they are not subject
to self-employment tax because of your re-
ligious beliefs. See Publication 533, Self-
Employment Tax, for more information.
What is not compensation? Compen-
sation does not include any of the following
items.
 Earnings and profits from property,
such as rental income, interest income,
and dividend income.
 Pension or annuity income.
 Deferred compensation received (com-
pensation payments postponed from a
past year).
 Income from a partnership for which
you do not provide services that are a
material income-producing factor.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 117

 Any amounts you exclude from income,
such as foreign earned income and
housing costs.
When and How Can
a Traditional IRA Be
Set Up?
You can set up a traditional IRA at any time.
However, the time for making contributions
for any year is limited. See When Can
Contributions Be Made?, later.
You can set up different kinds of IRAs
with a variety of organizations. You can set
up an IRA at a bank or other financial insti-
tution or with a mutual fund or life insurance
company. You can also set up an IRA
through your stockbroker. Any IRA must
meet Internal Revenue Code requirements.
Kinds of traditional IRAs.Your traditional
IRA can be an individual retirement account
or annuity. It can be either a part of a sim-
plified employee pension (SEP) or a part of
an employer or employee association trust
account.
Inherited IRAs.If you inherit a traditional
IRA, that IRA becomes subject to special
rules.
If you are a surviving spouse, you can
elect to treat a traditional IRA inherited from
your spouse as your own. 
For more information, see the dis-
cussions of inherited IRAs under How Much
Can Be Contributed? and under Rollover
From One IRA Into Another, later.
How Much Can Be
Contributed?
Contributions to a traditional IRA must be in
the form of money (cash, check, or money
order). Property cannot be contributed.
There are limits and other rules that af-
fect the amount that can be contributed and
the amount you can deduct. These limits
and other rules are explained next.
General limit. The most that can be con-
tributed for any year to your traditional IRA
is the smaller of the following amounts:
1) Your compensation (defined earlier)
that you must include in income for the
year, or
 2) $2,000.
This is the most that can be contributed re-
gardless of whether the contributions are to
one or more traditional IRAs or whether all
or part of the contributions are nondeduct-
ible. (See Nondeductible Contributions,
later.)
Example 1. Betty, who is single, earned
$24,000 in 2000. Her IRA contributions for
2000 are limited to $2,000.
Example 2. John, a college student
working part time, earned $1,500 in 2000.
His IRA contributions for 2000 are limited to
$1,500, the amount of his compensation.
Spousal IRA limit.If you file a joint return
and your taxable compensation is less than
that of your spouse, the most that can be
contributed for the year to your IRA is the
smaller of the following amounts:
 1) $2,000, or
2) The total compensation includible in
the gross income of both you and your
spouse for the year, reduced by the
following two amounts.
a) Your spouse's contribution for the
year to a traditional IRA.
b) Any contribution for the year to a
Roth IRA on behalf of your
spouse.
This means that the total combined contri-
butions that can be made for the year to
your IRA and your spouse's IRA can be as
much as $4,000.
CAUTION
!
Contributions to your traditional
IRAs reduce the limit for contribu-
tions to Roth IRAs. (See Roth IRAs,
later.) 
Community property laws.Except as just
discussed, each spouse figures his or her
limit separately, using his or her own com-
pensation. This is the rule even in states
with community property laws.
Age 70
1 / 2 rule. Contributions cannot be
made to your traditional IRA for the year in
which you reach age 70
1/2 or any later year.
Contributions not required.You do not
have to contribute to your traditional IRA for
every tax year, even if you can.
Inherited IRAs.If you inherit a traditional
IRA from your spouse, you can choose to
treat it as your own by making contributions
(including rollover contributions) to it.
If, however, you inherit a traditional IRA
and you are not the decedent's spouse, you
cannot make contributions (including
rollover contributions) to that IRA, because
you cannot treat it as your own.
Trustees' fees. Trustees' administrative
fees are not subject to the contribution limit.
Brokers' commissions.Brokers' commis-
sions paid in connection with your traditional
IRA are part of your IRA contribution.
When Can Contributions
Be Made?
Contributions can be made to your tradi-
tional IRA for a year at any time during the
year or by the due date for filing your return
for that year, not including extensions. For
most people, this means that contributions
for 2000 must be made by April 16, 2001.
Designating year for which contribution
is made.If an amount is contributed to your
traditional IRA between January 1 and April
16, 2001, tell the sponsor (the trustee or
issuer) to which year (the current year or the
previous year) the contribution applies. If
you do not tell the sponsor which year it is
for, the sponsor can assume, for reporting
to IRS, that the contribution is for the current
year (the year the sponsor received it).
Filing before a contribution is made.You
can file your return claiming a traditional IRA
contribution before the contribution is actu-
ally made. However, the contribution must
be made by the due date of your return, not
including extensions.
How Much Can I Deduct?
Generally, you can deduct the lesser of:
 The contributions to your traditional IRA
for the year, or
 The general limit (or the spousal IRA
limit, if it applies).
However, if you or your spouse were cov-
ered by an employer retirement plan, you
may not be able to deduct this amount. See
Limit if Covered by Employer Plan, later.
Trustees' fees. Trustees' administrative
fees that are billed separately and paid in
connection with your traditional IRA are
deductible. They are deductible (if they are
ordinary and necessary) as a miscellaneous
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form
1040). The deduction is subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. (See
chapter 30.)
Brokers' commissions.Brokers' commis-
sions are not deductible as a miscellaneous
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form
1040).
Full deduction. If neither you nor your
spouse was covered for any part of the year
by an employer retirement plan, you can
take a deduction for total contributions to
one or more traditional IRAs of up to the
lesser of:
1) $2,000, or 
2) 100% of your compensation.
This limit is reduced by any contributions
made to a 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf.
Spousal IRA. In the case of a married
couple with unequal compensation who file
a joint return, the deduction for contributions
to the traditional IRA of the spouse with less
compensation is limited to the lesser of:
 1) $2,000, or
2) The total compensation includible in
the gross income of both spouses for
the year reduced by the following two
amounts.
a) Any deduction allowed for contri-
butions to the traditional IRAs of
the spouse with more compen-
sation, and
b) Any contributions for the year to
a Roth IRA on behalf of the
spouse with more compensation.
This limit is reduced by any contributions to
a 501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse
with less compensation.
Note. If you were divorced or legally
separated (and did not remarry) before the
end of the year, you cannot deduct any
contributions to your spouse's IRA. After a
divorce or legal separation, you can deduct
only contributions to your own IRA and your
deductions are subject to the rules for single
individuals.
Covered by an employer retirement plan.
If you or your spouse were covered by an
employer retirement plan at any time during
the year for which contributions were made,
your deduction may be further limited. This
Page 118 Chapter 18  Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Table 18–1. Can I Take A Traditional IRA Deduction?
If Your
Modified AGI
1
is:
● Single
You Can Take
1
Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). For Form 1040A it is the
amount on line 15 increased by any excluded qualified bond interest
shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of Interest from Series EE and I U.S.
Savings Bonds Issued after 1989, and certain tax-exempt income
amounts. (See Modified adjusted gross income, later.) For Form 1040
it is the amount on line 33, figured without taking into account any
IRA deduction, any foreign earned income exclusion and foreign
housing exclusion (deduction), any student loan interest deduction,
any qualified bond interest exclusion from Form 8815, and certain
tax-exempt income amounts. (See Modified adjusted gross income,
later.)
If You Are
Covered by a Retirement Plan at Work
and Your Filing Status is:
If You Are Not
Covered by a Retirement Plan at Work
and Your Filing Status is:
Married Filing
Separately
(and your
spouse is
covered by a
plan at work)
3
● Head of
Household
Full deduction
Partial deduction
This chart sums up whether you can take a full deduction, a partial deduction, or no deduction as discussed in this chapter.
Full deduction
No deduction
No deduction
No deduction
● Married Filing
Jointly (even
if your spouse
is not
 covered
by a plan at
work)
You Can Take
● Qualifying
Widow(er)
Full deduction
Partial deduction
Full deduction
Full deduction
Full deduction
No deduction
You Can Take
Married Filing
Separately
2
No deduction
Partial deduction
No deduction
No deduction
No deduction
No deduction
At
Least
But
Less
Than
Married Filing
Jointly (and
your spouse is
covered by a
plan at work)
You Can Take
Full deduction
Full deduction
Full deduction
Full deduction
Full deduction
Full deduction
● Single
● Head of
Household
You Can Take You Can Take You Can Take
Full
Deduction
Full
Deduction
● Married
Filing
Jointly or
Separately
(and your
spouse is not
covered by a
plan at work)
● Qualifying
Widow(er)
$0.01
$10,000.00
$32,000.00
$42,000.00
$52,000.00
$62,000.00
$10,000.00
$32,000.00
$42,000.00
$52,000.00
$62,000.00
2
If you did not  live with your spouse at any time  during the
year, your filing status is considered, for this purpose, as Single
(therefore your IRA deduction is determined under the “Single”
column).
3
You are entitled to the full  deduction if you did not  live with
your spouse at any time  during the year.
$150,000.00
No deduction No deduction No deduction Partial deduction$150,000.00 $160,000.00
No deduction No deduction No deduction No deduction$160,000.00 or over
Partial deduction
No deduction
No deduction
No deduction
No deduction
No deduction
No deduction
No deduction
is discussed later under Limit If Covered by
Employer Plan. Limits on the amount you
can deduct do not affect the amount that
can be contributed. See Nondeductible
Contributions, later.
Form 5498. By June 1, 2001, you should
receive Form 5498 (or a similar statement)
from the sponsor of your IRA, showing all
the contributions made to your IRA for 2000.
Are You Covered by an
Employer Plan?
The Form W–2 you receive from your em-
ployer has a box used to indicate whether
you were covered for the year. The “Pen-
sion plan” box should be checked if you
were covered.
Reservists and volunteer firefighters
should also see Situations in Which You Are
Not Covered, later.
If you are not certain whether you were
covered by your employer's retirement plan,
you should ask your employer. 
Judges. For purposes of the IRA de-
duction, federal judges are covered by an
employer retirement plan.
For Which Year(s) Are You
Covered? 
Special rules apply to determine the tax
years for which you are covered by an em-
ployer plan. These rules differ depending
on whether the plan is a defined contribution
plan or a defined benefit plan.
Tax year. Your tax year is the annual ac-
counting period you use to keep records
and report income and expenses on your
return. For most people, the tax year is the
calendar year.
Defined contribution plan. A defined con-
tribution plan is a plan that provides for a
separate account for each person covered
by the plan. Types of defined contribution
plans include profit-sharing plans, stock
bonus plans, and money purchase pension
plans.
Generally, you are covered by a defined
contribution plan for a tax year if amounts
are contributed or allocated to your account
for the plan year that ends with or within that
tax year.
Defined benefit plan. A defined benefit
plan is any plan that is not a defined con-
tribution plan. Types of defined benefit plans
include pension plans and annuity plans.
If you are eligible to participate in your
employer's defined benefit plan for the plan
year that ends within your tax year, you are
covered by the plan. This rule applies even
if you:
 Declined to participate in the plan,
 Did not make a required contribution,
or
 Did not perform the minimum service
required to accrue a benefit for the year.
No vested interest. If you accrue a benefit
for a plan year, you are covered by that plan
even if you have no vested interest in (legal
right to) the account or the accrual.
Situations in Which You Are Not
Covered
Unless you are covered under another em-
ployer plan, you are not covered by an em-
ployer plan if you are in one of the situations
described below.
Social security or railroad retirement.
Coverage under social security or railroad
retirement is not coverage under an em-
ployer retirement plan.
Benefits from a previous employer's
plan.If you receive retirement benefits from
a previous employer's plan, you are not
covered by that plan.
Reservists.If the only reason you partic-
ipate in a plan is because you are a member
of a reserve unit of the armed forces, you
may not be covered by the plan. You are
not covered by the plan if both of the fol-
lowing conditions are met.
1) The plan you participate in is estab-
lished for its employees by:
a) The United States,
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 119

b) A state or political subdivision of
a state, or
c) An instrumentality of either (a) or
(b) above.
2) You did not serve more than 90 days
on active duty during the year (not
counting duty for training).
Volunteer firefighters. If the only reason
you participate in a plan is because you are
a volunteer firefighter, you may not be cov-
ered by the plan. You are not covered by the
plan if both of the following conditions are
met.
1) The plan you participate in is estab-
lished for its employees by:
a) The United States,
b) A state or political subdivision of
a state, or
c) An instrumentality of either (a) or
(b) above.
2) Your accrued retirement benefits at the
beginning of the year will not provide
more than $1,800 per year at retire-
ment.
Limit If Covered by Employer
Plan
If either you or your spouse were covered
by an employer retirement plan, you may
be entitled to only a partial (reduced) de-
duction or no deduction at all, depending
on your income and your filing status. Your
deduction begins to decrease (phase out)
when your income rises above a certain
amount, and is eliminated altogether when
it reaches a higher amount. These amounts
vary depending on your filing status.
To determine if your deduction is subject
to phaseout, you must determine your
modified adjusted gross income (AGI) and
your filing status. Then use Table 18–1 to
determine if the phaseout applies.
Social security recipients.Instead of us-
ing Table 18–1, use the worksheets in Ap-
pendix B of Publication 590 if, for the year,
all of the following apply.
 You received social security benefits.
 You received taxable compensation.
 Contributions were made to your tradi-
tional IRA.
 You or your spouse were covered by
an employer retirement plan.
Use those worksheets to figure your IRA
deduction and the taxable portion, if any,
of your social security benefits.
Deduction phaseout.If you were covered
by an employer retirement plan, your IRA
deduction may be reduced or eliminated
depending on your filing status and modified
AGI as shown in Table 1 below.
*See Married filing separately exception,
under Filing status, later.
TIP
For 2001, if you are covered by a
retirement plan at work, your IRA
deduction will not be reduced
(phased out) unless your modified AGI is
between:
 $33,000 (a $1,000 increase) and
$43,000 for a single individual (or head
of household),
 $53,000 (a $1,000 increase) and
$63,000 for a married couple (or a
qualifying widow(er)) filing a joint return,
or
 $–0– (no increase) and $10,000 for a
married individual filing a separate re-
turn.
If your spouse is covered.If you are
not covered by an employer retirement plan,
but your spouse is, your IRA deduction is
reduced or eliminated depending on your
filing status and modified AGI as shown in
Table 2.
*See Married filing separately exception,
under Filing status, next. Also, see Table
18–1 earlier.
Filing status.Your filing status depends
primarily on your marital status. For this
purpose, you need to know if your filing
status is single or head of household, mar-
ried filing jointly or qualifying widow(er), or
married filing separately. If you need more
information on filing status, see chapter 2.
Married filing separately exception.
If you did not live with your spouse at any
time during the year and you file a separate
return, your filing status, for this purpose, is
single.
Modified adjusted gross income (AGI).
How you figure your modified AGI depends
on whether you are filing Form 1040 or
Form 1040A. If you made contributions to
your IRA for 2000 and received a distribu-
tion from your IRA in 2000, see Publication
590.
CAUTION
!
Do not assume that your modified
AGI is the same as your compen-
sation. Your modified AGI may in-
clude income in addition to your compen-
sation (discussed earlier), such as interest,
dividends, and income from IRA distribu-
tions.
Form 1040. If you file Form 1040, figure
the amount on page 1 “adjusted gross in-
come” line without taking into account any
of the following amounts.
 IRA deduction.
 Student loan interest deduction.
 Foreign earned income exclusion.
 Foreign housing exclusion or deduction.
 Exclusion of qualified bond interest
shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of In-
terest From Series EE and I U.S.
Savings Bonds Issued After 1989 (For
Filers With Qualified Higher Education
Expenses).
 Exclusion of employer-paid adoption
expenses shown on Form 8839, Qual-
ified Adoption Expenses.
This is your modified AGI.
Form 1040A. If you file Form 1040A,
figure the amount on page 1 “adjusted gross
income” line without taking into account any
of the following amounts:
 IRA deduction.
 Student loan interest deduction.
 Exclusion of qualified bond interest
shown on Form 8815.
 Exclusion of employer-paid adoption
expenses shown on Form 8839.
This is your modified AGI.
How to figure your reduced IRA de-
duction. You can figure your reduced IRA
deduction for either Form 1040 or Form
1040A by using the worksheets in chapter
1 of Publication 590. Also, the instructions
for both Form 1040 and Form 1040A include
similar worksheets that you may be able to
use instead.
Reporting Deductible
Contributions
If you file Form 1040, enter your IRA de-
duction on line 23 of that form. If you file
Form 1040A, enter your IRA deduction on
line 16. You cannot deduct IRA contribu-
tions on Form 1040EZ .
Nondeductible
Contributions
Although your deduction for IRA contribu-
tions may be reduced or eliminated, contri-
butions can be made to your IRA up to the
general limit ($2,000 or 100% of compen-
sation, whichever is less) or the spousal IRA
limit (whichever applies). The difference
between your total permitted contributions
and your IRA deduction, if any, is your
nondeductible contribution.
Example. Sonny Jones is single. In
2000, he was covered by a retirement plan
at work. His salary was $52,312. His modi-
fied AGI is $55,000. Sonny made a $2,000
IRA contribution for that year. Because he
Table 1.
If your
filing
status
is:
Your deduction
is reduced if
your modified
AGI is between:
Your deduction
is eliminated if
your modified
AGI is:
Single, or
Head of
household
$32,000 and
$42,000
$42,000 or
more
Married—joint
return, or
Qualifying
widow(er)
$52,000 and
$62,000
$62,000 or
more
Married—
separate
return*
$–0– and
$10,000
$10,000 or
more
Table 2.
If your
filing
status
is:
Your deduction
is reduced if
your modified
AGI is between:
Your deduction
is eliminated if
your modified
AGI is:
Married—joint
return, or
Qualifying
widow(er)
$150,000 and
$160,000
$160,000 or
more
Married—
separate
return*
$–0– and
$10,000
$10,000 or
more
Page 120 Chapter 18  Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

was covered by a retirement plan and his
modified AGI is over $42,000, he cannot
deduct his $2,000 IRA contribution. How-
ever, he can choose to designate this con-
tribution as a nondeductible contribution, as
explained next.
Designating contributions as non-
deductible.To designate contributions as
nondeductible, you must file Form 8606. 
You do not have to designate a contri-
bution as nondeductible until you file your
tax return. When you file, you can even
designate otherwise deductible contribu-
tions as nondeductible.
Tax on earnings or gains. As long as
contributions are within the contribution
limits, none of the earnings or gains on
those contributions (deductible or non-
deductible) will be taxed until they are dis-
tributed. See When Can I Withdraw or Use
IRA Assets?, later.
Cost basis. You will have a cost basis in
your IRA if there are nondeductible contri-
butions. Your cost basis is the sum of the
nondeductible contributions to your IRA mi-
nus any withdrawals or distributions of
nondeductible contributions.
Reporting nondeductible contributions.
You must file Form 8606 to report non-
deductible contributions even if you do not
have to file a tax return for the year.
Failure to report nondeductible con-
tributions. If you do not report non-
deductible contributions, all of the contribu-
tions to your traditional IRA will be treated
as deductible. All distributions from your IRA
will be taxed unless you can show, with
satisfactory evidence, that nondeductible
contributions were made.
Penalty for overstatement. If you
overstate the amount of nondeductible
contributions on your Form 8606 for any tax
year, you must pay a penalty of $100 for
each overstatement, unless it was due to
reasonable cause.
Penalty for failure to file Form 8606.
You will have to pay a $50 penalty if you
do not file a required Form 8606, unless you
can prove that the failure was due to rea-
sonable cause.
Can I Move Retirement
Plan Assets?
Traditional IRA rules permit you to transfer,
tax free, assets (money or property) from
other retirement plans (including traditional
IRAs) to a traditional IRA. The rules permit
the following kinds of transfers.
 Transfers from one trustee to another.
 Rollovers.
 Transfers incident to a divorce.
Transfers to Roth IRAs. Under certain
conditions, you can move assets from a
traditional IRA to a Roth IRA. See Can I
Move Amounts Into a Roth IRA? under Roth
IRAs, later.
Trustee-to-Trustee Transfer
A transfer of funds in your traditional IRA
from one trustee directly to another, either
at your request or at the trustee's request,
is not a rollover. Because there is no dis-
tribution to you, the transfer is tax free. Be-
cause it is not a rollover, it is not affected
by the 1-year waiting period required be-
tween rollovers, discussed later under
Rollover From One IRA Into Another. For
information about direct transfers to IRAs
from retirement plans other than IRAs, see
Publication 590.
Rollovers
Generally, a rollover is a tax-free distribution
to you of cash or other assets from one re-
tirement plan that you contribute (roll over)
to another retirement plan. The contribution
to the second retirement plan is called a
“rollover contribution.”
Note. The amount you roll over tax free,
however, is generally taxable later when the
new plan distributes that amount to you or
your beneficiary.
Kinds of rollovers to an IRA.There are
two kinds of rollover contributions to a tra-
ditional IRA. In one, you put amounts you
receive from one traditional IRA into the
same or another traditional IRA. In the
other, you put amounts you receive from an
employer's qualified retirement plan for its
employees into a traditional IRA.
Treatment of rollovers.You cannot de-
duct a rollover contribution, but you must
report the rollover distribution on your tax
return as discussed later under Reporting
rollovers from IRAs and under Reporting
rollovers from employer plans.
Time limit for making a rollover contri-
bution. You must make the rollover con-
tribution by the 60th day after the day you
receive the distribution from your traditional
IRA or your employer's plan.
Extension of rollover period.If an
amount distributed to you from a traditional
IRA or a qualified employer retirement plan
becomes a frozen deposit during the 60-day
period allowed for a rollover, special rules
extend the rollover period. For more infor-
mation, get Publication 590.
Rollover From One IRA Into
Another
You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the
assets from one traditional IRA if you rein-
vest them within 60 days in the same or
another traditional IRA. Because this is a
rollover, you cannot deduct the amount that
you reinvest in an IRA.
Waiting period between rollovers.You
can take (receive) a distribution from a tra-
ditional IRA and make a rollover contribution
(of all or part of the amount received) to a
traditional IRA only once in any 1-year pe-
riod. The 1-year period begins on the date
you receive the IRA distribution, not on the
date you roll it over into an IRA. This rule
applies separately to each IRA you own.
Example. If you have two traditional
IRAs, IRA–1 and IRA–2, and you roll over
assets of IRA–1 into a new traditional IRA
(IRA–3), you may also make a rollover from
IRA–2 into IRA–3, or into any traditional
IRA, within 1 year after the rollover distri-
bution from IRA–1. These are both allow-
able rollovers because you have not re-
ceived more than one distribution from
either IRA within 1 year. However, you
cannot, within the 1-year period, again roll
over the assets you rolled over into IRA–3
into a traditional IRA.
Exception.There is an exception to this
1-year waiting period rule for distributions
from certain failed financial institutions. Get
Publication 590 for more information.
Partial rollovers.If you withdraw assets
from a traditional IRA, you can roll over part
of the withdrawal tax free into a traditional
IRA and keep the rest of it. The amount you
keep generally will be taxable (except for
the part that is a return of nondeductible
contributions) and may be subject to the
10% additional tax on early distributions,
discussed later under Early Distributions.
Required distributions. Amounts that
must be distributed during a particular year
under the required distribution rules (dis-
cussed later) are not eligible for rollover
treatment.
Inherited IRAs.If you inherit a traditional
IRA from your spouse, you generally can roll
it over into a traditional IRA established for
you.
Not inherited from spouse.If you in-
herit a traditional IRA from someone other
than your spouse, you cannot roll it over or
allow it to receive a rollover contribution.
You must withdraw the IRA assets within a
certain period. For more information, see
Publication 590.
Reporting rollovers from IRAs.Report
any rollover from one traditional IRA to the
same or another traditional IRA on lines 15a
and 15b, Form 1040, or lines 11a and 11b,
Form 1040A. Enter the total amount of the
distribution on line 15a, Form 1040, or line
11a, Form 1040A. If the total amount on line
15a, Form 1040, or line 11a, Form 1040A,
was rolled over, enter zero on line 15b,
Form 1040, or line 11b, Form 1040A. Oth-
erwise, enter the taxable portion of the part
that was not rolled over on line 15b, Form
1040, or line 11b, Form 1040A.
Rollover From Employer's Plan
Into an IRA
If you receive an eligible rollover distri-
bution from your (or your deceased
spouse's) employer's qualified pension,
profit-sharing or stock bonus plan, annuity
plan, or tax-sheltered annuity plan (403(b)
plan), you can roll over all or part of it into
a traditional IRA.
Eligible rollover distribution.Gener-
ally, an eligible rollover distribution is the
taxable part of any distribution of all or part
of the balance to your credit in a qualified
retirement plan except:
1) A required minimum distribution,
2) Hardship distributions from 401(k)
plans and certain 403(b) plans, or
3) Any of a series of substantially equal
periodic distributions paid at least once
a year over:
a) Your lifetime or life expectancy,
b) The lifetimes or life expectancies
of you and your beneficiary, or
c) A period of 10 years or more.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 121

The taxable parts of most other distributions
are eligible rollover distributions. See Publi-
cation 575, Pension and Annuity Income, for
additional exceptions.
Maximum rollover. The most that you
can roll over is the taxable part of any eli-
gible rollover distribution (defined earlier).
The distribution you receive generally will
be all taxable unless you have made non-
deductible employee contributions to the
plan.
Reporting rollovers from employer
plans. To report a rollover from an em-
ployer retirement plan to a traditional IRA,
use lines 16a and 16b, Form 1040, or lines
12a and 12b, Form 1040A. Do not use lines
15a or 15b, Form 1040, or lines 11a or 11b,
Form 1040A.
More Information on Rollovers
For more information on rollovers, get Pub-
lication 590.
Transfers Incident to Divorce
If an interest in a traditional IRA is trans-
ferred from your spouse or former spouse
to you by a divorce or separate mainte-
nance decree or a written document related
to such a decree, the interest in the IRA,
starting from the date of the transfer, is
treated as your IRA. The transfer is tax
free. For detailed information, see Publica-
tion 590.
When Can I
Withdraw or Use
IRA Assets?
There are rules limiting use of your IRA as-
sets and distributions from it. Violation of the
rules generally results in additional taxes in
the year of violation. See What Acts Result
in Penalties?
Age 59
1 / 2 rule.Generally, if you are under
age 591 / 2 you must pay a 10% additional tax
on the distribution of any assets (money or
other property) from your traditional IRA.
Distributions before you are age 59
1/2 are
called early distributions. The additional tax
is 10% of the part of the distribution that you
have to include in gross income. It is in ad-
dition to any regular income tax on the
amount you have to include in gross in-
come.
Exceptions. There are several ex-
ceptions to the age 59
1/2 rule. You may
qualify for an exception if you are in one of
the following situations.
 You have unreimbursed medical ex-
penses that are more than 7.5% of your
adjusted gross income.
 The distributions are not more than the
cost of your medical insurance.
 You are disabled.
 You are the beneficiary of a deceased
IRA owner.
 You are receiving distributions in the
form of an annuity.
 The distributions are not more than your
qualified higher education expenses.
 You use the distributions to buy, build,
or rebuild a first home.
 The distribution is due to an IRS levy
of the qualified plan.
Most of these exceptions are explained in
Publication 590.
Note. Distributions that are timely and
properly rolled over, as discussed earlier,
are not subject to either regular income tax
or the 10% additional tax. Certain with-
drawals of excess contributions after the
due date of your return are also tax free and
not subject to the 10% additional tax. (See
Excess contributions withdrawn after due
date of return, later.) This also applies to
transfers incident to divorce, as discussed
earlier.
Contributions returned before the due
date. If you made IRA contributions for
2000, you can withdraw them tax free by the
due date of your return. If you have an ex-
tension of time to file your return, you can
withdraw them tax free by the extended due
date. You can do this if, for each contribu-
tion you withdraw, both the following apply.
 You did not take a deduction for the
contribution.
 You also withdraw any interest or other
income earned on the contribution. Be-
ginning in 2000, you can take into ac-
count any loss on the contribution while
it was in the IRA when calculating the
amount that must be withdrawn. If there
was a loss, the net income earned on
the contribution may be a negative
amount.
Note. If the trustee of your IRA is for
any reason unable to calculate the amount
you must withdraw, get IRS Notice
2000–39. The notice explains the
IRS-approved method of calculating the
amount you must withdraw.
You must include in income any
earnings on the contributions you withdraw.
Include the earnings in income for the year
in which you made the withdrawn contribu-
tions.
CAUTION
!
Generally, except for any part of a
withdrawal that is a return of non-
deductible contributions (basis), any
withdrawal of your contributions after the
due date (or extended due date) of your
return will be treated as a taxable distribu-
tion. Another exception is the return of an
excess contribution as discussed under
What Acts Result in Penalties?, later.
Early distributions tax.The 10% ad-
ditional tax on distributions made before you
reach age 59
1 / 2 does not apply to these
tax-free withdrawals of your contributions.
However, the distribution of interest or other
income must be reported on Form 5329
and, unless the distribution qualifies as an
exception to the age 59
1/2 rule, it will be
subject to this tax.
When Must I Withdraw IRA
Assets? (Required
Distributions)
You cannot keep funds in your traditional
IRA indefinitely. Eventually they must  be
distributed. If there are no distributions, or
if the distributions are not large enough, you
may have to pay a 50% excise tax on the
amount not distributed as required. See
Excess Accumulations (Insufficient Distri-
butions), later. The requirements for distrib-
uting IRA funds differ depending on whether
you are the IRA owner or the beneficiary of
a decedent's IRA.
Required distributions not eligible for
rollover.Amounts that must be distributed
(required distributions) during a particular
year are not eligible for rollover treatment.
IRA owners. If you are the owner of a tra-
ditional IRA, you must:
1) Receive the entire balance in your IRA
or
2) Start receiving periodic distributions
from your IRA
by April 1 of the year following the year in
which you reach age 70
1/2. This date is re-
ferred to as the required beginning date.
Periodic distributions.If you choose
to receive periodic distributions, you must
receive at least a minimum amount for each
year starting with the year you reach age
70
1 / 2 (your 701 / 2 year). If you do not (or did
not) receive the minimum amount in your
70
1 / 2 year, then you must receive distribu-
tions for your 701/2 year by April 1 of the next
year.
Distributions after the required be-
ginning date.The required minimum dis-
tribution for any year after your 701/2 year
must be made by December 31 of that later
year.
Beneficiaries.If you are the beneficiary
of a decedent's traditional IRA, the require-
ments for distributions from that IRA depend
on whether distributions that satisfy the
minimum distributions requirement have
begun.
More information.For more information,
including how to figure your required mini-
mum distribution each year and how to fig-
ure your required distribution if you are a
beneficiary of a decedent's IRA, see Publi-
cation 590.
Are Distributions Taxable?
In general, distributions from a traditional
IRA are taxable in the year you receive
them.
Exceptions.Exceptions to this general rule
are rollovers and tax-free withdrawals of
contributions, discussed earlier, and the re-
turn of nondeductible contributions, dis-
cussed later under Distributions Fully or
Partly Taxable.
CAUTION
!
Although a conversion of a tradi-
tional IRA is considered a rollover
for Roth IRA purposes, it is not an
exception to the general rule for distribu-
tions from a traditional IRA. Conversion
distributions are includable in your gross
income subject to these rules and the spe-
cial rules for conversions explained in
chapter 2 of Publication 590.
Ordinary income.Distributions from tradi-
tional IRAs that you include in income are
taxed as ordinary income.
Page 122 Chapter 18  Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

No special treatment.In figuring your tax,
you cannot use the 10-year tax option or
capital gain treatment that applies to lump-
sum distributions from qualified employer
plans.
Distributions Fully or Partly
Taxable
Distributions from your traditional IRA may
be fully or partly taxable, depending on
whether your IRA includes any nondeduct-
ible contributions.
Fully taxable.If only deductible contribu-
tions were made to your traditional IRA (or
IRAs, if you have more than one), you have
no basis in your IRA. Because you have
no basis in your IRA, any distributions are
fully taxable when received. See Reporting
taxable distributions on your return, later.
Partly taxable.If you made nondeductible
contributions to any of your traditional IRAs,
you have a cost basis (investment in the
contract) equal to the amount of those con-
tributions. These nondeductible contribu-
tions are not taxed when they are distributed
to you. They are a return of your investment
in your IRA.
Only the part of the distribution that
represents nondeductible contributions
(your cost basis) is tax free. If nondeductible
contributions have been made, distributions
consist partly of nondeductible contributions
(basis) and partly of deductible contribu-
tions, earnings, and gains (if there are any).
Until all of your basis has been distributed,
each distribution is partly nontaxable and
partly taxable.
Form 8606. You must complete Form 8606
and attach it to your return if you receive a
distribution from a traditional IRA and have
ever made nondeductible contributions to
any of your traditional IRAs. Using the form,
you will figure the nontaxable distributions
for 2000, and your total IRA basis for 2000
and earlier years.
Note. If you are required to file Form
8606, but you are not required to file an in-
come tax return, you still must file Form
8606. Send it to the IRS at the time and
place you would otherwise file an income
tax return.
Distributions reported on Form 1099–R.
If you receive a distribution from your tradi-
tional IRA, you will receive Form 1099–R,
Distributions From Pensions, Annuities,
Retirement or Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs,
Insurance Contracts, Etc., or a similar
statement. IRA distributions are shown in
boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099–R. A number
or letter code in box 7 tells you what type
of distribution you received from your IRA.
Withholding. Federal income tax is with-
held from distributions from traditional IRAs
unless you choose not to have tax withheld.
See Publication 505.
IRA distributions delivered outside
the United States.In general, if you are a
U.S. citizen or resident alien and your home
address is outside the United States or its
possessions, you cannot choose exemption
from withholding on distributions from your
traditional IRA.
Reporting taxable distributions on your
return. Report fully taxable distributions,
including taxable early distributions, on line
15b, Form 1040 (no entry is required on line
15a), or line 11b, Form 1040A. If only part
of the distribution is taxable, enter the total
amount on line 15a, Form 1040, or line 11a,
Form 1040A, and the taxable part on line
15b, Form 1040, or line 11b, Form 1040A.
You cannot report distributions on Form
1040EZ.
What Acts Result in
Penalties?
The tax advantages of using traditional IRAs
for retirement savings can be offset by ad-
ditional taxes and penalties if you do not
follow the rules. For example, there are ad-
ditions to the regular tax for using your IRA
funds in prohibited transactions. There are
also additional taxes for the following activ-
ities.
 Investing in collectibles.
 Making excess contributions.
 Taking early distributions.
 Allowing excess amounts to accumulate
(failing to take required distributions).
There are penalties for overstating the
amount of nondeductible contributions and
for failure to file a required Form 8606. See
Reporting nondeductible contributions, ear-
lier.
Prohibited Transactions
Generally, a prohibited transaction is any
improper use of your traditional IRA by you,
your beneficiary, or any disqualified person.
Disqualified persons include your
fiduciary and members of your family
(spouse, ancestor, lineal descendent, and
any spouse of a lineal descendent).
The following are examples of prohibited
transactions with a traditional IRA.
 Borrowing money from it.
 Buying property for personal use (pres-
ent or future) with IRA funds.
 Selling property to it.
 Receiving unreasonable compensation
for managing it.
 Using it as collateral for a loan.
Effect on an IRA account.Generally, if
you or your beneficiary engages in a pro-
hibited transaction at any time during the
year with your IRA account, the account
stops being an IRA as of the first day of the
year.
Effect on you or your beneficiary.If you
or your beneficiary engage in a prohibited
transaction with your traditional IRA account
at any time during the year, you or your
beneficiary must include the fair market
value of all (or part, in certain cases) of the
IRA assets in your gross income for that
year. The fair market value is the price at
which the IRA assets would change hands
between a willing buyer and a willing seller,
when neither has any need to buy or sell,
and both have reasonable knowledge of the
relevant facts.
You must use the fair market value of
the assets as of the first day of the year you
engaged in the prohibited transaction. You
may have to pay the 10% additional tax on
early distributions, discussed later.
Taxes on prohibited transactions. If
someone other than you or your beneficiary
engages in a prohibited transaction, that
person may be liable for certain taxes. In
general, there is a 15% tax on the amount
of the prohibited transaction and a 100%
additional tax if the transaction is not cor-
rected.
More information. For more information
on prohibited transactions, get Publication
590.
Investment in Collectibles
If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles,
the amount invested is considered distrib-
uted to you in the year invested. You may
have to pay the 10% additional tax on early
distributions, discussed later.
Collectibles.These include art works,
rugs, antiques, metals, gems, stamps,
coins, alcoholic beverages, and other tan-
gible personal property if specified by the
IRS.
Exception.Your IRA can invest in one,
one-half, one-quarter, or one-tenth ounce
U.S. gold coins, or one ounce silver coins
minted by the Treasury Department. It can
also invest in certain platinum coins and
certain gold, silver, palladium, and platinum
bullion.
Excess Contributions
Generally, an excess contribution is the
amount contributed to your traditional IRA(s)
for the year that is more than the smaller
of:
 Your taxable compensation for the year,
or
 $2,000.
Tax on excess contributions.In general,
if the excess contribution for a year and any
earnings on it are not withdrawn by the date
your return for the year is due (including
extensions), you are subject to a 6% tax.
You must pay the 6% tax each year on ex-
cess amounts that remain in your traditional
IRA at the end of your tax year. The tax
cannot be more than 6% of the value of your
IRA as of the end of your tax year.
Excess contributions withdrawn by due
date of return.You will not have to pay the
6% tax if you withdraw an excess contribu-
tion made during a tax year and you also
withdraw interest or other income earned
on the excess contribution by the date your
return for that year is due, including exten-
sions.
How to treat withdrawn contributions.
Do not include in your gross income an ex-
cess contribution that you withdraw from
your traditional IRA before your tax return
is due if both the following conditions are
met.
1) No deduction was allowed for the ex-
cess contribution.
2) You withdraw the interest or other in-
come earned on the excess contribu-
tion. Beginning in 2000, you can take
into account any loss on the contribu-
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 123

tion while it was in the IRA when cal-
culating the amount that must be with-
drawn. If there was a loss, the net
income earned on the contribution may
be a negative amount.
How to treat withdrawn interest or
other income. You must include in your
gross income the interest or other income
that was earned on the excess contribution.
Report it on your return for the year in which
the excess contribution was made. Your
withdrawal of interest or other income may
be subject to an additional 10% tax on early
distributions, discussed later.
Excess contributions withdrawn after
due date of return.In general, you must
include all withdrawals from your traditional
IRA in your gross income. However, if the
total contributions (other than rollover con-
tributions) for the year to your IRA are
$2,000 or less and there were no employer
contributions for the year, you can withdraw
any excess contribution after the due date
for filing your tax return for that year, in-
cluding extensions. You do not include the
withdrawn contribution in your gross in-
come. This exclusion from income applies
only to the part of the withdrawn excess
contribution for which you did not take a
deduction.
Early Distributions
You must include early distributions of tax-
able amounts from your traditional IRA in
your gross income. Early distributions are
also subject to an additional 10% tax. See
the discussion of Form 5329 under Report-
ing Additional Taxes, later, to figure and
report the tax.
Early distributions defined.Early distri-
butions are amounts distributed from your
traditional IRA account or annuity before
you are age 59
1/2.
Exceptions. In certain situations, you
may not have to pay the 10% additional tax
even if amounts are distributed from your
IRA before you are age 59
1/2. These situ-
ations are listed below.
 You have unreimbursed medical ex-
penses that are more than 7.5% of your
adjusted gross income.
 The distributions are not more than the
cost of your medical insurance.
 You are disabled.
 You are the beneficiary of a deceased
IRA owner.
 You are receiving distributions in the
form of an annuity.
 The distributions are not more than your
qualified higher education expenses.
 You use the distributions to buy, build,
or rebuild a first home.
 The distribution is due to an IRS levy
of the qualified plan.
Note. Distributions that are timely and
properly rolled over, as discussed earlier,
are not subject to either regular income tax
or the 10% additional tax. Certain with-
drawals of excess contributions are also tax
free and not subject to the 10% additional
tax (see Excess Contributions, earlier). This
also applies to transfers incident to divorce,
as discussed under Can I Move Retirement
Plan Assets?, earlier.
Additional 10% tax.The additional tax on
early distributions is 10% of the amount of
the early distribution that you must include
in your gross income. This tax is in addition
to any regular income tax resulting from in-
cluding the distribution in income.
Nondeductible contributions.The tax on
early distributions does not apply to the part
of a distribution that represents a return of
your nondeductible contributions (basis).
More information. For more information
on early distributions, see Publication 590.
Excess Accumulations
(Insufficient Distributions)
You cannot keep amounts in your traditional
IRA indefinitely. Generally, you must begin
receiving distributions by April 1 of the year
following the year in which you reach age
70
1 / 2 (your 701 / 2 year). The required mini-
mum distribution for any year after your
70
1 / 2 year must be made by December 31
of that later year.
Tax on excess. If distributions are less
than the required minimum distribution for
the year, you may have to pay a 50% excise
tax for that year on the amount not distrib-
uted as required.
Request to excuse the tax.If the excess
accumulation is due to reasonable error and
you have taken, or are taking, steps to
remedy the insufficient distribution, you can
request that the tax be excused by filing
Form 5329.
Exemption from tax.If you are unable to
make required distributions because you
have a traditional IRA invested in a contract
issued by an insurance company that is in
state insurer delinquency proceedings, the
50% excise tax does not apply if the condi-
tions and requirements of Revenue Proce-
dure 92–10 are satisfied.
More information. For more information
on excess accumulations, see Publication
590.
Reporting Additional Taxes
Generally, you must use Form 5329 to re-
port the tax on excess contributions, early
distributions, and excess accumulations.
Filing Form 1040.If you file Form 1040,
complete Form 5329 and attach it to your
Form 1040. Enter the total amount of IRA
tax due on line 54, Form 1040.
Note. If you have to file an individual
income tax return and Form 5329, you must
use Form 1040.
Not filing Form 1040.If you do not have
to file a Form 1040 but do have to pay one
of the IRA taxes mentioned earlier, file the
completed Form 5329 with IRS at the time
and place you would have filed your Form
1040. Be sure to include your address on
page 1 and your signature on page 2. En-
close, but do not attach, a check or money
order payable to the United States Treasury
for the tax you owe, as shown on Form
5329. Write your social security number and
“2000 Form 5329” on your check or money
order.
Form 5329 not required.You do not have
to use Form 5329 if any of the following
conditions exist.
 Distribution code 1 (early distribution) is
shown in box 7 of Form 1099–R. In-
stead, multiply the taxable part of the
early distribution by 10% and enter the
result on line 54 of Form 1040. Write
“No” next to line 54 to indicate that you
do not have to file Form 5329. However,
if you owe this tax and also owe any
other additional tax on a distribution, do
not enter this 10% additional tax directly
on your Form 1040. You must file Form
5329 to report your additional taxes.
 You qualify for an exception to the ad-
ditional tax on early distributions. You
need not report the exception if distri-
bution code 2, 3, or 4 is shown in box
7 of Form 1099–R. However, if one of
those codes is not shown, or the code
shown is incorrect, you must file Form
5329 to report the exception.
 You properly rolled over all distributions
you received during the year.
Roth IRAs
Regardless of your age, you may be able
to establish and make nondeductible con-
tributions to a retirement plan called a Roth
IRA.
TIP
You can make contributions for
2000 by the due date (not including
extensions) for filing your 2000 tax
return. This means that most people can
make contributions for 2000 by April 16,
2001.
Contributions not reported.You do not
have to report Roth IRA contributions on
your return.
What Is a Roth IRA?
A Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan
that, except as explained in this chapter, is
subject to the rules that apply to a traditional
IRA (defined below). It can be either an ac-
count or an annuity. Individual retirement
accounts and annuities are described in
Publication 590. 
To be a Roth IRA, the account or annuity
must be designated as a Roth IRA when it
is set up. Neither a SEP-IRA nor a SIMPLE
IRA can be designated as a Roth IRA.
You cannot deduct contributions to a
Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy the require-
ments, qualified distributions (discussed
later) are tax free. Contributions can be
made to your Roth IRA after you reach age
70
1 / 2 and you can leave amounts in your
Roth IRA as long as you live.
Traditional IRA.A traditional IRA is any
IRA that is not a Roth IRA, SIMPLE IRA,
or education IRA.
Page 124 Chapter 18  Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Table 18–2. You Can Contribute to a Roth IRA
IF you have taxable compensation and your filing
status is ...
AND your modified AGI is
less than ...
Married filing jointly
Married filing separately— and you lived with your
spouse during the year
Single, head of household, qualifying widow(er), or
married filing separately— and you did not live with
your spouse at any time during the year
$160,000
$ 10,000
$110,000
sions) for filing your tax return for the year
is treated as an amount not contributed.
This treatment applies only if any earnings
on the contributions are also withdrawn and
are reported as income earned and receiv-
able in the year the contribution was made.
Applying excess contributions.If contri-
butions to your Roth IRA for a year were
more than the limit, you can apply the ex-
cess contribution in one year to a later year
if the contributions for that later year are
less than the maximum allowed for that
year.
Can I Move Amounts Into
a Roth IRA?
You may be able to convert amounts from
either a traditional (including SEP-IRA) or
SIMPLE IRA into a Roth IRA. You may be
able to recharacterize contributions made
to one IRA as having been made directly to
a different IRA. You can roll amounts over
from one Roth IRA to another Roth IRA.
Conversions
You can convert a traditional IRA or a
SIMPLE IRA to a Roth IRA. The conversion
is treated as a rollover, regardless of the
conversion method used. Most of the rules
for rollovers, described under Rollover From
One IRA Into Another under Traditional
IRAs, earlier, apply to these rollovers.
However, the 1-year waiting period does not
apply.
Conversion methods. You can convert
amounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth
IRA in any of the following three ways.
1) Rollover. You can receive a distribu-
tion from a traditional IRA and roll it
over (contribute it) to a Roth IRA within
60 days after the distribution. 
2) Trustee-to-trustee transfer. You can
direct the trustee of the traditional IRA
to transfer an amount from the tradi-
tional IRA to the trustee of the Roth
IRA.
3) Same trustee transfer. If the trustee
of the traditional IRA also maintains the
Roth IRA, you can direct the trustee to
transfer an amount from the traditional
IRA to the Roth IRA.
Same trustee. Conversions made with
the same trustee can be made by redesig-
nating the traditional IRA as a Roth IRA,
rather than opening a new account or issu-
ing a new contract.
Converting from any traditional IRA.You
can convert amounts from a traditional IRA
into a Roth IRA if, for the tax year you make
the withdrawal from the traditional IRA, both
of the following requirements are met.
1) Your modified AGI (explained earlier)
is not more than $100,000.
2) You are not a married individual filing
a separate return. (See Married filing
separately exception, under Filing sta-
tus, earlier.)
Required distributions.Amounts that
must be distributed from your traditional IRA
for a particular year (including the calendar
year in which you reach age 70
1/2) under the
Can I Contribute to a Roth
IRA?
Generally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA
if you have taxable compensation and your
modified AGI (defined later) is less than the
amount shown for your filing status in Table
18–2.
Is there an age limit for contributions?
Contributions can be made to your Roth IRA
regardless of your age.
Can I contribute to a Roth IRA for my
spouse? You can contribute to a Roth IRA
for your spouse provided the contributions
satisfy the spousal IRA limit discussed ear-
lier under Traditional IRAs and your modi-
fied AGI (defined later) is less than the
amount shown for your filing status in Table
18–2.
Compensation. Compensation includes
wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, bo-
nuses, and other amounts received for pro-
viding personal services. It also includes
commissions, self-employment income, and
taxable alimony and separate maintenance
payments.
Modified AGI. Your modified AGI is your
adjusted gross income (AGI) as shown on
your return modified as follows.
1) Subtract any income resulting from the
conversion (rollover) of an IRA (other
than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA (con-
version income).
2) Add  the following deductions and ex-
clusions:
a) Traditional IRA deduction,
b) Student loan interest deduction,
c) Foreign earned income exclusion,
d) Foreign housing exclusion or de-
duction,
e) Exclusion of qualified bond inter-
est shown on Form 8815, and
f) Exclusion of employer-paid
adoption expenses shown on
Form 8839.
How Much Can Be Contributed?
The contribution limit for Roth IRAs depends
on whether a contribution is made only to
Roth IRAs or to both traditional IRAs and
Roth IRAs.
Roth IRAs only.If a contribution is made
only to Roth IRAs, the maximum contribu-
tion limit is the lesser of $2,000 or your
taxable compensation. If your modified AGI
is above a certain amount, your contribution
limit may be reduced, as explained later in
Contribution limit reduced.
Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs.If you
contribute to both Roth IRAs and traditional
IRAs established for your benefit, your
contribution limit for Roth IRAs is the lesser
of:
1) The maximum contribution limit re-
duced by all contributions (other than
employer contributions under a SEP
or SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to
all IRAs other than Roth IRAs, or
2) The maximum contribution limit re-
duced because your modified AGI is
above a certain amount, as explained
next.
Contribution limit reduced.If your modi-
fied AGI is above a certain amount, your
maximum contribution limit is gradually re-
duced. Use Table 18–3 to determine if this
reduction applies to you.
Figuring the reduction.If your modi-
fied AGI is within the range shown in Table
18–3 for your filing status, see Publication
590.
When Can I Make Contributions?
You can make contributions to a Roth IRA
for a year at any time during the year or by
the due date of your return for that year (not
including extensions).
What If I Contribute Too Much?
A 6% excise tax applies to any excess
contribution to a Roth IRA.
Excess contributions. These are the
contributions to your Roth IRAs for a year
that equal the total of:
1) Amounts contributed for the tax year
to your Roth IRAs (other than amounts
properly and timely rolled over from a
Roth IRA or properly converted from a
traditional IRA, as described later) that
are more than your contribution limit for
the year, plus
2) Any excess contributions for the pre-
ceding year, reduced by the total of:
a) Any distributions out of your Roth
IRAs for the year, plus
b) Your contribution limit for the year
minus your contributions to all
your IRAs (other than education
IRAs) for the year.
Withdrawal of excess contributions.
For purposes of determining excess contri-
butions, any contribution that is withdrawn
on or before the due date (including exten-
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 125

Table 18–3 Your Contribution Limit is Reduced
IF your filing status is ... AND your modified AGI is between ...
Married filing a joint return
Married filing separately— and you lived
with your spouse during the year
Single, head of household, qualifying
widow(er), or married filing separately —
and you did not live with your spouse at
any time during the year
$150,000 and $160,000
$0 and $10,000
$95,000 and $110,000
recharacterized contribution are treated as
earned in the second IRA.
How to recharacterize a contribution.To
recharacterize a contribution, you generally
must have the contribution transferred from
the first IRA (the one to which it was made)
to the second IRA in a trustee-to-trustee
transfer. If the transfer is made by the due
date (including extensions) for your tax re-
turn for the year during which the contribu-
tion was made, you can elect to treat the
contribution as having been originally made
to the second IRA instead of to the first IRA.
It will be treated as having been made to the
second IRA on the same date that it was
actually made to the first IRA.
Required notifications.To recharac-
terize a contribution, you must notify both
the trustee of the first IRA (the one to which
the contribution was actually made) and the
trustee of the second IRA that you have
elected to treat, for federal tax purposes, the
contribution as having been made to the
second IRA rather than the first. You must
make the notifications by the date of the
transfer. Only one notification is required if
both IRAs are maintained by the same
trustee. The notification(s) must include all
of the following information.
 The type and amount of the contribution
to the first IRA that is to be recharac-
terized.
 The date on which the contribution was
made to the first IRA and the year for
which it was made.
 A direction to the trustee of the first IRA
to transfer in a trustee-to-trustee trans-
fer the amount of the contribution and
any net income allocable to the contri-
bution to the trustee of the second IRA.
If there was a loss while the contribution
was in the first IRA, the net income that
must be transferred may be a negative
amount. Beginning in 2000, there is a
new method available for calculating
net income allocable to recharacterized
contributions.
 The name of the trustee of the first IRA
and the name of the trustee of the sec-
ond IRA.
 Any additional information needed to
make the transfer.
Note. If the trustee of your first IRA is
for any reason unable to calculate the
amount of net income you must transfer, get
IRS Notice 2000–39. The notice explains
the IRS-approved method of calculating the
amount you must transfer.
Reporting a recharacterization.If you
elect to recharacterize a contribution to one
IRA as a contribution to another IRA, you
must report the recharacterization on Form
8606. You must treat the contribution as
having been made to the second IRA.
Are Distributions From My
Roth IRA Taxable?
You do not include in your gross income
qualified distributions or distributions that
are a return of your regular contributions
from your Roth IRA(s). You also do not in-
clude distributions from your Roth IRA that
you roll over tax free into another Roth IRA.
You may have to include part of other dis-
required distribution rules (discussed under
Traditional IRAs, earlier) cannot be con-
verted.
Inherited IRAs.If you inherited a tradi-
tional IRA from someone other than your
spouse, you cannot convert it to a Roth IRA.
Income. You must include in your in-
come distributions from a traditional IRA
that you would have to include in income if
you had not converted them into a Roth
IRA. You do not include in gross income any
part of a distribution from a traditional IRA
that is a return of your basis, as discussed
earlier under Traditional IRAs.
If you must include any amount in your
gross income, you may have to make esti-
mated tax payments. See Chapter 5.
How to treat 1998 conversions.If you
converted amounts from a traditional IRA in
1998 to a Roth IRA, any amount you had
to include in income as a result of the dis-
tribution is generally included ratably over
a 4-year period, beginning with 1998. This
means you included one-quarter of the
amount in income in 1998 and one-quarter
in 1999, and must include one-quarter in
2000 and one-quarter in 2001. However,
see Distributions from Roth IRA, next.
Distributions from Roth IRA.If you
are including the taxable part of a 1998
conversion ratably over the 4-year period
and in 2000 any amount allocable to the
taxable part of the conversion is distributed
from the Roth IRA, you will generally have
to include in income both the ratable (one-
quarter) portion for the year and the part of
the distribution made during the year that is
allocable to the taxable part of the conver-
sion. See Ordering rules for distributions,
later for information on how to determine the
amount allocable to the taxable part of the
conversion.
Death of Roth IRA owner during
4-year period.If a Roth IRA owner who is
including amounts ratably over the 4-year
period dies before including all of the
amounts in income, any amounts not in-
cluded must generally be included in the
owner's (decedent's) gross income for the
year of death. However, if the decedent's
surviving spouse receives the entire interest
in all the decedent's Roth IRAs, that spouse
can elect to continue to ratably include the
amounts in income over the remaining
years in the 4-year period. See Publication
590 for more information on making this
election.
Converting from a SIMPLE IRA. Gener-
ally, you can convert an amount in your
SIMPLE IRA to a Roth IRA under the same
rules explained earlier under Converting
from any traditional IRA.
 However, you cannot convert any
amount distributed from the SIMPLE IRA
during the 2-year period beginning on the
date, you first participated in any SIMPLE
IRA plan maintained by your employer.
More information. For more detailed in-
formation on conversions, see Publication
590.
Rollover From a Roth IRA
You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the
assets from one Roth IRA if you contribute
them within 60 days to another Roth IRA.
The rules for rollovers explained under
Rollover From One IRA Into Another, under
Traditional IRAs, earlier, apply to this
rollover.
Failed Conversions
If, when you converted amounts from a tra-
ditional IRA or SIMPLE IRA (including a
transfer by redesignation) into a Roth IRA,
you expected to have modified AGI of less
than $100,000 and a filing status other than
married filing separately, but events
changed these facts, you have made a
failed conversion.
Adverse consequences. If the converted
amount (contribution) is not recharacterized
(explained later), the contribution will be
treated as a regular contribution to the Roth
IRA and subject to the following tax conse-
quences.
1) A 6% excise tax per year will apply to
any excess contribution not withdrawn
from the Roth IRA.
2) The distributions from the traditional
IRA must be included in your gross in-
come.
3) The 10% additional tax on early distri-
butions may apply to any distribution.
How to avoid. You must move the
amount converted (including all earnings
from the date of conversion) into a tradi-
tional IRA by the due date (including ex-
tensions) for your tax return for the year
during which you made the conversion to
the Roth IRA. You do not have to include
this distribution (withdrawal) in income. See
Recharacterizations, next for more informa-
tion.
Recharacterizations
You may be able to treat a contribution
made to one type of IRA as having been
made to a different type of IRA. This is
called recharacterizing the contribution.
More detailed information is in Publication
590.
No deduction allowed. No deduction is
allowed for the contribution to the first IRA
and any net earnings transferred with the
Page 126 Chapter 18  Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

tributions in your income. See Ordering
rules for distributions, later.
What are qualified distributions? A
qualified distribution is any payment or dis-
tribution from your Roth IRA made after the
5-taxable-year period beginning with the
first taxable year for which a contribution
was made to a Roth IRA set up for your
benefit if the payment or distribution is:
1) Made on or after the date you reach
age 59
1 / 2,
2) Made because you are disabled,
3) Made to a beneficiary or to your estate
after your death, or
4) To pay certain qualified first-time
homebuyer amounts discussed in
Publication 590.
Distributions that are not qualified
distributions.A distribution is not a qual-
ified distribution if it is:
1) Made within the 5-year period begin-
ning with the first year for which either
a regular or a conversion contribution
was made to a Roth IRA set up for your
benefit.
2) Made after the 5-year period described
in (1), but you do not meet any of the
following requirements.
a) You have not reached age 59
1/2.
b) You are not disabled.
c) The distribution is not made to a
beneficiary or to your estate after
your death.
d) You do not use the distribution to
pay certain qualified first-time
homebuyer amounts. (See First
home  under When Can I With-
draw or Use IRA Assets? in
chapter 1 of Publication 590.)
3) The withdrawal of contributions and
earnings on or before the due date of
your return (including extensions) for
the year in which you made the contri-
butions. The returned contributions are
not taxable, but the distributed
earnings are taxable in the year the
contribution to which they relate was
made and may be subject to the 10%
additional tax on early distributions.
Additional tax on distributions of con-
version contributions within 5-year pe-
riod. If within the 5-year period starting with
the year in which you made a conversion
contribution, any part of a distribution from
a Roth IRA is from the taxable part of the
conversion contribution, the 10% additional
tax on early distributions generally applies.
It applies to the portion of the conversion
contribution that is includible in income be-
cause of the conversion. And it applies as
though the amount is includible in gross in-
come in the year of the distribution, even if
you had included it in income in an earlier
year (such as the year of conversion).
Additional tax on other early distribu-
tions. The taxable part of other distribu-
tions from your Roth IRA(s) that are not
qualified distributions is subject to the addi-
tional tax on early distributions. See Publi-
cation 590 for more information.
Ordering rules for distributions.If you
receive a distribution from your Roth IRA
that is not a qualified distribution, part of it
may be taxable. For purposes of determin-
ing the correct tax treatment of distributions
(other than the withdrawal of excess contri-
butions and the earnings on them, dis-
cussed earlier), there is an order in which
contributions (including conversion contri-
butions) and earnings are considered to be
distributed from your Roth IRA. Regular
contributions are distributed first. See Pub-
lication 590 for more information.
Am I required to take distributions when
I reach age 70
1/2? You are not required to
take distributions from your Roth IRA at any
age. The minimum distribution rules that
apply to traditional IRAs do not apply to
Roth IRAs while the owner is alive. How-
ever, after the death of a Roth IRA owner,
certain of the minimum distribution rules that
apply to traditional IRAs also apply to Roth
IRAs.
More information. For more detailed in-
formation on Roth IRAs, see Publication
590.
Education IRAs
You may be able to contribute up to $500
each year to an education individual retire-
ment account (education IRA or Ed IRA) for
a child under age 18. Contributions to an
education IRA are not deductible.
Any individual (including the child) can
contribute to a child's education IRA if the
individual's modified adjusted gross in-
come  (defined later) is less than $110,000
($160,000 on a joint return). The $500
maximum contribution for each contributor
is gradually reduced if the individual's mod-
ified adjusted gross income is between
$95,000 and $110,000 (between $150,000
and $160,000 on a joint return). See Who
Can Contribute to an Education IRA?, later.
There is no limit on the number of edu-
cation IRAs that can be established desig-
nating the same child as the beneficiary.
However, total contributions for the child
during any tax year cannot be more than
$500.
Amounts deposited in the accounts grow
tax free until distributed (withdrawn). 
If, for a year, distributions from an ac-
count are not more than a child's qualified
higher education expenses (defined later)
at an eligible educational institution (de-
fined later), the distributions are not taxable.
See Are Distributions Taxable, later, for
more information.
What Is an Education IRA?
An education IRA is not a retirement ar-
rangement. It is a trust or custodial account
created only for the purpose of paying the
qualified higher education expenses
(defined later) of the designated beneficiary
of the account. To be treated as an educa-
tion IRA, the account must be designated
as an education IRA when it is created. It
must be created or organized in the United
States.
Account requirements. The document
creating and governing the account must
be in writing and must satisfy certain re-
quirements. See Publication 590.
Designated beneficiary.The designated
beneficiary is the individual on whose behalf
the trust or custodial account has been es-
tablished.
Qualified higher education expenses.
These are expenses required for the en-
rollment or attendance of the designated
beneficiary at an eligible educational in-
stitution. The following are qualified higher
education expenses.
 1) Tuition.
 2) Fees.
 3) Books.
 4) Supplies.
 5) Equipment.
6) Amounts contributed to a qualified
state tuition program. State tuition
programs are discussed in Publication
970, Tax Benefits for Higher Educa-
tion.
7) Room and board if the designated
beneficiary is at least a half-time stu-
dent at an eligible educational institu-
tion. A student is enrolled at least
half-time if he or she is enrolled for at
least half the full-time academic work-
load for the course of study the student
is pursuing as determined under the
standards of the institution where the
student is enrolled. Room and board is
limited to:
a) The school's posted room and
board charge for students living
on-campus, or
b) $2,500 each year for students liv-
ing off-campus and not at home.
Eligible educational institution.This
is any college, university, vocational school,
or other postsecondary educational institu-
tion eligible to participate in the student aid
programs administered by the Department
of Education. It includes virtually any ac-
credited public, nonprofit, or proprietary
(privately owned profit-making) postsecon-
dary institution.
Who Can Contribute to an
Education IRA?
Any individual (including the designated
beneficiary) can contribute to a child's edu-
cation IRA if the individual's modified ad-
justed gross income (discussed later) for the
tax year is less than $110,000 ($160,000 for
married taxpayers filing jointly).
Contributions can be made to one or
several education IRAs for the same child
provided that the total contributions are not
more than the contribution limit (defined
later) for a tax year.
Qualified state tuition program.No con-
tributions can be made to an education IRA
on behalf of a beneficiary if any amount is
contributed during the tax year to a qualified
state tuition program on behalf of the same
beneficiary. For more information on state
tuition programs see Publication 970.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 127

Contribution Limits
There are two yearly limits, one on the total
amount that can be contributed for each
designated beneficiary (child) and one on
the amount that any individual can contrib-
ute for any one child for a year.
Limit for each child.The total of all con-
tributions to all education IRAs set up for the
benefit of any one designated beneficiary
(child) cannot be more than $500 for a tax
year. This includes contributions (other than
rollovers) to all the child's education IRAs
from all sources. Rollovers are discussed
at Can Education IRA Assets Be Moved?,
later.
Limit for each contributor.You can con-
tribute up to $500 for each child for any tax
year. This is the most you can contribute for
the benefit of any one child for any year,
regardless of the number of education IRAs
set up for the child. This limit may be re-
duced as explained next.
Reduced limit for certain contributors.
If your modified adjusted gross income
(defined next) is between $95,000 and
$110,000 (between $150,000 and $160,000
if filing a joint return), your $500 limit for
each child is gradually reduced. If your
modified adjusted income is $110,000 or
more ($160,000 or more if filing a joint re-
turn), you cannot contribute to anyone's
education IRA. See Publication 590 for
more information.
Modified adjusted gross income. Your
modified adjusted gross income for the
purpose of determining the contribution limit
is the adjusted gross income shown on your
return, increased by the following exclusions
from your income.
1) Foreign earned income of U.S. citizens
or residents living abroad.
2) Housing costs of U.S. citizens or resi-
dents living abroad.
3) Income from sources within:
 a) Puerto Rico,
 b) Guam,
c) American Samoa, or
d) The Northern Mariana Islands.
Additional tax on excess contributions.
A 6% excise tax applies each year to ex-
cess contributions that are in an education
IRA at the end of the year. Excess contri-
butions are the total of the following three
amounts.
1) Contributions to any child's education
IRAs for the year that are more than
$500 or, if less, the total of each con-
tributor's limit for the year, as dis-
cussed earlier.
2) All contributions to a child's education
IRA for the year if any amount is also
contributed during the year to a qual-
ified state tuition program on behalf of
the same child. However, amounts
distributed from the education IRA to
be contributed to the qualified state
tuition program are not excess contri-
butions.
3) Excess contributions for the preceding
year, reduced by the total of the fol-
lowing two amounts:
a) Distributions (other than those
rolled over as discussed later)
made during the year, and
b) The contribution limit for the cur-
rent year minus the amount con-
tributed for the current year.
When Contributions Can Be
Made
You can make contributions to an education
IRA for a year at any time during the year.
The last day you could have made a con-
tribution for 2000 was December 31, 2000.
Other Contribution Rules
You can contribute only cash to an educa-
tion IRA. You also cannot contribute to an
education IRA after the beneficiary reaches
age 18.
Can Education IRA Assets
Be Moved?
You can roll over assets from one education
IRA to another. You can also change the
designated beneficiary or transfer the ben-
eficiary's interest to a spouse or former
spouse.
Rollovers
Any amount distributed from an education
IRA and rolled over to another education
IRA for the benefit of the same designated
beneficiary or a member of the designated
beneficiary's family is not taxable. This rule
applies only if the beneficiary of the new IRA
is under age 30 on the date of the rollover
contribution to the new IRA. 
An amount is rolled over if it is paid to
another education IRA within 60 days after
the date of the distribution.
Members of the beneficiary's family. The
beneficiary's spouse and the following indi-
viduals (and their spouses) are members
of the designated beneficiary's family.
1) The beneficiary's child, grandchild, or
stepchild.
2) A brother, sister, stepbrother, or
stepsister of the beneficiary.
3) A son or daughter of the beneficiary's
brother or sister.
4) The father, mother, grandfather,
grandmother, stepfather, or
stepmother of the beneficiary.
5) A brother or sister of the beneficiary's
father or mother.
6) The beneficiary's son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, father-in-law, mother-
in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law.
CAUTION
!
Only one rollover per education IRA
is allowed during the 12-month pe-
riod ending on the date of the pay-
ment or distribution.
Changing the Designated
Beneficiary
The designated beneficiary can be changed
to certain members of the beneficiary's
family (listed earlier). There are no tax con-
sequences if, at the time of the change, the
new beneficiary is under age 30.
Transfer Because of
Divorce
The transfer of a designated beneficiary's
interest in an education IRA to his or her
spouse or former spouse under a divorce
or separation instrument is not a taxable
transfer. After the transfer, the interest will
be treated as an education IRA in which the
spouse or former spouse is the designated
beneficiary.
Are Distributions Taxable?
Distributions that are not more than the
designated beneficiary's qualified higher
education expenses during the year are
generally tax free. The portion of any distri-
bution that is more than the education ex-
penses may be taxable.
What Determines the Tax
Treatment of Distributions?
The tax treatment of distributions (with-
drawals) from an education IRA depends,
in part, on the qualified higher education
expenses that a designated beneficiary has
in a tax year.
Distribution not more than expenses.
Generally, a distribution is tax free if it is not
more than the designated beneficiary's
qualified higher education expenses in a tax
year.
CAUTION
!
You cannot take a tax deduction or
credit for educational expenses you
use as the basis for a tax-free dis-
tribution from an education IRA.
Waiver of tax-free treatment.If you
are the designated beneficiary, you can
waive the tax-free treatment of the educa-
tion IRA distribution and elect to pay any tax
that would otherwise be owed on the distri-
bution. You or your parents may then be
eligible to claim a Hope credit or lifetime
learning credit for qualified higher education
expenses paid with the distribution in that
tax year.
Distributions more than expenses.Gen-
erally, if the total distributions for a tax year
are more than the qualified higher education
expenses, a portion of the amount distrib-
uted is taxable and the beneficiary must in-
clude it in income. For more information,
see Publication 590.
Additional tax.Generally, if you receive a
taxable distribution, you must pay a 10%
additional tax on the amount you must in-
clude in income.
Exceptions. There are exceptions to
the 10% additional tax for special situations
such as the death or disability of the desig-
nated beneficiary. For more information, see
Publication 590.
Page 128 Chapter 18  Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

When Must Education IRA
Assets Be Distributed?
Generally, any assets remaining in an edu-
cation IRA must  be distributed when either
one of the following two events occurs.
1) The designated beneficiary reaches
age 30. In this case, the remaining
assets must be distributed within 30
days after he or she reaches age 30.
2) The designated beneficiary dies before
reaching age 30. In this case, the re-
maining assets must generally be dis-
tributed within 30 days after the date
of death.
Exception for transfer to surviving
spouse or family member.If an education
IRA is transferred or rolled over to a sur-
viving spouse or other family member (de-
fined earlier) under age 30 when distribution
is required under these rules, there are no
income tax consequences as a result of the
transfer.
More information. For a more detailed
discussion of these rules, see Publication
590.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 129

19.
Moving
Expenses
Important Reminder
Change of address. If you change your
mailing address, be sure to notify the IRS
using Form 8822, Change of Address. Mail
it to the Internal Revenue Service Center for
your old address. Addresses for the Service
Centers are on the back of the form.
Introduction
This chapter discusses what expenses you
can deduct for a job-related move. The fol-
lowing topics are covered.
 When moving expenses qualify for a
deduction.
 Which moving expenses can be
claimed.
 How to report moving expenses on
Form 3903, Moving Expenses.
You may be able to deduct some of your
expenses for moving to a new home be-
cause you changed job locations or started
a new job. You can qualify for the deduction
whether you are self-employed or an em-
ployee. However, the Requirements, ex-
plained later, must be met.
This chapter contains three charts that
may help you determine whether your move
qualifies for a deduction, and if so, how
much you can deduct. The charts are:
 Figure 19–A, Illustration of Distance
Test, which covers the minimum dis-
tance you must move before you qualify
to deduct moving expenses,
 Table 19–1, Satisfying the Time Test for
Employees and Self-Employed Per-
sons, which covers the time test you
must meet, and
 Figure 19–B, Qualifying Moves Within
the United States (Non-Military), which
covers general qualifications.
Moves to the United States.You may be
able to deduct the expenses of moving to
the United States or its possessions even
if the move is not related to a new job. You
must have worked outside the United States
or be a survivor of someone who did. See
Retirees or Survivors Who Move to the
United States, later.
Moves outside the United States.This
chapter does not discuss moves outside the
United States. If you are a United States
citizen or resident alien who moved outside
the United States or its possessions be-
cause of your job or business, see Publica-
tion 521, Moving Expenses, for special rules
that apply to your move.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554 521 Moving Expenses
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554 3903 Moving Expenses
/H185548822 Change of Address
Requirements
You can deduct your allowable moving ex-
penses if your move is closely related to the
start of work. You also must meet the dis-
tance test and the time test. These two tests
are discussed later.
Related to Start of Work
Your move must be closely related, both in
time and in place, to the start of work at your
new job location.
Closely related in time.You can generally
consider moving expenses incurred within
one year from the date you first reported to
work at the new location as closely related
in time to the start of work. It is not neces-
sary that you arrange to work before moving
to a new location, as long as you actually
do go to work.
If you do not move within one year of the
date you begin work, you ordinarily cannot
deduct the expenses unless you can show
that circumstances existed that prevented
the move within that time.
Example. Your family moved more than
a year after you started work at a new lo-
cation. You delayed the move for 18 months
to allow your child to complete high school.
You can deduct your allowable moving ex-
penses.
Closely related in place.You can gener-
ally consider your move closely related in
place to the start of work if the distance from
your new home to the new job location is
not more than the distance from your former
home to the new job location. A move that
does not meet this requirement can qualify
if you can show that:
1) You are required to live at that home
as a condition of your employment, or
2) You will spend less time or money
commuting from your new home to
your new job.
Home defined. Your home means your
main home (residence). It can be a house,
apartment, condominium, houseboat, house
trailer, or similar dwelling. It does not include
other homes owned or kept up by you or
members of your family. It also does not
include a seasonal home, such as a sum-
mer beach cottage. Your former home
means your home before you left for your
new job location. Your new home means
your home within the area of your new job
location.
Distance Test
Your move will meet the distance test if your
new main job location is at least 50 miles
farther from your former home than your old
main job location was from your former
home. For example, if your old job was 3
miles from your former home, your new job
must be at least 53 miles from that former
home.
The distance between a job location and
your home is the shortest of the more
commonly traveled routes between them.
The distance test considers only the lo-
cation of your former home. It does not take
into account the location of your new home.
See Figure 19–A.
Example. You moved to a new home
less than 50 miles from your former home
because you changed job locations. Your
old job was 3 miles from your former home.
Your new job is 60 miles from that home.
Because your new job is 57 miles farther
from your former home than the distance
from your former home to your old main job,
you meet the 50-mile distance test.
First job or return to full-time work.If you
go to work full time for the first time, your
place of work must be at least 50 miles from
your former home to meet the distance test.
If you go back to full-time work after a
substantial period of part-time work or un-
employment, your place of work must also
be at least 50 miles from your former home.
TIP
Exception for Armed Forces. If
you are in the Armed Forces and
you moved because of a permanent
change of station, you do not have to meet
the distance test. See Members of the
Armed Forces, later.
Main job location.Your main job location
is usually the place where you spend most
of your working time. A new job location is
a new place where you will work perma-
nently or indefinitely rather than temporarily.
If there is no one place where you spend
most of your working time, your main job
location is the place where your work is
centered, such as where you report for work
or are otherwise required to “base” your
work.
Union members. If you work for several
employers on a short-term basis and you
get work under a union hall system (such
as a construction or building trades worker),
your main job location is the union hall.
More than one job.If you have more than
one job at any time, your main job location
depends on the facts in each case. The
more important factors to be considered
are:
 The total time you spend at each place,
 The amount of work you do at each
place, and
 How much money you earn at each
place.
Page 130 Chapter 19  Moving Expenses

Figure 19–A. Illustration of Distance Test
Your new main job is at least
50 miles farther from your
former residence than your old
main job was.
DISTANCE TEST IS MET
Your new main job is not at
least 50 miles farther from your
former residence than your old
main job was.
DISTANCE TEST IS NOT MET
New
main job
New
main job
Old
main job
Former
residence
58
miles38
miles
3
miles
Time Test
To deduct your moving expenses, you also
must meet one of the following time tests.
See Table 19–1 for a summary of these
tests.
Time test for employees.If you are an
employee, you must work full time for at
least 39 weeks during the first 12 months
after you arrive in the general area of your
new job location. For this time test, count
only your full-time work as an employee; do
not count any work you do as a self-
employed person. You do not have to work
for the same employer for the 39 weeks.
You do not have to work 39 weeks in a row.
However, you must work full time within the
same general commuting area. Full-time
employment depends on what is usual for
your type of work in your area.
Temporary absence from work. You
are considered to be a full-time employee
during any week you are temporarily absent
from work because of illness, strikes, lock-
outs, layoffs, natural disasters, or similar
causes. You are also considered a full-time
employee during any week you are absent
from work for leave or vacation provided for
in your work contract or agreement.
Seasonal work. If your work is sea-
sonal, you are considered to be working full
time during the off-season only if your work
contract or agreement covers an off-season
period and that period is less than 6 months.
For example, a school teacher on a
12-month contract who teaches on a full-
time basis for more than 6 months is con-
sidered a full-time employee for the entire
12 months.
Time test for self-employed persons.If
you are self-employed, you must work full
time for at least 39 weeks during the first
12 months AND for a total of at least 78
weeks during the first 24 months after
you arrive in your new job location. For this
time test, count any full-time work you do
as an employee or as a self-employed per-
son. You do not have to work for the same
employer or be self-employed in the same
trade or business for the 78 weeks, but you
do have to work in the same general com-
muting area. If you were both an employee
and self-employed, see Table 19–1 for the
requirements.
Self-employment. You are self-
employed if you work as the sole owner of
an unincorporated business or as a partner
in a partnership carrying on a business. You
are not considered self-employed if you are
semiretired, are a part-time student, or work
only a few hours each week.
Full-time work. You can only count
those weeks you work full time as a week
of work. Whether you work full time during
any week depends on what is usual for your
type of work in your area.
For more information, see Time test for
self-employed persons in Publication 521.
TIP
Joint return. If you are married and
file a joint return and both you and
your spouse work full time, either of
you can satisfy the full-time work test.
However, you cannot combine the weeks
your spouse worked with the weeks you
worked to satisfy that test.
Time test not yet met.You can deduct
your moving expenses on your 2000 tax
return even if you have not yet met the time
test by the date your 2000 return is due. You
can do this if you expect to meet the
39-week test in 2001, or the 78-week test
in 2001 or 2002. If you deduct moving ex-
penses but do not meet the time test by
2001 or 2002, you must either:
1) Report your moving expense deduction
as other income on your Form 1040 for
the year you cannot meet the test, or
2) Amend your 2000 return.
Use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi-
vidual Income Tax Return, to amend your
return.
If you do not deduct your moving ex-
penses on your 2000 return and you later
meet the time test, you can file an amended
return for 2000 to take the deduction.
Exceptions to the Time Test
You do not have to meet the time test if one
of the following applies.
1) You are in the Armed Forces and you
moved because of a permanent
change of station. See Members of the
Armed Forces, later.
2) You moved to the United States be-
cause you retired. See Retirees or
Survivors Who Move to the United
States, later.
3) You are the survivor of a person whose
main job location at the time of death
was outside the United States. See
Retirees or Survivors Who Move to the
United States, later.
4) Your job at the new location ends be-
cause of death or disability.
Chapter 19 Moving Expenses Page 131

Table 19–1. Satisfying the Time Test for Employees
and Self-Employed Persons
IF you are... THEN you satisfy the time test by
meeting...
An employee and become
self-employed before satisfying the
39-week test for employees
Self-employed and become an
employee before satisfying the
78-week test for self-employed
persons
Both self-employed and an
employee at the same time
The 78-week test for self-employed
persons.
The 39-week test for employees,
or using the time spent as a
full-time employee to satisfy the
78-week test.
The 78-week test for a self-employed
person or the 39-week test for an
employee based on your principal
place of work.
and personal effects to be moved to
your home in the United States, but
only if the move is completed within a
reasonable time.
2) Your household goods and personal
effects are packed and on the way to
your home in the United States.
3) You leave your former home to travel
to your new home in the United States.
Deductible Moving
Expenses
If you meet the Requirements at the begin-
ning of this chapter, you can deduct the
reasonable expenses of:
1) Moving your household goods and
personal effects (including in-transit
storage expenses), and
2) Traveling (including lodging but not
meals) to your new home.
CAUTION
!
You cannot deduct any expenses
for meals.
Reasonable expenses. You can deduct
only those expenses that are reasonable for
the circumstances of your move. For ex-
ample, the cost of traveling from your former
home to your new one should be by the
shortest, most direct route available by
conventional transportation. If, during your
trip to your new home, you stop over, or
make side trips for sightseeing, the addi-
tional expenses for your stopover or side
trips are not deductible as moving ex-
penses.
Travel by car.If you use your car to take
yourself, members of your household, or
your personal effects to your new home, you
can figure your expenses by deducting ei-
ther:
1) Your actual expenses, such as gas
and oil for your car, if you keep an ac-
curate record of each expense, or
2) 10 cents a mile.
When using the standard mileage rate of
10 cents a mile, you can also deduct park-
ing fees and tolls you paid in moving. You
cannot deduct any part of general repairs,
general maintenance, insurance, or depre-
ciation for your car.
Member of household. You can deduct
moving expenses you pay for yourself and
members of your household. A member of
your household is anyone who has both
your former and new home as his or her
home. It does not include a tenant or em-
ployee, unless you can claim that person
as a dependent.
Location of move. There are different
rules for moving within or to the United
States than for moving outside the United
States. This chapter only discusses moves
within or to the United States. The rules for
moves outside the United States can be
found in Publication 521.
5) You are transferred for your employer's
benefit or laid off for a reason other
than willful misconduct. For this ex-
ception, you must have obtained full-
time employment, and you must have
expected to meet the test at the time
you started the job.
Members of the Armed Forces
If you are a member of the Armed Forces
on active duty and you move because of a
permanent change of station, you do not
have to meet the distance and time tests,
discussed earlier. You can deduct your un-
reimbursed allowable moving expenses.
A permanent change of station includes:
1) A move from your home to the first post
of active duty,
2) A move from one permanent post of
duty to another, and
3) A move from your last post of duty to
your home or to a nearer point in the
United States. The move must occur
within one year of ending your active
duty or within the period allowed under
the Joint Travel Regulations.
Spouse and dependents. If a member of
the Armed Forces dies, is imprisoned, or
deserts, a permanent change of station for
the spouse or dependent includes a move
to:
 The place of enlistment, 
 The member's, spouse's, or depen-
dent's home of record, or 
 A nearer point in the United States.
If the military moves you and your
spouse and dependents to or from separate
locations, the moves are treated as a single
move to your new main job location.
More information. For more information
on moving expenses for members of the
Armed Forces, and instructions for com-
pleting Form 3903, see Members of the
Armed Forces in Publication 521.
Retirees or Survivors Who Move
to the United States
You can deduct your allowable moving ex-
penses if you move to the United States or
to a possession of the United States. You
do not have to meet the time test, dis-
cussed earlier, but you must meet the re-
quirements discussed next.
Retirees who were working abroad.You
can deduct moving expenses for a move to
a new home in the United States when you
permanently retire. However, both your for-
mer main job location and your former home
must have been outside the United States.
Permanently retired.You are consid-
ered permanently retired when you cease
gainful full-time employment or self-
employment. If, at the time you retire, you
intend your retirement to be permanent, you
will be considered retired though you later
return to work. Your intention to retire per-
manently may be determined by:
1) Your age and health,
2) The customary retirement age for
people who do similar work,
3) Whether you are receiving retirement
payments from a pension or retirement
fund, and
4) The length of time before you return to
full-time work.
Survivors of decedents who were work-
ing abroad. You can deduct moving ex-
penses for a move to a home in the United
States if you are the spouse or the de-
pendent of a person whose main job lo-
cation at the time of death was outside the
United States. The move must begin within
6 months after the decedent's death. It must
be from the decedent's former home outside
the United States. That home must also
have been your home.
When a move begins. A move begins
when one of the following events occurs.
1) You contract for your household goods
Page 132 Chapter 19  Moving Expenses

Figure 19–B. Qualifying Moves Within the United States (Non-Military)
1
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
1
Military persons should see Members of the Armed Forces for special rules that apply to them.
Was your move closely related to a
new or changed job location?
2
Is your new job at least 50 miles
farther from your FORMER HOME
than your old job was?
Are you an employee? Are you self-employed?
Did you or will you work full time as an
employee for at least 39 weeks in the
first 12 months after you arrived in the
new area?
3, 4
YOUR MOVE DOES QUALIFY.
You may be able to deduct your
moving expenses.
Did you or will you work full time as an
employee or a self-employed person
for at least 78 weeks in the first 24
months (which includes 39 weeks in
the first 12 months) after you arrived
in the new area?
YOUR
MOVE
DOES NOT
QUALIFY
/H17075
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
2
Your move must be closely related to the start of work at your new job location. See Related to Start of Work.
3
If you deduct expenses and do not meet this test later, you must either file an amended tax return or report your moving expens e deduction as other
income. See Time test not yet met.
4
If you become self-employed during the first 12 months, answer YES if your combined time as a full-time employee and self-emplo yed person equals or will
equal at least 78 weeks in the first 24 months (including 39 weeks in the first twelve months) after you arrived in the new are a.
Start Here
Household Goods and
Personal Effects
You can deduct the cost of packing, crating,
and transporting your household goods and
personal effects and those of the members
of your household from your former home
to your new home. If you use your own car
to move your things, see Travel by car,
earlier. You can include the cost of storing
and insuring household goods and personal
effects within any period of 30 consec-
utive days after the day your things are
moved from your former home and before
they are delivered to your new home.
You can deduct any costs of connecting
or disconnecting utilities required because
you are moving your household goods, ap-
pliances, or personal effects.
You can deduct the cost of shipping your
car and household pets to your new home.
You can deduct the cost of moving your
household goods and personal effects from
a place other than your former home. Your
deduction is limited to the amount it would
have cost to move them from your former
home.
CAUTION
!
You cannot deduct the cost of mov-
ing furniture you buy on the way to
your new home.
Travel Expenses
You can deduct the cost of transportation
and lodging for yourself and members of
your household while traveling from your
former home to your new home. This in-
cludes expenses for the day you arrive. You
can include any lodging expenses you had
in the area of your former home within one
day after you could not live in your former
home because your furniture had been
moved. You can deduct expenses for only
one trip to your new home for yourself and
members of your household. However, all
of you do not have to travel together or at
the same time. If you use your own car, see
Travel by car, earlier.
Nondeductible
Expenses
You cannot deduct the following items as
moving expenses.
 Any part of the purchase price of your
new home.
 Car tags.
 Driver's license.
 Expenses of buying or selling a home.
 Expenses of getting or breaking a
lease.
 Home improvements to help sell your
home.
 Loss on the sale of your home.
 Losses from disposing of memberships
in clubs.
 Meal expenses.
 Mortgage penalties.
 Pre-move househunting expenses.
 Real estate taxes.
 Refitting carpets and draperies.
Chapter 19 Moving Expenses Page 133

 Security deposits (including any given
up due to the move).
 Storage charges except those incurred
in transit.
 Temporary living expenses.
No double deduction.You cannot take a
moving expense deduction and a business
expense deduction for the same expenses.
You must decide if your expenses are
deductible as moving expenses or as busi-
ness expenses. For example, expenses you
have for travel, meals, and lodging while
temporarily working at a place away from
your regular place of work may be deduct-
ible as business expenses if you are con-
sidered away from home on business.
Generally, your work at a single location is
considered temporary if it is realistically ex-
pected to last (and does in fact last) for one
year or less. See Temporary Assignment
or Job in chapter 28 for information on de-
ducting your expenses.
How To Report
The following discussions explain how to
report your moving expenses and any re-
imbursements or allowances you received
for your move.
Form 3903.  Use Form 3903 to report your
moving expenses.
Where to deduct. Deduct your moving
expenses on line 26 of Form 1040. The
amount of moving expenses you can deduct
is shown on line 5 of Form 3903.
CAUTION
!
You cannot deduct moving ex-
penses on Form 1040EZ or Form
1040A.
Reimbursements. If you received a re-
imbursement for your allowable moving ex-
penses, how you report this amount and
your expenses depends on whether the re-
imbursement was paid to you under an ac-
countable plan or a nonaccountable plan.
For more information on reimburse-
ments, see Publication 521.
When To Deduct Expenses
If you were not reimbursed, deduct your al-
lowable moving expenses either in the year
you incurred them or in the year you paid
them.
Example. In December 2000, your
employer transferred you to another city in
the United States, where you still work. You
are single and were not reimbursed for your
moving expenses. In 2000, you paid for
moving your furniture. You deducted these
expenses in 2000. In January 2001, you
paid for travel to the new city. You can de-
duct these additional expenses in 2001.
Reimbursed expenses. If you are reim-
bursed for your expenses, you may be able
to deduct your allowable expenses in the
year you incurred them or paid them. If you
use the cash method of accounting, you can
choose to deduct the expenses in the year
you are reimbursed even though you paid
the expenses in a different year. For more
information, see Publication 521.
Choosing when to deduct. If you use
the cash method of accounting, which is
used by most individuals, you can choose
to deduct moving expenses in the year your
employer reimburses you if:
1) You paid the expenses in a year before
the year of reimbursement, or
2) You paid the expenses in the year im-
mediately after the year of reimburse-
ment but by the due date, including
extensions, for filing your return for the
reimbursement year.
How to make the choice. You can
choose to deduct moving expenses in the
year you received reimbursement by taking
the deduction on your return, or amended
return, for that year.
CAUTION
!
You cannot deduct any moving ex-
penses for which you received a
reimbursement that was excluded
from your income. (Reimbursements are
discussed in Publication 521.)
Page 134 Chapter 19  Moving Expenses

20.
Alimony
Introduction
This chapter discusses the rules that apply
if you pay or receive alimony. It covers the
following topics:
 What payments are alimony, 
 What payments are not alimony, such
as child support, 
 How to deduct alimony you paid, 
 How to report alimony income you re-
ceived, and
 Whether you must recapture the tax
benefits of alimony. Recapture means
adding back in your income all or part
of a deduction you took in a prior year.
Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse
or former spouse under a divorce or sepa-
ration instrument. It does not include volun-
tary payments that are not made under a
divorce or separation instrument.
Alimony is deductible by the payer and
must be included by the spouse or former
spouse in his or her income. Although this
chapter is generally written for the payer of
the alimony, the recipient can use the in-
formation to determine whether an amount
received is alimony.
To be alimony, a payment must meet
certain requirements. Different require-
ments apply to payments under instruments
executed after 1984 and to payments under
instruments executed before 1985. This
chapter discusses the rules for payments
under instruments executed after 1984. For
the rules for payments under pre-1985 in-
struments, see Publication 504, Divorced
or Separated Individuals.
Use Table 20–1 in this chapter as a
guide to determine whether certain pay-
ments are considered alimony.
Definitions.The following definitions apply
throughout this chapter.
Spouse or former spouse. Unless
otherwise stated in the following discussions
about alimony, the term “spouse” includes
former spouse.
Divorce or separation instrument.
The term “divorce or separation
instrument” means:
1) A decree of divorce or separate main-
tenance or a written instrument incident
to that decree, 
2) A written separation agreement, or 
3) A decree or any type of court order
requiring a spouse to make payments
for the support or maintenance of the
other spouse. This includes a tempo-
rary decree, an interlocutory (not final)
decree, and a decree of alimony
pendente lite (while awaiting action on
the final decree or agreement). 
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554504 Divorced or Separated Individ-
uals 
General Rules
The following rules apply to alimony re-
gardless of when the divorce or separation
instrument was executed.
Payments not alimony. Not all payments
under a divorce or separation instrument
are alimony. Alimony does not include any
of the following.
 1) Child support.
2) Noncash property settlements.
3) Payments that are your spouse's part
of community income. (See Commu-
nity Property in Publication 504.)
4) Payments to keep up the payer's
property.
5) Use of property.
Payments to a third party. Cash pay-
ments (including checks and money orders)
to a third party on behalf of your spouse
under the terms of your divorce or sepa-
ration instrument may be alimony if they
otherwise qualify. These include payments
for your spouse's medical expenses, hous-
ing costs (rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition,
etc. The payments are treated as received
by your spouse and then paid to the third
party.
Life insurance premiums.Alimony in-
cludes premiums you must pay under your
divorce or separation instrument for insur-
ance on your life to the extent your spouse
owns the policy.
Payments for jointly-owned home.If your
divorce or separation instrument states that
you must pay expenses for a home owned
by you and your spouse or former spouse,
some of your payments may be alimony.
Mortgage payments. If you must pay
all the mortgage payments (principal and
interest) on a jointly-owned home, and they
otherwise qualify, you can deduct one-half
of the total payments as alimony. If you
itemize deductions and the home is a qual-
ified home, you can claim the other half of
the interest in figuring your deductible in-
terest. Your spouse must report one-half of
the payments as alimony received. If your
spouse itemizes deductions and the home
is a qualified home, he or she can claim
one-half of the interest on the mortgage in
figuring deductible interest.
Taxes and insurance.If you must pay
all the real estate taxes or insurance on a
home held as tenants in common, you can
deduct one-half of these payments as
alimony. Your spouse must report one-half
of these payments as alimony received. If
you and your spouse itemize deductions,
you can each claim one-half of the real es-
tate taxes and none of the home insurance.
If your home is held as tenants by the
entirety or joint tenants, none of your
payments for taxes or insurance are
alimony. But if you itemize deductions, you
can claim all of the real estate taxes and
none of the home insurance.
Other payments to a third party.If you
made other third-party payments, see Pub-
lication 504 to see whether any part of the
payments qualify as alimony.
Instruments
Executed After 1984
The following rules for alimony apply to
payments under divorce or separation in-
struments executed after 1984. They also
apply to alimony payments under earlier in-
struments that were modified after 1984 to:
1) Specify that these rules will apply,
2) Change the amount or period of pay-
ment, or
3) Add or delete any contingency or con-
dition.
The rules in this section do not apply to
divorce or separation instruments executed
after 1984 if the terms for alimony are un-
changed from an instrument executed be-
fore 1985.
Example 1. In November 1984, you and
your former spouse executed a written
separation agreement. In February 1985, a
decree of divorce was substituted for the
written separation agreement. The decree
of divorce did not change the terms for the
alimony you pay your former spouse. The
decree of divorce is treated as executed
before 1985. Alimony payments under this
decree are not subject to the rules for pay-
ments under instruments executed after
1984.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as
in Example 1 except that the decree of di-
vorce changed the amount of the alimony.
In this example, the decree of divorce is not
treated as executed before 1985. The
alimony payments are subject to the rules
for payments under instruments executed
after 1984.
Alimony requirements. A payment to or
for a spouse under a divorce or separation
instrument is alimony if the spouses do not
file a joint return with each other and all the
following requirements are met.
1) The payment is in cash. 
2) The instrument does not designate the
payment as not alimony.
3) The spouses are not members of the
same household at the time the pay-
ments are made. This requirement ap-
plies only if the spouses are legally
separated under a decree of divorce
or separate maintenance.
4) There is no liability to make any pay-
ment (in cash or property) after the
death of the recipient spouse.
5) The payment is not treated as child
support.
Each of these requirements is discussed
next.
Chapter 20 Alimony Page 135

Payment must be in cash. Only cash
payments, including checks and money or-
ders, qualify as alimony. The following do
not qualify as alimony.
 Transfers of services or property (in-
cluding a debt instrument of a third
party or an annuity contract). 
 Execution of a debt instrument by the
payer.
 The use of property.
Payments to a third party.Cash pay-
ments to a third party under the terms of
your divorce or separation instrument can
qualify as a cash payment to your spouse.
See Payments to a third party under Gen-
eral Rules, earlier.
Also, cash payments made to a third
party at the written request of your spouse
qualify as alimony if all the following re-
quirements are met.
1) The payments are in lieu of payments
of alimony directly to your spouse. 
2) The written request states that both
spouses intend the payments to be
treated as alimony. 
3) You receive the written request from
your spouse before you file your return
for the year you made the payments.
Payments designated as not alimony.
You and your spouse can designate that
otherwise qualifying payments are not
alimony. You do this by including a provision
in your divorce or separation instrument that
states the payments are not deductible by
you and are excludable from your spouse's
income. For this purpose, any instrument
(written statement) signed by both of you
that makes this designation and that refers
to a previous written separation agreement
is treated as a written separation agree-
ment. If you are subject to temporary sup-
port orders, the designation must be made
in the original or a later temporary support
order.
Your spouse can exclude the payments
from income only if he or she attaches a
copy of the instrument designating them as
not alimony to his or her return. The copy
must be attached each year the designation
applies.
Spouses cannot be members of the
same household. Payments to your
spouse while you are members of the same
household are not alimony if you are legally
separated under a decree of divorce or
separate maintenance. A home you for-
merly shared is considered one household,
even if you physically separate yourselves
in the home.
You are not treated as members of the
same household if one of you is preparing
to leave the household and does leave no
later than one month after the date of the
payment.
Exception. If you are not legally sepa-
rated under a decree of divorce or separate
maintenance, a payment under a written
separation agreement, support decree, or
other court order may qualify as alimony
even if you are members of the same
household when the payment is made.
Liability for payments after death of re-
cipient spouse. If you must continue to
make payments for any period after your
Table 20–1. Alimony Requirements (Instruments
executed after 1984)
Payments ARE alimony if all  of the 
following are true:
Payments are required by a divorce or
separation instrument.
Payment is designated as child support.
Payments are NOT alimony if any  of
the following are true:
Payer and recipient spouse do not file a
joint return.
Payment is in cash (including checks or
money orders).
Payment is a noncash property
settlement.
Payments are spouse’s part of
community income.
These payments are deductible by the
payer and includible in income by the
recipient.
These payments are neither deductible by
the payer nor includible in income by the
recipient.
Payment is not designated in the
instrument as not alimony.
Spouses legally separated under a
decree of divorce or separate
maintenance are not members of the
same household.
Payments are not required after death of
the recipient spouse.
Payment is not designated as child
support.
Payments are to keep up the payer ’s
property.
Payments are not required by a divorce
or separation instrument.
spouse's death, none of the payments made
before or after the death are alimony.
The divorce or separation instrument
does not have to expressly state that the
payments cease upon the death of your
spouse if, for example, the liability for cont-
inued payments would end under state law.
Example. You must pay your former
spouse $10,000 in cash each year for 10
years. Your divorce decree states that the
payments will end upon your former
spouse's death. You must also pay your
former spouse or your former spouse's es-
tate $20,000 in cash each year for 10 years.
The death of your spouse would not termi-
nate these payments under state law.
The $10,000 annual payments are
alimony. But because the $20,000 annual
payments will not end upon your former
spouse's death, they are not alimony.
Substitute payments. If you must
make any payments in cash or property af-
ter your spouse's death as a substitute for
continuing otherwise qualifying payments,
the otherwise qualifying payments are not
alimony. To the extent that your payments
begin, accelerate, or increase because of
the death of your spouse, otherwise quali-
fying payments you made may be treated
as payments that were not alimony.
Whether or not such payments will be
treated as not alimony depends on all the
facts and circumstances.
Example 1. Under your divorce decree,
you must pay your former spouse $30,000
annually. The payments will stop at the end
of 6 years or upon your former spouse's
death, if earlier.
Your former spouse has custody of your
minor children. The decree provides that if
any child is still a minor at your spouse's
death, you must pay $10,000 annually to a
trust until the youngest child reaches the
age of majority. The trust income and cor-
pus (principal) are to be used for your chil-
dren's benefit.
These facts indicate that the payments
to be made after your former spouse's death
are a substitute for $10,000 of the $30,000
annual payments. $10,000 of each of the
$30,000 annual payments is not alimony.
Example 2. Under your divorce decree,
you must pay your former spouse $30,000
annually. The payments will stop at the end
of 15 years or upon your former spouse's
death, if earlier. The decree provides that if
your former spouse dies before the end of
the 15-year period, you must pay the estate
the difference between $450,000 ($30,000
× 15) and the total amount paid up to that
time. For example, if your spouse dies at the
end of the tenth year, you must pay the
estate $150,000 ($450,000 − $300,000).
These facts indicate that the lump-sum
payment to be made after your former
spouse's death is a substitute for the full
amount of the $30,000 annual payments.
None of the annual payments are alimony.
The result would be the same if the payment
required at death were to be discounted by
an appropriate interest factor to account for
the prepayment.
Child support.A payment that is specif-
ically designated as child support or treated
as specifically designated as child support
under your divorce or separation instrument
is not alimony. The designated amount or
part may vary from time to time. Child sup-
port payments are neither deductible by the
payer nor taxable to the payee.
Specifically designated as child sup-
port. A payment will be treated as specif-
ically designated as child support to the
extent that the payment is reduced either:
1) On the happening of a contingency
relating to your child, or 
Page 136 Chapter 20  Alimony

2) At a time that can be clearly associated
with a contingency. 
A payment may be treated as specifically
designated as child support even if other
separate payments are specifically desig-
nated as child support.
Contingency relating to your child.
A contingency relates to your child if it de-
pends on any event relating to that child. It
does not matter whether the event is certain
or likely to occur. Events relating to your
child include the child's:
 Becoming employed,
 Dying,
 Leaving the household,
 Leaving school, 
 Marrying, or
 Reaching a specified age or income
level.
Clearly associated with a contin-
gency. Payments are presumed to be re-
duced at a time clearly associated with the
happening of a contingency relating to your
child only in the following situations.
1) The payments are to be reduced not
more than 6 months before or after the
date the child will reach 18, 21, or the
local age of majority. 
2) The payments are to be reduced on
two or more occasions that occur not
more than one year before or after a
different one of your children reaches
a certain age from 18 to 24. This cer-
tain age must be the same for each
child, but need not be a whole number
of years. 
In all other situations, reductions in pay-
ments are not treated as clearly associated
with the happening of a contingency relating
to your child.
Either you or the IRS can overcome the
presumption in the two situations above.
This is done by showing that the time at
which the payments are to be reduced was
determined independently of any contin-
gencies relating to your children. For ex-
ample, if you can show that the period of
alimony payments is customary in the local
jurisdiction, such as a period equal to one-
half of the duration of the marriage, you can
treat the amount as alimony.
How To Deduct
Alimony Paid
You can deduct alimony you paid, whether
or not you itemize deductions on your re-
turn. You must file Form 1040; you cannot
use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
Enter the amount of alimony you paid
on line 31a of Form 1040. In the space
provided on line 31b, enter your spouse's
social security number.
If you paid alimony to more than one
person, enter the social security number of
one of the recipients. Show the social se-
curity number and amount paid to each
other recipient on an attached statement.
Enter your total payments on line 31a.
CAUTION
!
If you do not provide your spouse's
social security number, you may
have to pay a $50 penalty and your
deduction may be disallowed.
How To Report
Alimony Received
Report alimony you received on line 11 of
Form 1040; you cannot use Form 1040A
or Form 1040EZ.
CAUTION
!
You must give the person who paid
the alimony your social security
number. If you do not, you may have
to pay a $50 penalty.
Recapture Rule
If your alimony payments decrease or ter-
minate during the first 3 calendar years, you
may be subject to the recapture rule. If you
are subject to this rule, you have to include
in income in the third year part of the
alimony payments you previously deducted.
Your spouse can deduct in the third year
part of the alimony payments he or she
previously included in income.
The 3-year period starts with the first
calendar year you make a payment qualify-
ing as alimony under a decree of divorce
or separate maintenance or a written sepa-
ration agreement. Do not include any time
in which payments were being made under
temporary support orders. The second and
third years are the next 2 calendar years,
whether or not payments are made during
those years.
The reasons for a reduction or termi-
nation of alimony payments that can require
a recapture include:
 A change in your divorce or separation
instrument, 
 A failure to make timely payments, 
 A reduction in your ability to provide
support, or
 A reduction in your spouse's support
needs.
When to apply the recapture rule.You
are subject to the recapture rule in the third
year if the alimony you pay in the third year
decreases by more than $15,000 from the
second year or the alimony you pay in the
second and third years decreases signif-
icantly from the alimony you pay in the first
year.
When you figure a decrease in alimony,
do not include the following amounts.
1) Payments made under a temporary
support order.
2) Payments required over a period of at
least 3 calendar years of a fixed part
of your income from a business or
property, or from compensation for
employment or self-employment.
3) Payments that decrease because of
the death of either spouse or the re-
marriage of the spouse receiving the
payments. 
Figuring the recapture. For a blank
worksheet for you to use to figure recap-
tured alimony, see Table 3. Worksheet for
Recapture of Alimony in Publication 504.
Including the recapture in income.If you
must include a recapture amount in income,
show it on Form 1040, line 11 (“Alimony
received”). Cross out “received” and write
“recapture.” On the dotted line next to the
amount, enter your spouse's last name and
social security number.
Deducting the recapture.If you can de-
duct a recapture amount, show it on Form
1040, line 31a (“Alimony paid”). Cross out
“paid” and write “recapture.” In the space
provided, enter your spouse's social secu-
rity number.
Chapter 20 Alimony Page 137

After you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to
subtract the deductions used to figure taxable income. You can subtract
either the standard deduction or itemized deductions. Itemized
deductions are deductions for certain expenses that are listed on
Schedule A (Form 1040). The ten chapters in this part discuss the
standard deduction, each itemized deduction, and the limit on some of
your itemized deductions if your adjusted gross income exceeds certain
amounts. See chapter 21 for the factors to consider when deciding
whether to subtract the standard deduction or itemized deductions.
Part Five.
Standard
Deduction
and Itemized
Deductions
21.
Standard
Deduction
Important Changes
Increase in standard deduction. The
standard deduction for taxpayers who do
not itemize deductions on Schedule A of
Form 1040 is higher in 2000 than it was in
1999. The amount depends on your filing
status. 2000 Standard Deduction Tables are
shown at the end of this chapter.
Itemized deductions.The amount you can
deduct for itemized deductions is limited if
your adjusted gross income is more than
$128,950 ($64,475 if you are married filing
separately). See chapter 22 for more infor-
mation.
Introduction
This chapter discusses:
 How to figure the amount of your
standard deduction, 
 The standard deduction for dependents,
and 
 Who should itemize deductions. 
Most taxpayers have a choice of either
taking a standard deduction or itemizing
their deductions. The standard deduction is
a dollar amount that reduces the amount of
income on which you are taxed.
The standard deduction is a benefit that
eliminates the need for many taxpayers to
itemize actual deductions, such as medical
expenses, charitable contributions, or taxes.
The standard deduction is higher for tax-
payers who are 65 or older or blind. If you
have a choice, you should use the method
that gives you the lower tax.
You benefit from the standard deduction
if your standard deduction is more than the
total of your allowable itemized deductions.
Figuring the Amount
Before figuring the amount of your standard
deduction, you must determine if you are
eligible to take it.
Persons not eligible to take the standard
deduction. Your standard deduction is zero
and you should itemize any deductions you
have if:
1) You are married and filing a separate
return, and your spouse itemizes de-
ductions, 
2) You are filing a tax return for a short
tax year because of a change in your
annual accounting period, or 
3) You are a nonresident or dual-status
alien during the year. You are consid-
ered a dual-status alien if you were
both a nonresident and resident alien
during the year. 
Note. If you are a nonresident alien
who is married to a U.S. citizen or
resident at the end of the year, you can
choose to be treated as a U.S. resi-
dent. (See Publication 519, U.S. Tax
Guide for Aliens.) If you make this
choice, you can take the standard de-
duction.
CAUTION
!
If an exemption for you can be
claimed on another person's return
(such as your parents' return), your
standard deduction may be limited. See
Standard Deduction for Dependents, later.
Standard Deduction
Amount
The standard deduction amounts for most
taxpayers are shown in Table 21–1.
The amount of the standard deduction
for a decedent's final return is the same as
it would have been had the decedent cont-
inued to live. However, if the decedent was
not 65 or older at the time of death, the
higher standard deduction for age cannot
be claimed.
Higher Standard Deduction for
Age (65 or Older)
If you do not itemize deductions, you are
entitled to a higher standard deduction if you
are age 65 or older at the end of the year.
You are considered 65 on the day before
your 65th birthday. Therefore, you can take
a higher standard deduction for 2000 if your
65th birthday was on or before January 1,
2001.
Use Table 21–2 to figure the standard
deduction amount.
Higher Standard Deduction for
Blindness
If you are blind on the last day of the year
and you do not itemize deductions, you are
entitled to a higher standard deduction as
shown in Table 21–2. You qualify for this
benefit if you are totally or partly blind.
Partly blind.If you are partly blind, you
must get a certified statement from an eye
doctor or registered optometrist that:
1) You cannot see better than 20/200 in
the better eye with glasses or contact
lenses, or 
2) Your field of vision is not more than 20
degrees.
If your eye condition will never improve
beyond these limits, the statement should
include this fact. You must keep the state-
ment in your records.
If your vision can be corrected beyond
these limits only by contact lenses that you
can wear only briefly because of pain, in-
fection, or ulcers, you can take the higher
standard deduction for blindness if you oth-
erwise qualify.
Spouse 65 or Older or Blind
You can take the higher standard deduction
if your spouse is age 65 or older or blind
and:
1) You file a joint return, or 
2) You file a separate return and can
claim an exemption for your spouse
because your spouse had no gross in-
come and an exemption for your
spouse could not be claimed by an-
other taxpayer.
CAUTION
!
You cannot claim the higher stand-
ard deduction for an individual, other
than yourself and your spouse.
Examples 
The following examples illustrate how to
determine your standard deduction using
Tables 21–1 and 21–2.
Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33,
are filing a joint return for 2000. Neither is
blind. They decide not to itemize their de-
Page 138 Chapter 21  Standard Deduction

ductions. They use Table 21–1. Their
standard deduction is $7,350.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as
in Example 1, except that Larry is blind at
the end of 2000. Larry and Donna use Table
21–2. Their standard deduction is $8,200.
Example 3. Bill and Terry are filing a
joint return for 2000. Both are over age 65.
Neither is blind. If they do not itemize de-
ductions, they use Table 21–2. Their
standard deduction is $9,050.
Standard Deduction
for Dependents 
The standard deduction for an individual for
whom an exemption can be claimed on an-
other person's tax return is generally limited
to the greater of (a) $700, or (b) the indi-
vidual's earned income for the year plus
$250 (but not more than the regular stand-
ard deduction amount, generally $4,400).
However, if the individual is 65 or older
or blind, the standard deduction may be
higher.
If an exemption for you can be claimed
on someone else's return, use Table 21–3
to determine your standard deduction.
Earned income defined. Earned in-
come is salaries, wages, tips, professional
fees, and other amounts received as pay for
work you actually perform.
For purposes of the standard deduction,
earned income also includes any part of a
scholarship or fellowship grant that you
must include in your gross income. See
Scholarship and Fellowship Grants in
chapter 13 for more information on what
qualifies as a scholarship or fellowship
grant.
Example 1. Michael is single. His par-
ents claim an exemption for him on their
2000 tax return. He has interest income of
$780 and wages of $150. He has no item-
ized deductions. Michael uses Table 21–3
to find his standard deduction. He enters
$150 (his earned income) on line 1, $400
($150 plus $250) on line 3, $700 (the larger
of $400 and $700) on line 5, and $4,400 on
line 6. The amount of his standard de-
duction, on line 7a, is $700 (the smaller of
$700 and $4,400).
Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time
college student, is claimed on his parents'
2000 tax return. Joe is married and files a
separate return. His wife does not itemize
deductions on her separate return.
Joe has $1,500 in interest income and
wages of $3,600. He has no itemized de-
ductions. Joe finds his standard deduction
by using Table 21–3. He enters his earned
income, $3,600, on line 1. He adds lines 1
and 2 and enters $3,850 on line 3. On line
5 he enters $3,850, the larger of lines 3 and
4. Since Joe is married filing a separate re-
turn, he enters $3,675 on line 6. On line 7a
he enters $3,675 as his standard deduction
because it is smaller than $3,850, the
amount on line 5.
Example 3. Amy, who is single, is
claimed on her parents' 2000 tax return.
She is 18 years old and blind. She has in-
terest income of $1,300 and wages of
$2,900. She has no itemized deductions.
Amy uses Table 21–3 to find her standard
deduction. She enters her wages of $2,900
on line 1. She adds lines 1 and 2 and enters
$3,150 on line 3. On line 5 she enters
$3,150, the larger of lines 3 and 4. Since
she is single, Amy enters $4,400 on line 6.
She enters $3,150 on line 7a. This is the
smaller of the amounts on lines 5 and 6.
Because she checked one box in the top
part of the worksheet, she enters $1,100 on
line 7b. She then adds the amounts on lines
7a and 7b and enters her standard de-
duction of $4,250 on line 7c.
Who Should Itemize
You should itemize deductions if your total
deductions are more than the standard de-
duction amount. Also, you should itemize if
you do not qualify for the standard de-
duction, as discussed earlier under Persons
not eligible for the standard deduction.
You should first figure your itemized de-
ductions and compare that amount to your
standard deduction to make sure you are
using the method that gives you the greater
benefit.
CAUTION
!
You may be subject to a limit on
some of your itemized deductions if
your adjusted gross income (AGI) is
more than $128,950 ($64,475 if you are
married filing separately). See chapter 22
and the instructions for Schedule A (Form
1040), line 28, for more information on fig-
uring the correct amount of your itemized
deductions.
When to itemize.You may benefit from
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A
(Form 1040) if you:
1) Do not qualify for the standard de-
duction, or the amount you can claim
is limited, 
2) Had large uninsured medical and
dental expenses during the year, 
3) Paid interest and taxes on your home,
4) Had large unreimbursed employee
business expenses or other miscella-
neous deductions, 
5) Had large uninsured casualty or theft
losses, 
6) Made large contributions to qualified
charities, or 
7) Have total itemized deductions that are
more than the standard deduction to
which you otherwise are entitled. 
These deductions are explained in chapters
23–30.
If you decide to itemize your deductions,
complete Schedule A and attach it to your
Form 1040. Enter the amount from Sched-
ule A, line 28, on Form 1040, line 36.
Itemizing for state tax or other purposes.
If you choose to itemize even though your
itemized deductions are less than the
amount of your standard deduction, write
“IE” (itemized elected) next to line 36 (Form
1040).
Changing your mind. If you do not itemize
your deductions and later find that you
should have itemized — or if you itemize
your deductions and later find you should
not have — you can change your return by
filing Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual
Income Tax Return. See Amended Returns
and Claims for Refund in chapter 1 for more
information on amended returns.
Married persons who filed separate
returns.You can change methods of taking
deductions only if you and your spouse both
make the same changes. Both of you must
file a consent to assessment for any addi-
tional tax either one may owe as a result
of the change.
You and your spouse can use the
method that gives you the lower total tax,
even though one of you may pay more tax
than you would have paid by using the other
method. You both must use the same
method of claiming deductions. If one item-
izes deductions, the other should itemize
because he or she will not qualify for the
standard deduction (see Persons not eligi-
ble for the standard deduction, earlier).
Chapter 21 Standard Deduction Page 139

Table 21–1. Standard Deduction Chart for Most
People*
IF Your Filing Status is ...
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,400
7,350
3,675
6,450
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table 21 –2 or 21–3 instead.
Table 21–2. Standard Deduction Chart for People
Age 65 or Older or Blind*
IF Your
Filing Status is ...
THEN your
Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,500
6,600
8,200
9,050
9,900
10,750
4,525
5,375
6,225
7,075
7,550
8,650
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table 21 –3, instead.
AND the Number
in the Box
Above is ...
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if
claiming spouse’s
exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table 21–3. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if
claiming spouse’s
exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
2. Additional amount 2.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,400
● Married filing separate return, enter
$3,675
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child, enter
$7,350
● Head of household, enter $6,450
7. Standard deduction.
7a.
Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,100 ($850 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2000.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$250
2000 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien,
you cannot take the standard deduction even if you were 65
or older or blind.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 3.
4. Minimum amount 4. $700
Page 140 Chapter 21  Standard Deduction

22.
Limit on
Itemized
Deductions
Introduction
This chapter discusses the overall limit on
itemized deductions. The topics include:
 Who is subject to the limit, 
 Which itemized deductions are limited,
and 
 How to figure the limit. 
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
Deductions 
Are You Subject
to the Limit?
You are subject to the limit on certain item-
ized deductions if your adjusted gross in-
come (AGI) is more than $128,950 ($64,475
if you are married filing separately). Your
AGI is the amount on line 34 of your Form
1040.
This limit does not apply to estates or
trusts.
Which Deductions
Are Limited?
Schedule A (Form 1040) deductions subject
to the overall limit are:
 Taxes — line 9,
 Interest — lines 10, 11, and 12,
 Gifts to charity — line 18,
 Job expenses and most other miscella-
neous deductions — line 26, and
 Other miscellaneous deductions — line
27, excluding gambling and casualty or
theft losses.
Which Deductions Are Not
Limited?
The Schedule A (Form 1040) deductions
listed next are not subject to the overall limit
on itemized deductions. However, they are
still subject to other applicable limits.
 Medical and dental expenses—line 4.
 Investment interest expense—line 13.
 Nonbusiness casualty and theft
losses—line 19.
 Casualty or theft losses from income
producing property—line 27.
 Gambling losses—line 27.
How Do You Figure
the Limit?
If your itemized deductions are subject to
the limit, the total of all your itemized de-
ductions is reduced by the smaller of:
1) 3% of the amount by which your AGI
exceeds $128,950 ($64,475 if married
filing separately), or 
2) 80% of your itemized deductions that
are affected by the limit. See Which
Deductions Are Limited?, earlier.
Before you figure the overall limit on
itemized deductions, you must first com-
plete lines 1 through 27 of Schedule A
(Form 1040), including any appropriate
forms (such as Form 2106, Form 4684,
etc.).
The overall limit on itemized deductions
is figured after you have applied any other
limit on the allowance of any itemized de-
duction. These other limits include charita-
ble contribution limits (chapter 26), the limit
on certain meals and entertainment (chapter
28), and the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
limit on certain miscellaneous deductions
(chapter 30).
Itemized Deductions Worksheet. After
you have completed Schedule A (Form
1040) through line 27, you can use the
Itemized Deductions Worksheet in the In-
structions for Form 1040 to figure your limit.
Enter the result on line 28 of Schedule A
(Form 1040). Keep the worksheet for your
records.
TIP
You should compare the amount of
your standard deduction to the
amount of your itemized deductions
after applying the limit. Use the greater
amount when completing line 36 of your
Form 1040. See chapter 21 for information
on how to figure your standard deduction.
Example
For tax year 2000, Bill and Terry Willow are
filing a joint return on Form 1040. Their ad-
justed gross income is $255,250. Their
Schedule A itemized deductions are as fol-
lows:
The Willows' investment interest ex-
pense ($41,000 from line 13 of Schedule
A) is not subject to the overall limit on
itemized deductions. Their deduction for
miscellaneous deductions is the total after
applying the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
limit and does not include any gambling and
casualty or theft losses.
The Willows figure their overall limit as
follows:
Of their $142,140 total itemized de-
ductions, the Willows can deduct only
$138,351 ($142,140 − $3,789). They enter
$138,351 on Schedule A, line 28.
State income and real estate taxes ...... $17,900
Home mortgage interest ....................... 45,000
Investment interest expense ................. 41,000
Charitable contributions ........................ 21,000
Miscellaneous deductions ..................... 17,240
Total ..................................................... $142,140
Itemized Deductions Worksheet
Line 28 (Schedule A)
(Keep for your records)
1. Add the amounts on Schedule A,
lines 4, 9, 14, 18, 19, 26, and 27 .. $142,140
2. Add the amounts on Schedule A,
lines 4, 13, and 19, plus any gam-
bling and casualty or theft losses
included on line 27 ......................... 41,000
3. Is the amount on line 2 less than the
amount on line 1?
No. Stop. Enter the amount from
line 1 above on Schedule A.
Yes. Subtract line 2 from line 1. .... 101,140
4. Multiply the amount on
line 3 by 80% (.80) ......... 80,912
5. Enter the amount from
Form 1040, line 34 ......... 255,250
6. Enter $128,950 ($64,475
if married filing sepa-
rately) .............................. 128,950
7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the
amount on line 5?
No. Stop. Enter the amount from
line 1 above on Schedule A, line 28.
Yes. Subtract line 6 from line 5 ..... $126,300
8. Multiply the amount on
line 7 by 3% (.03) ........... 3,789
9. Enter the smaller of line 4 or
line 8 ............................................... 3,789
10. Total itemized deductions. Sub-
tract line 9 from line 1. Enter the
result here and on Schedule A, line
28 ................................................... $138,351
Chapter 22 Limit on Itemized Deductions Page 141

23.
Medical and
Dental Expenses
Important Change
Medical conferences.  You can include in
medical expenses amounts paid for admis-
sion and transportation to a medical con-
ference if the medical conference concerns
the chronic illness of you, your spouse, or
your dependent. The costs of the medical
conference must be primarily for and nec-
essary to the medical care of you, your
spouse, or your dependent. You must
spend the majority of your time at the con-
ference attending sessions on medical in-
formation. The cost of meals and lodging
while attending the conference is not
deductible as medical expenses.
Introduction
This chapter defines medical and dental
care expenses. It contains an alphabetical
list of items that you can or cannot include
in figuring your deduction. It also explains
how to treat insurance reimbursements and
other reimbursements you may receive for
medical care.
It will help you determine:
 What expenses you can include,
 How much of the expenses you can in-
clude,
 Whose expenses you can include,
 How to claim expenses of a decedent,
and
 How to report your deduction.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554502 Medical and Dental Expenses
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
Deductions
What Is the Definition
of Medical Care?
Medical care means amounts paid for the
diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or
prevention of disease, and for treatments
affecting any part or function of the body.
The medical care expenses must be pri-
marily to alleviate or prevent a physical or
mental defect or illness.
Medical care expenses include the pre-
miums you pay for insurance that covers the
expenses of medical care, and the amounts
you pay for transportation to get medical
care. Medical care expenses also include
limited amounts paid for any qualified long-
term care insurance contract.
What Expenses Can
You Include This
Year?
You can include only the medical and dental
expenses you paid this year, regardless of
when the services were provided. (But see
Decedent, later, for an exception.) If you pay
medical expenses by check, the day you
mail or deliver the check generally is the
date of payment. If you use a
“pay-by-phone” or “on-line” account to pay
your medical expenses, the date reported
on the statement of the financial institution
showing when payment was made is the
date of payment. You can include medical
expenses you charge to your credit card in
the year the charge is made. It does not
matter when you actually pay the amount
charged.
When do you include a decedent's med-
ical expenses? Medical expenses for a
decedent that are paid from his or her estate
are treated as paid at the time the medical
services were provided if they are paid
within the one-year period beginning with
the day after the date of death. See Dece-
dent, later.
Medical expenses paid before death by
the decedent are included in figuring any
deduction for medical and dental expenses
on the decedent's final income tax return.
This includes expenses for the decedent's
spouse and dependents as well as for the
decedent.
CAUTION
!
Qualified medical expenses paid
before death by the decedent are
not deductible if paid with a tax-free
distribution from any medical savings ac-
count or Medicare+Choice savings account.
How Much of the
Expenses Can You
Deduct?
To figure your medical expense deduction,
complete lines 1–4 of Schedule A (Form
1040). If you need more information on
itemized deductions or you are not sure
whether you can itemize, see chapters 21
and 22.
Write in the amount you paid for medical
and dental care after reducing the amount
by payments you received from insurance
and other sources. You can deduct only the
amount of your medical and dental ex-
penses that is more than 7.5% of your ad-
justed gross income shown on line 34, Form
1040.
Write the amount of your unreimbursed
medical expenses on line 1, Schedule A
(Form 1040). For an example, see the par-
tial Schedule A at the end of this chapter.
Separate returns.If you and your spouse
live in a noncommunity property state and
file separate returns, each of you can in-
clude only the medical expenses each ac-
tually paid. Any medical expenses paid out
of a joint checking account in which you and
your spouse have the same interest are
considered to have been paid equally by
each of you, unless you can show other-
wise.
Community property states. If you
and your spouse live in a community prop-
erty state and file separate returns, any
medical expenses paid out of community
funds are divided equally. Each of you
should include half the expenses. If medical
expenses are paid out of the separate funds
of one spouse, only the spouse who paid
the medical expenses can include them. If
you live in a community property state, are
married, and file a separate return, see
Publication 555, Community Property.
Whose Medical
Expenses
Can You Include?
You can include medical expenses you pay
for yourself and for the individuals dis-
cussed in this section.
Spouse. You can include medical expenses
you paid for your spouse. To claim these
expenses, you must have been married ei-
ther at the time your spouse received the
medical services or at the time you paid the
medical expenses.
Example 1. Mary received medical
treatment before she married Bill. Bill paid
for the treatment after they married. Bill can
include these expenses in figuring his
medical expense deduction even if Bill and
Mary file separate returns.
If Mary had paid the expenses before
she and Bill married, Bill could not include
Mary's medical expenses in his separate
return. Mary would include the amounts she
paid during the year in her separate return.
If they filed a joint return, the medical ex-
penses both paid during the year would be
used to figure their medical expense de-
duction.
Example 2. This year, John paid med-
ical expenses for his wife Louise, who died
last year. John married Belle this year and
they file a joint return. Because John was
married to Louise when she incurred the
medical expenses, he can include those
expenses in figuring his medical deduction
for this year.
Dependent. You can include medical ex-
penses you paid for your dependent. To
claim these expenses, the person must
have been your dependent either at the time
the medical services were provided or at the
time you paid the expenses. A person gen-
erally qualifies as your dependent for pur-
poses of the medical expense deduction if:
1) That person lived with you for the entire
year as a member of your household
or is related to you,
2) That person was a U.S. citizen or res-
ident, or a resident of Canada or
Page 142 Chapter 23  Medical and Dental Expenses

Mexico, for some part of the calendar
year in which your tax year began, and
3) You provided over half of that person's
total support for the calendar year.
You can include the medical expenses
of any person who is your dependent even
if you cannot claim an exemption for him
or her on your return.
Example. Last year your son was your
dependent. This year he no longer qualifies
as your dependent. However, you paid $800
this year for medical expenses your son in-
curred last year when he was your de-
pendent. You can include the $800 in figur-
ing this year's medical expense deduction.
You cannot include this amount on last
year's return.
Adopted child. You can include medical
expenses that you paid for a child before
adoption, if the child qualified as your de-
pendent when the medical services were
provided or when the expenses were paid.
If you pay back an adoption agency or other
persons for medical expenses they paid
under an agreement with you, you are
treated as having paid those expenses
provided you clearly substantiate that the
payment is directly attributable to the med-
ical care of the child. But if you pay back
medical expenses incurred and paid before
adoption negotiations began, you cannot
include them as medical expenses.
TIP
You may be able to take a credit or
exclusion for other expenses related
to adoption. See Publication 968,
Tax Benefits for Adoption, for more infor-
mation.
Child of divorced or separated parents.
If either parent can claim a child as a de-
pendent under the rules for divorced or
separated parents, each parent can include
the medical expenses he or she pays for the
child even if an exemption for the child is
claimed by the other parent.
Support claimed under a multiple sup-
port agreement. A multiple support agree-
ment is used when two or more people
provide more than half of a person's sup-
port, but no one alone provides more than
half. If you are considered to have provided
more than half of a person's support under
such an agreement, you can include med-
ical expenses you pay for that person, even
if you cannot claim an exemption for the
person because he or she had gross in-
come of more than the standard deduction
amount or filed a joint return.
Any medical expenses paid by others
who joined you in the agreement cannot be
included as medical expenses by anyone.
However, you can include the entire unre-
imbursed amount you paid for medical ex-
penses.
Example. You and your three brothers
each provide one-fourth of your mother's
total support. Under a multiple support
agreement, you claim your mother as a de-
pendent. You paid all of her medical ex-
penses. Your brothers repaid you for three-
fourths of these expenses. In figuring your
medical expense deduction, you can include
only one-fourth of your mother's medical
expenses. Your brothers cannot include any
part of the expenses. However, if you and
your brothers share the nonmedical support
items and you separately pay all of your
mother's medical expenses, you can include
the amount you paid for her medical ex-
penses in your medical expenses.
Decedent
The survivor or personal representative of
a decedent can choose to treat certain ex-
penses paid by the decedent's estate for the
decedent's medical care as paid by the de-
cedent at the time the medical services
were provided. The expenses must be paid
within the one-year period beginning with
the day after the date of death. If you are
the survivor or personal representative
making this choice, you must attach a
statement to the decedent's Form 1040 (or
the decedent's amended return, Form
1040X), saying that the expenses have not
been and will not be claimed on the estate
tax return.
CAUTION
!
Qualified medical expenses paid
before death by the decedent are
not deductible if paid with a tax-free
distribution from any medical savings ac-
count or Medicare+Choice savings account.
Amended returns and claims for refund
are discussed in chapter 1.
What if you pay medical expenses of a
deceased spouse or dependent?  If you
paid medical expenses for your deceased
spouse or dependent, include them as
medical expenses on your Form 1040 in the
year paid, whether they are paid before or
after the decedent's death. The expenses
can be included if the person was your
spouse or dependent either at the time the
medical services were provided or at the
time you paid the expenses.
What Medical
Expenses Are
Deductible?
Use Table 23–1 in this chapter as a guide
to determine which medical and dental ex-
penses you can include on Schedule A
(Form 1040). See Publication 502 for infor-
mation about other expenses you can in-
clude.
Medical Insurance
Premiums
You can include in medical expenses in-
surance premiums you pay for policies that
cover medical care. Policies can provide
payment for:
 Hospitalization, surgical fees, X-rays,
etc.,
 Prescription drugs,
 Replacement of lost or damaged con-
tact lenses,
 Membership in an association that
gives cooperative or so-called “free-
choice” medical service, or group
hospitalization and clinical care, or
 Qualified long-term care insurance
contracts (subject to additional limita-
tions). See Long-term Care Contracts,
Qualified in Publication 502.
You cannot deduct insurance premiums
paid with pretax dollars because the premi-
ums are not included in box 1 of your Form
W–2.
If you have a policy that provides more
than one kind of payment, you can include
the premiums for the medical care part of
the policy if the charge for the medical part
is reasonable. The cost of the medical part
must be separately stated in the insurance
contract or given to you in a separate
statement.
Employer-sponsored health insurance
plan. Do not include in your medical and
dental expenses insurance premiums paid
by an employer-sponsored health insurance
plan unless the premiums are included in
box 1 of your Form W–2. Also, do not in-
clude any other medical and dental ex-
penses paid by the plan unless the amount
paid is included in box 1 of your Form W–2.
Flexible spending arrangement.
Contributions made by your employer to
provide coverage for qualified long-term
care services under a flexible spending or
similar arrangement must be included in
your income. This amount will be reported
as wages in box 1 of your Form W–2.
Medicare A. If you are covered under so-
cial security (or if you are a government
employee who paid Medicare tax), you are
enrolled in Medicare A. The payroll tax paid
for Medicare A is not a medical expense. If
you are not covered under social security
(or were not a government employee who
paid Medicare tax), you can voluntarily en-
roll in Medicare A. In this situation the pre-
miums paid for Medicare A can be included
as a medical expense on your tax return.
Medicare B. Medicare B is a supplemental
medical insurance. Premiums you pay for
Medicare B are a medical expense. If you
applied for it at age 65 or after you became
disabled, you can deduct the monthly pre-
miums you paid. If you were over age 65
or disabled when you first enrolled, check
the information you received from the Social
Security Administration to find out your
premium.
Prepaid insurance premiums. Premiums
you pay before you are age 65 for insurance
for medical care for yourself, your spouse,
or your dependents after you reach age 65
are medical care expenses in the year paid
if they are:
1) Payable in equal yearly installments,
or more often, and
2) Payable for at least 10 years, or until
you reach age 65 (but not for less than
5 years).
Unused sick leave used to pay premi-
ums. You must include in gross income
cash payments you receive at the time of
retirement for unused sick leave. You must
also include in gross income the value of
unused sick leave that, at your option, your
employer applies to the cost of your contin-
uing participation in your employer's health
plan after you retire. You can include this
cost of continuing participation in the health
plan as a medical expense.
If you participate in a health plan where
your employer automatically applies the
value of unused sick leave to the cost of
Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 143

your continuing participation in the health
plan (and you do not have the option to re-
ceive cash), you do not include the value
of the unused sick leave in gross income.
You cannot include this cost of continuing
participation in that health plan as a medical
expense.
Health Insurance Costs for
Self-Employed Persons 
If you were self-employed and had a net
profit for the year, you may be able to de-
duct, as an adjustment to income, up to
60% of the amount paid for health insurance
on behalf of yourself, your spouse, and de-
pendents. If you itemize your deductions,
include the remaining premiums with all
other medical care expenses on Schedule
A (Form 1040), subject to the 7.5% limit.
See chapter 7 of Publication 535, Business
Expenses, for more information.
Meals and Lodging
You can include in medical expenses the
cost of meals and lodging at a hospital or
similar institution if your main reason for
being there is to receive medical care. See
Nursing home, later.
You may be able to include in medical
expenses the cost of lodging not provided
in a hospital or similar institution. You can
include the cost of such lodging while away
from home if you meet all of the following
requirements.
1) The lodging is primarily for and essen-
tial to medical care.
2) The medical care is provided by a
doctor in a licensed hospital or in a
medical care facility related to, or the
equivalent of, a licensed hospital.
3) The lodging is not lavish or extravagant
under the circumstances.
4) There is no significant element of per-
sonal pleasure, recreation, or vacation
in the travel away from home.
The amount you include in medical ex-
penses for lodging cannot be more than $50
for each night for each person. You can in-
clude lodging for a person traveling with the
person receiving the medical care. For ex-
ample, if a parent is traveling with a sick
child, up to $100 per night can be included
as a medical expense for lodging. Meals are
not included.
Nursing home. You can include in medical
expenses the cost of medical care in a
nursing home or home for the aged for
yourself, your spouse, or your dependents.
This includes the cost of meals and lodging
in the home if the main reason for being
there is to get medical care. 
Do not include the cost of meals and
lodging if the reason for being in the home
is personal. You can, however, include in
medical expenses the part of the cost that
is for medical or nursing care.
Transportation
You can include in medical expenses
amounts paid for transportation primarily for,
and essential to, medical care.
You can include:
 Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares, or am-
bulance service,
 Transportation expenses of a parent
who must go with a child who needs
medical care,
 Transportation expenses of a nurse or
other person who can give injections,
medications, or other treatment re-
quired by a patient who is traveling to
get medical care and is unable to travel
alone, and
 Transportation expenses for regular
visits to see a mentally ill dependent, if
these visits are recommended as a part
of treatment.
You cannot include:
 Transportation expenses to and from
work even if your condition requires an
unusual means of transportation, or
 Transportation expenses if, for non-
medical reasons only, you choose to
travel to another city, such as a resort
area, for an operation or other medical
care prescribed by your doctor.
Car expenses. You can include out-of-
pocket expenses for your car, such as gas
and oil, when you use your car for medical
reasons. You cannot include depreciation,
insurance, general repair, or maintenance
expenses.
If you do not want to use your actual
expenses, you can use a standard rate of
10 cents a mile for use of your car for
medical reasons.
You can also include the cost of parking
fees and tolls. You can add these fees and
tolls to your medical expenses whether you
use actual expenses or use the standard
mileage rate.
Example. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles
for medical reasons during the year. He
spent $200 for gas, $5 for oil, and $50 for
tolls and parking. He wants to figure the
amount he can include in medical expenses
both ways to see which gives him the
greater deduction.
He figures the actual expenses first. He
adds the $200 for gas, the $5 for oil, and the
$50 for tolls and parking for a total of $255.
He then figures the standard mileage
amount. He multiplies the 2,800 miles by
10 cents a mile for a total of $280. He then
adds the $50 tolls and parking for a total of
$330.
Bill includes the $330 of car expenses
with his other medical expenses for the year
because the $330 is more than the $255
he figured using actual expenses.
Disabled Dependent
Care Expenses
Some disabled dependent care expenses
may qualify as medical expenses or as
work-related expenses for purposes of tak-
ing a credit for dependent care. (See chap-
ter 33.) You can choose to apply them either
way as long as you do not use the same
expenses to claim both a credit and a
medical expense deduction.
Figure 23–A. Is Your Excess Medical Reimbursement Taxable?
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this chapter.
Was any part of your
premiums paid by
your employer?
Were your employer’s
contributions to your
premiums included in
your income?
Did you pay any part
of the premiums?
NONE of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Page 144 Chapter 23  Medical and Dental Expenses

Table 23–1. Medical and Dental Expenses Checklist
You can include: You cannot include:
● Birth control pills
prescribed by your doctor
● Capital expenses for
equipment or
improvements to your
home needed for
medical care (see
Publication 502)
● Cost and care of guide
dogs or other animals
aiding the blind, deaf,
and disabled
● Cost of lead-based paint
removal (see Publication
502)
● Expenses of an organ
donor
● Hospital services fees
(lab work, therapy,
nursing services, surgery,
etc.)
● Legal abortion
● Legal operation to
prevent having children
● Meals and lodging
provided by a hospital
during medical treatment
● Medical and hospital
insurance premiums
● Medical services fees
(from doctors, dentists,
surgeons, specialists,
and other medical
practitioners)
● Oxygen equipment and
oxygen
● Part of life-care fee paid
to retirement home
designated for medical
care
● Prescription medicines
(prescribed by a doctor)
and insulin
● Psychiatric care at a
specially equipped
medical center (includes
meals and lodging)
● Social Security tax,
Medicare tax, FUTA, and
state employment tax for
worker providing medical
care (see Wages for
nursing services, later).
● Special items (artificial
limbs, false teeth, eye-
glasses, contact lenses,
hearing aids, crutches,
wheelchair, etc.)
● Special school or home
for mentally or physically
disabled persons (see
Publication 502)
● Transportation for
needed medical care
● Treatment at a drug or
alcohol center (includes
meals and lodging
provided by the center)
● Wages for nursing
services (see Publication
502)
● Diaper service
● Expenses for your
general health (even if
following your doctor’s
advice) such as —
— Health club dues
— Household help (even
if recommended by a
doctor)
— Social activities, such as
dancing or swimming
lessons
— Trip for general health
improvement
● Funeral, burial, or
cremation expenses
● Illegal operation or
treatment
● Life insurance or income
protection policies, or
policies providing
payment for loss of life,
limb, sight, etc.
● Maternity clothes
● Medical insurance
included in a car
insurance policy
covering all persons
injured in or by your car
● Medicine you buy
without a prescription
● Nursing care for a
healthy baby
● Surgery for purely
cosmetic reasons
● Toothpaste, toiletries,
cosmetics, etc.
● Long-term care contracts,
qualified (see Publication
502)
● Bottled water
● Stop-smoking programs
● Medical Savings Accounts
(see Publication 969)
● Cost of fertility
enhancement procedures
● Cost of vasectomy
● Lazer eye surgery— to
promote the correct
function of the eye
● Cost of nutritional
supplements, vitamins,
herbal supplements,
“natural medicines”, etc.,
unless you can only obtain
them legally with a
physician’s prescription
Impairment-Related
Work Expenses
(Business or Medical)
Certain unreimbursed expenses may ap-
pear to be deductible as either medical or
business expenses. Deduct them as busi-
ness deductions if they are:
 Necessary for you to do your work sat-
isfactorily,
 For goods or services not required or
used, other than incidentally, in your
personal activities, and
 Not specifically covered under other in-
come tax laws.
Example. You are blind. You must use
a reader to do your work. You use the
reader both during your regular working
hours at your place of work and outside your
regular working hours away from your place
of work. The reader's services are only for
your work. You can deduct your expenses
for the reader as business expenses.
What If You Are
Repaid for Some of
the Expenses?
You can deduct as medical expenses only
those amounts paid during the taxable year
for which you received no insurance or other
reimbursement.
Insurance Reimbursement 
Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 145

OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A and B (Form 1040).
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and 
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-2)1
22
3Multiply line 2 above by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 34
(99)
2000
Bill and Helen Jones 000 00 0000
3,434
2,475
959
33,004
You must reduce your total medical ex-
penses for the year by all reimbursements
for medical expenses that you receive from
insurance or other sources during the year.
This includes payments from Medicare.
Generally, you do not reduce medical
expenses by payments you receive for loss
of earnings or damages for personal injury
or sickness.
You do not have a medical deduction if
you are reimbursed for all of your medical
expenses for the year.
Excess reimbursement. If you are reim-
bursed more than your medical expenses,
you may have to include the excess in in-
come.
Premiums paid by you.If you pay the
entire premium for your medical insurance
or all of the costs of a plan similar to medical
insurance, generally do not include an ex-
cess reimbursement in your gross income.
Premiums paid by you and your em-
ployer. If both you and your employer
contribute to your medical insurance plan
and your employer's contributions are not
included in your gross income, you must
include in your gross income the part of an
excess reimbursement that is from your
employer's contribution.
Example. You are covered by your
employer's medical insurance policy. The
annual premium is $2,000. Your employer
pays $600 of that amount and the balance
of $1,400 is taken out of your wages. The
part of any excess reimbursement you re-
ceive under the policy that is from your
employer's contributions is figured like this:
You must include in your gross income
30% of any excess reimbursement you re-
ceived for medical expenses under the pol-
icy.
Premiums paid by your employer. If
your employer or your former employer
pays the total cost of your medical insur-
ance plan and your employer's contributions
are not included in your income, you must
report all of your excess reimbursement as
other income.
More than one policy.If you are cov-
ered under more than one policy, the costs
of which are paid by both you and your
employer, you must first divide the medical
expense among the policies to figure the
excess reimbursement from each policy.
Then divide the policy costs to figure the
part of any excess reimbursement that is
from your employer's contribution.
Example. You are covered by your
employer's health insurance policy. The
annual premium is $1,200. Your employer
pays $300, and the balance of $900 is de-
ducted from your wages. You also paid the
entire premium ($250) for a personal health
insurance policy.
During the year, you paid medical ex-
penses of $3,600. In the same year, you
were reimbursed $2,500 under your em-
ployer's policy and $1,500 under your per-
sonal policy.
You figure the part of any excess re-
imbursement you receive that is from your
employer's contribution like this:
Reimbursement in a later year.If you are
reimbursed in a later year for medical ex-
penses you deducted in an earlier year, you
must report the reimbursement as income
up to the amount you previously deducted
as medical expenses. However, do not re-
port as income the reimbursement you re-
ceived up to the amount of your medical
deductions that did not reduce your tax for
the earlier year. For more information about
the recovery of an amount that you claimed
as an itemized deduction in an earlier year,
see Itemized Deduction Recoveries in
chapter 13.
Medical expenses not deducted. If you
did not deduct a medical expense in the
year you paid it because your medical ex-
penses were not more than 7.5% of your
adjusted gross income, or because you did
not itemize deductions, do not include in
income the reimbursement for this expense
that you receive in a later year. However, if
the reimbursement is more than the ex-
pense, see Excess reimbursement, earlier.
Example. Last year, you had medical
expenses of $500. You cannot deduct the
$500 because it is less than 7.5% of your
adjusted gross income. If, in a later year,
you are reimbursed for any of the $500
medical expenses, you do not include that
amount in your gross income.
Settlement of damages suit. If you receive
an amount in settlement of a personal injury
suit, the part that is for medical expenses
deducted in an earlier year is included in
income in the later year if your medical de-
duction in the earlier year reduced your in-
come tax in that year. See Reimbursement
in a later year, earlier.
Future medical expenses. If you re-
ceive an amount in settlement of a damage
suit for personal injuries that is properly
allocable or determined to be for future
medical expenses, you must reduce any
medical expenses for these injuries until the
amount you received has been completely
used.
How Do You Report
the Deduction on
Your Tax Return?
Once you have determined which medical
care expenses you can include when figur-
ing your deduction, you must report the de-
duction on your tax return.
What Tax Form Do You
Use?
You figure your medical expense deduction
on Schedule A , Form 1040. You cannot
claim medical expenses on Form 1040A or
Form 1040EZ. An example of a filled-in
medical and dental expense part of Sched-
ule A is shown on this page.
Step 1.
Reimbursement from employer's policy .. $2,500
Reimbursement from your policy ............ 1,500
Total reimbursement .............................$4,000
Amount of medical expenses from your
policy [($1,500 ÷ $4,000) × $3,600 total
medical expenses] ................................... $1,350
Amount of medical expenses from your
employer's policy [($2,500 ÷ $4,000) ×
$3,600 total medical expenses] ............... 2,250
Total medical expenses ........................$3,600
Excess reimbursement from your em-
ployer's policy ($2,500 − $2,250) .......... $250
Step 2.
Because both you and your employer contributed
to the cost of this policy, you must divide the cost
to determine the excess reimbursement from your
employer's contribution.Total annual cost of policy ........................ $2,000
Amount paid by employer ......................... $600
Employer's contribution in relation to the
annual cost of the policy
($300 ÷ $1,200) ....................................... 25%
Employer's contribution in
relation to the annual cost
of the policy ($600 ÷ $2,000) ................. 30%
Amount to report as other income on
line 21, Form 1040 (25% × $250) ..........$62.50
Page 146 Chapter 23  Medical and Dental Expenses

24.
Taxes
Important Reminder
Limit on itemized deductions. If your
adjusted gross income is more than
$128,950 ($64,475 if you are married filing
separately), the overall amount of your
itemized deductions may be limited. See
chapter 22 for more information about this
limit.
Introduction
This chapter discusses which taxes you can
deduct if you itemize deductions on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040). It also explains which
taxes you can deduct on other schedules
or forms and which taxes you cannot de-
duct. 
The chapter covers:
 Income taxes (state, local, or foreign),
 Real estate taxes (state, local, or for-
eign),
 Personal property taxes (state or local),
and
 Taxes and fees you cannot deduct.
At the end of the chapter is a section that
explains which form you use to deduct the
different types of taxes. 
Table. Use Table 24–1 as a guide to de-
termine which taxes you can deduct.
Business taxes. You can deduct certain
taxes only if they are ordinary and neces-
sary expenses of your trade or business or
of producing income. For information on
these taxes, see Publication 535, Business
Expenses.
State or local taxes.These are taxes im-
posed by the 50 states, U.S. possessions,
or any of their political subdivisions (such
as a county or city), or by the District of
Columbia.
Indian tribal government.An Indian
tribal government that is recognized by the
Secretary of the Treasury as performing
substantial government functions will be
treated as a state for this purpose. Income
taxes, real estate taxes, and personal
property taxes imposed by that Indian tribal
government (or by any of its subdivisions
that are treated as political subdivisions of
a state) are deductible.
Foreign taxes.These are taxes imposed
by a foreign country or any of its political
subdivisions.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individ-
uals 
/H18554 530 Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554 Schedule A (Form 1040)  Itemized
Deductions 
/H18554 Schedule E (Form 1040)  Supple-
mental Income and Loss 
/H18554 Form 1116  Foreign Tax Credit 
Tests To Deduct
Any Tax
The following two tests must be met for any
tax to be deductible by you.
1) The tax must be imposed on you. 
2) The tax must be paid during your tax
year. 
The tax must be imposed on you.Gen-
erally, you can deduct only taxes that are
imposed on you.
Generally, you can deduct property
taxes only if you are the property owner. If
your spouse owns property and pays real
estate taxes on it, the taxes are deductible
on your spouse's separate return or on your
joint return.
The tax must be paid during your tax
year. If you are a cash basis taxpayer, you
can deduct only those taxes paid during the
calendar year for which you file a return. If
you pay your taxes by check, the day you
mail or deliver the check is generally the
date of payment. If you use a pay-by-phone
account, the date reported on the statement
of the financial institution showing when
payment was made is the date of payment.
If you contest a tax liability and use the cash
method of accounting, you can deduct the
tax only in the year it is actually paid.
If you use an accrual method of ac-
counting, see Publication 538, Accounting
Periods and Methods, for more information.
Income Taxes
This section discusses the deductibility of
state and local income taxes (including
employee contributions to state benefit
funds) and foreign income taxes. 
State and Local Income
Taxes
You can deduct state and local income
taxes.
Exception. You cannot deduct state and
local income taxes you pay on income that
is exempt from federal income tax, unless
the exempt income is interest income. For
example, you cannot deduct the part of a
state's income tax that is on a cost-of-living
allowance that is exempt from federal in-
come tax.
What To Deduct
Your deduction may be for withheld taxes,
estimated tax payments, or other tax pay-
ments as follows.
Withheld taxes. Deduct state and local
income taxes withheld from your salary in
the year they are withheld. For 2000, these
taxes will be shown in boxes 18 and 21 of
your Form W–2. You may also have state
or local income tax withheld on Form W–2G
(box 14), Form 1099–MISC (box 11), or
Form 1099–R (boxes 10 and 13).
Estimated tax payments. Deduct esti-
mated tax payments you made during the
year under a pay-as-you-go plan of a state
or local government. However, you must
have a reasonable basis for making the
estimated tax payments. Any estimated
state or local tax payments you make that
are not reasonably determined in good faith
at the time of payment are not deductible.
For example, you made an estimated state
income tax payment. However, the estimate
of your state tax liability shows that you will
get a refund of the full amount of your esti-
mated payment. You had no reasonable
basis to believe you had any additional li-
ability for state income taxes and you can-
not deduct the estimated tax payment.
Refund applied to taxes.Deduct any part
of a refund of prior-year state or local in-
come taxes that you chose to have credited
to your 2000 estimated state or local income
taxes. 
Do not reduce your deduction by either
of the following items.
 Any state or local income tax refund (or
credit) you expect to receive for 2000. 
 Any refund of (or credit for) prior year
state and local income taxes you actu-
ally received in 2000.
See Refund (or credit) of state or local in-
come taxes, later.
Separate federal returns.If you and your
spouse file separate state, local, and federal
income tax returns, you each can deduct
on your federal return only the amount of
your own state and local income tax.
Chapter 24 Taxes Page 147

Joint state and local returns.If you
and your spouse file joint state and local
returns and separate federal returns, each
of you can deduct on your separate federal
return part of the state and local income
taxes. You can deduct only the amount of
the total taxes that is proportionate to your
gross income compared to the combined
gross income of you and your spouse.
However, you cannot deduct more than the
amount you actually paid during the year.
If you and your spouse are jointly and indi-
vidually liable for the full amount of the state
and local income taxes, you and your
spouse can deduct on your separate federal
returns the amount you each actually paid.
Joint federal return.If you file a joint fed-
eral return, you can deduct on your joint
federal return the total of the state and local
income taxes both of you paid.
Contributions to state benefit funds. As
an employee, you can deduct mandatory
contributions to state benefit funds that
provide protection against loss of wages.
Mandatory payments made to the following
state benefit funds are deductible as state
income taxes on line 5 of Schedule A (Form
1040).
 California.
 New Jersey.
 New York Nonoccupational Disability
Benefit Fund.
 Rhode Island Temporary Disability
Benefit Fund.
 Washington State Supplemental Work-
men's Compensation Fund.
CAUTION
!
Employee contributions to private
or voluntary disability plans are not
deductible.
Refund (or credit) of state or local in-
come taxes. If you receive a refund of (or
credit for) state or local income taxes in a
year after the year in which you paid them,
you may have to include the refund in in-
come on line 10 of Form 1040, in the year
you receive it. This includes refunds result-
ing from taxes that were overwithheld, ap-
plied from a prior year return, not figured
correctly, or figured again because of an
amended return. If you did not itemize your
deductions in the previous year, you do not
have to include the refund in income. If you
did deduct the taxes in the previous year,
include all or part of the refund on line 10,
Form 1040, in the year you receive the re-
fund. For a discussion of how much to in-
clude, see Recoveries in chapter 13.
Foreign Income Taxes
Generally, you can take either a deduction
or a credit for income taxes imposed on you
by a foreign country or a U.S. possession.
However, you cannot take a deduction or
credit for foreign income taxes paid on in-
come that is exempt from U.S. tax under the
foreign earned income exclusion or the for-
eign housing exclusion. For information on
these exclusions, get Publication 54, Tax
Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens
Abroad. For information on the foreign tax
credit, get Publication 514.
Real Estate Taxes
Deductible real estate taxes are any state,
local, or foreign taxes on real property levied
for the general public welfare. The taxes
must be based on the assessed value of the
real property and must be charged uniformly
against all property under the jurisdiction of
the taxing authority. 
Deductible real estate taxes generally
do not include taxes charged for local ben-
efits and improvements that increase the
value of the property. They also do not in-
clude itemized charges for services (such
as trash collection) to specific property or
people, even if the charge is paid to the
taxing authority. For more information about
taxes and charges that are not deductible,
see Real Estate-Related Items You Cannot
Deduct, later.
Tenant-shareholders in a cooperative
housing corporation. Generally, you can
deduct your share of the real estate taxes
the corporation paid or incurred on the
property. The corporation should provide
you with a statement showing you your
share of the taxes. For more information,
see Special Rules for Cooperatives in Pub-
lication 530.
Buyers and sellers of real estate.If you
bought or sold real estate during the year,
the real estate taxes must be divided be-
tween the buyer and the seller.
The buyer and the seller must divide the
real estate taxes according to the number
of days in the real property tax year (the
period to which the tax imposed relates) that
each owned the property. The seller is
treated as paying the taxes up to, but not
including, the date of sale. The buyer is
treated as paying the taxes beginning with
the date of sale. This applies regardless
of the lien dates under local law. Generally,
this information is included on the settle-
ment statement provided at the closing.
If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes
until they are paid because you use the
cash method of accounting, and the buyer
of your property is personally liable for the
tax, you are considered to have paid your
part of the tax at the time of the sale. This
lets you deduct the part of the tax to the
date of sale even though you did not actu-
ally pay it. However, you must also include
the amount of that tax in the selling price
of the property. The buyer must include the
same amount in his or her cost of the
property.
You figure your deduction for taxes on
each property bought or sold during the real
property tax year as follows.
Delinquent taxes.Do not divide delin-
quent taxes between the buyer and seller if
the taxes are for any real property tax year
before the one in which the property is sold.
Even if the buyer agrees to pay the delin-
quent taxes, the buyer cannot deduct them.
The buyer must add them to the cost of the
property. The seller can deduct these taxes
paid by the buyer. However, the seller must
include them in the selling price.
Examples. The following examples il-
lustrate how real estate taxes are divided
between buyer and seller. 
Example 1. Dennis and Beth White's
real property tax year for both their old
home and their new home is the calendar
year, with payment due August 1. The tax
on their old home, sold on May 5, was $620.
The tax on their new home, bought on May
3, was $732. Dennis and Beth are consid-
ered to have paid a proportionate share of
the real estate taxes on the old home even
though they did not actually pay them to the
taxing authority. On the other hand, they
can claim only a proportionate share of the
taxes they paid on their new property even
though they paid the entire amount. 
Dennis and Beth owned their old home
during the real property tax year for 125
days (January 1 to May 4, the day before
the sale). They figure their deduction for
taxes on their old home as follows.
Since the buyers of their old home paid all
of the taxes, Dennis and Beth also include
the $212 in the selling price of the old home.
(The buyers add the $212 to their cost of the
home.) 
Dennis and Beth owned their new home
during the real property tax year for 243
days (May 3 to December 31, including their
date of purchase). They figure their de-
duction for taxes on their new home as fol-
lows.
Since Dennis and Beth paid all of the taxes
on the new home, they add $246 ($732 paid
less $486 deduction) to their cost of the new
home. (The sellers add this $246 to their
selling price and deduct the $246 as a real
estate tax.)
Dennis and Beth's real estate tax de-
duction for their old and new homes is the
sum of $212 and $486, or $698. They will
enter this amount on line 6 of Schedule A
(Form 1040). 
Example 2. George and Helen Brown
bought a home on May 3, 2000. Their real
property tax year is the calendar year. Real
estate taxes for 1999 were assessed in their
state on January 1, 2000. The taxes be-
came due on May 31, 2000, and October
31, 2000.
TAXES ON OLD HOME
1. Enter the total real estate taxes for
the real property tax year ................. $620
2. Enter the number of days in the real
property tax year that you owned the
property ............................................ 125
3. Divide line 2 by 366 ......................... .342
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your
deduction. Enter it on line 6 of
Schedule A (Form 1040) .................. $212
TAXES ON NEW HOME
1. Enter the total real estate taxes for
the real property tax year ................. $732
2. Enter the number of days in the real
property tax year that you owned the
property ............................................ 243
3. Divide line 2 by 366 ......................... .664
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your
deduction. Enter it on line 6 of
Schedule A (Form 1040) .................. $486
1. Enter the total real estate taxes for
the real property tax year .................
2. Enter the number of days in the real
property tax year that you owned the
property ............................................
3. Divide line 2 by 366 .........................
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your
deduction. Enter it on line 6 of
Schedule A (Form 1040) ..................
Note. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property
you bought or sold during the real property tax
year. Page 148 Chapter 24  Taxes

Table 24–1. Which Taxes Can You Deduct?
Income Taxes State and local income taxes.
You Can Deduct You Cannot Deduct
Federal income taxes.
Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. Taxes for local benefits (with exceptions).
Foreign income taxes.
Employee contributions to state funds listed under
Contributions to state benefit funds.
Employee contributions to private or voluntary
disability plans.
Foreign real estate taxes.
Tenant’s share of real estate taxes paid by
cooperative housing corporation.
Trash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions).
Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
Homeowners association charges.
Personal Property
Taxes
State and local personal property taxes.
Other Taxes Taxes that are expenses of your trade or business
or of producing income.
Many taxes, such as state and local sales taxes
and federal excise taxes. See Taxes and Fees
You Cannot Deduct.One-half of self-employment tax paid.
Taxes on property producing rent or royalty
income.
Occupational taxes.
Fees and Charges Fees and charges, such as fees for driver ’s
licenses or charges for water bills. See Taxes
and Fees You Cannot Deduct.
The Browns agreed to pay all taxes due
after the date of purchase. Real estate taxes
for 1999 were $680. They paid $340 on May
31, 2000, and $340 on October 31, 2000.
These taxes were for the 1999 real property
tax year. The Browns cannot deduct them
since they did not own the property until
2000. Instead, they must add $680 to the
cost of their home.
In January 2001, the Browns receive
their 2000 property tax statement for $752,
which they will pay in 2001. The Browns
owned their new home during the 2000 real
property tax year for 243 days (May 3 to
December 31). They will figure their 2001
deduction for taxes as follows.
The remaining $253 ($752 paid less $499
deduction) of taxes paid in 2001, along with
the $680 paid in 2000, is added to the cost
of their home. 
Because the taxes up to the date of sale
are considered paid by the seller on the
date of sale, the seller is entitled to a 2000
tax deduction of $933. This is the sum of the
$680 for 1999 and the $253 for the 123 days
the seller owned the home in 2000. The
seller must also include the $931 in the
selling price when he or she figures the gain
or loss on the sale. The seller should con-
tact the Browns in January 2001 to find out
how much real estate tax is due for 2000. 
Form 1099 –S. For certain sales or ex-
changes of real estate, the person respon-
sible for closing the sale (generally the
settlement agent) prepares Form 1099–S,
Proceeds From Real Estate Transactions,
to report certain information to the IRS and
to the seller of the property. Box 2 of the
form should include the portion of the sell-
er's real estate tax liability that the buyer
will pay after the date of sale. The buyer
includes these taxes in the cost basis of the
property, and the seller both deducts this
amount as a tax paid and includes it in the
sales price of the property. 
For a real estate transaction that in-
volves a home, any real estate tax the seller
paid in advance but that is the liability of the
buyer appears in box 5 of Form 1099–S.
The buyer deducts this amount as a real
estate tax, and the seller reduces his or her
real estate tax deduction by the same
amount. See Refund (or rebate), later.
Taxes placed in escrow.If your monthly
mortgage payment includes an amount
placed in escrow (put in the care of a third
party) for real estate taxes, you may not be
able to deduct the total amount placed in
escrow. You can deduct only the real estate
tax that the third party actually paid to the
taxing authority. If the third party does not
notify you of the amount of real estate tax
that was paid for you, contact the third party
or the taxing authority to find the proper
amount to show on your return.
Tenants by the entirety.If you and your
spouse held property as tenants by the en-
tirety and you file separate returns, each of
you can deduct only the taxes each of you
paid on the property.
Divorced individuals.If your divorce or
separation agreement states that you must
pay the real estate taxes for a home owned
by you and your spouse, part of your pay-
ments may be deductible as alimony and
part as real estate taxes. See Publication
504, Divorced or Separated Individuals, for
information.
Minister's and military personnel hous-
ing allowances.If you are a minister or a
member of the uniformed services and re-
ceive a housing allowance that you can ex-
clude from income, you still can deduct all
of the real estate taxes you pay on your
home.
Refund (or rebate). If you receive a refund
or rebate in 2000 of real estate taxes you
paid in 2000, you must reduce your de-
duction by the amount refunded to you. If
you receive a refund or rebate in 2000 of
real estate taxes you deducted in an earlier
year, you generally must include the refund
or rebate in income in the year you receive
it. However, you only need to include the
amount of the deduction that reduced your
tax in the earlier year. For more information,
see Recoveries in chapter 13. 
TIP
If you did not itemize deductions in
the year you paid the tax, do not
report the refund as income.
Real Estate-Related Items
You Cannot Deduct
Payments for the following items generally
are not deductible as real estate taxes.
 Taxes for local benefits. 
 Itemized charges for services (such as
trash and garbage pickup fees). 
 Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes). 
 Rent increases due to higher real estate
taxes. 
 Homeowners association charges. 
Taxes for local benefits. Deductible real
estate taxes generally do not include taxes
charged for local benefits and improve-
ments that increase the value of your prop-
erty. These include assessments for streets,
sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, public
parking facilities, and similar improvements.
You should increase the basis of your
property by the amount of the assessment.
Local benefit taxes are deductible only
if they are for maintenance, repair, or inter-
est charges related to those benefits. If only
a part of the taxes is for maintenance, re-
pair, or interest, you must be able to show
the amount of that part to claim the de-
duction. If you cannot determine what part
of the tax is for maintenance, repair, or in-
terest, none of it is deductible.
1. Enter the total real estate taxes for
the real property tax year ................. $752
2. Enter the number of days in the real
property tax year that you owned the
property ............................................ 243
3. Divide line 2 by 366 ......................... .664
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your
deduction. Claim it on line 6 of
Schedule A (Form 1040) .................. $499
Chapter 24 Taxes Page 149

Taxes for local benefits may be included
in your real estate tax bill. If your taxing
authority (or mortgage lender) does not fur-
nish you a copy of your real estate tax bill,
ask for it. You should use the rules above
to determine if the local benefit tax is
deductible.
Itemized charges for services. An item-
ized charge for services to specific property
or people is not a tax, even if the charge is
paid to the taxing authority. For example,
you cannot deduct the charge as a real es-
tate tax if it is:
 A unit fee for the delivery of a service
(such as a $5 fee charged for every
1,000 gallons of water you use), 
 A periodic charge for a residential ser-
vice (such as a $20 per month or $240
annual fee charged to each homeowner
for trash collection), or
 A flat fee charged for a single service
provided by your government (such as
a $30 charge for mowing your lawn
because it was allowed to grow higher
than permitted under your local ordi-
nance).
CAUTION
!
You must look at your real estate tax
bill to determine if any nondeduct-
ible itemized charges, such as those
just listed, are included in the bill. If your
taxing authority (or mortgage lender) does
not furnish you a copy of your real estate tax
bill, ask for it.
Exception. Service charges used to
maintain or improve services (such as trash
collection or police and fire protection) are
deductible as real estate taxes if:
1) The fees or charges are imposed at a
like rate against all property in the tax-
ing jurisdiction,
2) The funds collected are not earmarked;
instead, they are commingled with
general revenue funds, and
3) Funds used to maintain or improve
services are not limited to or deter-
mined by the amount of these fees or
charges collected. 
Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).Transfer
taxes and similar taxes and charges on the
sale of a personal home are not deductible.
If they are paid by the seller, they are ex-
penses of the sale and reduce the amount
realized on the sale. If paid by the buyer,
they are included in the cost basis of the
property.
Rent increase due to higher real estate
taxes. If your landlord increases your rent
in the form of a tax surcharge because of
increased real estate taxes, you cannot de-
duct the increase as taxes.
Homeowners association charges.
These charges are not deductible because
they are imposed by the homeowners as-
sociation, rather than the state or local
government.
Personal Property
Taxes
Personal property tax is deductible if it is a
state or local tax that is:
1) Charged on personal property, 
2) Based only on the value of the per-
sonal property, and 
3) Charged on a yearly basis, even if it is
collected more than once a year, or
less than once a year.
A tax that meets the above requirements
can be considered charged on personal
property even if it is for the exercise of a
privilege. For example, a yearly tax based
on value qualifies as a personal property tax
even if it is called a registration fee and is
for the privilege of registering motor vehicles
or using them on the highways.
Example. Your state charges a yearly
motor vehicle registration tax of 1% of value
plus 50 cents per hundredweight. You paid
$32 based on the value ($1,500) and weight
(3,400 lbs.) of your car. You can deduct $15
(1% × $1,500) as a personal property tax,
since it is based on the value. The remain-
ing $17 ($.50 × 34), based on the weight,
is not deductible.
Taxes and Fees
You Cannot Deduct
Many federal, state, and local government
taxes are not deductible because they do
not fall within the categories discussed ear-
lier. Other taxes and fees, such as federal
income taxes, are not deductible because
the tax law specifically prohibits a deduction
for them.
Taxes and fees that are generally not
deductible include the following items.
 Estate, inheritance, legacy, or suc-
cession taxes. These taxes are gen-
erally not deductible. However, you can
deduct the estate tax attributable to in-
come in respect of a decedent if you
must include that income in gross in-
come. In that case, deduct the estate
tax as a miscellaneous deduction that
is not subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-
gross-income limit. For more informa-
tion, see Estate Tax Deduction in Pub-
lication 559, Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators.
  Federal income taxes. This includes
taxes withheld from your pay.
 Fines. You cannot deduct penalties for
violation of any law, including forfeiture
of related collateral deposits.
 Gift taxes.
 License fees. You cannot deduct li-
cense fees for personal purposes (such
as marriage, driver's, and dog license
fees).
 Social security. This includes social
security, Medicare, or railroad retire-
ment  taxes withheld from your pay.
 Social security and other employ-
ment taxes for household workers.
You generally cannot deduct the social
security or other employment taxes you
pay on the wages of a household
worker. However, you may be able to
include them in medical or child care
expenses. For more information, see
chapters 23 and 33.
Many taxes and fees other than those
listed above are also nondeductible, unless
they are ordinary and necessary expenses
of a business or income-producing activity.
For other nondeductible items, see Real
Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct,
earlier.
Where To Deduct
You deduct taxes on the following sched-
ules.
State and local income taxes. These
taxes are deducted on line 5 of Schedule
A (Form 1040), even if your only source of
income is from business, rents, or royalties.
Foreign income taxes. Generally, income
taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S.
possession can be claimed as an itemized
deduction on line 8 of Schedule A (Form
1040), or as a credit against your U.S. in-
come tax on line 43 of Form 1040. To claim
the credit, you may have to complete and
attach Form 1116. For more information,
see the instructions for Form 1040 or get
Publication 514.
Real estate taxes and personal property
taxes. These taxes are deducted on lines
6 and 7 of Schedule A (Form 1040), unless
they are paid on property used in your
business or on property that produces rent
or royalty income. See Taxes on property
producing rent or royalty income, later.
Self-employment tax.Deduct one-half of
your self-employment tax on line 27, Form
1040.
Taxes on property producing rent or
royalty income.These taxes generally are
deducted on Schedule E (Form 1040). 
Other taxes.All other deductible taxes are
deducted on line 8 of Schedule A (Form
1040).
Page 150 Chapter 24  Taxes

25.
Interest
Expense
Important Reminders
Personal interest.Personal interest is not
deductible. Examples of personal interest
include interest on a loan to purchase an
automobile for personal use and credit card
and installment interest incurred for per-
sonal expenses. But you may be able to
deduct interest you pay on a qualified stu-
dent loan. For details, see Publication 970,
Tax Benefits for Higher Education.
Limit on itemized deductions. Certain
itemized deductions (including home mort-
gage interest) are limited if your adjusted
gross income is more than $128,950
($64,475 if you are married filing a separate
return). For more information, see chapter
22.
Introduction
This chapter discusses interest. Interest is
the amount you pay for the use of borrowed
money.
The types of interest you can deduct as
itemized deductions on Schedule A (Form
1040) are:
 Home mortgage interest, including cer-
tain points, and
 Investment interest. 
This chapter explains these deductions. It
also explains where to deduct other types
of interest and lists some types of interest
you cannot deduct.
Use Table 25–1 to find out where to get
more information on various types of inter-
est, including investment interest.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554936 Home Mortgage Interest De-
duction 
Home Mortgage
Interest
Generally, home mortgage interest is any
interest you pay on a loan secured by your
home (main home or a second home). The
loan may be a mortgage to buy your home,
a second mortgage, a line of credit, or a
home equity loan.
You can deduct home mortgage interest
only if you meet all the following conditions.
 You must file Form 1040 and itemize
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
 You must be legally liable for the loan.
You cannot deduct payments you make
for someone else if you are not legally
liable to make them. Both you and the
lender must intend that the loan be re-
paid. In addition, there must be a true
debtor-creditor relationship between
you and the lender.
 The mortgage must be a secured debt
on a qualified home. (Generally, your
mortgage is a secured debt if you put
your home up as collateral to protect
the interests of the lender. The term
“qualified home” means your main
home or second home. For details, see
Publication 936.)
Deductible Mortgage
Interest
In most cases, you will be able to deduct
all of your home mortgage interest. Whether
you can deduct all of it depends on the date
you took out the mortgage, the amount of
the mortgage, and your use of its proceeds.
Fully deductible interest.If all of your
mortgages fit into one or more of the fol-
lowing three categories at all times during
the year, you can deduct all of the interest
on those mortgages. (If any one mortgage
fits into more than one category, add the
debt that fits in each category to your other
debt in the same category.)
The three categories are:
1) Mortgages you took out on or before
October 13, 1987 (called grandfa-
thered debt).
2) Mortgages you took out after October
13, 1987, to buy, build, or improve your
home (called home acquisition
debt), but only if throughout 2000
these mortgages plus any grandfa-
thered debt totaled $1 million or less
($500,000 or less if married filing sep-
arately).
3) Mortgages you took out after October
13, 1987, other than to buy, build, or
improve your home (called home eq-
uity debt), but only if throughout 2000
these mortgages totaled $100,000 or
less ($50,000 or less if married filing
separately) and totaled no more than
the fair market value of your home re-
duced by (1) and (2).
The dollar limits for the second and third
categories apply to the combined mort-
gages on your main home and second
home.
See Part II of Publication 936 for more
detailed definitions of grandfathered, home
acquisition, and home equity debt.
You can use Figure 25–A to check
whether your home mortgage interest is
fully deductible.
Limits on deduction. You cannot fully
deduct interest on a mortgage that does not
fit into any of the three categories listed
above. If this applies to you, see Part II of
Publication 936 to figure the amount of in-
terest you can deduct.
Special Situations
This section describes certain items that
can be included as home mortgage interest
and others that cannot. It also describes
certain special situations that may affect
your deduction.
Late payment charge on mortgage pay-
ment. You can deduct as home mortgage
interest a late payment charge if it was not
for a specific service performed in con-
nection with your mortgage loan.
Mortgage prepayment penalty. If you pay
off your home mortgage early, you may
have to pay a penalty. You can deduct that
penalty as home mortgage interest provided
the penalty is not for a specific service per-
formed or cost incurred in connection with
your mortgage loan.
Sale of home. If you sell your home, you
can deduct your home mortgage interest
(subject to any limits that apply) paid up to,
but not including, the date of sale.
Example. John and Peggy Harris sold
their home on May 7. Through April 30, they
made home mortgage interest payments of
$1,220. The settlement sheet for the sale
of the home showed $50 interest for the
6-day period in May up to, but not including,
the date of sale. Their mortgage interest
deduction is $1,270 ($1,220 + $50).
Prepaid interest. If you pay interest in ad-
vance for a period that goes beyond the end
of the tax year, you must spread this interest
over the tax years to which it applies. You
can deduct in each year only the interest
that qualifies as home mortgage interest for
that year. However, see Points, later.
Mortgage interest credit. You may be able
to claim a mortgage interest credit if you
were issued a mortgage credit certificate
(MCC) by a state or local government. Fig-
ure the credit on Form 8396, Mortgage In-
terest Credit. If you take this credit, you
must reduce your mortgage interest de-
duction by the amount of the credit.
For more information on the credit, see
chapter 38.
Ministers' and military housing allow-
ance. If you are a minister or a member
of the uniformed services and receive a
housing allowance that is not taxable, you
can still deduct your home mortgage inter-
est.
Mortgage assistance payments. If you
qualify for mortgage assistance payments
under section 235 of the National Housing
Act, part or all of the interest on your mort-
gage may be paid for you. You cannot de-
duct the interest that is paid for you.
No other effect on taxes.Do not in-
clude these mortgage assistance payments
in your income. Also, do not use these
payments to reduce other deductions, such
as real estate taxes.
Divorced or separated individuals.If a
divorce or separation agreement requires
you or your spouse or former spouse to pay
home mortgage interest on a home owned
by both of you, the payment of interest may
be alimony. See the discussion of Payments
for jointly-owned home in chapter 20.
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 151

Figure 25–A. Is My Home Mortgage Interest Fully Deductible?
Were your total mortgage balances $100,000 or less
1 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately)?
Start Here
No
/H17075
Were all of your home mortgages taken out on or
before 10-13-87?
Were all of your home mortgages taken out after
10-13-87 used to buy, build, or improve the main
home secured by that main home mortgage or
used to buy, build, or improve the second home
secured by that second home mortgage, or both?
Were the mortgage balances $1,000,000 or less
($500,000 or less if married filing separately)?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
Yes
(Instructions: Include balances of ALL mortgages secured by your main home and second home. Answer YES only if the answer
is true at ALL times during the year.)
Yes
/H17073
Yes
/H17076
/H17076
Your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
You do not need Publication 936.
Go to Part II of Publication 936 to determine the
limits on your deductible home mortgage interest.
Were your grandfathered debt plus home
acquisition debt balances $1,000,000 or less
2
($500,000 or less if married filing separately)?
Were your home equity debt balances $100,000 or
less
1 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately)?
1
If all mortgages on your main or second home exceed the home ’s fair market value, a lower limit may apply. See Home equity debt limit under Home Equity
Debt in Part II of Publication 936.
2
Amounts over the $1,000,000 limit ($500,000 if married filing separately) qualify as home equity debt if they are not more than  the total home equity debt
limit. See Publication 936 for more information about grandfathered debt, home acquisition debt, and home equity debt.
If you meet the conditions to deduct home mortgage interest, use this figure to determine whether that interest is fully deduct ible or
subject to limits.
Redeemable ground rent. If you make
annual or periodic rental payments on a
redeemable ground rent, you can deduct
them as mortgage interest.
Payments made to end the lease and to
buy the lessor's entire interest in the land
are not ground rents. You cannot deduct
them. For more information, see Publication
936.
Nonredeemable ground rent. Pay-
ments on a nonredeemable ground rent are
not mortgage interest. You can deduct them
as rent if they are a business expense or if
they are for rental property.
Rental payments. If you live in a house
before final settlement on the purchase, any
payments you make for that period are rent
and not interest. This is true even if the
settlement papers call them interest. You
cannot deduct these payments as home
mortgage interest.
Mortgage proceeds invested in tax-
exempt securities.You cannot deduct the
home mortgage interest on grandfathered
debt or home equity debt if you used the
proceeds of the mortgage to buy securities
or certificates that produce tax-free income.
Grandfathered debt and home equity debt
are defined earlier under Deductible Mort-
gage Interest.
Refunds of interest. If you receive a refund
of interest in the same tax year you paid it,
you must reduce your interest expense by
the amount refunded to you. If you receive
a refund of interest you deducted in an
earlier year, you generally must include the
refund in income in the year you receive it.
However, you need to include it only up to
the amount of the deduction that reduced
your tax in the earlier year. This is true
whether the interest overcharge was re-
funded to you or was used to reduce the
outstanding principal on your mortgage.
If you received a refund of interest you
overpaid in an earlier year, you generally
will receive a Form 1098, Mortgage Interest
Statement, showing the refund in box 3. For
information about Form 1098, see Mortgage
Interest Statement, later.
For more information on how to treat
refunds of interest deducted in earlier years,
see Recoveries in chapter 13.
Page 152 Chapter 25  Interest Expense

Points
The term “points” is used to describe certain
charges paid, or treated as paid, by a bor-
rower to obtain a home mortgage. Points
may also be called loan origination fees,
maximum loan charges, loan discount, or
discount points.
A borrower is treated as paying any
points that a home seller pays for the bor-
rower's mortgage. See Points paid by the
seller, later.
General rule.You generally cannot deduct
the full amount of points in the year paid.
Because they are prepaid interest, you
generally must deduct them over the life
(term) of the mortgage.
Exception. You can fully deduct points
in the year paid if you meet all the following
tests.
1) Your loan is secured by your main
home. (Your main home is the one you
live in most of the time.) 
2) Paying points is an established busi-
ness practice in the area where the
loan was made. 
3) The points paid were not more than the
points generally charged in that area. 
4) You use the cash method of account-
ing. This means you report income in
the year you receive it and deduct ex-
penses in the year you pay them. (If
you want more information about this
method, see Accounting Methods in
chapter 1.) 
5) The points were not paid in place of
amounts that ordinarily are stated
separately on the settlement state-
ment, such as appraisal fees, in-
spection fees, title fees, attorney fees,
and property taxes. 
6) The funds you provided at or before
closing, plus any points the seller paid,
were at least as much as the points
charged. The funds you provided do
not have to have been applied to the
points. They can include a down pay-
ment, an escrow deposit, earnest
money, and other funds you paid at or
before closing for any purpose. You
cannot have borrowed these funds
from your lender or mortgage broker. 
7) You use your loan to buy or build your
main home. 
8) The points were computed as a per-
centage of the principal amount of the
mortgage. 
9) The amount is clearly shown on the
settlement statement (such as the
Uniform Settlement Statement, Form
HUD-1) as points charged for the
mortgage. The points may be shown
as paid from either your funds or the
seller's. 
Note. If you meet all of these tests, you
can choose to either fully deduct the points
in the year paid, or amortize them over the
life of the loan.
Home improvement loan. You can
also fully deduct in the year paid points paid
on a loan to improve your main home, if
tests (1) through (6) are met.
Figure 25–B. You can use Figure 25–B
as a quick guide to see whether your points
are fully deductible in the year paid. If you
do not qualify under the exception to deduct
the full amount of points in the year paid,
see Points in chapter 5 of Publication 535,
Business Expenses, for the rules on when
and how much you can deduct. However,
if the points relate to refinancing a home
mortgage, see Refinancing, later.
CAUTION
!
Second home.  The Exception does
not apply to points you pay on loans
secured by your second home. You
can deduct these points only over the life
of the loan.
Amounts charged for services.Amounts
charged by the lender for specific services
connected to the loan are not interest. Ex-
amples of these charges are:
 1) Appraisal fees,
 2) Notary fees,
3) Preparation costs for the mortgage
note or deed of trust,
4) Mortgage insurance premiums, and
5) VA funding fees.
You cannot deduct these amounts as points
either in the year paid or over the life of the
mortgage. For information about the tax
treatment of these amounts and other
settlement fees and closing costs, get Pub-
lication 530.
Points paid by the seller. The term
“points” includes loan placement fees that
the seller pays to the lender to arrange fi-
nancing for the buyer.
Treatment by seller.The seller cannot
deduct these fees as interest. But they are
a selling expense that reduces the amount
realized by the seller. See chapter 16 for
information on the sale of your home.
Treatment by buyer. The buyer re-
duces the basis of the home by the amount
of the seller-paid points and treats the points
as if he or she had paid them. If all the tests
under the Exception, earlier, are met, the
buyer can deduct the points in the year paid.
If any of those tests is not met, the buyer
deducts the points over the life of the loan.
For information about basis, see chapter
14.
Funds provided are less than points.If
you meet all the tests in the Exception,
earlier, except that the funds you provided
were less than the points charged to you
(test 6), you can deduct the points in the
year paid, up to the amount of funds you
provided. In addition, you can deduct any
points paid by the seller.
Example 1. When you took out a
$100,000 mortgage loan to buy your home
in December, you were charged one point
($1,000). You meet all the tests for deduct-
ing points in the year paid, except the only
funds you provided were a $750 down
payment. Of the $1,000 charged for points,
you can deduct $750 in the year paid. You
spread the remaining $250 over the life of
the mortgage.
Example 2. The facts are the same as
in Example 1, except that the person who
sold you your home also paid one point
($1,000) to help you get your mortgage. In
the year paid, you can deduct $1,750 ($750
of the amount you were charged plus the
$1,000 paid by the seller). You must reduce
the basis of your home by the $1,000 paid
by the seller.
Excess points.If you meet all the tests in
the Exception, earlier, except that the points
paid were more than are generally paid in
your area (test 3), you deduct in the year
paid only the points that are generally
charged. You must spread any additional
points over the life of the mortgage.
Mortgage ending early.If you spread your
deduction for points over the life of the
mortgage, you can deduct any remaining
balance in the year the mortgage ends.
However, if you refinance the mortgage with
the same lender, you cannot deduct any
remaining balance of spread points. In-
stead, deduct the remaining balance over
the term of the new loan.
A mortgage may end early due to a
prepayment, refinancing, foreclosure, or
similar event.
Example. Dan paid $3,000 in points in
1993 that he had to spread out over the
15-year life of the mortgage. He had de-
ducted $1,400 of these points through 1999.
Dan prepaid his mortgage in full in 2000.
He can deduct the remaining $1,600 of
points in 2000.
Refinancing.Generally, points you pay to
refinance a mortgage are not deductible in
full in the year you pay them. This is true
even if the new mortgage is secured by your
main home.
However, if you use part of the refi-
nanced mortgage proceeds to improve
your main home and you meet the first six
tests listed under Exception, earlier, you can
fully deduct the part of the points related to
the improvement in the year you paid them
with your own funds. You can deduct the
rest of the points over the life of the loan.
Example 1. In 1991, Bill Fields got a
mortgage to buy a home. The interest rate
on that mortgage loan was 11%. In 2000,
Bill refinanced that mortgage with a 15-year
$100,000 mortgage loan that has an interest
rate of 7%. The mortgage is secured by his
home. To get the new loan, he had to pay
three points ($3,000). Two points ($2,000)
were for prepaid interest, and one point
($1,000) was charged for services, in place
of amounts that ordinarily are stated sepa-
rately on the settlement statement. Bill paid
the points out of his private funds, rather
than out of the proceeds of the new loan.
The payment of points is an established
practice in the area, and the points charged
are not more than the amount generally
charged there. Bill's first payment on the
new loan was due July 1. He made six
payments on the loan in 2000 and is a cash
basis taxpayer.
Bill used the funds from the new mort-
gage to repay his existing mortgage. Al-
though the new mortgage loan was for Bill's
continued ownership of his main home, it
was not for the purchase or improvement
of that home. He cannot deduct all of the
points in 2000. He can deduct two points
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 153

Figure 25–B. Are My Points Fully Deductible This Year?
Is the loan secured by your main home?
Start Here
/H17075
/H17074Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
*The funds you provided do not have to have been applied to the points. They can include a down payment, an escrow deposit, ear nest money, and other
funds you paid at or before closing for any purpose.
Is the payment of points an established
business practice in your area?
Were the points paid more than the amount
generally charged in your area?
Do you use the cash method of accounting?
Did you take out the loan to improve your
main home?
Did you take out the loan to buy or build
your new home?
Were the points computed as a percentage of
the principal amount of the mortgage?
Were the funds you provided (other than
those you borrowed from your lender or
mortgage broker), plus any points the seller
paid, at least as much as the points charged?*
Is the amount paid clearly shown as points on
the settlement statement?
You can fully deduct the points this year on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
You cannot fully deduct the points this year. See the
discussion on Points.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
/H17075
Yes
Were the points paid in place of amounts that
ordinarily are separately stated on the
settlement sheet?
/H17074
/H17075
Yes
No
Page 154 Chapter 25  Interest Expense

($2,000) ratably over the life of the loan. He
deducts $67 [($2,000 ÷ 180 months) × 6
payments] of the points in 2000. The other
point ($1,000) was a fee for services and is
not deductible.
Example 2. The facts are the same as
in Example 1, except that Bill used $25,000
of the loan proceeds to improve his home
and $75,000 to repay his existing mortgage.
Bill deducts 25% ($25,000 ÷ $100,000) of
the points ($2,000) in 2000. His deduction
is $500 ($2,000 × 25%).
Bill also deducts the ratable part of the
remaining $1,500 ($2,000 − $500) that must
be spread over the life of the loan. This is
$50 [($1,500 ÷ 180 months) × 6 payments]
in 2000. The total amount Bill deducts in
2000 is $550 ($500 + $50).
Limits on deduction. You cannot fully
deduct points on a mortgage unless the
mortgage fits into one of the categories
listed earlier under Fully deductible interest.
See Publication 936 for details.
Mortgage Interest
Statement
If you paid $600 or more of mortgage inter-
est (including certain points) during the year
on any one mortgage, you generally will
receive a Form 1098, Mortgage Interest
Statement, or a similar statement from the
mortgage holder. You will receive the
statement if you pay interest to a person
(including a financial institution or a coop-
erative housing corporation) in the course
of that person's trade or business. A gov-
ernmental unit is a person for purposes of
furnishing the statement.
You should receive the statement for
each year by January 31 of the following
year. A copy of this form will also be sent
to the IRS.
The statement will show the total interest
you paid during the year. If you purchased
a main home during the year, it will also
show the deductible points paid during the
year, including seller-paid points. However,
it should not show any interest that was paid
for you by a government agency.
As a general rule, Form 1098 will include
only points that you can fully deduct in the
year paid. However, certain points not in-
cluded on Form 1098 also may be deduct-
ible, either in the year paid or over the life
of the loan. See Points, earlier, to determine
whether you can deduct points not shown
on Form 1098.
Prepaid interest on Form 1098.If you
prepaid interest in 2000 that accrued in full
by January 15, 2001, this prepaid interest
may be included in box 1 of Form 1098.
However, you cannot deduct the prepaid
amount for January 2001 in 2000. (See
Prepaid interest, earlier.) You will have to
figure the interest that accrued for 2001 and
subtract it from the amount in box 1. You
will include the interest for January 2001
with the other interest you pay for 2001.
See How To Report, later.
Refunded interest.If you received a re-
fund of mortgage interest you overpaid in
an earlier year, you generally will receive a
Table 25–1. Where To Deduct Your Interest
Type of interest
Student loan interest Form 1040, line 24 or
Form 1040A, line 17
Deductible home mortgage interest
not reported on Form 1098
Points not reported on Form 1098
Schedule A (Form
1040), line 11
Schedule A (Form
1040), line 12
Investment interest (other than
interest incurred to produce rents
or royalties)
Farm business interest
Interest incurred to produce rents
or royalties
Schedule A (Form
1040), line 13
Schedule C or C-EZ
(Form 1040)
 Where to deduct
Publication 970
Publication 936
Publication 550
Publication 535
Publications 225 and
535
Business interest (non-farm)
Personal interest
Schedule F (Form
1040)
Schedule E (Form
1040)
Publication 936
Publications 527 and
535
Not Deductible
 Where to find
information
Deductible home mortgage interest
and points reported on Form 1098
Schedule A (Form
1040), line 10
Publication 936
Form 1098 showing the refund in box 3. See
Refunds of interest, earlier.
Investment Interest
This section discusses the interest ex-
penses you may be able to deduct as an
investor.
If you borrow money and use it to buy
property you hold for investment, the inter-
est you pay is investment interest. You can
deduct investment interest subject to the
limit discussed later. However, you cannot
deduct interest you incurred to produce
tax-exempt income. Nor can you deduct in-
terest expenses on straddles.
Investment interest does not include any
qualified home mortgage interest or any in-
terest taken into account in computing in-
come or loss from a passive activity.
Investment Property
Property held for investment includes prop-
erty that produces interest, dividends, an-
nuities, or royalties not derived in the ordi-
nary course of a trade or business. It also
includes property that produces gain or loss
(not derived in the ordinary course of a trade
or business) from the sale or trade of prop-
erty producing these types of income or held
for investment (other than an interest in a
passive activity). Investment property also
includes an interest in a trade or business
activity in which you did not materially par-
ticipate (other than a passive activity).
Partners, shareholders, and beneficia-
ries. To determine your investment inter-
est, combine your share of investment in-
terest from a partnership, S corporation,
estate, or trust with your other investment
interest.
Allocation of Interest
Expense 
If you use borrowed money for business or
personal purposes as well as for invest-
ment, you must allocate the debt among
those purposes. Only the interest expense
on the part of the debt used for investment
purposes is treated as investment interest.
The allocation is not affected by the use of
property that secures the debt. However,
fully deductible home mortgage interest is
not treated as investment interest and the
debt does not have to be allocated, regard-
less of how the proceeds are used.
Limit on Deduction
Generally, your deduction for investment
interest expense is limited to the amount of
your net investment income.
You can carry over the amount of in-
vestment interest that you could not deduct
because of this limit to the next tax year.
The interest carried over is treated as in-
vestment interest paid or accrued in that
next year.
You can carry over disallowed invest-
ment interest to the next tax year even if it
is more than your taxable income in the year
the interest was paid or accrued.
Net Investment Income
Determine the amount of your net invest-
ment income by subtracting your investment
expenses (other than interest expense) from
your investment income.
Investment income. This generally in-
cludes your gross income from property
held for investment (such as interest, divi-
dends, annuities, and royalties). Investment
income does not include Alaska Permanent
Fund dividends.
Choosing to include net capital gain.
Investment income generally does not in-
clude net capital gain from disposing of in-
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 155

vestment property (including capital gain
distributions from mutual funds). However,
you can choose to include all or part of your
net capital gain in investment income.
You make this choice by completing line
4e of Form 4952 according to its in-
structions.
If you choose to include any amount of
your net capital gain in investment income,
you must reduce your net capital gain that
is eligible for the lower capital gains tax
rates by the same amount.
TIP
Before making this choice, consider
the overall effect on your tax liability.
Compare your tax if you make this
choice with your tax if you do not.
Investment income of child reported on
parent's return.Investment income in-
cludes the part of your child's interest and
dividend income that you choose to report
on your return. If the child does not have
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends or capital
gain distributions, this is the amount on line
6 of Form 8814, Parents' Election To Report
Child's Interest and Dividends.
Child's Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends.  If part of the amount you report is
your child's Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends, that part does not count as invest-
ment income. To figure the amount of your
child's income that you can consider your
investment income, start with the amount
on line 6 of Form 8814. Multiply that amount
by a percentage that is equal to the Alaska
Permanent Fund dividends divided by the
total amount on line 4 of Form 8814. Sub-
tract the result from the amount on line 6
of Form 8814.
Child's capital gain distributions. If
part of the amount you report is your child's
capital gain distributions, that part generally
does not count as investment income.
However, you can choose to include part
of it in investment income. Use a worksheet
in chapter 3 of Publication 550 to figure the
amount to include on line 4a of Form 4952.
Investment expenses. Investment ex-
penses include all income-producing ex-
penses (other than interest expense) relat-
ing to the investment property that are
allowable deductions after applying the 2%
limit that applies to miscellaneous itemized
deductions. Use the smaller of:
1) The investment expenses included on
line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040), or
2) The amount on line 26 of Schedule A.
Losses from passive  activities.Income
or expenses that you used in computing in-
come or loss from a passive activity are not
included in determining your investment in-
come or investment expenses (including
investment interest expense). See Publica-
tion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules,
for information about passive activities.
Form 4952 
Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Ex-
pense Deduction, to figure your deduction
for investment interest. 
Exception to use of Form 4952.You do
not have to complete Form 4952 or attach
it to your return if you meet all of the fol-
lowing tests.
 Your investment interest expense is not
more than your investment income from
interest and ordinary dividends.
 You have no other deductible invest-
ment expenses.
 You have no disallowed investment in-
terest expense from 1999.
If you meet all of these tests, you can de-
duct all of your investment interest.
More Information
For more information on investment interest,
see Investment Expenses in chapter 3 of
Publication 550.
Items You
Cannot Deduct
Some interest payments are not deductible.
Certain expenses similar to interest also are
not deductible. Nondeductible expenses in-
clude the following items.
 Personal interest (discussed later).
 Service charges (however, see Other
Expenses in chapter 30).
 Annual fees for credit cards.
 Loan fees.
 Credit investigation fees.
 FHA mortgage insurance premiums and
VA funding fees.
 Interest to purchase or carry tax-exempt
securities.
Penalties. You cannot deduct fines and
penalties for violations of law, regardless of
their nature.
Personal Interest
Personal interest is not deductible. Personal
interest is any interest that is not home
mortgage interest, investment interest,
business interest, or other deductible inter-
est. It includes the following items.
 Interest on car loans (unless you use
the car for business).
 Interest on federal, state, or local in-
come tax.
 Finance charges on credit cards, retail
installment contracts, and revolving
charge accounts incurred for personal
expenses.
 Late payment charges by a public utility.
TIP
You may be able to deduct interest
you pay on a qualified student loan.
For details, see the instructions for
line 24 of Form 1040 or line 17 of Form
1040A.
Allocation of Interest
If you use the proceeds of a loan for more
than one purpose (for example, personal
and business), you must allocate the inter-
est on the loan to each use. However, you
do not have to allocate home mortgage in-
terest if it is fully deductible, regardless of
how the funds are used.
You allocate interest (other than fully
deductible home mortgage interest) on a
loan in the same way as the loan itself is
allocated. You do this by tracing disburse-
ments of the debt proceeds to specific uses.
For details on how to do this, see chapter
5 of Publication 535.
How To Report
You must file Form 1040 to deduct any
home mortgage interest expense on your
tax return. Where you deduct your interest
expense generally depends on how you use
the loan proceeds. See Table 25–1 for a
summary of where to deduct your interest
expense.
Home mortgage interest and points.
Deduct the home mortgage interest and
points reported to you on Form 1098 on line
10 of Schedule A (Form 1040). If you paid
more deductible interest to the financial in-
stitution than the amount shown on Form
1098, show the larger deductible amount
on line 10. Attach a statement explaining the
difference and print “See attached” next to
line 10.
Deduct home mortgage interest that was
not reported to you on Form 1098 on line
11 of Schedule A (Form 1040). If you paid
home mortgage interest to the person from
whom you bought your home, show that
person's name, address, and taxpayer
identification number (TIN) on the dotted
lines next to line 11. The seller must give
you this number and you must give the
seller your TIN. A Form W–9 can be used
for this purpose. Failure to meet any of
these requirements may result in a $50
penalty for each failure. The TIN can be
either a social security number, an individ-
ual taxpayer identification number (issued
by the Internal Revenue Service), or an
employer identification number. See Social
Security Number in chapter 1 for more in-
formation about TINs.
If you can take a deduction for points
that were not reported to you on Form
1098, deduct those points on line 12 of
Schedule A (Form 1040).
More than one borrower. If you and at
least one other person (other than your
spouse if you file a joint return) were liable
for and paid interest on a mortgage that was
for your home, and the other person re-
ceived a Form 1098 showing the interest
that was paid during the year, attach a
statement to your return explaining this.
Show how much of the interest each of you
paid, and give the name and address of the
person who received the form. Deduct your
share of the interest on line 11 of Schedule
A (Form 1040), and print “See attached”
next to the line.
If you are the payer of record on a
mortgage on which there are other borrow-
Page 156 Chapter 25  Interest Expense

ers entitled to a deduction for the interest
shown on the Form 1098 you received, de-
duct only your share of the interest on line
10 of Schedule A (Form 1040). You should
let each of the other borrowers know what
his or her share is.
Mortgage proceeds used for business
or investment.If your home mortgage in-
terest deduction is limited but all or part of
the mortgage proceeds were used for busi-
ness, investment, or other deductible activ-
ities, see Table 25–1. It shows where to
deduct the part of your excess interest that
is for those activities.
Investment interest.Deduct investment
interest, subject to certain limits discussed
in Publication 550, on line 13 of Schedule
A (Form 1040).
Amortization of bond premium. There
are various ways to treat the premium you
pay to buy taxable bonds. See Bond Pre-
mium Amortization in Publication 550.
Income-producing rental or royalty in-
terest. Deduct interest on a loan for
income-producing rental or royalty property
that is not used in your business in Part I
of Schedule E (Form 1040). 
Example. You rent out part of your
home and borrow money to make repairs.
You can deduct only the interest payment
for the rented part in Part I of Schedule E
(Form 1040). Deduct the rest of the interest
payment on Schedule A (Form 1040) if it is
deductible home mortgage interest.
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 157

26.
Contributions
Important Reminders
Disaster relief.You can deduct contribu-
tions earmarked for flood relief, hurricane
relief, or other disaster relief to a qualified
organization (defined later under Organiza-
tions That Qualify To Receive Deductible
Contributions). However, you cannot deduct
contributions earmarked for relief of a par-
ticular individual or family.
Written acknowledgment required.You
can claim a deduction for a contribution of
$250 or more only if you have a written ac-
knowledgment of your contribution from the
qualified organization or certain payroll de-
duction records. For more information, see
Records To Keep, later in this chapter.
Payment partly for goods or services.
A qualified organization must give you a
written statement if you make a payment
that is more than $75 and is partly a con-
tribution and partly for goods or services.
The statement must tell you that you can
deduct only the amount of your payment
that is more than the value of the goods or
services you received. It must also give you
a good faith estimate of the value of those
goods or services. See Contributions From
Which You Benefit, later in this chapter, for
more information.
Introduction
This chapter discusses:
 Organizations that are qualified to re-
ceive deductible charitable contribu-
tions,
 The types of contributions you can de-
duct,
 How much you can deduct,
 What records to keep, and
 How to report your charitable contribu-
tions.
A charitable contribution is a donation
or gift to, or for the use of, a qualified or-
ganization. It is voluntary and is made
without getting, or expecting to get, anything
of equal value.
Form 1040 required.To deduct a charita-
ble contribution, you must file Form 1040
and itemize deductions on Schedule A. The
amount of your deduction may be limited if
certain rules and limits explained in this
chapter apply to you.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H1855478 Cumulative List of Organizations
/H18554 526 Charitable Contributions
/H18554561 Determining the Value of Do-
nated Property
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
Deductions
/H185548283 Noncash Charitable Contribu-
tions
Organizations That
Qualify To Receive
Deductible
Contributions
You can deduct your contributions only if
you make them to a qualified organiza-
tion. To become a qualified organization,
most organizations other than churches and
governments, as described below, must
apply to the IRS.
TIP
You can ask any organization
whether it is a qualified organization,
and most will be able to tell you. Or
you can check IRS Publication 78, which
lists most qualified organizations. You may
find Publication 78 in your local library's
reference section. If not, you can call the
IRS to find out if an organization is qualified.
Call 1–800–829–1040. (For TTY/TDD help,
call 1–800–829–4059.)
Types of Qualified
Organizations
Generally, only the five following types of
organizations can be qualified organiza-
tions.
1) A community chest, corporation,
trust, fund, or foundation organized
or created in or under the laws of the
United States, any state, the District
of Columbia, or any possession of the
United States (including Puerto Rico).
It must be organized and operated only
for:
 a) Charitable purposes,
 b) Religious purposes,
 c) Educational purposes,
d) Scientific purposes, 
e) Literary purposes, or
f) The prevention of cruelty to chil-
dren or animals.
Certain organizations that foster
national or international amateur sports
competition also qualify.
2) War veterans' organizations, includ-
ing posts, auxiliaries, trusts, or foun-
dations, organized in the United States
or any of its possessions.
3) Domestic fraternal societies, orders,
and associations operating under the
lodge system.
Note. Your contribution to this type
of organization is deductible only if it is
to be used solely for charitable, reli-
gious, scientific, literary, or educational
purposes, or for the prevention of cru-
elty to children or animals.
4) Certain nonprofit cemetery compa-
nies or corporations.
Note. Your contribution to this type
of organization is not deductible if it
can be used for the care of a specific
lot or mausoleum crypt.
5) The United States or any state, the
District of Columbia, a U.S. pos-
session (including Puerto Rico), a pol-
itical subdivision of a state or U.S.
possession, or an Indian tribal govern-
ment or any of its subdivisions that
perform substantial government func-
tions.
Note: To be deductible, your con-
tribution to this type of organization
must be made solely for public pur-
poses.
Examples. Qualified organizations include:
 Churches, a convention or association
of churches, temples, synagogues,
mosques, and other religious organiza-
tions.
 Most nonprofit charitable organizations
such as the Red Cross and the United
Way.
 Most nonprofit educational organiza-
tions, including the Girl (and Boy)
Scouts of America, colleges, museums,
and day-care centers if substantially all
the child care provided is to enable in-
dividuals (the parents) to be gainfully
employed and the services are avail-
able to the general public. However, if
your contribution is a substitute for tui-
tion or other enrollment fee, it is not
deductible as a charitable contribution,
as explained later under Contributions
You Cannot Deduct.
 Nonprofit hospitals and medical re-
search organizations.
 Utility company emergency energy pro-
grams, if the utility company is an agent
for a charitable organization that assists
individuals with emergency energy
needs.
 Nonprofit volunteer fire companies.
 Public parks and recreation facilities.
 Civil defense organizations.
Certain foreign charitable organizations.
Under income tax treaties with Canada,
Israel, and Mexico, you may be able to de-
duct contributions to certain Canadian,
Israeli, or Mexican charitable organizations.
The organization must meet tests that are
essentially the same as the tests that qualify
U.S. organizations to receive deductible
contributions. For additional information on
the deduction of contributions to Canadian
charities, see Publication 597, Information
on the United States–Canada Income Tax
Treaty. If you need more information on how
to figure your contribution to Mexican and
Israeli charities, see Publication 526.
Page 158 Chapter 26  Contributions

Contributions
You Can Deduct
Generally, you can deduct your contribu-
tions of money or property that you make
to, or for the use of, a qualified organization.
A gift or contribution is “for the use of” a
qualified organization when it is held in a
legally enforceable trust for the qualified
organization or in a similar legal arrange-
ment.
If you give property to a qualified or-
ganization, you generally can deduct the fair
market value of the property at the time of
the contribution. See Contributions of Prop-
erty, later in this chapter.
Your deduction for charitable contribu-
tions is generally limited to 50% of your
adjusted gross income, but in some cases
20% and 30% limits may apply. See Limits
on Deductions, later.
Table 26–1 lists some examples of con-
tributions you can deduct and some that you
cannot deduct.
Contributions From
Which You Benefit
If you receive a benefit as a result of making
a contribution to a qualified organization,
you can deduct only the amount of your
contribution that is more than the value of
the benefit you receive.
If you pay more than fair market value
to a qualified organization for merchandise,
goods, or services, the amount you pay that
is more than the value of the item can be a
charitable contribution. For the excess
amount to qualify, you must pay it with the
intent to make a charitable contribution.
Example 1. You pay $65 for a ticket to
a dinner-dance at a church. All of the pro-
ceeds of the function go to the church. The
ticket to the dinner-dance has a fair market
value of $25. When you buy your ticket, you
know that its value is less than your pay-
ment. To figure the amount of your charita-
ble contribution, you subtract the value of
the benefit you receive ($25) from your total
payment ($65). You can deduct $40 as a
contribution to the church.
Example 2. At a fund-raising auction
conducted by a charity, you pay $600 for a
week's stay at a beach house. The amount
you pay is no more than the fair rental value.
You have not made a deductible charitable
contribution.
Athletic events.If you make a payment to,
or for the benefit of, a college or university
and, as a result, you receive the right to buy
tickets to an athletic event in the athletic
stadium of the college or university, you can
deduct 80% of the payment as a charitable
contribution.
If any part of your payment is for tickets
(rather than the right to buy tickets), that
part is not deductible. In that case, subtract
the price of the tickets from your payment.
80% of the remaining amount is a charitable
contribution.
Example 1. You pay $300 a year for
membership in an athletic scholarship pro-
gram maintained by a university (a qualified
Table 26–1. Examples of Charitable Contributions — A Quick Check
Deductible As
Charitable Contributions
Money or property you give to:
● Churches, synagogues, temples,
mosques, and other religious
organizations
●  Federal, state, and local
governments, if your contribution is
solely for public purposes (for
example, a gift to reduce the public
debt)
● Nonprofit schools and hospitals
● Salvation Army, Red Cross, CARE,
Goodwill Industries, United Way,
Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Boys and
Girls Clubs of America, etc.
● War veterans’ groups
Not Deductible As
Charitable Contributions
● Public parks and recreation facilities
Costs you pay for a student living with
you, sponsored by a qualified
organization
Use the following lists for a quick check of contributions you can or cannot deduct.
See the rest of this chapter for more information and additional rules and limits that
may apply.
Money or property you give to:
Out-of-pocket expenses when you serve
a qualified organization as a volunteer
● Civic leagues, social and sports
clubs, labor unions, and chambers
of commerce
● Foreign organizations (except
certain Canadian, Israeli, and
Mexican charities)
● Groups that are run for personal
profit
● Homeowners’ associations
● Political groups or candidates for
public office
● Groups whose purpose is to lobby
for law changes
Cost of raffle, bingo, or lottery tickets
Dues, fees, or bills paid to country clubs,
lodges, fraternal orders, or similar
groups
● Individuals
Tuition
Value of your time or services
Value of blood given to a blood bank
organization). The only benefit of member-
ship is that you have the right to buy one
season ticket for a seat in a designated area
of the stadium at the university's home
football games. You can deduct $240 (80%
of $300) as a charitable contribution.
Example 2. The facts are the same as
in Example 1 except that your $300 pay-
ment included the purchase of one season
ticket for the stated ticket price of $120. You
must subtract the usual price of a ticket
($120) from your $300 payment. The result
is $180. Your deductible charitable contri-
bution is $144 (80% of $180).
Charity benefit events.If you pay a qual-
ified organization more than fair market
value for the right to attend a charity ball,
banquet, show, sporting event, or other
benefit event, you can deduct only the
amount that is more than the value of the
privileges or other benefits you receive.
If there is an established charge for the
event, that charge is the value of your ben-
efit. If there is no established charge, your
contribution is that part of your payment that
is more than the reasonable value of the
right to attend the event. Whether you use
the tickets or other privileges has no effect
on the amount you can deduct. However, if
you return the ticket to the qualified organ-
ization for resale, you can deduct the entire
amount you paid for the ticket.
CAUTION
!
Even if the ticket or other evidence
of payment indicates that the pay-
ment is a “contribution,” this does
not mean you can deduct the entire amount.
If the ticket shows the price of admission
and the amount of the contribution, you can
deduct the contribution amount.
Example. You pay $40 to see a special
showing of a movie for the benefit of a
qualified organization. Printed on the ticket
is “Contribution—$40.” If the regular price
for the movie is $8, your contribution is $32
($40 payment − $8 regular price).
Membership fees or dues. You may be
able to deduct membership fees or dues
you pay to a qualified organization. How-
ever, you can deduct only the amount that
is more than the value of the benefits you
receive. You cannot deduct dues, fees, or
assessments paid to country clubs and
other social organizations. They are not
qualified organizations.
Certain membership benefits can be
disregarded. Both you and the organiza-
tion can disregard certain membership
benefits you get in return for an annual
payment of $75 or less to the qualified or-
ganization. You can pay more than $75 to
the organization, if the organization does
not require a larger payment for you to get
the benefits. The following benefits are
covered under this rule.
1) Any rights or privileges, other than
those discussed under Athletic events,
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 159

earlier, that you can use frequently
while you are a member, such as:
a) Free or discounted admission to
the organization's facilities or
events,
b) Free or discounted parking,
c) Preferred access to goods or ser-
vices, and
d) Discounts on the purchase of
goods and services.
2) Admission, while you are a member,
to events that are open only to mem-
bers of the organization, if the organ-
ization reasonably projects that the
cost per person (excluding any allo-
cated overhead) is not more than
$7.40. This amount may be adjusted
annually for inflation.
Token items. You can deduct your entire
payment to a qualified organization as a
charitable contribution if both of the follow-
ing are true.
1) You get a small item or other benefit
of token value.
2) The qualified organization correctly
determines that the value of the item
or benefit you received is not substan-
tial and informs you that you can de-
duct your payment in full.
Written statement.A qualified organiza-
tion must give you a written statement if you
make a payment to it that is more than $75
and is partly a contribution and partly for
goods or services. The statement must tell
you that you can deduct only the amount
of your payment that is more than the value
of the goods or services you received. It
must also give you a good faith estimate of
the value of those goods or services.
The organization can give you the
statement either when it solicits or when it
receives the payment from you.
Exception. An organization will not
have to give you this statement if any of the
following is true.
1) The organization is:
a) The type of organization de-
scribed in (5) under Types of
Qualified Organizations, earlier,
or
b) Formed only for religious pur-
poses, and the only benefit you
receive is an intangible religious
benefit (such as admission to a
religious ceremony) that generally
is not sold in commercial trans-
actions outside the donative con-
text.
2) You receive only items whose value is
not substantial, as described under
Token items, earlier.
3) You receive only membership benefits
that can be disregarded, as described
earlier.
Expenses Paid for Student
Living With You
You may be able to deduct some expenses
of having a student live with you. You can
deduct qualifying expenses for a foreign
or American student who:
1) Lives in your home under a written
agreement between you and a qual-
ified organization as part of a pro-
gram of the organization to provide
educational opportunities for the stu-
dent,
2) Is not your dependent or relative, and
3) Is a full-time student in the twelfth or
any lower grade at a school in the
United States.
You can deduct up to $50 a month for
each full calendar month the student lives
with you.
TIP
 Any month when conditions (1)
through (3) above are met for 15
days or more counts as a full month.
For additional information, see Ex-
penses Paid for Student Living With You in
Publication 526.
Mutual exchange program. You cannot
deduct the costs of a foreign student living
in your home under a mutual exchange
program through which your child will live
with a family in a foreign country.
Out-of-Pocket Expenses in
Giving Services
You may be able to deduct some amounts
you pay in giving services to a qualified or-
ganization. The amounts must be:
 Unreimbursed,
 Directly connected with the services,
 Expenses you had only because of the
services you gave, and
 Not personal, living, or family expenses.
Table 26–2 contains questions and an-
swers that apply to some individuals who
volunteer their services.
Conventions. If you are a chosen repre-
sentative attending a convention of a qual-
ified organization, you can deduct actual
unreimbursed expenses for travel and
transportation, including a reasonable
amount for meals and lodging, while away
from home overnight in connection with the
convention. However, see Travel, later.
You cannot deduct personal expenses
for sightseeing, fishing parties, theater tick-
ets, or nightclubs. You also cannot deduct
travel, meals and lodging, and other ex-
penses for your spouse or children.
You cannot deduct your expenses in at-
tending a church convention if you go only
as a member of your church rather than as
a chosen representative. You can deduct
unreimbursed expenses that are directly
connected with giving services for your
church during the convention.
Uniforms. You can deduct the cost and
upkeep of uniforms that are not suitable for
everyday use and that you must wear while
performing donated services for a charitable
organization.
Foster parents.You may be able to deduct
as a charitable contribution some of the
costs of being a foster parent (foster care
provider) if you have no profit motive in
providing the foster care and are not, in fact,
making a profit. A qualified organization
must designate the individuals you take into
your home for foster care.
You may deduct expenses that are:
1) Unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses
to feed, clothe, and care for the foster
child, and
2) Mainly to benefit the qualified organ-
ization.
Unreimbursed expenses that you cannot
deduct as charitable contributions may be
considered support provided by you in de-
termining whether you can claim the foster
child as a dependent. For details see
chapter 3.
Example. You cared for a foster child
because you wanted to adopt her, not to
benefit the agency that placed her in your
home. Your unreimbursed expenses are
not deductible as charitable contributions.
Car expenses. You can deduct unreim-
bursed out-of-pocket expenses, such as the
cost of gas and oil, that are directly related
to the use of your car in giving services to
a charitable organization. You cannot de-
duct any part of general repair and mainte-
nance expenses, depreciation, registration
fees, or the costs of tires or insurance.
If you do not want to deduct your actual
expenses, you can use a standard mileage
rate of 14 cents a mile to figure your con-
tribution.
You can deduct parking fees and tolls,
whether you use your actual expenses or
the standard mileage rate.
You must keep reliable written records
of your car expenses. For more information,
see Car expenses under Records To Keep,
later.
Travel. Generally, you can claim a chari-
table contribution deduction for travel ex-
penses necessarily incurred while you are
away from home performing services for a
charitable organization only if there is no
significant element of personal pleasure,
recreation, or vacation in the travel. This
applies whether you pay the expenses di-
rectly or indirectly. You are paying the ex-
penses indirectly if you make a payment to
the charitable organization and the organ-
ization pays for your travel expenses.
The deduction for travel expenses will
not be denied simply because you enjoy
providing services to the charitable organ-
ization. Even if you enjoy the trip, you can
take a charitable contribution deduction for
your travel expenses if you are on duty in
a genuine and substantial sense throughout
the trip. However, if you have only nominal
duties, or if for significant portions of the trip
you do not have any duties, you cannot
deduct your travel expenses.
Example 1. You are a troop leader for
a tax-exempt youth group and take the
group on a camping trip. You are responsi-
ble for overseeing the setup of the camp
and for providing the adult supervision for
the other activities during the entire trip.
You participate in the activities of the group
and really enjoy your time with them. You
oversee the breaking of camp and you
transport the group home. You can deduct
your travel expenses.
Page 160 Chapter 26  Contributions

Table 26–2. Volunteers’ Questions and Answers
Question
I do volunteer work 6 hours a week in the office of a qualified
organization. The receptionist is paid $6 an hour to do the same
work I do. Can I deduct $36 a week for my time?
No, you cannot deduct the value of your time or services.
Answer
I volunteer as a Red Cross nurse ’s aide at a hospital. Can I
deduct the cost of uniforms that I must wear?
Yes, you can deduct the cost of buying and cleaning your
uniforms if the hospital is a qualified organization, the uniforms
are not suitable for everyday use, and you must wear them when
working.
If you do volunteer work for a qualified organization, the following questions and answers may apply to you. All of the rules e xplained
in this chapter also apply. See, in particular, Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services.
The office is 30 miles from my home. Can I deduct any of my car
expenses for these trips?
Yes, you can deduct the costs of gas and oil that are directly
related to getting to the qualified organization where you are a
volunteer. If you don ’t want to figure your actual costs, you can
deduct 14 cents for each mile.
I pay a babysitter to watch my children while I do volunteer work
for a qualified organization. Can I deduct these costs?
No, you cannot deduct payments for child care expenses as a
charitable contribution, even if they are necessary so you can do
volunteer work for a qualified organization. (If you have child care
expenses so you can work for pay, see Chapter 33.)
Example 2. You sail from one island to
another and spend 8 hours a day counting
whales and other forms of marine life. The
project is sponsored by a charitable organ-
ization. In most circumstances, you cannot
deduct your expenses.
Example 3. You work for several hours
each morning on an archaeological dig
sponsored by a charitable organization. The
rest of the day is free for recreation and
sightseeing. You cannot take a charitable
contribution deduction even though you
work very hard during those few hours.
Example 4. You spend the entire day
attending a charitable organization's re-
gional meeting as a chosen representative.
In the evening you go to the theater. You
can claim your travel expenses as charita-
ble contributions, but you cannot claim the
cost of your evening at the theater.
Daily allowance (per diem). If you
provide services for a charitable organiza-
tion and receive a daily allowance to cover
reasonable travel expenses, including
meals and lodging while away from home
overnight, include in income the amount that
is more than your actual travel expenses.
You can deduct your necessary travel ex-
penses that are more than the allowance.
Deductible travel expenses. These
include:
 Air, rail, and bus transportation,
 Out-of-pocket expenses for your car,
 Taxi fares or other costs of transporta-
tion between the airport or station and
your hotel,
 Lodging costs, and
 The cost of meals.
Because these travel expenses are not
business-related, they are not subject to the
same limits that business-related expenses
are. For information on business travel ex-
penses, see Travel Expenses in chapter 28.
Contributions
You Cannot Deduct
There are some contributions that you can-
not deduct, such as those made to individ-
uals and those made to nonqualified or-
ganizations. (See Contributions to
Individuals, and Contributions to Nonqual-
ified Organizations, next). There are others
that you can deduct only part of, as dis-
cussed later under Contributions From
Which You Benefit.
Contributions To
Individuals
You cannot deduct contributions to specific
individuals, including the following.
 Contributions to fraternal societies
made for the purpose of paying medical
or burial expenses of deceased mem-
bers.
 Contributions to individuals who are
needy or worthy. This includes contri-
butions to a qualified organization if you
indicate that your contribution is for a
specific person. But you can deduct a
contribution that you give to a qualified
organization that in turn helps needy or
worthy individuals if you do not indicate
that your contribution is for a specific
person.
 Payments to a member of the clergy
that can be spent as he or she wishes,
such as for personal expenses.
 Expenses you paid for another person
who provided services to a qualified
organization.
Example. Your son does missionary
work. You pay his expenses. You
cannot claim a deduction for your son's
unreimbursed expenses related to his
contribution of services.
 Payments to a hospital that are for ser-
vices for a specific patient's care or
for services for a specific patient. You
cannot deduct these payments even if
the hospital is operated by a city, a
state, or other qualified organization.
Contributions To
Nonqualified Organizations
You cannot deduct contributions to organ-
izations that are not qualified to receive
tax-deductible contributions, including the
following.
1) Certain state bar associations, if:
a) The state bar is not a political
subdivision of a state,
b) The bar has private, as well as
public, purposes, such as pro-
moting the professional interests
of members, and
c) Your contribution is unrestricted
and can be used for private pur-
poses.
2) Chambers of commerce and other
business leagues or organizations.
3) Civic leagues and associations.
 4) Communist organizations.
5) Country clubs and other social clubs.
6) Foreign organizations. But you can
deduct contributions you make to:
a) A U.S. organization that transfers
funds to a charitable foreign or-
ganization if the U.S. organization
controls the use of the funds, or
if the foreign organization is only
an administrative arm of the U.S.
organization, or
b) Certain Canadian, Israeli, or
Mexican charitable organizations.
See Certain foreign charitable or-
ganizations under Organizations
That Qualify To Receive Deduct-
ible Contributions, earlier.
 7) Homeowners' associations.
8) Labor unions. But you may be able to
deduct union dues as a miscellaneous
itemized deduction, subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit, on
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 161

Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter
30.
9) Political organizations and candi-
dates.
Contributions From
Which You Benefit
If you receive or expect to receive a finan-
cial or economic benefit as a result of mak-
ing a contribution to a qualified organization,
you cannot deduct the part of the contribu-
tion that represents the value of the benefit
you receive. These contributions include the
following.
 Contributions for lobbying. This in-
cludes amounts that you earmark for
use in, or in connection with, influencing
specific legislation.
 Contributions to a retirement home
that are clearly for room, board, main-
tenance, or admittance. Also, if the
amount of your contribution depends
on the type or size of apartment you
will occupy, it is not a charitable contri-
bution.
 Costs of raffles, bingo, lottery, etc.
You cannot deduct as a charitable
contribution amounts you pay to buy
raffle or lottery tickets or to play bingo
or other games of chance. For more
information on how to report gambling
winnings and losses, see Gambling
Losses Up To the Amount of Gambling
Winnings in chapter 30.
 Dues to fraternal orders and similar
groups. However, see Membership fees
or dues, earlier, under Contributions
You Can Deduct.
 Tuition,  or amounts you pay instead
of tuition, even if you pay them for chil-
dren to attend parochial schools or
qualifying nonprofit day-care centers.
You also cannot deduct any fixed
amount you may be required to pay in
addition to the tuition fee to enroll in a
private school, even if it is designated
as a “donation.”
Value of Time or Services
You cannot deduct the value of your time
or services, including:
 Blood donations to the Red Cross or
to blood banks, and
 The value of income lost while you
work as an unpaid volunteer for a
qualified organization.
Personal Expenses
You cannot deduct personal, living, or family
expenses, such as:
 The cost of meals you eat while you
perform services for a qualified organ-
ization, unless it is necessary for you to
be away from home overnight while
performing the services, or
  Adoption expenses, including fees
paid to an adoption agency and the
costs of keeping a child in your home
before adoption is final. However, you
may be able to claim a tax credit for
these expenses, and/or exclude from
your gross income adoption expenses
paid or reimbursed by your employer.
See Adoption Credit in chapter 38 and
Publication 968, Tax Benefits for
Adoption.
You also may be able to claim an
exemption for the child. See Adoption
in chapter 3.
Appraisal Fees
Fees that you pay to find the fair market
value of donated property are not deductible
as contributions. You can claim them, sub-
ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
limit, as miscellaneous deductions on
Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 30.
Contributions
of Property
If you contribute property to a qualified or-
ganization, the amount of your charitable
contribution is generally the fair market
value of the property at the time of the
contribution. However, if the property has
increased in value, you may have to make
some adjustments to the amount of your
deduction. See Giving Property That Has
Increased in Value, later.
For information about the records you
must keep and the information you must
furnish with your return if you donate prop-
erty, see Records To Keep and How To
Report, later.
Partial interest in property.Generally,
you cannot deduct a charitable contribution
(not made by a transfer in trust) of less than
your entire interest in property. A contribu-
tion of the right to use property is a contri-
bution of less than your entire interest in that
property and is not deductible. For ex-
ceptions and more information, see Partial
Interest in Property Not in Trust in Publica-
tion 561.
Future interests in tangible personal
property. You can deduct the value of a
charitable contribution of a future interest in
tangible personal property only after all in-
tervening interests in and rights to the actual
possession or enjoyment of the property
have either expired or been turned over to
someone other than yourself, a related
person, or a related organization.
Future interest.A future interest is any
interest that is to begin at some future time,
regardless of whether it is designated as a
future interest under state law.
Determining
Fair Market Value
This section discusses general guidelines
for determining the fair market value of
various types of donated property. Fair
market value is the price at which property
would change hands between a willing
buyer and a willing seller, neither having to
buy or sell, and both having reasonable
knowledge of all the relevant facts. Publi-
cation 561 contains a more complete dis-
cussion.
Used clothing and household goods.
Generally, the fair market value of used
clothing and household goods is far less
than its original cost.
For used clothing, you should claim as
the value the price that buyers of used items
actually pay in used clothing stores, such
as consignment or thrift shops.
See Household Goods in Publication
561 for information on the valuation of
household goods, such as furniture, appli-
ances, and linens.
Cars, boats, and aircraft.If you contribute
a car, boat, or aircraft to a charitable or-
ganization, you must determine its fair
market value.
Certain commercial firms and trade or-
ganizations publish guides, commonly
called “blue books,” containing complete
dealer sale prices or dealer average prices
for recent model years. The guides may be
published monthly or seasonally, and for
different regions of the country. These
guides also provide estimates for adjusting
for unusual equipment, unusual mileage,
and physical condition. The prices are not
“official” and these publications are not
considered an appraisal of any specific do-
nated property. But they do provide clues
for making an appraisal and suggest relative
prices for comparison with current sales and
offerings in your area.
Example. You donate your car to a lo-
cal high school for use by their students
studying automobile repair. Your credit un-
ion told you that the “blue book” value of the
car is $1,600. However, your car needs ex-
tensive repairs and, after some checking,
you find that you could sell it for $750. You
can deduct $750, the true fair market value
of the car, as a charitable contribution.
Large quantities.If you contribute a large
number of the same item, fair market value
is the price at which comparable numbers
of the item are being sold.
Giving Property That
Has Decreased in Value
If you contribute property with a fair market
value that is less than your basis in it, your
deduction is limited to fair market value. You
cannot claim a deduction for the difference
between the property's basis and its fair
market value.
Giving Property That
Has Increased in Value
If you contribute property with a fair market
value that is more than your basis in it, you
may have to reduce the fair market value
by the amount of appreciation (increase in
value) when you figure your deduction.
Your “basis” in property is generally what
you paid for it. See chapter 14 if you need
more information about basis.
Different rules apply to figuring your de-
duction, depending on whether the property
is:
1) Ordinary income property, or
2) Capital gain property.
Ordinary income property. Property is
ordinary income property if its sale at fair
market value on the date it was contributed
would have resulted in ordinary income or
in short-term capital gain. Examples of or-
dinary income property are inventory, works
of art created by the donor, manuscripts
Page 162 Chapter 26  Contributions

prepared by the donor, and capital assets
held one year or less.
The amount you can deduct for a con-
tribution of ordinary income property is its
fair market value less the amount that would
be ordinary income or short-term capital
gain if you sold the property for its fair
market value. Generally, this rule limits the
deduction to your basis in the property.
Example. You donate stock that you
held for 5 months to your church. The fair
market value of the stock on the day you
donate it is $1,000, but you paid only $800
(your basis). Because the $200 of appreci-
ation would be short-term capital gain if you
sold the stock, your deduction is limited to
$800 (fair market value less the appreci-
ation).
Capital gain property.Property is capital
gain property if its sale at fair market value
on the date of the contribution would have
resulted in long-term capital gain. It includes
capital assets held more than one year, as
well as certain real property and depreciable
property used in your trade or business and,
generally, held more than one year.
Amount of deduction —  general rule.
When figuring your deduction for a gift of
capital gain property, you usually can use
the fair market value of the gift.
Exceptions. In certain situations, you
must reduce the fair market value by any
amount that would have been long-term
capital gain if you had sold the property for
its fair market value. Generally, this means
reducing the fair market value to the prop-
erty's cost or other basis.
Bargain sales.A bargain sale of property
to a qualified organization (a sale or ex-
change for less than the property's fair
market value) is partly a charitable contri-
bution and partly a sale or exchange. A
bargain sale may result in a taxable gain.
More information. For more information on
donated appreciated property, see Giving
Property That Has Increased in Value in
Publication 526.
When To Deduct
You can deduct your contributions only in
the year you actually make them in cash or
other property (or in a later carryover year,
as explained later under Carryovers). This
applies whether you use the cash or an
accrual method of accounting.
Time of making contribution. Usually, you
make a contribution at the time of its un-
conditional delivery.
Checks. A check that you mail to a
charity is considered delivered on the date
you mail it.
Credit card. Contributions charged on
your bank credit card are deductible in the
year you make the charge.
Pay-by-phone account. If you use a
pay-by-phone account, the date you make
a contribution is the date the financial insti-
tution pays the amount. This date should
be shown on the statement the financial in-
stitution sends to you.
Stock certificate.A gift to a charity of
a properly endorsed stock certificate is
completed on the date of mailing or other
delivery to the charity or to the charity's
agent. However, if you give a stock certif-
icate to your agent or to the issuing corpo-
ration for transfer to the name of the charity,
your gift is not completed until the date the
stock is transferred on the books of the
corporation.
Promissory note.If you issue and de-
liver a promissory note to a charitable or-
ganization as a contribution, it is not a con-
tribution until you make the note payments.
Option. If you grant an option to buy real
property at a bargain price to a charitable
organization, you cannot take a deduction
until the organization exercises the option.
Borrowed funds. If you make a contri-
bution with borrowed funds, you can deduct
the contribution in the year you make it, re-
gardless of when you repay the loan.
Limits on Deductions
If your total contributions for the year are
20% or less of your adjusted gross income,
you do not need to read this section. The
limits discussed here do not apply to you.
The amount of your deduction may be
limited to either 20%, 30%, or 50% of your
adjusted gross income, depending on the
type of property you give and the type of
organization you give it to. These limits are
described below.
If your contributions are more than any
of the limits that apply, see Carryovers, un-
der How To Figure Your Deduction When
Limits Apply, in Publication 526.
50% Limit
This limit applies to the total of all charitable
contributions you make during the year.
This means that your deduction for charita-
ble contributions cannot be more than 50%
of your adjusted gross income for the year.
The 50% limit is the only limit that ap-
plies to gifts to organizations listed below
under 50% limit organizations. But there is
one exception. The 30% limit also applies
to such gifts if they are gifts of capital gain
property for which you figure your deduction
using fair market value without reduction for
appreciation. (See 30% Limit, later.)
50% limit organizations. You can ask any
organization whether it is a 50% limit or-
ganization and most will be able to tell you.
Or you may check IRS Publication 78. The
following is a partial list of the types of or-
ganizations that are 50% limit organizations.
1) Churches, and conventions or associ-
ations of churches.
2) Educational organizations with a regu-
lar faculty and curriculum that normally
have a regularly enrolled student body
attending classes on site.
3) Hospitals and certain medical research
organizations associated with these
hospitals.
4) Publicly supported charities.
5) Private operating foundations.
6) Private nonoperating foundations that
make qualifying distributions of 100%
of contributions within 2
1/2 months fol-
lowing the year they receive the con-
tribution.
7) Certain private foundations whose
contributions are pooled in a common
fund, the income and principal of which
are paid to public charities.
30% Limit
This limit applies to the following contribu-
tions.
 Gifts of capital gain property to 50%
limit organizations. (For other gifts of
capital gain property, see 20% Limit,
later.) However, the 30% limit does not
apply when you choose to reduce the
fair market value of the property by the
amount that would have been long-term
capital gain if you had sold the property.
Instead, only the 50% limit applies. For
more information, see the rules for
electing the 50% limit for capital gain
property under How To Figure Your
Deduction When Limits Apply in Publi-
cation 526.
 Gifts (other than gifts of capital gain
property — see 20% Limit, later) for the
use of any organization.
 Gifts (other than capital gain property
— see 20% Limit, later) to all qualified
organizations other than 50% limit or-
ganizations. This includes gifts to vet-
erans' organizations, fraternal societies,
nonprofit cemeteries, and certain pri-
vate nonoperating foundations.
20% Limit
This limit applies to all gifts of capital gain
property to or for the use of qualified or-
ganizations other than gifts of capital gain
property to 50% limit organizations.
Carryovers
You can carry over your contributions that
you are not able to deduct in the current
year because they exceed your adjusted-
gross-income limits. You can deduct the
excess in each of the next 5 years until it is
used up, but not beyond that time. For more
information, see Carryovers in Publication
526.
Records To Keep
You must keep records to prove the amount
of the cash and noncash contributions you
make during the year. The kind of records
you must keep depends on the amount of
your contributions and whether they are
cash or noncash contributions.
Note. An organization generally must
give you a written statement if it receives a
payment from you that is more than $75 and
is partly a contribution and partly for goods
or services. (See Contributions From Which
You Benefit under Contributions You Can
Deduct, earlier.) Keep the statement for
your records. It may satisfy all or part of the
recordkeeping requirements explained in
the following discussions.
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 163

Cash Contributions
Cash contributions include those paid by
cash, check, credit card, or payroll de-
duction. They also include your out-of-
pocket expenses when donating your ser-
vices.
For a contribution made in cash, the
records you must keep depend on whether
the contribution is:
1) Less than $250, or
2) $250 or more.
Amount of contribution. In figuring
whether your contribution is $250 or more,
do not combine separate contributions. For
example, if you gave your church $25 each
week, your weekly payments do not have
to be combined. Each payment is a sepa-
rate contribution.
If contributions are made by payroll de-
duction, the deduction from each paycheck
is treated as a separate contribution.
If you made a payment that is partly for
goods and services, as described earlier
under Contributions From Which You Ben-
efit, your contribution is the amount of the
payment that is more than the value of the
goods and services.
Contributions of Less Than $250
For each cash contribution that is less than
$250, you must keep one of the following
items.
1) A canceled check, or a legible and
readable account statement that
shows:
a) If payment was by check—the
check number, amount, date
posted, and to whom paid.
b) If payment was by electronic
funds transfer—the amount, date
posted, and to whom paid.
c) If payment was charged to a credit
card—the amount, transaction
date, and to whom paid.
2) A receipt (or a letter or other written
communication) from the charitable
organization showing the name of the
organization, the date of the contribu-
tion, and the amount of the contribu-
tion.
3) Other reliable written records that in-
clude the information described in (2).
Records may be considered reliable if
they were made at or near the time of
the contribution, and were regularly
kept by you, or if, in the case of small
donations, you have emblems, buttons,
or other tokens that are regularly given
to persons making small cash contri-
butions.
Car expenses. If you claim expenses di-
rectly related to use of your car in giving
services to a qualified organization, you
must keep reliable written records of your
expenses. Whether your records are con-
sidered reliable depends on all the facts and
circumstances. Generally, they may be
considered reliable if you made them regu-
larly and at or near the time you had the
expenses.
Your records must show the name of the
organization you were serving and the date
each time you used your car for a charitable
purpose. If you use the standard mileage
rate of 14 cents a mile, your records must
show the miles you drove your car for the
charitable purpose. If you deduct your ac-
tual expenses, your records must show the
costs of operating the car that are directly
related to a charitable purpose.
See Car expenses, earlier, under Out-
of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services, for
the expenses you can deduct.
Contributions of $250 or More
You can claim a deduction for a contribution
of $250 or more only if you have an ac-
knowledgment of your contribution from the
qualified organization or certain payroll de-
duction records.
If you made more than one contribution
of $250 or more, you must have either a
separate acknowledgment for each or one
acknowledgment that shows your total con-
tributions.
Acknowledgment.  The acknowledgment
must meet these tests.
1) It must be written.
2) It must include:
a) The amount of cash you contrib-
uted,
b) Whether the qualified organization
gave you any goods or services
as a result of your contribution
(other than certain token items
and membership benefits), and
c) A description and good faith esti-
mate of the value of any goods
or services described in (b). If the
only benefit you received was an
intangible religious benefit (such
as admission to a religious cere-
mony) that generally is not sold in
a commercial transaction outside
the donative context, the ac-
knowledgment must say so and
does not need to describe or es-
timate the value of the benefit.
3) You must get it on or before the earlier
of:
a) The date you file your return for
the year you make the contribu-
tion, or
b) The due date, including exten-
sions, for filing the return.
Payroll deductions.If you make a contri-
bution by payroll deduction, you do not need
an acknowledgment from the qualified or-
ganization. But if your employer deducted
$250 or more from a single paycheck, you
must keep:
1) A pay stub, Form W–2, or other docu-
ment furnished by your employer that
proves the amount withheld, and
2) A pledge card or other document from
the qualified organization that states
the organization does not provide
goods or services in return for any
contribution made to it by payroll de-
duction.
Out-of-pocket expenses. If you render
services to a qualified organization and
have unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses
related to those services, you can satisfy the
written acknowledgment requirement just
discussed if:
1) You have adequate records to prove
the amount of the expenses, and
2) By the required date, you get an ac-
knowledgment from the qualified or-
ganization that contains:
a) A description of the services you
provided,
b) A statement of whether or not the
organization provided you any
goods or services to reimburse
you for the expenses you in-
curred,
c) A description and a good faith
estimate of the value of any goods
or services (other than intangible
religious benefits) provided to re-
imburse you, and
d) A statement of any intangible reli-
gious benefits provided to you.
Noncash Contributions
For a contribution not made in cash, the
records you must keep depend on whether
your deduction for the contribution is:
1) Less than $250,
2) At least $250 but not more than $500,
3) Over $500 but not more than $5,000,
or
 4) Over $5,000.
Amount of contribution. In figuring
whether your contribution is $250 or more,
do not combine separate contributions. If
you received goods or services in return,
as described earlier in Contributions From
Which You Benefit, reduce your contribution
by the value of those goods or services. If
you figure your deduction by reducing the
fair market value of the donated property
by its appreciation, as described earlier in
Giving Property That Has Increased in
Value, your contribution is the reduced
amount. 
Deductions of Less Than $250
If you make any noncash contribution, you
must get and keep a receipt from the char-
itable organization showing:
1) The name of the charitable organiza-
tion,
2) The date and location of the charitable
contribution, and
3) A reasonably detailed description of
the property.
TIP
A letter or other written communi-
cation from the charitable organiza-
tion acknowledging receipt of the
contribution and containing the information
in (1), (2), and (3) will serve as a receipt.
You are not required to have a receipt
where it is impractical to get one (for ex-
ample, if you leave property at a charity's
unattended drop site).
Additional records.You must also keep
reliable written records for each item of do-
nated property. Your written records must
include the following information.
Page 164 Chapter 26  Contributions

1) The name and address of the organ-
ization to which you contributed.
2) The date and location of the contribu-
tion.
3) A description of the property in detail
reasonable under the circumstances.
For a security, keep the name of the
issuer, the type of security, and
whether it is regularly traded on a stock
exchange or in an over-the-counter
market.
4) The fair market value of the property
at the time of the contribution, and how
you figured the fair market value. If it
was determined by appraisal, keep a
signed copy of the appraisal.
5) The cost or other basis of the property
if you must reduce its fair market value
by appreciation. Your records should
also include the amount of the re-
duction and how you figured it. If you
choose the 50% limit instead of the
special 30% limit on certain capital gain
property, you must keep a record
showing the years for which you made
the choice, contributions for the current
year to which the choice applies, and
carryovers from preceding years to
which the choice applies. See How To
Figure Your Deduction When Limits
Apply in Publication 526 for information
on how to make the capital gain prop-
erty election.
6) The amount you claim as a deduction
for the tax year as a result of the con-
tribution, if you contribute less than
your entire interest in the property
during the tax year. Your records must
include the amount you claimed as a
deduction in any earlier years for con-
tributions of other interests in this
property. They must also include the
name and address of each organiza-
tion to which you contributed the other
interests, the place where any such
tangible property is located or kept,
and the name of any person in pos-
session of the property, other than the
organization to which you contributed.
7) The terms of any conditions attached
to the gift of property.
Deductions of At Least $250
But Not More Than $500
If you claim a deduction of at least $250 but
not more than $500 for a noncash charitable
contribution, you must get and keep an ac-
knowledgment of your contribution from the
qualified organization. If you made more
than one contribution of $250 or more, you
must have either a separate acknowledg-
ment for each or one acknowledgment that
shows your total contribution.
The acknowledgment must contain the
information in items (1) through (3) listed
under Deductions of Less Than $250, ear-
lier, and your written records must include
the information listed in that discussion un-
der Additional records.
The acknowledgment must also meet
these tests.
1) It must be written.
2) It must include:
a) A description (but not necessarily
the value) of any property you
contributed,
b) Whether the qualified organization
gave you any goods or services
as a result of your contribution
(other than certain token items
and membership benefits), and
c) A description and good faith esti-
mate of the value of any goods
or services described in (b). If the
only benefit you received was an
intangible religious benefit (such
as admission to a religious cere-
mony) that generally is not sold in
a commercial transaction outside
the donative context, the ac-
knowledgment must say so and
does not need to describe or es-
timate the value of the benefit.
3) You must get the acknowledgment on
or before the earlier of:
a) The date you file your return for
the year you make the contribu-
tion, or
b) The due date, including exten-
sions, for filing the return.
Deductions Over $500
You are required to give additional infor-
mation if you claim a deduction over $500
for noncash charitable contributions. See
Records To Keep in Publication 526 for
more information.
Qualified Conservation
Contribution
If the gift was a “qualified conservation
contribution,” your records must also include
the fair market value of the underlying
property before and after the gift and the
conservation purpose furthered by the gift.
See Qualified conservation contribution in
Publication 561 for more information.
How To Report
Enter your cash contributions (including
out-of-pocket expenses) on line 15, Sched-
ule A (Form 1040).
Enter your noncash contributions on line
16 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
If your total deduction for all noncash
contributions for the year is over $500, you
must also file  Form 8283. See How To
Report in Publication 526 for more informa-
tion.
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 165

27.
Nonbusiness
Casualty and
Theft Losses
Introduction
This chapter explains the tax treatment of
personal (not business related) casualty
losses, theft losses, and losses on deposits.
The chapter also explains the following
topics.
 How to figure the amount of your loss.
 How to treat insurance and other re-
imbursements you receive. 
 The deduction limits.
 When and how to report a casualty or
theft.
Forms to file.When you have a casualty
or theft, you have to file Form 4684. You
will also have to file one or more of the fol-
lowing forms.
 Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized De-
ductions 
 Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains
and Losses
Condemnations. For information on con-
demnations of property, see Involuntary
Conversions in chapter 1 of Publication 544.
Also see Publication 523, Selling Your
Home.
Workbook for casualties and thefts.
Publication 584 is available to help you
make a list of your stolen or damaged
personal-use property and figure your loss.
It includes schedules to help you figure the
loss on your home and its contents, and
your motor vehicles.
Other sources of information.For infor-
mation on a casualty or theft loss of busi-
ness or income-producing property, see
Publication 547.
For information on a condemnation of
your home, see Involuntary Conversions in
chapter 1 of Publication 544.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554544  Sales and Other Dispositions
 of Assets
/H18554547  Casualties, Disasters, and
 Thefts (Business and
 Nonbusiness)
/H18554584  Casualty, Disaster, and Theft
 Loss Workbook (Personal-Use
 Property)
Form (and Instructions)
/H185544684  Casualties and Thefts 
Casualty
A casualty is the damage, destruction, or
loss of property resulting from an identifiable
event that is sudden, unexpected, or unu-
sual.
 A sudden event is one that is swift, not
gradual or progressive. 
 An unexpected event is one that is or-
dinarily unanticipated and unintended. 
 An unusual event is one that is not a
day-to-day occurrence and that is not
typical of the activity in which you were
engaged.
Deductible losses. Deductible casualty
losses can result from a number of different
causes, including the following.
 Car accidents (but see Nondeductible
losses, next, for exceptions).
 Earthquakes.
 Fires (but see Nondeductible losses,
next, for exceptions).
 Floods.
 Government-ordered demolition or re-
location of a home that is unsafe to use
because of a disaster as discussed un-
der Disaster Area Losses in Publication
547.
 Hurricanes.
 Mine cave-ins.
 Shipwrecks.
 Sonic booms.
 Storms.
 Tornadoes.
 Vandalism.
 Volcanic eruptions.
Nondeductible losses.A casualty loss is
not deductible if the damage or destruction
is caused by the following.
 Accidentally breaking articles such as
glassware or china under normal con-
ditions.
 A family pet.
 A fire if you willfully set it, or pay
someone else to set it.
 A car accident if your willful negligence
or willful act caused it. The same is true
if the willful act or willful negligence of
someone acting for you caused the ac-
cident.
 Progressive deterioration (explained
next).
Progressive deterioration.Loss of
property due to progressive deterioration is
not deductible as a casualty loss. This is
because the damage results from a steadily
operating cause or a normal process, rather
than from a sudden event. The following are
examples of damage due to progressive
deterioration.
 The steady weakening of a building due
to normal wind and weather conditions.
 The deterioration and damage to a wa-
ter heater that bursts. But the rust and
water damage to rugs and drapes
caused by the bursting of a water
heater does qualify as a casualty.
 Most losses of property caused by
droughts. To be deductible, a drought-
related loss generally must be incurred
in a trade or business or in a transaction
entered into for profit.
 Termite or moth damage.
 The damage or destruction of trees,
shrubs, or other plants by a fungus,
disease, insects, worms, or similar
pests. But a sudden destruction due to
an unexpected or unusual infestation
of beetles or other insects may result in
a casualty loss.
Theft
A theft is the taking and removing of money
or property with the intent to deprive the
owner of it. The taking of property must be
illegal under the laws of the state where it
occurred and it must have been done with
criminal intent.
Theft includes the taking of money or
property by the following means.
 Blackmail
 Burglary
 Embezzlement
 Extortion
 Kidnapping for ransom
 Larceny
 Robbery
 Threats
Mislaid or lost property. The simple dis-
appearance of money or property is not a
theft. However, an accidental loss or dis-
appearance of property can qualify as a
casualty if it results from an identifiable
event that is sudden, unexpected, or unu-
sual.
Example. A car door is accidentally
slammed on your hand, breaking the setting
of your diamond ring. The diamond falls
from the ring and is never found. The loss
of the diamond is a casualty.
Loss on Deposits
A loss on deposits can occur when a bank,
credit union, or other financial institution
becomes insolvent or bankrupt. If you in-
curred this type of loss, you can choose one
of three ways to deduct the loss.
1) As a casualty loss
2) As an ordinary loss
3) As a nonbusiness bad debt
Casualty loss or ordinary loss.You can
choose to deduct a loss on deposits as a
casualty loss or as an ordinary loss for any
year in which you can reasonably estimate
Page 166 Chapter 27  Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

how much of your deposits you have lost in
an insolvent or bankrupt financial institution.
The choice is generally made on the return
you file for that year and applies to all your
losses on deposits for the year in that par-
ticular financial institution. If you treat the
loss as a casualty or ordinary loss, you
cannot treat the same amount of the loss
as a nonbusiness bad debt when it actually
becomes worthless.
Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not
choose to deduct the loss as a casualty loss
or as an ordinary loss, you must wait until
the actual loss is determined before you can
deduct the loss as a nonbusiness bad debt.
Once you make this choice, you cannot
change it without approval from the Internal
Revenue Service.
How to report.The kind of deduction you
choose for your loss on deposits determines
how you report your loss. If you choose:
 Casualty loss — report it on Form 4684
first and then on Schedule A (Form
1040). 
 Ordinary loss — report it on Schedule
A (Form 1040). 
 Nonbusiness bad debt — report it on
Schedule D (Form 1040). 
More information.For more information,
see Special Treatment for Losses on De-
posits in Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial In-
stitutions in the instructions for Form 4684.
Proof of Loss
To deduct a casualty or theft loss, you must
be able to prove that you had a casualty or
theft. You must be able to support the
amount you claim for the loss as discussed
next.
Casualty loss.For a casualty loss, your
records should show all the following.
1) The type of casualty (car accident, fire,
storm, etc.) and when it occurred. 
2) That the loss was a direct result of the
casualty.
3) That you were the owner of the prop-
erty or, if you leased the property from
someone else, that you were
contractually liable to the owner for the
damage.
Theft loss.For a theft loss, your records
should show all the following.
1) When you discovered that your prop-
erty was missing. 
2) That your property was stolen. 
3) That you were the owner of the prop-
erty.
Amount of Loss
Figure the amount of your loss using the
following steps.
1) Determine your adjusted basis in the
property before the casualty or theft. 
2) Determine the decrease in fair market
value of the property as a result of the
casualty or theft. 
3) From the smaller of the amounts you
determined in (1) and (2), subtract any
insurance or other reimbursement you
received or expect to receive.
For personal-use property and property
used in performing services as an em-
ployee, apply the deduction limits, dis-
cussed later, to determine the amount of
your deductible loss.
Leased property.If you are liable for cas-
ualty damage to property you lease, your
loss is the amount you must pay to repair
the property minus any insurance or the
reimbursement you receive or expect to re-
ceive.
Adjusted Basis
Adjusted basis is your basis (usually cost)
increased or decreased by various events,
such as improvements and casualty losses.
For more information, see chapter 14.
Decrease in
Fair Market Value
Fair market value (FMV) is the price for
which you could sell your property to a will-
ing buyer when neither of you have to sell
or buy and both of you know all the relevant
facts.
The decrease in FMV is the difference
between the property's fair market value
immediately before and immediately after
the casualty or theft.
FMV of stolen property. The FMV of
property immediately after a theft is consid-
ered to be zero, since you no longer have
the property.
Recovered property.Recovered property
is your property that was stolen and later
returned to you. If you recover property after
you had already taken a theft loss de-
duction, you must refigure your loss using
the smaller of the property's adjusted basis
(explained earlier) or the decrease in FMV
from the time it was stolen until the time it
was recovered. Use this amount to refigure
your total loss for the year in which the loss
was deducted.
If your refigured loss is less than the loss
you deducted, you generally have to report
the difference as income in the recovery
year. But report the difference only up to the
amount of the loss that reduced your tax.
For more information on the amount to re-
port, see Recoveries in chapter 13.
Figuring Decrease in FMV—
Items To Consider
To figure the decrease in FMV because of
a casualty or theft, you generally need a
competent appraisal. But other measures
can also be used to establish certain de-
creases.
Appraisal. An appraisal to determine the
difference between the FMV of the property
immediately before a casualty or theft and
immediately afterward should be made by
a competent appraiser. The appraiser must
recognize the effects of any general market
decline that may occur along with the cas-
ualty. This information is needed to limit any
deduction to the actual loss resulting from
damage to the property.
Several factors are important in evalu-
ating the accuracy of an appraisal, including
the following.
 The appraiser's familiarity with your
property before and after the casualty
or theft.
 The appraiser's knowledge of sales of
comparable property in the area. 
 The appraiser's knowledge of condi-
tions in the area of the casualty.
 The appraiser's method of appraisal.
Appraisal fee.The appraisal fee is not
a part of the casualty or theft loss. It is an
expense in determining your tax liability.
You can deduct it as a miscellaneous de-
duction subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-
income limit on Schedule A (Form 1040).
For information about miscellaneous de-
ductions, see chapter 30.
Cost of cleaning up or making repairs.
The cost of repairing damaged property is
not part of a casualty loss. Neither is the
cost of cleaning up after a casualty. But you
can use the cost of cleaning up or making
repairs as a measure of the decrease in
FMV if you meet all the following conditions.
1) The repairs are necessary to bring the
property back to its condition before
the casualty. 
2) The amount spent for repairs is not
excessive. 
3) The repairs take care of the damage
only. 
4) The value of the property after the re-
pairs is not, due to the repairs, more
than the value of the property before
the casualty. 
Landscaping. The cost of restoring
landscaping to its original condition after a
casualty may indicate the decrease in FMV.
You may be able to measure your loss by
what you spend on the following.
1) Removing destroyed or damaged trees
and shrubs minus any salvage you re-
ceive.
2) Pruning and other measures taken to
preserve damaged trees and shrubs.
3) Replanting necessary to restore the
property to its approximate value be-
fore the casualty. 
Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 167

Car value.Books issued by various auto-
mobile organizations that list your car may
be useful in figuring the value of your car.
You can modify the book's retail value by
such factors as mileage and the condition
of your car to figure its value. The prices
are not “official,” but they may be useful in
determining value and suggesting relative
prices for comparison with current sales and
offerings in your area. If your car is not listed
in the books, determine its value from other
sources. A dealer's offer for your car as a
trade-in on a new car is not usually a
measure of its true value.
Figuring Decrease in FMV—
Items Not To Consider
The following items are generally not con-
sidered when establishing the decrease in
the FMV of your property.
Replacement cost. The cost of replacing
stolen or destroyed property is not part of
a casualty or theft loss.
Cost of protection.The cost of protecting
your property against a casualty or theft is
not part of a casualty or theft loss. For ex-
ample, you cannot deduct the amount you
spend on insurance or to board up your
house against a storm.
If you make permanent improvements to
your property to protect it against a casualty
or theft, add the cost of these improvements
to your basis in the property. An example
would be the cost of a dike to prevent
flooding.
Related expenses. Any incidental ex-
penses you have due to a casualty or theft,
such as expenses for the treatment of per-
sonal injuries, for temporary housing, or for
a rental car, are not part of your casualty
or theft loss.
Sentimental value.Do not consider senti-
mental value when determining your loss.
If a family portrait, heirloom, or keepsake is
damaged, destroyed, or stolen, you must
base your loss only on its fair market value.
Decline in market value of property.A
decrease in the value of your property be-
cause it is in or near an area that suffered
a casualty, or that might again suffer a
casualty, is not to be taken into consider-
ation. You have a loss only for actual cas-
ualty damage to your property. However, if
your home is in a federally declared disaster
area, see Disaster Area Losses in Publica-
tion 547.
Photographs. Photographs taken after a
casualty will be helpful in establishing the
condition and value of the property after it
was damaged. Photographs showing the
condition of the property after it was re-
paired, restored, or replaced may also be
helpful.
The cost of photographs obtained for
this purpose is not a part of the loss. You
can claim this cost as a miscellaneous
itemized deduction subject to the 2%-of-
adjusted-gross-income limit on Schedule A
(Form 1040). For information about miscel-
laneous deductions, see chapter 30.
Insurance and Other
Reimbursements 
If you receive an insurance payment or
other type of reimbursement, you must
subtract the reimbursement when you figure
your loss. You do not have a casualty or
theft loss to the extent you are reimbursed.
If you expect to be reimbursed for part
or all of your loss, you must subtract the
expected reimbursement when you figure
your loss. You must reduce your loss even
if you do not receive payment until a later
tax year. See Reimbursement Received
After Deducting Loss, later.
Failure to file a claim for reimbursement.
If your property is covered by insurance, you
should file a timely insurance claim for re-
imbursement of your loss. Otherwise, you
cannot deduct this loss as a casualty or theft
loss. However, this rule does not apply to
the portion of the loss not covered by in-
surance (for example, a deductible).
Example. You have a car insurance
policy with a $500 deductible. Because
your insurance did not cover the first $500
of an auto collision, the $500 would be
deductible (subject to the deduction limits
discussed later). This is true even if you do
not file an insurance claim, since your in-
surance policy would never have reim-
bursed you for it.
Gain from reimbursement. If your re-
imbursement is more than your adjusted
basis in the property, you have a gain. This
is true even if the decrease in the FMV of
the property is more than your adjusted
basis. If you have a gain, you may have to
pay tax on it, or you may be able to post-
pone reporting the gain. See Publication
547 for more information on how to treat a
gain from the reimbursement for a casualty
or theft.
Types of Reimbursements
The most common type of reimbursement
is an insurance payment for your stolen or
damaged property. Other types of re-
imbursements are discussed next. Also see
the Instructions for Form 4684.
Employer's emergency disaster fund.If
you receive money from your employer's
emergency disaster fund, and you must use
that money to rehabilitate or replace prop-
erty on which you are claiming a casualty
loss deduction, then you must take that
money into consideration in computing the
casualty loss deduction. Take into consid-
eration only the amount you used to replace
your destroyed or damaged property.
Example. Your home was extensively
damaged by a tornado. Your loss after re-
imbursement from your insurance company
was $10,000. Your employer set up a dis-
aster relief fund for its employees. Em-
ployees receiving money from the fund had
to use it to rehabilitate or replace their
damaged or destroyed property. You re-
ceived $4,000 from the fund and spent the
entire amount on repairs to your home. In
figuring your casualty loss, you must reduce
your unreimbursed loss ($10,000) by the
$4,000 you received from your employer's
fund. Your casualty loss before applying the
deduction limits discussed later is $6,000.
Cash gifts.If you receive excludable cash
gifts as a disaster victim, and there are no
limits on how you can use the money, you
do not reduce your casualty loss by these
excludable gifts. This applies even if you
use the money to pay for repairs to property
damaged in the disaster.
Example. Your home was damaged by
a hurricane. Relatives and neighbors made
cash gifts to you which were excludable
from your income. You applied part of the
cash gifts to the cost of repairing your home.
There were no limits or restrictions on how
you could use the cash gifts. Because it was
received as excludable gifts, the money you
received and used to pay for repairs to your
home does not reduce the amount of your
casualty loss on the damaged home.
Insurance payments for living expenses.
You do not reduce your casualty loss by
insurance payments you receive to cover
living expenses in either of the following
situations.
 You lose the use of your main home
because of a casualty.
 Government authorities do not allow
you access to your main home because
of a casualty or threat of one.
Inclusion in income.If these insurance
payments are more than the temporary in-
crease in your living expenses, you must
include the excess in your income. Report
this amount on line 21 of Form 1040.
A temporary increase in your living ex-
penses is the difference between the actual
living expenses you and your family in-
curred during the period you could not use
your home and your normal living expenses
for that period. Actual living expenses are
the reasonable and necessary expenses
incurred because of the loss of your main
home. Generally, these expenses include
the amounts you pay for the following.
 Rent for suitable housing
 Transportation
 Food
 Utilities
 Miscellaneous services
Normal living expenses consist of these
same expenses that you would have in-
curred but did not because of the casualty.
Example. As a result of a fire, you va-
cated your apartment for a month and
moved to a motel. You normally pay $525
a month rent. None was charged for the
month the apartment was vacated. Your
motel rent for this month was $1,200. You
normally pay $200 a month for food. Your
food expenses for the month you lived in the
motel were $400. You received $1,100 from
your insurance company to cover your living
expenses. You determine the payment you
must include in income as follows.
1) Insurance payment for living
expenses .............................................. $1,100
2) Actual expenses during the
month you are unable to use
your home because of the fire . $1,600
3) Normal living expenses ........... 725
4) Temporary increase in living ex-
penses: Subtract line 3 from line 2 ...... 875
5) Amount of payment includible in
income: Subtract line 4 from line 1 ...... $225
Page 168 Chapter 27  Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Tax year of inclusion.You include the
taxable part of the insurance payment in
income for the year you regain the use of
your main home or, if later, for the year you
receive the taxable part of the insurance
payment.
Example. Your main home was de-
stroyed by a tornado in August 1998. You
regained use of your home in November
1999. The insurance payments you re-
ceived in 1998 and 1999 were $1,500 more
than the temporary increase in your living
expenses during those years. You include
this amount in income on your 1999 Form
1040. If, in 2000, you receive further pay-
ments to cover the living expenses you had
in 1998 and 1999, you must include those
payments in income on your 2000 Form
1040.
Disaster relief.Food, medical supplies,
and other forms of assistance you receive
do not reduce your casualty loss unless they
are replacements for lost or destroyed
property. These items are not taxable in-
come to you.
Reimbursement Received After
Deducting Loss
If you figured your casualty or theft loss
using your expected reimbursement, you
may have to adjust the tax return for the tax
year in which you get your actual re-
imbursement. This section explains the
adjustment you may have to make.
Actual reimbursement less than ex-
pected. If you later receive less re-
imbursement than you expected, you in-
clude that difference as a loss with your
other losses (if any) on your return for the
year in which you can reasonably expect
no more reimbursement.
Example. Your personal car had an
FMV of $2,000 when it was destroyed in a
collision with another car last year. The ac-
cident was due to the negligence of the
other driver. At the end of the year, there
was a reasonable prospect that the owner
of the other car would reimburse you in full.
You subtracted the expected reimburse-
ment when you figured your loss. You did
not have a deductible loss last year.
This January, the court awarded you a
judgment of $2,000. However, in July it
became apparent that you will be unable to
collect any amount from the other driver.
You can claim this as a casualty loss, sub-
ject to the deduction limits discussed later.
Actual reimbursement more than ex-
pected. If you receive more reimbursement
than you expected after you claimed a de-
duction for the loss, you may have to in-
clude the extra reimbursement in your in-
come for the year you receive it. However,
if any part of your original deduction did not
reduce your tax for the earlier year, do not
include that part of the reimbursement in
your income. You do not refigure your tax
for the year you claimed the deduction. For
more information, see Recoveries in chapter
13.
CAUTION
!
If the total of all the reimbursements
you receive is more than your ad-
justed basis in the destroyed or
stolen property, you will have a gain on the
casualty or theft. If you have already taken
a deduction for a loss and you receive the
reimbursement in a later year, you may
have to include the gain in your income for
the later year. Include the gain as ordinary
income up to the amount of your deduction
that reduced your tax for the earlier year.
See Publication 547 for more information
on how to treat a gain from the reimburse-
ment of a casualty or theft.
Actual reimbursement same as ex-
pected. If you receive exactly the re-
imbursement you expected to receive, you
do not have any amount to include in your
income or any loss to deduct.
Example. Last December, you had a
collision while driving your personal car.
Repairs to the car cost $950. You had $100
deductible collision insurance. Your insur-
ance company agreed to reimburse you for
the rest of the damage. As a result of your
expected reimbursement from the insurance
company, you did not have a casualty loss
deduction last year. 
Due to the $100 rule (discussed later
under Deduction Limits), you cannot deduct
the $100 you paid. When you receive the
$850 from the insurance company this year,
do not report it as income.
Single Casualty on Multiple
Properties
Personal property.If a single casualty or
theft involves more than one item of per-
sonal property, you must figure the loss on
each item separately. Then combine the
losses to determine your total loss from that
casualty or theft. Personal property is any
property that is not real property.
Example. A fire in your home destroyed
an upholstered chair, an oriental rug, and
an antique table. You did not have fire in-
surance to cover your loss. (This was the
only casualty or theft you had during the
year.) You paid $750 for the chair, and you
established that it had an FMV of $500 just
before the fire. The rug cost $3,000 and had
an FMV of $2,500 just before the fire. You
bought the table at an auction for $100,
before discovering it was an antique. It had
been appraised at $900 before the fire. You
figure your loss on each of these items as
follows:
Real property.In figuring a casualty loss
on personal-use real property, treat the en-
tire property (including any improvements,
such as buildings, trees, and shrubs) as one
item. Figure the loss using the smaller of the
adjusted basis or the decrease in FMV of
the entire property.
Example. You bought your home a few
years ago. You paid $160,000 ($20,000 for
the land and $140,000 for the house). You
also spent $2,000 for landscaping. This year
a fire destroyed your home. The fire also
damaged the shrubbery and trees in your
yard. The fire was your only casualty or theft
loss this year. Competent appraisers valued
the property as a whole at $200,000 before
the fire, but only $30,000 after the fire. (The
loss to your household furnishings is not
shown in this example. It would be figured
separately, as explained earlier under Per-
sonal property.) Shortly after the fire, the
insurance company paid you $155,000 for
the loss. Your adjusted gross income is
$90,000. You figure your casualty loss as
follows:
Deduction Limits
After you have figured the amount of your
loss, as discussed earlier, you must figure
how much of the loss you can deduct. If the
loss was to property for your personal use
or your family's, there are two limits on the
amount you can deduct for your casualty
or theft loss.
1) You must reduce each casualty or theft
loss by $100 ($100 rule).
2) You must further reduce the total of all
your losses by 10% of your adjusted
gross income (10% rule). 
You make these reductions on Form 4684.
These rules are explained next, and
Table 27–1 summarizes how to apply the
$100 rule and the 10% rule in various situ-
ations. For more detailed explanations and
examples, see Publication 547.
Property used partly for business and
partly for personal purposes. When
property is used partly for personal pur-
poses and partly for business or income-
producing purposes, the casualty or theft
loss deduction must be figured separately
for the personal-use portion and for the
business or income-producing portion. You
must figure each loss separately because
the $100 rule and the 10% rule apply only
to the loss on the personal-use portion of
the property.
$100 Rule
After you have figured your casualty or theft
loss, as discussed earlier, you must reduce
that loss by $100. This reduction applies to
each casualty or theft loss. It does not
matter how many pieces of property are in-
volved in an event; only a single $100 re-
duction applies.
Example. A hailstorm damages your
home and your car. Determine the amount
of loss, as discussed earlier, for each of
these items. Since the losses are due to a
single event, you combine the losses and
reduce the combined amount by $100.
Single event. Generally, events closely
related in origin cause a single casualty. It
is a single casualty when the damage is
1) Adjusted basis of the entire property
(cost of land, building, and land-
scaping) .......................................... $162,000
2) FMV of entire property before fire . $200,000
3) FMV of entire property after fire .... 30,000
4) Decrease in FMV of entire property $170,000
5) Loss (smaller of (1) or (4)) ............. $162,000
6) Subtract insurance ......................... 155,000
7) Amount of loss .............................$7,000
Chair Rug Table
1) Basis (cost) ................ $750$3,000 $100
2) FMV before fire .......... $500 $2,500 $900
3) FMV after fire ............. –0––0– –0–
4) Decrease in FMV ....... $500$2,500 $900
5) Loss (smaller of (1) or
(4)) .............................. $500$2,500 $100
6) Total loss ..........................................$3,100
Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 169

Table 27–1. How To Apply the Deduction Limits
$100 Rule
You must reduce each casualty or theft loss by
$100 when figuring your deduction. Apply this rule
after you have figured the amount of your loss.
You must reduce your total casualty or theft loss
by 10% of your adjusted gross income. Apply this
rule after you reduce each loss by $100 (the $100
rule).
10% Rule
General Application
Apply this rule only once, even if many pieces of
property are affected.
Apply this rule only once, even if many pieces of
property are affected.
Single Event
Apply to the loss from each event. Apply to the total of all your losses from all events.More Than One Event
Apply separately to each person. Apply separately to each person.More Than One Person —
With Losses From the
Same Event
(other than a married
couple filing jointly)
Apply as if you were one person. Apply as if you were one person.Married
Couple—
With Loss
From the
Same Event
Filing
jointly
Apply separately to each spouse.Filing
separately
Apply separately to each owner of jointly owned
property.
Apply separately to each spouse.
Apply separately to each owner of jointly owned
property.
More Than One Owner
(other than a married
couple filing jointly)
from two or more closely related causes,
such as wind and flood damage caused by
the same storm.
10% Rule
You must reduce the total of all your casu-
alty or theft losses by 10% of your adjusted
gross income. Apply this rule after you re-
duce each loss by $100. If you have both
gains and losses from casualties or thefts,
see Gains and losses, later in this dis-
cussion.
Example 1. In June, you discovered
that your house had been burglarized. Your
loss after insurance reimbursement was
$2,000. Your adjusted gross income is
$29,500. You first apply the $100 rule and
then the 10% rule. Figure your theft loss
deduction as follows.
You do not have a theft loss deduction
because your loss ($1,900) is less than 10%
of your adjusted gross income ($2,950).
Example 2. In March, you had a car
accident that totally destroyed your car. You
did not have collision insurance on your car,
so you did not receive any insurance re-
imbursement. Your loss on the car was
$1,200. In November, you had a fire that
damaged your basement and totally de-
stroyed the furniture, washer, dryer, and
other items you had stored there. Your loss
on the basement items after reimbursement
was $1,700. Your adjusted gross income
is $25,000. You figure your casualty loss
deduction as follows.
Gains and losses. If you had both gains
and losses from casualties or thefts to
personal-use property, you must compare
your total gains to your total losses. Do this
after you have reduced each loss by $100.
Losses more than gains.If your losses
are more than your recognized gains, sub-
tract your gains from your losses and re-
duce the result by 10% of your adjusted
gross income. The rest is your deductible
loss.
Gains more than losses.If your rec-
ognized gains are more than your losses,
subtract your losses from your gains. The
difference is treated as capital gain and
must be reported on Schedule D (Form
Car Basement 1040). The 10% rule does not apply to your
losses.
When To Report
Gain or Loss
If you receive an insurance or other re-
imbursement that is more than your ad-
justed basis in the destroyed or stolen
property, you have a gain from the casualty
or theft. You must include this gain in your
income in the year you receive the re-
imbursement, unless you choose to post-
pone the gain as explained in Publication
547.
If you have a loss, see Table 27–2.
Loss on deposits. If your loss is a loss
on deposits in an insolvent or bankrupt fi-
nancial institution, see Loss on Deposits,
earlier.
1. Loss .................................... $1,200 $1,700
2. Subtract $100 ..................... 100
100
3. Loss after $100 rule ........... $1,100$1,600
4. Total loss ......................................... $2,700
5. Subtract 10% × $25,000 AGI .......... 2,500
6. Casualty loss deduction  .............$200
1. Loss after insurance ............................. $2,000
2. Subtract $100 ....................................... 100
3. Loss after $100 rule ............................. $1,900
4. Subtract 10% × $29,500 AGI ............... 2,950
Table 27–2. When To Deduct a Loss
IF you have a
loss ...
The loss occurredFrom a casualty
● A reasonable estimate can be made
On a deposit treated
as a:
● Casualty
● A reasonable estimate can be made
The theft was discovered
● Ordinary loss
In a federal
disaster area
The disaster occurred or the year immediately before the
disaster
From a theft
THEN deduct it in the year ...
● Bad debt ● Deposits are totally worthless
5. Theft loss deduction  .........................–0–
Page 170 Chapter 27  Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Casualty loss.Generally, you can deduct
a casualty loss only in the tax year in which
the casualty occurred. This is true even if
you do not repair or replace the damaged
property until a later year.
Disaster area loss.If you have a casualty
loss in a Presidentially declared disaster
area, you can choose to deduct the loss on
your tax return for either of the following
years.
1) The year the casualty occurred.
2) The year immediately preceding the
year the casualty occurred.
Interest abatement on underpay-
ments in disaster areas. The IRS will
abate interest for the length of the extension
period granted to all taxpayers who meet
both the following requirements.
1) They were located in an area declared
a disaster area by the President.
2) They were granted extensions to file
income tax returns and pay income tax.
More information. For more informa-
tion, see Disaster Area Losses in Publica-
tion 547.
Theft loss. You can generally deduct a
theft loss only in the year you discover your
property was stolen. You must be able to
show that there was a theft, but you do not
have to know when the theft occurred.
However, you should show when you dis-
covered that your property was missing.
How To Report
Gains and Losses
Use Form 4684 to report a gain or a
deductible loss from a casualty or theft. If
you have more than one casualty or theft,
use a separate Form 4684 to determine
your gain or loss for each event. Combine
the gains and losses on one Form 4684.
Follow the form instructions as to which
lines to fill out.
Adjustments to basis. If you have a cas-
ualty or theft loss, you must reduce your
adjusted basis in the property by any
deductible loss and any insurance or other
reimbursements. Amounts you spend to re-
store your property after a casualty increase
your adjusted basis. See Adjusted Basis in
chapter 14 for more information.
Net operating loss. If your casualty or theft
loss deduction is more than your income,
you may have a net operating loss (NOL).
You can use an NOL to lower your taxes in
an earlier year, allowing you to get a refund
for taxes you have already paid. Or, you can
use it to lower your taxes in a later year.
You do not have to be in business to have
an NOL from a casualty or theft loss. For
more information, see Publication 536, Net
Operating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals,
Estates, and Trusts.
If you have a:Report it on:
Gain ................. Schedule D (Form 1040)
Loss ................. Schedule A (Form 1040)
Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 171

28.
Car Expenses
and Other
Employee
Business
Expenses
Important Changes
Standard mileage rate. The standard
mileage rate for the cost of operating your
car in 2000 is 32
1/2 cents a mile for all
business miles.
Car expenses and use of the standard
mileage rate are explained under Local
Transportation Expenses, later.
Meal expenses when subject to “hours
of service” limits.Generally, you can de-
duct only 50% of your business-related
meal expenses while traveling away from
your tax home for business purposes. You
can deduct a higher percentage if the meals
take place during or incident to any period
subject to the Department of Transporta-
tion's “hours of service” limits. (These limits
apply to certain workers who are under
certain federal regulations.) The percent-
age is 60% for 2000 and 2001, and it grad-
ually increases to 80% by the year 2008.
See Exceptions to the 50% limit, later.
Important Reminders
Standard meal allowance.The standard
meal allowance (also referred to as the limit
on meals and incidental expenses (M&IE
rate)) for most small localities in the United
States is $30. However, the standard meal
allowance is higher for most major cities and
many other localities in the continental
United States. See Publication 1542, Per
Diem Rates. These rates (allowances/limits)
are also listed in Appendix A of Chapter 41,
Part 301 of the Code of Federal Regu-
lations. If you have a computer, you can find
them on the Internet at www.policyworks.
gov/perdiem. Click on “Domestic per diem
rates.” Use of the standard meal allowance
is explained under What Travel Expenses
Are Deductible?, later.
Days you depart and return. For the
days you depart for and return from a busi-
ness trip, you can claim 
3/4 of the standard
meal allowance amount. For more informa-
tion, see Travel for days you depart and
return under Meals, later.
Limits that apply to employee de-
ductions. If you are an employee, deduct
your work-related expenses discussed in
this chapter as a miscellaneous itemized
deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Generally, the amount of miscellaneous
itemized deductions you can deduct is lim-
ited to the amount that is more than 2% of
your adjusted gross income. It may be fur-
ther limited if your adjusted gross income is
more than $128,950 ($64,475 if you are
married filing separately). For more infor-
mation, see chapter 22 and the instructions
for Schedule A (Form 1040).
Introduction
This chapter discusses rules for deducting
the ordinary and necessary business-
related expenses connected with:
 Travel away from home,
 Entertainment,
 Gifts, and
 Local transportation.
An ordinary expense is one that is com-
mon and accepted in your field of trade,
business, or profession. A necessary ex-
pense is one that is helpful and appropriate
for your business. An expense does not
have to be indispensable to be considered
necessary.
This chapter also discusses:
 What records you need to prove your
expenses,
 How to handle reimbursements of your
employee business expenses, and
 How to report your expenses on Forms
2106 and 2106–EZ.
Who does not need to use this publica-
tion.You will not need to read this chapter
if all of the following are true.
1) You fully accounted to your employer
for your work-related expenses.
2) You received full reimbursement for
your expenses.
3) Your employer required you to return
any excess reimbursement and you did
so.
4) Box 13 of your Form W–2, Wage and
Tax Statement, shows no amount with
a code L.
If you meet these four conditions, there is
no need to show the expenses or the re-
imbursements on your return. See Re-
imbursements, later, if you would like more
information on reimbursements and ac-
counting to your employer.
TIP
If you meet these conditions and
your employer included reimburse-
ments on your Form W–2 in error,
ask your employer for a corrected Form
W –2.
If you do not meet all of these conditions,
you generally must complete Form 2106 or
2106–EZ and itemize your deductions to
claim your expenses. See Completing
Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, later.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and
Car Expenses
/H18554 535 Business Expenses
/H185541542 Per Diem Rates
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
Deductions
/H18554Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or
Loss From Business
/H18554Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) Net
Profit From Business
/H18554Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or
Loss From Farming
/H18554Form 2106 Employee Business Ex-
penses
/H18554Form 2106–EZ  Unreimbursed Em-
ployee Business Expenses
Travel Expenses
If you temporarily travel away from your tax
home, you can use this section to determine
if you have deductible travel expenses. This
section defines “tax home,” “temporary,”
and “travel expenses,” including the “stand-
ard meal allowance.” It also discusses the
rules for travel inside and outside the United
States and deductible convention expenses.
Travel expenses defined. For tax pur-
poses, travel expenses are the ordinary and
necessary expenses of traveling away from
home for your business, profession, or job.
However, you cannot deduct expenses that
are lavish or extravagant. See What Travel
Expenses Are Deductible? later.
You will find examples of deductible
travel expenses in Table 28–1.
Traveling away from home. You are trav-
eling away from home if:
1) Your duties require you to be away
from the general area of your tax home
(defined later) substantially longer than
an ordinary day's work, and
2) You need to get sleep or rest to meet
the demands of your work while away
from home.
This rest requirement is not satisfied by
merely napping in your car. You do not have
to be away from your tax home for a whole
day or from dusk to dawn as long as your
relief from duty is long enough to get nec-
essary sleep or rest.
Example 1. You are a railroad conduc-
tor. You leave your home terminal on a
regularly scheduled round-trip run between
two cities and return home 16 hours later.
During the run, you have 6 hours off at your
turnaround point where you eat two meals
and rent a hotel room to get necessary
sleep before starting the return trip. You are
considered to be away from home, and you
can deduct travel expenses.
Example 2. You are a truck driver. You
leave your terminal and return to it later the
same day. You get an hour off at your
turnaround point to eat. Because you are
not off to get necessary sleep and the brief
time off is not an adequate rest period, your
trip is not considered as travel away from
home. You cannot deduct travel expenses.
Page 172 Chapter 28  Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Tax Home
To deduct travel expenses, you must first
determine the location of your tax home.
Generally, your tax home is your regular
place of business or post of duty, regardless
of where you maintain your family home. It
includes the entire city or general area in
which your business or work is located. If
you have more than one regular place of
business, your tax home is your main place
of business. See Main place of business
or work, later. If you do not have a regular
or a main place of business because of the
nature of your work, then your tax home
may be the place where you regularly live.
See No main place of business or work,
later.
If you do not have a regular place of
business or post of duty and there is no
place where you regularly live, you are
considered a transient (an itinerant) and
your tax home is wherever you work. As a
transient, you cannot claim a travel expense
deduction because you are never consid-
ered away from home.
Main place of business or work.If you
have more than one place of work, consider
the following when determining your main
place of business or work.
1) The total time you ordinarily spend
working in each area.
2) The degree of your business activity in
each area.
3) The relative amount of your income
from each area.
Example. You live in Cincinnati where
you have a seasonal job for 8 months each
year and earn $25,000. You work the other
4 months in Miami, also at a seasonal job,
and earn $9,000. Cincinnati is your main
place of work because you spend most of
your time there and earn most of your in-
come there.
No main place of business or work.You
may have a tax home even if you do not
have a regular or main place of work. Your
tax home may be the home where you
regularly live.
Factors used to determine tax home.
If you do not have a regular or main place
of business or work, use the following three
factors to see if you have a tax home.
1) You perform part of your business in
the area of your main home and use
that home for lodging while doing
business in the area.
2) You have living expenses at your main
home that you duplicate because your
business requires you to be away from
that home.
3) You have not abandoned the area in
which both your traditional place of
lodging and your main home are lo-
cated; you have a member or members
of your family living at your main home;
or you often use that home for lodging.
If you satisfy all three factors, your tax
home is the home where you regularly live,
and you may be able to deduct travel ex-
penses. If you satisfy only two factors, you
may have a tax home depending on all the
facts and circumstances. If you satisfy only
one factor, you are a transient; your tax
home is wherever you work and you cannot
deduct travel expenses.
Example. You are single and live in
Boston in an apartment you rent. You have
worked for your employer in Boston for a
number of years. Your employer enrolls you
in a 12-month executive training program.
You do not expect to return to work in
Boston after you complete your training.
During your training, you do not do any
work in Boston. Instead, you receive
classroom and on-the-job training through-
out the United States. You keep your
apartment in Boston and return to it fre-
quently. You use your apartment to conduct
your personal business. You also keep up
your community contacts in Boston. When
you complete your training, you are trans-
ferred to Los Angeles.
You do not satisfy factor (1) because you
did not work in Boston. You satisfy factor
(2) because you had duplicate living ex-
penses. You also satisfy factor (3) because
you did not abandon your apartment in
Boston as your traditional home, you kept
your community contacts, and you fre-
quently returned to live in your apartment.
You have a tax home in Boston for travel
expense deduction purposes.
Living away from your tax home.If you
(and your family) live in an area outside your
tax home (main place of work), you cannot
deduct the cost of traveling between your
tax home and your family home. You also
cannot deduct the cost of meals and lodging
while at your tax home. See Example 1 that
follows.
If you are working temporarily in the
same city where you and your family live,
you may be considered as traveling away
from home. See Example 2, below.
Example 1. You are a truck driver and
you and your family live in Tucson. You are
employed by a trucking firm that has its
terminal in Phoenix. At the end of your long
runs, you return to your home terminal in
Phoenix and spend one night there before
returning home. You cannot deduct any
expenses you have for meals and lodging
in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from
Phoenix to Tucson. This is because
Phoenix is your tax home.
Example 2. Your family home is in
Pittsburgh, where you work 12 weeks a
year. The rest of the year you work for the
same employer in Baltimore. In Baltimore,
you eat in restaurants and sleep in a room-
ing house. Your salary is the same whether
you are in Pittsburgh or Baltimore.
Because you spend most of your work-
ing time and earn most of your salary in
Baltimore, that city is your tax home. You
cannot deduct any expenses you have for
meals and lodging there. However, when
you return to work in Pittsburgh, you are
away from your tax home even though you
stay at your family home. You can deduct
the cost of your round trip between
Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also de-
duct your part of your family's living ex-
penses for meals and lodging while you are
living and working in Pittsburgh.
Temporary Assignment or Job
You may regularly work within the city or
general area of your tax home and also
work at another location. It may not be
practical to return home from this other lo-
cation at the end of each work day.
If your assignment or job away from your
main place of work is temporary, your tax
home does not change. You are considered
to be away from home for the whole period
you are away from your main place of work.
Your travel expenses are deductible. Gen-
erally, a temporary assignment in a single
location is one that is realistically expected
to last (and does in fact last) for one year
or less.
However, if your assignment or job is
indefinite, the location of the assignment
or job becomes your new tax home and you
cannot deduct your travel expenses while
there. An assignment or job in a single lo-
cation is considered indefinite if it is realis-
tically expected to last for more than one
year, whether or not it actually lasts for more
than one year.
If your assignment is indefinite, you must
include in your income any amounts you
receive from your employer for living ex-
penses, even if they are called travel al-
lowances and you account to your employer
for them. You may be able to deduct the
cost of relocating to your new tax home as
a moving expense. See chapter 19 for more
information.
Exception for federal crime investi-
gations or prosecutions. If you are a
federal employee participating in a federal
crime investigation or prosecution, you are
not subject to the one-year rule for deduct-
ing temporary travel expenses. This means
you may be able to deduct travel expenses
even if you are away from your tax home for
more than one year.
For you to qualify, the Attorney General
must certify that you are traveling:
1) For the federal government,
2) In a temporary duty status, and
3) To investigate or prosecute, or provide
support services for the investigation
or prosecution of, a federal crime.
You can deduct your otherwise allowable
travel expenses throughout the period of
certification.
Determining temporary or indefinite.You
must determine whether your assignment is
temporary or indefinite when you start work.
If you expect employment to last for one
year or less, it is temporary unless there are
facts and circumstances that indicate oth-
erwise. Employment that is initially tempo-
rary may become indefinite due to changed
circumstances. A series of assignments to
the same location, all for short periods but
that together cover a long period, may be
considered an indefinite assignment.
Going home on days off. If you go back
to your tax home from a temporary assign-
ment on your days off, you are not consid-
ered away from home while you are in your
hometown. You cannot deduct the cost of
your meals and lodging there. However, you
can deduct your travel expenses, including
meals and lodging, while traveling from the
area of your temporary place of work to your
hometown and back to work. You can claim
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 173

these expenses up to the amount it would
have cost you for meals and lodging had
you stayed at your temporary place of work.
If you keep your hotel room during your
visit home, you can deduct the cost of your
hotel room. In addition, you can deduct your
expenses of returning home up to the
amount you would have spent for meals had
you stayed at your temporary place of work.
Probationary work period.If you take a
job that requires you to move, with the
understanding that you will keep the job if
your work is satisfactory during a
probationary period, the job is indefinite.
You cannot deduct any of your expenses for
meals and lodging during the probationary
period.
Members of the Armed Forces. If you are
a member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a
permanent duty assignment overseas, you
are not traveling away from home. You
cannot deduct your expenses for meals and
lodging. You cannot deduct these ex-
penses even if you have to maintain a home
in the United States for your family mem-
bers who are not allowed to accompany you
overseas. If you are transferred from one
permanent duty station to another, you may
have deductible moving expenses, which
are explained in chapter 19.
A naval officer assigned to permanent
duty aboard a ship that has regular eating
and living facilities has a tax home aboard
ship for travel expense purposes.
What Travel Expenses Are
Deductible?
Once you have determined that you are
traveling away from your tax home, you can
determine what travel expenses are
deductible.
Deductible travel expenses include
those ordinary and necessary expenses you
have when you travel away from home on
business. The type of expense you can
deduct depends on the facts and your cir-
cumstances.
Table 28–1 summarizes travel expenses
you may be able to deduct. You may have
other deductible travel expenses that are
not covered there, depending on the facts
and your circumstances.
RECORDS
When you travel away from home
on business, you should keep rec-
ords of all the expenses you have
and any advances you receive from your
employer. You can use a log, diary, note-
book, or any other written record to keep
track of your expenses. The types of ex-
penses you need to record, along with
supporting documentation, are described in
Table 28–2.
Travel expenses for another individual.
If a spouse, dependent, or other individual
goes with you (or your employee) on a
business trip or to a business convention,
you generally cannot deduct his or her travel
expenses. 
Employee. You can deduct the travel
expenses you have for an accompanying
individual if that individual:
1) Is your employee,
2) Has a bona fide business purpose for
the travel, and
Table 28–1.
IF you have
expenses for:
Transportation
THEN you can deduct the costs of:
Fares for these and other types of transportation that take you
to or from:
Tips
Other
Taxi, commuter
bus, and airport
limousine
Baggage and
shipping
Car
Lodging and meals
Cleaning
Telephone
Sending baggage and sample or display material between your
regular and temporary work locations.
Operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from
home on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the
standard mileage rate as well as business-related tolls and
parking. If you rent a car while away from home on business,
you can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
Your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or
long enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
perform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food,
beverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals for additional
rules and limits.
Dry cleaning and laundry.
Business calls while on your business trip. This includes
business communication by fax machine or other
communication devices.
Tips you pay for any expenses in this chart.
Other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
business travel. These expenses might include transportation
to or from a business meal, public stenographer ’s fees,
computer rental fees, and operating and maintaining a house
trailer.
Travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and
your business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or
you are riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar
program, your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury
Water Travel and Cruise ships (under Conventions) in
Publication 463 for additional rules and limits.
Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from
home for business purposes.
1) The airport or station and your hotel, and
2) The hotel and the work location of your customers or
clients, your business meeting place, or your temporary
work location.
3) Would otherwise be allowed to deduct
the travel expenses.
Business associate.If a business as-
sociate travels with you and meets the
conditions in (2) and (3) above, you can
claim the deductible travel expenses you
have for that person. A business associate
is someone with whom you could reason-
ably expect to actively conduct business. A
business associate can be a current or
prospective (likely to become) customer,
client, supplier, employee, agent, partner,
or professional advisor.
Bona fide business purpose. For a
bona fide business purpose to exist, you
must prove a real business purpose for the
individual's presence. Incidental services,
such as typing notes or assisting in enter-
taining customers, are not enough to war-
rant a deduction.
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on
business and takes his wife, Linda, with him.
Linda is not Jerry's employee. Even if her
presence serves a bona fide business pur-
pose, her expenses are not deductible.
Jerry pays $115 a day for a double
room. A single room costs $90 a day. He
can deduct the total cost of driving his car
to and from Chicago, but only $90 a day for
his hotel room. If he uses public transpor-
tation, he can deduct only his fare.
Meals
Unless you meet the rules for business
entertainment, you cannot deduct the cost
of meals if it is not necessary for you to stop
for sleep or rest to properly perform your
duties. The rules for business enter-
tainment are explained later under Enter-
tainment Expenses.
50% limit on meals.You can use either
the actual cost of your meals or a standard
amount to figure your meals expense. (See
Standard meal allowance later in this sec-
tion.) However, you can generally deduct
only 50% of the cost of your unreimbursed
business-related meals.
If you are reimbursed for the cost of
your meals, how you apply the 50% limit
depends on whether your employer's re-
Page 174 Chapter 28  Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

imbursement plan was accountable or non-
accountable. Whether the unreimbursed
meal expense is for business travel or
business entertainment, the 50% limit ap-
plies. The 50% limit is explained later under
Entertainment Expenses. Accountable and
nonaccountable plans are discussed later
under How To Report.
Lavish or extravagant.You cannot deduct
expenses for meals that are lavish or ex-
travagant. An expense is not considered
lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable
based on the facts and circumstances.
Expenses will not be disallowed merely be-
cause they are more than a fixed dollar
amount or take place at deluxe restaurants,
hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.
Standard meal allowance. You generally
can deduct a standard amount for your daily
meals and incidental expenses (M&IE)
while you are traveling away from home on
business. In this chapter, “standard meal
allowance” refers to the federal rate for
M&IE (which varies based on where and
when you travel).
Incidental expenses.These include,
but are not limited to, your costs for the fol-
lowing items.
1) Laundry, cleaning and pressing of
clothing.
2) Fees and tips for persons who provide
services, such as porters and baggage
carriers.
Incidental expenses do not include taxicab
fares or the costs of telegrams or telephone
calls.
CAUTION
!
Federal employees should refer to
the federal travel regulations at 41
CFR 301 for changes affecting their
claims for reimbursement of these ex-
penses.
The standard meal allowance method is
an alternative to the actual cost method and
allows you to deduct a set amount, de-
pending on where and when you travel, in-
stead of keeping records of your actual
costs. If you use the standard meal allow-
ance, you still must keep records to prove
the time, place, and business purpose of
your travel. See the recordkeeping rules
explained later under Recordkeeping.
CAUTION
!
There is no optional standard lodg-
ing amount similar to the standard
meal allowance. Your allowable
lodging expense deduction is your actual
cost.
Who can use the standard meal allow-
ance? You can use the standard meal al-
lowance whether you are an employee or
self-employed, and whether or not you are
reimbursed for your traveling expenses. You
cannot use the standard meal allowance if
you are related to your employer as defined
next.
Related to employer.You are related
to your employer if:
1) Your employer is your brother or sister,
half brother or half sister, spouse, an-
cestor, or lineal descendant,
2) Your employer is a corporation in
which you own, directly or indirectly,
more than 10% in value of the out-
standing stock, or
3) Certain relationships (such as grantor,
fiduciary, or beneficiary) exist between
you, a trust, and your employer.
You may be considered to indirectly own
stock, for purposes of (2), if you have an
interest in a corporation, partnership, estate,
or trust that owns the stock or if a member
of your family or your partner owns the
stock.
Use of the standard meal allowance for
other travel.You can use the standard
meal allowance to prove meal expenses
you have when you travel in connection with
investment and other income-producing
property. You can also use it to prove meal
expenses you have when you travel for
qualifying educational purposes. You can-
not use the standard meal allowance to
prove the amount of your meals when you
travel for medical or charitable purposes.
Amount of standard meal allowance.
The standard meal allowance is the federal
M&IE rate. For travel in 2000, the rate is
$30 a day for most areas in the United
States. Other locations in the United States
are designated as high-cost areas, qualify-
ing for higher standard meal allowances.
Locations qualifying for rates of $34, $38,
$42, or $46 a day are listed in Publication
1542.
If you travel to more than one location
in one day, use the rate in effect for the area
where you stop for sleep or rest. If you work
in the transportation industry, however, see
Special rate for transportation workers,
later.
50% limit may apply. If you are not
reimbursed or if you are reimbursed under
a nonaccountable plan for meal expenses,
you can generally deduct only 50% of the
standard meal allowance. If you are reim-
bursed under an accountable plan and you
are deducting amounts that are more than
your reimbursements, you can deduct only
50% of the excess amount. The 50% limit
is discussed in more detail under Enter-
tainment Expenses, and accountable and
nonaccountable plans are discussed later
under How To Report.
Standard meal allowance for areas
outside the continental United States.
The standard meal allowance rates do not
apply to travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any
other locations outside the continental
United States. The federal per diem rates
for these locations are published monthly in
the Maximum Travel Per Diem Allowances
for Foreign Areas.
Your employer may have these
rates available, or you can purchase
the publication from the:
Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Office
P.O. Box 371954
Pittsburgh, PA 15250–7954
You can also order it by calling the
Government Printing Office at
1–202–512–1800 (not a toll-free
number).
Per diem rates are also available on
the Internet. If you have a computer
and a modem, you can access do-
mestic per diem rates at:
www.policyworks.gov/perdiem
You can access foreign per diem rates at:
www.state.gov/www/perdiems
Special rate for transportation work-
ers. You can use a special standard meal
allowance if you work in the transportation
industry. You are in the transportation in-
dustry if your work:
1) Directly involves moving people or
goods by airplane, barge, bus, ship,
train, or truck, and
2) Regularly requires you to travel away
from home and, during any single trip,
usually involves travel to areas eligible
for different standard meal allowance
rates.
If this applies to you, you can claim a $38
a day standard meal allowance ($42 for
travel outside the continental United States).
Using the special rate for transportation
workers eliminates the need for you to de-
termine the standard meal allowance for
every area where you stop for sleep or rest.
If you choose to use the special rate for any
trip, you must use the special rate (and not
use the regular standard meal allowance
rates) for all trips you take that year.
Travel for days you depart and return.
For both the day you depart for and the day
you return from a business trip, you must
prorate the standard meal allowance. You
can do so by one of two methods.
1) Method 1: You can claim 
3/4 of the
standard meal allowance, or
2) Method 2: You can use any method
that you consistently apply and that is
in accordance with reasonable busi-
ness practice.
Example. Jen is employed in New
Orleans as a convention planner. In March,
her employer sent her on a 3-day trip to
Washington, DC, to attend a planning sem-
inar. She left her home in New Orleans at
10 a.m. on Wednesday and arrived in
Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After spend-
ing two nights there, she flew back to New
Orleans on Friday and arrived back home
at 8:00 p.m. Jen's employer gave her a flat
amount to cover her expenses and included
it with her wages.
Under Method 1, Jen can claim 2
1/2 days
of the standard meal allowance for Wash-
ington, DC: 
3/4 of the daily rate for Wednes-
day and Friday (the days she departed and
returned), and the full daily rate for Thurs-
day.
Under Method 2, Jen could also use any
method that she applies consistently and
that is in accordance with reasonable busi-
ness practice. For example, she could claim
3 days of the standard meal allowance even
though a federal employee would be limited
to only 2
1/2 days.
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 175

Travel in the
United States
The following discussion applies to travel in
the United States. For this purpose, the
United States includes the 50 states and the
District of Columbia. The treatment of your
travel expenses depends on how much of
your trip was business related and on how
much of your trip occurred within the United
States. See Part of Trip Outside the United
States, later.
Trip Primarily for Business
You can deduct all your travel expenses if
your trip was entirely business related. If
your trip was primarily for business and,
while at your business destination, you ex-
tended your stay for a vacation, made a
nonbusiness side trip, or had other non-
business activities, you can deduct your
business-related travel expenses. These
expenses include the travel costs of getting
to and from your business destination and
any business-related expenses at your
business destination.
Example. You work in Atlanta and take
a business trip to New Orleans. On your
way home, you stop in Mobile to visit your
parents. You spend $630 for the 9 days you
are away from home for travel, meals,
lodging, and other travel expenses. If you
had not stopped in Mobile, you would have
been gone only 6 days, and your total cost
would have been $580. You can deduct
$580 for your trip, including the round-trip
transportation to and from New Orleans.
The cost of your meals is subject to the 50%
limit on meals mentioned earlier.
Trip Primarily for
Personal Reasons
If your trip was primarily for personal rea-
sons, such as a vacation, the entire cost of
the trip is a nondeductible personal ex-
pense. However, you can deduct any ex-
penses you have while at your destination
that are directly related to your business.
A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may
be a vacation even if the promoter adver-
tises that it is primarily for business. The
scheduling of incidental business activities
during a trip, such as viewing videotapes
or attending lectures dealing with general
subjects, will not change what is really a
vacation into a business trip.
Part of Trip Outside
the United States
If part of your trip is outside the United
States, use the rules described later under
Travel Outside the United States for that
part of the trip. For the part of your trip that
is inside the United States, use the rules in
this section. Travel outside the United
States does not include travel from one
point in the United States to another point
in the United States. The following dis-
cussion can help you determine whether
your trip was entirely within the United
States.
Public transportation.If you travel by
public transportation, any place in the
United States where that vehicle makes a
scheduled stop is a point in the United
States. Once the vehicle leaves the last
scheduled stop in the United States on its
way to a point outside the United States,
you apply the rules under Travel Outside the
United States.
Example. You fly from New York to
Puerto Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami.
You return to New York nonstop. The flight
from New York to Miami is in the United
States, so only the flight from Miami to
Puerto Rico is outside the United States.
Because there are no scheduled stops be-
tween Puerto Rico and New York, all of the
return trip is outside the United States.
Private car.Travel by private car in the
United States is travel between points in the
United States, even when you are on your
way to a destination outside the United
States.
Example. You travel by car from
Denver to Mexico City and return. Your
travel from Denver to the border and from
the border back to Denver is travel in the
United States, and the rules in this section
apply. The rules under Travel Outside the
United States apply to your trip from the
border to Mexico City and back to the bor-
der.
Travel Outside
the United States
If any part of your business travel is outside
the United States, some of your deductions
for the cost of getting to and from your
destination may be limited. For this purpose,
the United States includes the 50 states and
the District of Columbia.
How much of your travel expenses you
can deduct depends in part upon how much
of your trip outside the United States was
business related.
See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for in-
formation on luxury water travel.
Travel Entirely for Business
or Considered Entirely
for Business
You can deduct all your travel expenses of
getting to and from your business destina-
tion if your trip is entirely for business or
considered entirely for business.
Travel entirely for business.If you travel
outside the United States and you spend the
entire time on business activities, you can
deduct all of your travel expenses.
Travel considered entirely for business.
Even if you did not spend your entire time
on business activities, your trip is consid-
ered entirely for business if you meet at
least one of the following four exceptions.
Exception 1 – No substantial control.
Your trip is considered entirely for business
if you did not have substantial control over
arranging the trip. You are not considered
to have substantial control merely because
you have control over the timing of your trip.
You are considered not to have sub-
stantial control over your trip if you:
1) Are an employee who was reimbursed
or paid a travel expense allowance,
2) Are not related to your employer, and
3) Are not a managing executive.
“Related to your employer” was defined
earlier in this chapter under Who can use
the standard meal allowance?
A “managing executive” is an employee
who has the authority and responsibility,
without being subject to the veto of another,
to decide on the need for the business
travel.
A self-employed person generally has
substantial control over arranging business
trips.
Exception 2 – Outside United States
no more than a week. Your trip is con-
sidered entirely for business if you were
outside the United States for a week or less,
combining business and nonbusiness ac-
tivities. One week means seven consecutive
days. In counting the days, do not count the
day you leave the United States, but do
count the day you return to the United
States.
Exception 3 – Less than 25% of time
on personal activities.Your trip is con-
sidered entirely for business if you were
outside the United States for more than a
week, but you spent less than 25% of the
total time you were outside the United
States on nonbusiness activities. For this
purpose, count both the day your trip began
and the day it ended.
Exception 4 – Vacation not a major
consideration.Your trip is considered en-
tirely for business if you can establish that
a personal vacation was not a major con-
sideration, even if you have substantial
control over arranging the trip.
Travel not entirely for business.If you
do not meet any of the above exceptions,
you may still be able to deduct some of your
expenses. See Travel Primarily for Busi-
ness, next.
Travel Primarily for Business
If you travel outside the United States pri-
marily for business but spend some of your
time on nonbusiness activities, you gener-
ally cannot deduct all of your travel ex-
penses. You can only deduct the business
portion of your cost of getting to and from
your destination. You must make an allo-
cation between your business and non-
business activities to determine your
deductible amount. These travel allocation
rules are discussed in chapter 1 of Publi-
cation 463.
TIP
You do not have to allocate your
travel expense deduction if you
meet one of the four exceptions
listed earlier under Travel considered en-
tirely for business. In those cases, you can
deduct the total cost of getting to and from
your destination.
Travel Primarily for Vacation
If you travel outside the United States pri-
marily for vacation or for investment pur-
poses, the entire cost of the trip is a non-
deductible personal expense. This is true
even if you spend some time attending brief
professional seminars or a continuing edu-
cation program. You can, however, deduct
your registration fees and any other ex-
penses you have that are directly related to
your business.
Page 176 Chapter 28  Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Conventions
You can deduct your travel expenses when
you attend a convention if you can show
that your attendance benefits your trade or
business. You cannot deduct the travel ex-
penses for your family. If the convention is
for investment, political, social, or other
purposes unrelated to your trade or busi-
ness, you cannot deduct the expenses. You
cannot deduct nonbusiness expenses, such
as social or sight-seeing expenses.
CAUTION
!
Your appointment or election as a
delegate does not, in itself, deter-
mine whether you can deduct travel
expenses. You can deduct your travel ex-
penses only if your attendance is connected
to your own trade or business.
Convention agenda. The convention
agenda or program generally shows the
purpose of the convention. You can show
your attendance at the convention benefits
your trade or business by comparing the
agenda with the official duties and respon-
sibilities of your position. The agenda does
not have to deal specifically with your official
duties and responsibilities; it will be enough
if the agenda is so related to your position
that it shows your attendance was for busi-
ness purposes.
Foreign conventions. See chapter 1 of
Publication 463 for information on con-
ventions held outside the North American
area.
Entertainment
Expenses
You may be able to deduct business-related
entertainment expenses you have for en-
tertaining a client, customer, or employee.
You can deduct entertainment expenses
only if they are both ordinary and necessary
and meet one of the following two tests.
 1) Directly-related test.
 2) Associated test.
CAUTION
!
The amount you can deduct for
entertainment expenses may be
limited. Generally, you can deduct
only 50% of your unreimbursed enter-
tainment expenses. This limit is discussed
later under 50% Limit.
Club dues and membership fees. You
cannot deduct dues (including initiation
fees) for membership in any club organized
for business, pleasure, recreation, or other
social purpose. This rule applies to any
membership organization if one of its prin-
cipal purposes is to conduct entertainment
activities for members or their guests, or to
provide members or their guests with ac-
cess to entertainment facilities.
The purposes and activities of a club,
not its name, will determine whether or not
you can deduct the dues. You cannot de-
duct dues paid to country clubs, golf and
athletic clubs, airline clubs, hotel clubs, and
clubs operated to provide meals under cir-
cumstances generally considered to be
conducive to business discussions.
Entertainment. Entertainment includes
any activity generally considered to provide
entertainment, amusement, or recreation.
Examples include entertaining guests at
nightclubs; at social, athletic, and sporting
clubs; at theaters; at sporting events; on
yachts; or on hunting, fishing, vacation, and
similar trips. You cannot deduct expenses
for entertainment that are lavish or extrava-
gant. If you buy a ticket to an entertainment
event for a client, you generally cannot de-
duct more than the face value of the ticket,
even if you paid a higher price.
A meal as a form of entertainment.
Entertainment includes the cost of a meal
you provide to a customer or client, whether
the meal is a part of other entertainment or
by itself. A meal expense includes the cost
of food, beverages, taxes, and tips for the
meal. To deduct an entertainment-related
meal, you or your employee must be pres-
ent when the food or beverages are pro-
vided.
CAUTION
!
You cannot claim the cost of your
meal both as an entertainment ex-
pense and as a travel expense.
Taking turns paying for meals or
entertainment.Expenses are not deduct-
ible when a group of business acquaint-
ances take turns picking up each others'
meal or entertainment checks without re-
gard to whether any business purposes are
served.
Trade association meetings.You can
deduct expenses for entertainment that are
directly related to, and necessary for, at-
tending business meetings or conventions
of certain exempt organizations. These or-
ganizations include business leagues,
chambers of commerce, real estate boards,
trade associations, and professional asso-
ciations. The expenses of your attendance
must be related to your active trade or
business. These expenses are subject to
the 50% limit on entertainment expenses.
Additional information.For more infor-
mation on entertainment expenses, includ-
ing discussions of the directly-related and
associated tests, see chapter 2 of Publica-
tion 463.
50% Limit
In general, you can deduct only 50% of your
business-related meal and entertainment
expenses. (If you are subject to the De-
partment of Transportation's “hours of ser-
vice” limits, you can deduct a higher per-
centage. See Individuals subject to “hours
of service” limits, later.) The 50% limit ap-
plies to employees or their employers, and
to self-employed persons (including inde-
pendent contractors) or their clients, de-
pending on whether the expenses are re-
imbursed. Figure 28–A summarizes the
general rules explained in this section.
The 50% limit applies to business meals
or entertainment expenses you have while:
1) Traveling away from home (whether
eating alone or with others) on busi-
ness,
2) Entertaining customers at your place
of business, a restaurant, or other lo-
cation, or
3) Attending a business convention or
reception, business meeting, or busi-
ness luncheon at a club.
Covered expenses. Taxes and tips relat-
ing to a business meal or entertainment
activity are included in the amount that is
subject to the 50% limit. Expenses such
as cover charges for admission to a night-
club, rent paid for a room in which you hold
a dinner or cocktail party, or the amount
paid for parking at a sports arena are also
subject to the 50% limit. However, the cost
of transportation to and from a business
meal or a business-related entertainment
activity is not subject to the 50% limit.
Separating costs.If you have an expense
for goods and services consisting of meals,
entertainment, and other services (such as
lodging or transportation), you must allocate
that expense between the cost of meals and
entertainment and the cost of the other
services. You must have a reasonable basis
for making this allocation. For example, you
must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-
cludes one or more meals in its room
charge, or if you are provided with one per
diem amount to cover both your lodging and
meal expenses.
Application of 50% limit.The 50% limit
on meal and entertainment expenses ap-
plies if the expense is otherwise deductible
and is not covered by one of the exceptions
discussed later in this section.
The 50% limit also applies to activities
that are not a trade or business. It applies
to meal and entertainment expenses in-
curred for the production of income, includ-
ing rental or royalty income. It also applies
to the cost of meals included in deductible
educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit.You apply
the 50% limit after determining the amount
that would otherwise qualify for a deduction.
You first determine the amount of meal and
entertainment expenses that would be
deductible under the other rules discussed
in this chapter.
Example 1. You spend $100 for a
business-related meal. If $40 of that amount
is not allowable because it is lavish and
extravagant, the remaining $60 is subject to
the 50% limit. Your deduction cannot be
more than $30 (.50 × $60).
Example 2. You purchase two tickets
to a concert and give them to a client. You
purchased the tickets through a ticket agent.
You paid $150 for the two tickets, which had
a face value of $60 each ($120 total). Your
deduction cannot be more than $60 (.50 ×
$120).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and
entertainment expenses are subject to the
50% limit. Figure 28–A can help you deter-
mine if the 50% limit applies to you.
Your meal or entertainment expense is
not subject to the 50% limit if the expense
meets either of the following exceptions.
Employee's reimbursed expenses.If you
are an employee, you are not subject to the
50% limit on the amount of expenses for
which your employer reimburses you under
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 177

Figure 28–A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. For more information, see
50% Limit.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not include
in box 1 of your Form W –2. If self-employed, count only
reimbursements from clients or customers that are not
included on Form 1099 –MISC, Miscellaneous Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See How To Report.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed. . . For the excess amount. . .
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However,
since the reimbursement was
not treated as wages or as
other taxable income, you
cannot deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
Yes
No
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
whether each of you has an independent
connection with the recipient. If a partner-
ship gives gifts, the partnership and the
partners are treated as one taxpayer.
Incidental costs.Incidental costs, such as
engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insur-
ing, and mailing, are generally not included
in determining the cost of a gift for purposes
of the $25 limit.
A related cost is incidental only if it does
not add substantial value to the gift. For
example, the cost of gift wrapping is an in-
cidental cost. However, the purchase of an
ornamental basket for packaging fruit is not
an incidental cost if the value of the basket
is substantial compared to the value of the
fruit.
Exceptions. The following items are not
considered gifts for purposes of the $25
limit.
1) An item that costs $4 or less and:
a) Has your name clearly and per-
manently imprinted on the gift,
and
b) Is one of a number of identical
items you widely distribute.
Examples include pens, desk sets,
and plastic bags and cases.
2) Signs, display racks, or other promo-
tional material to be used on the busi-
ness premises of the recipient.
Gift or entertainment.Any item that might
be considered either a gift or an enter-
tainment expense generally will be consid-
ered an entertainment expense. However,
if you give a customer packaged food or
beverages that you intend the customer to
use at a later date, treat it as a gift expense.
If you give a customer tickets to a thea-
ter performance or sporting event and you
do not go with the customer to the per-
formance or event, you have a choice. You
can treat the cost of the tickets as either a
gift expense or an entertainment expense,
whichever is to your advantage.
You can change your treatment of the
tickets at a later date, but not after the time
allowed for the assessment of income tax.
In most instances, this assessment period
ends 3 years after the due date of your in-
come tax return.
If you go with the customer to the event,
you must treat the cost of the tickets as an
entertainment expense. You cannot choose,
in this case, to treat the cost of the tickets
as a gift expense.
Local Transportation
Expenses
This section discusses expenses you can
deduct for local business transportation.
This includes the cost of transportation by
air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the cost of driv-
ing and maintaining your car.
Local transportation expenses include
the ordinary and necessary costs of all of
the following.
 Getting from one workplace to another
in the course of your business or pro-
fession when you are traveling within
an accountable plan. Accountable plans are
discussed later under Reimbursements.
Individuals subject to “hours of
service” limits. You can deduct a higher
percentage of your meal expenses if the
meals take place during or incident to any
period subject to the Department of Trans-
portation's “hours of service” limits. The
percentage is 60% for 2000, and it gradually
increases to 80% by the year 2008.
Individuals subject to the Department of
Transportation's “hours of service” limits in-
clude the following persons.
1) Certain air transportation workers
(such as pilots, crew, dispatchers, me-
chanics, and control tower operators)
who are under Federal Aviation Ad-
ministration regulations.
2) Interstate truck operators and bus
drivers who are under Department of
Transportation regulations.
3) Certain railroad employees (such as
engineers, conductors, train crews,
dispatchers, and control operations
personnel) who are under Federal
Railroad Administration regulations.
4) Certain merchant mariners who are
under Coast Guard regulations.
Business Gift
Expenses
If you give business gifts in the course of
your trade or business, you can deduct all
or part of the cost. This section explains the
limits and rules for deducting business gifts.
$25 limit on business gifts.You can de-
duct no more than $25 for business gifts you
give directly or indirectly to any one person
during your tax year. A gift to a company
that is intended for the eventual personal
use or benefit of a particular person or a
limited class of people will be considered
an indirect gift to that particular person or
to the individuals within that class of people
who receive the gift.
If you give a gift to a member of a cus-
tomer's family, the gift is generally consid-
ered to be an indirect gift to the customer.
This rule does not apply if you have a bona
fide, independent business connection with
that family member and the gift is not in-
tended for the customer's eventual use.
If you and your spouse both give gifts,
both of you are treated as one taxpayer. It
does not matter whether you have separate
businesses, are separately employed, or
Page 178 Chapter 28  Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

your tax home. (Tax home is defined
earlier under Travel Expenses.)
 Visiting clients or customers.
 Going to a business meeting away from
your regular workplace.
 Getting from your home to a temporary
workplace when you have one or more
regular places of work. These tempo-
rary workplaces can be either within the
area of your tax home or outside that
area.
Local business transportation does not in-
clude expenses you have while traveling
away from home overnight. Those ex-
penses are deductible as travel expenses,
which are discussed earlier. However, if you
use your car while traveling away from
home overnight, use the rules in this section
to figure your car expense deduction. See
Car Expenses, later.
Illustration of local transportation.Figure
28–B illustrates the rules for when you can
deduct local transportation expenses when
you have a regular or main job away from
your home. You may want to refer to it when
deciding whether you can deduct your local
business transportation expenses.
Temporary work location. If you have one
or more regular places of business away
from your home and you commute to a
temporary work location in the same trade
or business, you can deduct the expenses
of the daily round-trip transportation be-
tween your home and the temporary lo-
cation.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last (and does in
fact last) for one year or less, the employ-
ment is temporary unless there are facts
and circumstances that would indicate oth-
erwise. If your employment at a work lo-
cation is realistically expected to last for
more than 1 year or if there is no realistic
expectation that the employment will last for
1 year or less, the employment is not tem-
porary, regardless of whether it actually
lasts for more than 1 year. If employment
at a work location initially is realistically ex-
pected to last for 1 year or less, but at some
later date the employment is realistically
expected to last more than 1 year, that
employment will be treated as temporary
(unless there are facts and circumstances
that would indicate otherwise) until your
expectation changes. It will not be treated
as temporary after the date you determine
it will last more than 1 year.
CAUTION
!
A temporary work location was for-
merly defined as employment on an
irregular or short-term basis (gener-
ally a matter of days or weeks).
TIP
You can file an amended return on
Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi-
vidual Income Tax Return, for any
year that is affected by this change. How-
ever, you generally must file the amended
return within three years from the time you
filed the original return or within two years
from the time you paid the tax, whichever
is later.
If the temporary work location is beyond
the general area of your regular place of
Figure 28–B.
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have aregular or main job
at another location
Always deductible
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home .)
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
When Are Local Transportation Expenses Deductible?
work and you stay overnight, you are trav-
eling away from home. You may have
deductible travel expenses as discussed
earlier in this chapter.
No regular place of work.If you have no
regular place of work but ordinarily work in
the metropolitan area where you live, you
can deduct daily transportation costs be-
tween home and a temporary work site
outside that metropolitan area. Generally,
a metropolitan area includes the area within
the city limits and the suburbs that are
considered part of that metropolitan area.
You cannot deduct daily transportation
costs between your home and temporary
work sites within your metropolitan area.
These are nondeductible commuting costs.
Two places of work. If you work at two
places in one day, whether or not for the
same employer, you can deduct the ex-
pense of getting from one workplace to the
other. However, if for some personal reason
you do not go directly from one location to
the other, you cannot deduct more than the
amount it would have cost you to go directly
from the first location to the second.
Transportation expenses you have in going
between home and a part-time job on a day
off from your main job are commuting ex-
penses. You cannot deduct them.
Armed Forces reservists. A meeting
of an Armed Forces reserve unit is a second
place of business if the meeting is held on
a day on which you work at your regular job.
You can deduct the expense of getting from
one workplace to the other as just discussed
under Two places of work. 
You usually cannot deduct the expense
if the reserve meeting is held on a day on
which you do not work at your regular job.
In this case, your transportation generally is
considered a nondeductible commuting
cost. However, you can deduct your trans-
portation expenses if the location of the
meeting is temporary and you have one or
more regular places of work.
If you ordinarily work in a particular
metropolitan area but not at any specific
location and the reserve meeting is held at
a temporary location outside that metropol-
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 179

itan area, you can deduct your transporta-
tion expenses.
If you travel away from home overnight
to attend a guard or reserve meeting, you
can deduct your travel expenses. These
expenses are discussed earlier under
Travel Expenses. 
Commuting expenses.  You cannot deduct
the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway,
or taxi, or of driving a car between your
home and your main or regular place of
work. These costs are personal commuting
expenses. You cannot deduct commuting
expenses no matter how far your home is
from your regular place of work. You cannot
deduct commuting expenses even if you
work during the commuting trip.
Example. You had a telephone installed
in your car. You sometimes use that tele-
phone to make business calls while com-
muting to and from work. Sometimes busi-
ness associates ride with you to and from
work, and you have a business discussion
in the car. These activities do not change
the trip from personal to business. You
cannot deduct your commuting expenses.
Parking fees. Fees you pay to park
your car at your place of business are non-
deductible commuting expenses. You can,
however, deduct business-related parking
fees when visiting a customer or client.
Advertising display on car.Putting
display material that advertises your busi-
ness on your car does not change the use
of your car from personal use to business
use. If you use this car for commuting or
other personal uses, you still cannot deduct
your expenses for those uses.
Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost
of using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do
not include payments you receive from the
passengers in your income. These pay-
ments are considered reimbursements of
your expenses. However, if you operate a
car pool for a profit, you must include pay-
ments from passengers in your income. You
can then deduct your car expenses (using
the rules in this chapter).
Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling
tools or instruments in your car while com-
muting to and from work does not make
your car expenses deductible. However,
you can deduct any additional costs you
have for hauling tools or instruments (such
as for renting a trailer you tow with your car).
Union members' trips from a union
hall.If you get your work assignments at
a union hall and then go to your place of
work, the costs of getting from the union hall
to your place of work are nondeductible
commuting expenses. Although you need
the union to get your work assignments, you
are employed where you work, not where
the union hall is located.
Office in the home.If you have an office
in your home that qualifies as a principal
place of business, you can deduct your
daily transportation costs between your
home and another work location in the same
trade or business. (See chapter 30 for in-
formation on determining if your home office
qualifies as a principal place of business.)
If your home office does not qualify as
a principal place of business, follow the
general rules explained earlier.
Examples of deductible local transpor-
tation.The following examples show when
you can deduct local transportation ex-
penses based on the location of your work
and your home.
Example 1. You regularly work in an
office in the city where you live. Your em-
ployer sends you to a one-week training
session at a different office in the same city.
You travel directly from your home to the
training location and return each day. You
can deduct the cost of your daily round-trip
transportation between your home and the
training location.
Example 2. Your principal place of
business is in your home. You can deduct
the cost of round-trip transportation between
your qualifying home office and your client's
or customer's place of business.
Example 3. You have no regular office,
and you do not have an office in your home.
In this case, the location of your first busi-
ness contact is considered your office.
Transportation expenses between your
home and this first contact are nondeduct-
ible commuting expenses. Transportation
expenses between your last business con-
tact and your home are also nondeductible
commuting expenses. Although you cannot
deduct the costs of these first and last trips,
you can deduct the costs of going from one
client or customer to another.
Car Expenses
If you use your car for business purposes,
you may be able to deduct car expenses.
You generally can use one of two methods
to figure your expenses: actual expenses
or the standard mileage rate. In this chapter,
“car” includes a van, pickup, or panel truck.
TIP
You may be entitled to a tax credit
for an electric vehicle (see chapter
38) or a deduction from gross in-
come for a part of the cost of a clean-fuel
vehicle that you place in service during the
year. The vehicle must meet certain re-
quirements, and you do not have to use it
in your business to qualify for the credit or
the deduction. For more information, see
chapter 12 of Publication 535.
Rural mail carriers.If you are a rural mail
carrier, you may be able to treat the amount
of qualified reimbursement you received as
the amount of your allowable expense. Be-
cause the qualified reimbursement is
treated as paid under an accountable plan,
your employer should not include the
amount of reimbursement in your income.
And, since the reimbursement equals the
expense, you have no deduction to report
on your tax return.
A “qualified reimbursement” is the
amount of reimbursement you receive that
meets both of the following conditions.
1) It is given as an equipment mainte-
nance allowance (EMA) to employees
of the U.S. Postal Service.
2) It is at the rate contained in the 1991
collective bargaining agreement. Any
later agreement cannot increase the
qualified reimbursement amount by
more than the rate of inflation.
See your employer for information on your
reimbursement.
CAUTION
!
If you are a rural mail carrier and
received a qualified reimbursement,
you cannot use the standard mile-
age rate.
Standard Mileage Rate
You may be able to use the standard mile-
age rate to figure the deductible costs of
operating your car for business purposes.
For 2000, the standard mileage rate is
32
1 / 2 cents a mile for all business miles.
CAUTION
!
If you use the standard mileage rate
for a year, you cannot deduct your
actual car expenses for that year.
You generally can use the standard
mileage rate regardless of whether you are
reimbursed and whether any reimburse-
ment is more or less than the amount fig-
ured using the standard mileage rate. See
Reimbursements under How To Report,
later.
Choosing the standard mileage rate.If
you want to use the standard mileage rate
for a car you own, you must choose to use
it in the first year the car is available for use
in your business. Then in later years, you
can choose to use either the standard
mileage rate or actual expenses.
If you want to use the standard mileage
rate for a car you lease, you must use it for
the entire lease period. For leases that be-
gan on or before December 31, 1997, the
standard mileage rate must be used for the
entire portion of the lease period (including
renewals) that is after that date.
If you choose to use the standard mile-
age rate, you are considered to have cho-
sen not to use the depreciation methods
under the Modified Accelerated Cost Re-
covery System (MACRS). This is because
the standard mileage rate includes an al-
lowance for depreciation that is not ex-
pressed in terms of years. If you change to
the actual expenses method in a later year,
but before your car is fully depreciated, you
have to estimate the remaining useful life
of the car and use straight line depreciation.
For more information about depreciation in-
cluded in the standard mileage rate, see the
exception in Methods of depreciation under
Depreciation Deduction in chapter 4 of
Publication 463.
Standard mileage rate not allowed.You
cannot use the standard mileage rate if you:
1) Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
2) Operate two or more cars at the same
time (as in fleet operations),
3) Claimed a depreciation deduction us-
ing ACRS or MACRS depreciation in
an earlier year,
4) Claimed a section 179 deduction on
the car,
5) Claimed actual car expenses after
1997 for a car you leased, or
6) Are a rural mail carrier who received a
qualified reimbursement. (See Rural
mail carriers, earlier.)
Two or more cars. If you own two or
more cars that are used for business at the
same time, you cannot use the standard
mileage rate for the business use of any car.
However, you may be able to deduct your
actual expenses for operating each of the
Page 180 Chapter 28  Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

cars in your business. See Actual Car Ex-
penses in chapter 4 of Publication 463 for
information on how to figure your deduction.
You are not using two or more cars for
business at the same time if you alternate
using (use at different times) the cars for
business.
Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson,
owns a car and a van that she alternates
using for calling on her customers. She can
use the standard mileage rate for the busi-
ness mileage of the car and the van.
Example 2. Maureen owns a car and
a van that are both used in her
housecleaning business. Her employees
use the van and she uses the car to travel
to the various customers. Maureen cannot
use the standard mileage rate for the car
or the van. This is because both vehicles
are used in Maureen's business at the same
time. She must use actual expenses for
both vehicles.
Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using
the standard mileage rate, you can deduct
any business-related parking fees and tolls.
(Parking fees that you pay to park your car
at your place of work are nondeductible
commuting expenses.)
Actual Car Expenses
If you do not choose to use the standard
mileage rate, you may be able to deduct
your actual car expenses.
TIP
If you qualify to use both methods,
before choosing a method, you may
want to figure your deduction both
ways to see which gives you a larger de-
duction.
Actual car expenses include the costs
of:
Business and personal use. If you use
your car for both business and personal
purposes, you must divide your expenses
between business and personal use. You
can divide based on the miles driven for
each purpose.
Example. You are a contractor and
drive your car 20,000 miles during the year:
12,000 miles for business use and 8,000
miles for personal use. You can claim only
60% (12,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of oper-
ating your car as a business expense.
Interest on car loans.If you are an em-
ployee, you cannot deduct any interest paid
on a car loan. This interest is treated as
personal interest and is not deductible.
However, if you are self-employed and use
your car in that business, see chapter 5 of
Publication 535.
TIP
If you use a home equity loan to
purchase your car, you may be able
to deduct the interest. See chapter
25 for more information.
Taxes paid on your car. If you are an
employee, you can deduct personal prop-
erty taxes paid on your car if you itemize
deductions. Enter the amount paid on line
7 of Schedule A (Form 1040). (See chapter
24 for more information on taxes.) If you are
not an employee, see your form instructions
for information on how to deduct personal
property taxes paid on your car.
You cannot deduct luxury or sales taxes,
even if you use your car 100% for business.
Luxury and sales taxes are part of your car's
basis and may be recovered through de-
preciation, discussed later.
Fines and collateral. You cannot deduct
fines and collateral you pay for traffic vio-
lations.
Depreciation and section 179 de-
ductions. Generally, the cost of a car, plus
sales tax, luxury tax, and improvements, is
a capital expense. Because the benefits last
longer than one year, you generally cannot
deduct a capital expense. However, you can
recover this cost by claiming a section 179
deduction (the deduction allowed by section
179 of the Internal Revenue Code) and/or
a depreciation deduction. By using depreci-
ation, you recover the cost over more than
one year by deducting part of it each year.
The section 179 deduction and the depre-
ciation deduction are discussed in more
detail in chapter 4 of Publication 463.
Generally, there are limits on both of
these deductions. Special rules apply if you
use your car 50% or less in your work or
business.
Leasing a car. If you lease a car that you
use in your business, you can use the
standard mileage rate or actual expenses
to figure your deductible car expense.
Deductible payments. If you choose
to use actual expenses, you can deduct the
part of each lease payment that is for the
use of the car in your business. You cannot
deduct any part of a lease payment that is
for personal use of the car, such as com-
muting.
You must spread any advance payments
over the entire lease period. You cannot
deduct any payments you make to buy a
car, even if the payments are called lease
payments.
If you lease a car for 30 days or more,
you may have to reduce your lease payment
deduction by an “inclusion amount.” For in-
formation on reporting lease inclusion
amounts, see Leasing a Car in chapter 4
of Publication 463.
Sale, Trade-in, or
Other Disposition
If you sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of
your car, you may have a taxable gain or a
deductible loss. This is true whether you
used the standard mileage rate or actual car
expenses to deduct the business use of
your car. Chapter 15 has information on
sales of property. For details on how to re-
port the disposition, see Publication 544.
Recordkeeping
If you deduct travel, entertainment, business
gift, or local transportation expenses, you
must be able to prove (substantiate) certain
elements of the expense. This section dis-
cusses the records you need to keep to
prove these expenses.
RECORDS
If you keep timely and accurate
records, you will have support to
show the IRS if your tax return is
ever examined. You will also have proof of
expenses that your employer may require
if you are reimbursed under an accountable
plan. These plans are discussed later under
Reimbursements.
How To Prove Expenses
Table 28–2 is a summary of records you
need to prove each expense discussed in
this chapter. You must be able to prove the
elements listed across the top portion of the
chart. You prove them by having the infor-
mation and receipts (where needed) for the
expenses listed in the first column.
CAUTION
!
You cannot deduct amounts that
you approximate or estimate.
You should keep adequate records to
prove your expenses or have sufficient evi-
dence that will support your own statement.
You must generally prepare a written record
for it to be considered adequate. This is
because written evidence is more reliable
than oral evidence alone. However, if you
prepare a record in a computer memory
device with the aid of a logging program, it
is considered an adequate record.
Adequate Records
You should keep the proof you need in an
account book, diary, statement of expense,
or similar record. You should also keep
documentary evidence that, together with
your records, will support each element of
an expense.
Documentary evidence. You generally
must have documentary evidence, such as
receipts, canceled checks, or bills, to sup-
port your expenses.
Exception. Documentary evidence is
not needed if any of the following conditions
apply.
1) You have meals or lodging expenses
while traveling away from home for
which you account to your employer
under an accountable plan and you
use a per diem allowance method that
includes meals and/or lodging. (Ac-
countable plans and per diem allow-
ances are discussed later under Re-
imbursements.)
2) Your expense, other than lodging, is
less than $75.
3) You have a transportation expense for
which a receipt is not readily available.
Adequate evidence. Documentary ev-
idence ordinarily will be considered ade-
quate if it shows the amount, date, place,
and essential character of the expense.
For example, a hotel receipt is enough
to support expenses for business travel if it
has all of the following information.
1) The name and location of the hotel.
2) The dates you stayed there.
3) Separate amounts for charges such as
lodging, meals, and telephone calls.
A restaurant receipt is enough to prove
an expense for a business meal if it has all
of the following information.
Depreciation Lease
payments
Registration
fees
Garage rent Licenses Repairs
Gas Oil Tires
Insurance Parking fees Tolls
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 181

1) The name and location of the restau-
rant.
2) The number of people served.
3) The date and amount of the expense.
If a charge is made for items other than food
and beverages, the receipt must show that
this is the case.
Canceled check. A canceled check,
together with a bill from the payee, ordinarily
establishes the cost. However, a canceled
check by itself does not prove a business
expense without other evidence to show
that it was for a business purpose.
Duplicate information.You do not have
to record information in your account book
or other record that duplicates information
shown on a receipt as long as your records
and receipts complement each other in an
orderly manner.
You do not have to record amounts your
employer pays directly for any ticket or other
travel item. However, if you charge these
items to your employer, through a credit
card or otherwise, you must keep a record
of the amounts you spend.
Timely-kept records.You should record
the elements of an expense or of a business
use at or near the time of the expense or
use and support it with sufficient documen-
tary evidence. A timely-kept record has
more value than a statement prepared later
when generally there is a lack of accurate
recall.
You do not need to write down the ele-
ments of every expense on the day of the
expense. If you maintain a log on a weekly
basis which accounts for use during the
week, the log is considered a timely-kept
record.
If you give your employer, client, or
customer an expense account statement, it
can also be considered a timely-kept record.
This is true if you copy it from your account
book, diary, statement of expense, or similar
record.
Proving business purpose. You must
generally provide a written statement of the
business purpose of an expense. However,
the degree of proof varies according to the
circumstances in each case. If the business
purpose of an expense is clear from the
surrounding circumstances, then you do not
need to give a written explanation.
Confidential information.You do not
need to put confidential information relating
to an element of a deductible expense (such
as the place, business purpose, or business
relationship) in your account book, diary, or
other record. However, you do have to rec-
ord the information elsewhere at or near the
time of the expense and have it available to
fully prove that element of the expense.
Incomplete Records
If you do not have complete records to
prove an element of an expense, then you
must prove the element by:
1) Your own written or oral statement,
containing specific information about
the element, and
2) Other supporting evidence that is suf-
ficient to establish the element.
Destroyed records.If you cannot produce
a receipt because of reasons beyond your
control, you can prove a deduction by re-
constructing your records or expenses.
Reasons beyond your control include fire,
flood, and other casualty.
Additional Rules
This section explains when expenses must
be kept separate and when expenses can
be combined.
Separating expenses. Each separate
payment is generally considered a separate
expense. For example, if you entertain a
customer or client at dinner and then go to
the theater, the dinner expense and the cost
of the theater tickets are two separate ex-
penses. You must record them separately
in your records.
Combining items.You can make one daily
entry in your record for reasonable catego-
ries of expenses. Examples are taxi fares,
telephone calls, or other incidental travel
costs. Meals should be in a separate cate-
gory. You can include tips for meal-related
services with the costs of the meals.
Expenses of a similar nature occurring
during the course of a single event are
considered a single expense. For example,
if during entertainment at a cocktail lounge,
you pay separately for each serving of
refreshments, the total expense for the
refreshments is treated as a single expense.
Allocating total cost.If you can prove the
total cost of travel or entertainment but you
cannot prove how much it cost for each
person who participated in the event, you
may have to allocate the total cost among
you and your guests on a pro rata basis.
An allocation would be needed, for exam-
ple, if you did not have a business relation-
ship with all of your guests.
If your return is examined.If your return
is examined, you may have to provide ad-
ditional information to the IRS. This infor-
mation could be needed to clarify or to es-
tablish the accuracy or reliability of
information contained in your records,
statements, testimony, or documentary evi-
dence before a deduction is allowed.
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts
You must keep records as long as they may
be needed for the administration of any
provision of the Internal Revenue Code.
Generally, this means you must keep your
records that support your deduction (or an
item of income) for 3 years from the date
you file the income tax return on which the
deduction is claimed. A return filed early is
considered filed on the due date. For a more
complete explanation, get Publication 583,
Starting a Business and Keeping Records.
Reimbursed for expenses. Employees
who give their records and documentation
to their employers and are reimbursed for
their expenses generally do not have to
keep copies of this information. However,
you may have to prove your expenses if any
of the following conditions apply.
1) You claim deductions for expenses
that are more than reimbursements.
2) Your expenses are reimbursed under
a nonaccountable plan.
3) Your employer does not use adequate
accounting procedures to verify ex-
pense accounts.
4) You are related to your employer, as
defined earlier under Who can use the
standard meal allowance?
See the next section, How To Report, for
a discussion of reimbursements, adequate
accounting, and nonaccountable plans.
Additional information. Chapter 5 of
Publication 463 has more information on
recordkeeping, including examples.
How To Report
This section explains where and how to re-
port the expenses discussed in this chapter.
It discusses reimbursements and how to
treat them under accountable and nonac-
countable plans. It also explains rules for
fee-basis officials, certain performing artists,
and certain disabled employees. This sec-
tion ends with an illustration of how to report
travel, entertainment, gift, and car expenses
on Form 2106–EZ.
Self-employed. You must report your in-
come and expenses on Schedule C or
C–EZ (Form 1040) if you are a sole propri-
etor, or on Schedule F (Form 1040) if you
are a farmer. You do not use Form 2106
or 2106–EZ. See your form instructions for
information on how to complete your tax
return. You can also find information in
Publication 535 if you are a sole proprietor,
or in Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide,
if you are a farmer.
Both self-employed and an employee.If
you are both self-employed and an em-
ployee, you must keep separate records for
each business activity. Report your busi-
ness expenses for self-employment on
Schedule C, C–EZ, or F (Form 1040), as
discussed earlier. Report your business ex-
penses for your work as an employee on
Form 2106 or 2106–EZ, as discussed next.
Employee. If you are an employee, you
generally must complete Form 2106 to de-
duct your travel, transportation, and enter-
tainment expenses. However, you can use
the shorter Form 2106–EZ instead of Form
2106 if you meet both of the following con-
ditions.
1) You were not reimbursed by your em-
ployer for your expenses (amounts in-
cluded in box 1 of your Form W–2 are
not considered reimbursements).
2) If you claim car expenses, you use the
standard mileage rate.
For more information on how to report
your expenses on Forms 2106 and
2106–EZ, see Completing Forms 2106 and
2106–EZ, later.
Gifts. If you did not receive any re-
imbursements (or the reimbursements were
all included in box 1 of your Form W–2), the
only business expense you are claiming is
for business gifts, and the rules for certain
individuals (such as performing artists),
discussed later under Special Rules, do not
Page 182 Chapter 28  Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Table 28–2. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have
expenses for:
Travel
Entertainment
Gifts
Transportation
(Car)
Amount Time
Place or
Description
Business Purpose and
Business Relationship
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements.
Cost of each separate expense
for travel, lodging, and meals.
Incidental expenses may be
totaled in reasonable categories
such as taxis, daily meals for
traveler, etc.
Dates you
left and
returned for
each trip
and number
of days
spent on
business.
Destination or area
of your travel
(name of city, town,
or other
designation).
Cost of each separate expense.
Incidental expenses such as
taxis, telephones, etc., may be
totaled on a daily basis.
Date of
entertainment.
(Also see
Business
Purpose.)
Name and address
or location of place
of entertainment.
Type of
entertainment if not
otherwise apparent.
(Also see Business
Purpose.)
Cost of the gift. Date of the
gift.
Description of the
gift.
Date of the
expense.
For car
expenses,
the date of
the use of
the car.
Your business
destination (name
of city, town, or
other designation).
Cost of each separate expense.
For car expenses, the cost of
the car and any improvements,
the date you started using it for
business, the mileage for each
business use, and the total miles
for the year.
Purpose:
 Business purpose for the
expense or the business benefit gained
or expected to be gained.
Relationship:
 N/A
Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense or the business benefit gained
or expected to be gained.
For entertainment, the nature of the
business discussion or activity. If the
entertainment was directly before or
after a business discussion: the date,
place, nature, and duration of the
business discussion, and the identities
of the persons who took part in both
the business discussion and the
entertainment activity.
Relationship:
 Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or
other designations) about the recipients
that shows their business relationship
to you.
Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense.
Relationship: N/A
For entertainment, you must also prove
that you or your employee was present
if the entertainment was a business
meal.
apply to you, do not complete Form 2106
or 2106–EZ. Instead, claim the amount of
your deductible business gifts directly on
line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
Statutory employees.If you received
a Form W–2 and the “Statutory employee”
box in box 15 was checked, you report your
income and expenses related to that income
on Schedule C or C–EZ (Form 1040). Do
not complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ.
Statutory employees include full-time life
insurance salespersons, certain agent or
commission drivers, traveling salespersons,
and certain homeworkers.
CAUTION
!
If you are entitled to a reimburse-
ment from your employer but you
do not claim it, you cannot claim a
deduction for the expenses to which that
unclaimed reimbursement applies.
Reimbursement for personal expenses.
If your employer reimburses you for non-
deductible personal expenses, such as for
vacation trips, your employer must report
the reimbursement as wage income in box
1 of your Form W–2. You cannot deduct
personal expenses.
Reimbursements
This section explains what to do when you
receive an advance or are reimbursed for
any of the employee business expenses
discussed in this chapter.
If you received an advance, allowance,
or reimbursement for your expenses, how
you report this amount and your expenses
depends on whether the reimbursement
was paid to you under an accountable plan
or a nonaccountable plan.
This section explains the two types of
plans, how per diem and car allowances
simplify proving the amount of your ex-
penses, and the tax treatment of your re-
imbursements and expenses.
No reimbursement. You are not reim-
bursed or given an allowance for your ex-
penses if you are paid a salary or commis-
sion with the understanding that you will pay
your own expenses. In this situation, you
have no reimbursement or allowance ar-
rangement, and you do not have to read this
section on reimbursements. Instead, see
Completing Forms 2106 and 2106 –EZ,
later, for information on completing your tax
return.
Reimbursement, allowance, or advance.
A reimbursement or other expense allow-
ance arrangement is a system or plan that
an employer uses to pay, substantiate, and
recover the expenses, advances, re-
imbursements, and amounts charged to the
employer for employee business expenses.
Arrangements include per diem and car al-
lowances.
A per diem allowance is a fixed amount
of daily reimbursement your employer gives
you for your lodging, meal, and incidental
expenses when you are away from home
on business. (The term “incidental
expenses” is defined earlier under Standard
meal allowance.) A car allowance is an
amount your employer gives you for the
business use of your car.
Your employer should tell you what
method of reimbursement is used and what
records you must provide.
Accountable Plans
To be an accountable plan, your employer's
reimbursement or allowance arrangement
must include all three of the following rules.
1) Your expenses must have a business
connection — that is, you must have
paid or incurred deductible expenses
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 183

while performing services as an em-
ployee of your employer.
2) You must adequately account to your
employer for these expenses within a
reasonable period of time.
3) You must return any excess re-
imbursement or allowance within a
reasonable period of time.
See Adequate Accounting and Return-
ing Excess Reimbursements, later.
An excess reimbursement or allow-
ance is any amount you are paid that is
more than the business-related expenses
that you adequately accounted for to your
employer.
The definition of reasonable period of
time depends on the facts and circum-
stances of your situation. However, regard-
less of the facts and circumstances of your
situation, actions that take place within the
times specified in the following list will be
treated as taking place within a reasonable
period of time.
1) You receive an advance within 30 days
of the time you have an expense.
2) You adequately account for your ex-
penses within 60 days after they were
paid or incurred.
3) You return any excess reimbursement
within 120 days after the expense was
paid or incurred.
4) You are given a periodic statement (at
least quarterly) that asks you to either
return or adequately account for out-
standing advances and you comply
within 120 days of the statement.
Employee meets accountable plan rules.
If you meet the three rules for accountable
plans, your employer should not include any
reimbursements in your income in box 1 of
your Form W–2. If your expenses equal
your reimbursement, you do not complete
Form 2106. You have no deduction since
your expenses and reimbursement are
equal.
TIP
If your employer included re-
imbursements in box 1 of your Form
W –2 and you meet all three rules for
accountable plans, ask your employer for a
corrected Form W–2.
Accountable plan rules not met.Even
though you are reimbursed under an ac-
countable plan, some of your expenses may
not meet all three rules. Those expenses
that fail to meet all three rules for account-
able plans are treated as having been re-
imbursed under a nonaccountable plan
(discussed later).
Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses. You may be reimbursed under
your employer's accountable plan for ex-
penses related to that employer's business,
some of which are deductible as employee
business expenses and some of which are
not deductible. The reimbursements you
receive for the nondeductible expenses do
not meet rule (1) for accountable plans, and
they are treated as paid under a nonac-
countable plan.
Example. Your employer's plan reim-
burses you for travel expenses while away
from home on business and also for meals
when you work late at the office, even
though you are not away from home. The
part of the arrangement that reimburses you
for the nondeductible meals when you work
late at the office is treated as paid under a
nonaccountable plan.
TIP
The employer makes the decision
whether to reimburse employees
under an accountable plan or a
nonaccountable plan. If you are an em-
ployee who receives payments under a
nonaccountable plan, you cannot convert
these amounts to payments under an ac-
countable plan by voluntarily accounting to
your employer for the expenses and volun-
tarily returning excess reimbursements to
the employer.
Adequate Accounting
One of the three rules for an accountable
plan is that you must adequately account to
your employer for your expenses. You ad-
equately account by giving your employer
a statement of expense, an account book,
a diary, or a similar record in which you
entered each expense at or near the time
you had it, along with documentary evi-
dence (such as receipts) of your travel,
mileage, and other employee business ex-
penses. (See Table 28–2, earlier, for details
you need to enter in your record and docu-
ments you need to prove certain expenses.)
You must account for all amounts you
received from your employer during the year
as advances, reimbursements, or allow-
ances. This includes amounts you charged
to your employer by credit card or other
method. You must give your employer the
same type of records and supporting infor-
mation that you would have to give to the
IRS if the IRS questioned a deduction on
your return. You must pay back the amount
of any reimbursement or other expense al-
lowance for which you do not adequately
account or that is more than the amount for
which you accounted.
Per Diem and Car Allowances
If your employer reimburses you for your
expenses using a per diem or car allow-
ance, you can generally use the allowance
as proof for the amount of your expenses.
A per diem or car allowance satisfies the
adequate accounting requirements for the
amount of your expenses only if all four of
the following conditions apply.
1) Your employer reasonably limits pay-
ments of the travel expenses to those
that are ordinary and necessary in the
conduct of the trade or business.
2) The allowance is similar in form to and
not more than the federal rate (defined
later).
3) You prove the time (dates), place, and
business purpose of your expenses to
your employer (as explained in Table
28–2) within a reasonable period of
time.
4) You are not related to your employer
(as defined earlier under Who can use
the standard meal allowance?). If you
are related to your employer, you must
be able to prove your expenses to the
IRS even if you have already ade-
quately accounted to your employer
and returned any excess reimburse-
ment.
If the IRS finds that an employer's travel
allowance practices are not based on rea-
sonably accurate estimates of travel costs
(including recognition of cost differences in
different areas for per diem amounts), you
will not be considered to have accounted to
your employer. In this case, you must be
able to prove your expenses to the IRS.
The federal rate. The federal rate can be
figured using any one of the following
methods.
1) For per diem amounts:
a) The regular federal per diem rate.
b) The standard meal allowance.
c) The high-low rate.
2) For car expenses:
a) The standard mileage rate.
b) A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
Regular federal per diem rate. The
regular federal per diem rate is the highest
amount that the federal government will pay
to its employees for lodging, meal, and in-
cidental expenses (or meal and incidental
expenses only) while they are traveling
away from home in a particular area. The
rates are different for different locations.
Your employer should have these rates
available. (Employers can get Publication
1542, which gives the rates in the conti-
nental United States for the current year.)
The standard meal allowance. The
standard meal allowance (discussed earlier)
is the federal rate for meals and incidental
expenses (M&IE). The rate for most small
localities in the United States is $30. Most
major cities and many other localities qualify
for higher rates. The rates for all localities
within the continental United States are
listed in Publication 1542.
You receive an allowance only for meals
and incidental expenses when your em-
ployer does one of the following.
1) Provides you with lodging (furnishes it
in kind).
2) Reimburses you, based on your re-
ceipts, for the actual cost of your lodg-
ing.
3) Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for
your lodging.
4) Does not have a reasonable belief that
you had (or will have) lodging ex-
penses, such as when you stay with
friends or relatives or sleep in the cab
of your truck.
5) Computes the allowance on a basis
similar to that used in computing your
compensation, such as number of
hours worked or miles traveled.
High-low rate. This is a simplified
method of computing the federal per diem
rate for travel within the continental United
States. It eliminates the need to keep a
current list of the per diem rate for each city.
Under the high-low method, the per diem
amount for travel during 2000 is $201 (in-
cluding $42 for M&IE) for certain high-cost
locations. All other areas have a per diem
amount of $124 (including $34 for M&IE).
(Employers can get Publication 1542, which
gives the areas eligible for the $201 per
diem amount under the high-low method for
all or part of the year.)
Page 184 Chapter 28  Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Prorating the standard meal allow-
ance on partial days of travel. The
standard meal allowance is for a full 24-hour
day of travel. If you travel for part of a day,
such as on the days you depart and return,
you must prorate the full-day M&IE rate.
This rule also applies if your employer uses
the regular federal per diem rate or the
high-low rate.
You can use either of the following
methods to figure the federal M&IE for that
day.
 1) Method 1:
a) For the day you depart, add 
3/4 of
the standard meal allowance
amount for that day.
b) For the day you return, add 
3/4 of
the standard meal allowance
amount for the preceding day.
2) Method 2: Prorate the standard meal
allowance using any method that you
consistently apply and that is in ac-
cordance with reasonable business
practice.
The standard mileage rate.This is a
set rate per mile that you can use to com-
pute your deductible car expenses. For
2000, the standard mileage rate is 32
1/2
cents a mile for all business miles. This
rate is adjusted periodically.
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR).This
is an allowance your employer may use to
reimburse your car expenses. Under this
method, your employer pays an allowance
that includes a combination of payments
covering fixed and variable costs, such as
a cents-per-mile rate to cover your variable
operating costs (such as gas, oil, etc.) plus
a flat amount to cover your fixed costs (such
as depreciation (or lease payments), insur-
ance, etc.). If your employer chooses to use
this method, your employer will request the
necessary records from you.
Reporting your expenses with a per diem
or car allowance.If your reimbursement
is in the form of an allowance received un-
der an accountable plan, the following two
facts affect your reporting.
1) The federal rate.
2) Whether the allowance or your actual
expenses were more than the federal
rate.
The following discussions explain where to
report your expenses depending upon how
the amount of your allowance compares to
the federal rate.
Allowance LESS than or EQUAL to
the federal rate.If your allowance is less
than or equal to the federal rate, the allow-
ance will not be included in box 1 of your
Form W–2. You do not need to report the
related expenses or the allowance on your
return if your expenses are equal to or less
than the allowance.
However, if your actual expenses are
more than your allowance, you can com-
plete Form 2106 and deduct the excess
amount on Schedule A (Form 1040). If you
are using actual expenses, you must be
able to prove to the IRS the total amount
of your expenses and reimbursements for
the entire year. If you are using the standard
meal allowance or the standard mileage
rate, you do not have to prove that amount.
Example. Nicole drives 10,000 miles a
year for business. Under her employer's
accountable plan, she accounts for the time
(dates), place, and business purpose of
each trip. Her employer pays her a mileage
allowance of 20 cents a mile.
Since Nicole's $3,250 expenses com-
puted under the standard mileage rate
(10,000 miles × 32
1/2 cents) are more than
her $2,000 reimbursement (10,000 miles ×
20 cents), she itemizes her deductions to
claim the excess expenses. Nicole com-
pletes Form 2106 (showing all of her ex-
penses and reimbursements) and enters
$1,250 ($3,250 − $2,000) as an itemized
deduction.
Allowance MORE than the federal
rate. If your allowance is more than the
federal rate, your employer must include the
allowance amount up to the federal rate in
box 13 of your Form W–2. This amount is
not taxable. However, the excess allow-
ance will be included in box 1 of your Form
W–2. You must report this part of your al-
lowance as if it were wage income.
If your actual expenses are less than or
equal to the federal rate, you do not com-
plete Form 2106 or claim any of your ex-
penses on your return.
However, if your actual expenses are
more than the federal rate, you can com-
plete Form 2106 and, generally, deduct
those excess expenses. You must report
on Form 2106 your reimbursements up to
the federal rate (as shown in box 13 of your
Form W–2) and all your expenses. You
should be able to prove these amounts to
the IRS.
Example. Joe lives and works in Austin.
His employer sent him to San Diego for 4
days and paid the hotel directly for Joe's
hotel bill. The employer reimbursed Joe $50
a day for his meals and incidental expenses.
The federal rate for San Diego is $46 a day.
Joe can prove that his actual meal ex-
penses totaled $290. His employer's ac-
countable plan will not pay more than $50
a day for travel to San Diego, so Joe does
not give his employer the records that prove
that he actually spent $290. However, he
does account for the time, place, and busi-
ness purpose of the trip. This is Joe's only
business trip this year.
Joe was reimbursed $200 ($50 × 4
days), which is $16 more than the federal
rate of $184 ($46 × 4 days). The employer
includes the $16 as income on Joe's Form
W–2 in box 1. The employer also enters
$184 in box 13 of Joe's Form W–2, along
with a code L. 
Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his
deductible expenses. He enters the total of
his actual expenses for the year ($290) on
Form 2106. He also enters the reimburse-
ments that were not included in his income
($184). His total deductible expense, before
the 50% limit, is $106. After he figures the
50% limit on his unreimbursed meals and
entertainment, he will include the balance,
$53, as an itemized deduction.
Returning Excess
Reimbursements
Under an accountable plan, you are re-
quired to return any excess reimbursement
for your business expenses to the person
paying the reimbursement or allowance.
Excess reimbursement means any
amount for which you did not adequately
account within a reasonable period of time.
For example, if you received a travel ad-
vance and you did not spend all the money
on business-related expenses, or if you do
not have proof of all your expenses, you
have an excess reimbursement.
“Adequate accounting” and “reasonable
period of time” were discussed earlier.
Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-
vance if your employer provides you with
an expense allowance before you actually
have the expense, and the allowance is
reasonably expected to be no more than
your expense. Under an accountable plan,
you are required to adequately account to
your employer for this advance and to return
any excess within a reasonable period of
time.
If you do not adequately account for or
do not return any excess advance within a
reasonable period of time, the amount you
do not account for or return will be treated
as having been paid under a nonaccount-
able plan (discussed later).
Unproved amounts. If you do not
prove that you actually traveled on each day
for which you received a per diem or car
allowance (proving the elements described
in Table 28–2), you must return this un-
proved amount of the travel advance within
a reasonable period of time. If you do not
do this, the unproved amount is considered
paid under a nonaccountable plan (dis-
cussed later).
Per diem allowance MORE than fed-
eral rate.If your employer's accountable
plan pays you an allowance that is higher
than the federal rate, you do not have to
return the difference between the two rates
for the period you can prove business-
related travel expenses. However, the dif-
ference will be reported as wages on your
Form W–2. This excess amount is consid-
ered paid under a nonaccountable plan
(discussed later).
Example. Your employer sends you on
a 5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives
you a $225 ($45 × 5 days) advance to cover
your meals and incidental expenses. The
federal per diem for meals and incidental
expenses for Phoenix is $42. Your trip lasts
only 3 days. Under your employer's ac-
countable plan, you must return the $90
($45 × 2 days) advance for the 2 days you
did not travel. You do not have to return the
$9 difference between the allowance you
received and the federal rate for Phoenix
[($45 − $42) × 3 days]. However, the $9 will
be reported on your Form W–2 as wages.
Nonaccountable Plans
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement
or expense allowance arrangement that
does not meet one or more of the three
rules listed earlier under Accountable Plans.
In addition, even if your employer has
an accountable plan, the following pay-
ments will be treated as being paid under
a nonaccountable plan.
1) Excess reimbursements you fail to re-
turn to your employer.
2) Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses related to your employer's
business. See Reimbursement of non-
deductible expenses earlier under Ac-
countable Plans.
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 185

If you are not sure if the reimbursement
or expense allowance arrangement is an
accountable or nonaccountable plan, ask
your employer.
Reporting your expenses under a non-
accountable plan. Your employer will
combine the amount of any reimbursement
or other expense allowance paid to you
under a nonaccountable plan with your
wages, salary, or other pay. Your employer
will report the total in box 1 of your Form
W–2.
You must complete Form 2106 or
2106–EZ and itemize your deductions to
deduct your expenses for travel, transpor-
tation, meals, or entertainment. Your meal
and entertainment expenses will be subject
to the 50% limit discussed earlier under
Entertainment Expenses. Also, your total
expenses will be subject to the 2%-of-
adjusted-gross-income limit that applies to
most miscellaneous itemized deductions.
Example. Kim's employer gives her
$500 a month ($6,000 for the year) for her
business expenses. Kim does not have to
provide any proof of her expenses to her
employer, and Kim can keep any funds that
she does not spend.
Kim is being reimbursed under a non-
accountable plan. Her employer will include
the $6,000 on Kim's Form W–2 as if it were
wages. If Kim wants to deduct her business
expenses, she must complete Form 2106
or 2106–EZ and itemize her deductions.
Completing Forms
2106 and 2106–EZ
This section briefly describes how employ-
ees complete Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ.
Table 28–3 explains what the employer re-
ports on Form W–2 and what the employee
reports on Form 2106. The instructions for
the forms have more information on com-
pleting them.
Form 2106–EZ. You may be able to use the
shorter Form 2106–EZ to claim your em-
ployee business expenses. You can use
this form if you meet both of the following
conditions.
1) You were not reimbursed for your ex-
penses or, if you were reimbursed, the
reimbursement was included in your
income (box 1 of your Form W–2).
2) If you claim car expenses, you use the
standard mileage rate.
Car expenses.If you used a car to perform
your job as an employee, you may be able
to deduct certain car expenses. These are
generally figured in Part II of Form 2106,
and then claimed on line 1, Column A, of
Part I of Form 2106. Car expenses using the
standard mileage rate can also be figured
on Form 2106–EZ by completing Part II and
line 1 of Part I.
Local transportation expenses. Show
your local business transportation expenses
that did not involve overnight travel on line
2, Column A, of Form 2106 or on line 2, Part
I, of Form 2106–EZ. Also include on this line
business expenses you have for parking
fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of
operating your car or expenses of commut-
ing between your home and work.
Table 28–3.
IF the type of reimbursement
(or other expense allowance)
arrangement is under:
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: 
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
THEN the employer
reports on Form W –2:
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return
of excess both required but
excess not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return
of excess both required but
excess not returned
A nonaccountable plan with:
No reimbursement plan:
Either adequate accounting or
return of excess, or both, not
required by plan
No amount.
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
All expenses and
reimbursements only if
excess expenses are
claimed. Otherwise,
form is not filed.
All expenses.
All expenses.
* You may be able to use Form 2106 –EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106 –EZ.
Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements
AND the employee
reports on
Form 2106: *
Per diem or mileage allowance
exceeds the federal rate:
Adequate accounting up to the
federal rate only and
 excess not
returned.
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
All expenses (and
reimbursements
reported on Form W –2,
box 13) only if expenses
in excess of the federal
rate are claimed.
Otherwise, form is not
filed.
No amount.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 13 — it is not
reported in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 13 — it is not
reported in box 1.Employee business expenses other than
meals and entertainment. Show your
other employee business expenses on lines
3 and 4, Column A, of Form 2106 or lines
3 and 4 of Form 2106–EZ. Do not include
expenses for meals and entertainment on
those lines. Line 4 is for expenses such as
business gifts, educational expenses (tuition
and books), office-in-the-home expenses,
and trade and professional publications.
TIP
If line 4 expenses are the only ones
you are claiming, you received no
reimbursements (or the reimburse-
ments were all included in box 1 of your
Form W –2), and the Special Rules dis-
cussed later do not apply to you, do not
complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ. Claim
these amounts directly on line 20 of
Schedule A (Form 1040). List the type and
amount of each expense on the dotted lines
and include the total on line 20.
Meal and entertainment expenses.Show
the full amount of your expenses for
business-related meals and entertainment
on line 5, Column B, of Form 2106. Include
meals while away from your tax home
overnight and other business meals and
entertainment. Enter 50% of the line 8 meal
and entertainment expenses on line 9, Col-
umn B, of Form 2106.
If you file Form 2106–EZ, enter the full
amount of your meals and entertainment on
the line to the left of line 5 and multiply the
total by 50%. Enter the result on line 5.
Hours of service limits.If you are
subject to the Department of Transporta-
tion's “hours of service” limits, use 60% in-
stead of 50%.
Reimbursements. Enter on line 7 of Form
2106 the amounts your employer (or third
party) reimbursed you that were not in-
cluded in box 1 of your Form W–2. (You
cannot use Form 2106–EZ.) This includes
any reimbursement reported under code L
in box 13 of Form W–2.
Allocating your reimbursement.If you
were reimbursed under an accountable plan
and want to deduct excess expenses that
were not reimbursed, you may have to al-
locate your reimbursement. This is neces-
Page 186 Chapter 28  Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

sary if your employer pays your reimburse-
ment in the following manner:
1) Pays you a single amount that covers
meals and/or entertainment, as well as
other business expenses, and
2) Does not clearly identify how much is
for deductible meals and/or enter-
tainment.
You must allocate the reimbursement so
that you know how much to enter in Column
A and Column B of line 7 of Form 2106.
Example. Rob's employer paid him an
expense allowance of $5,000 this year un-
der an accountable plan. The $5,000 pay-
ment consisted of $2,000 for airfare and
$3,000 for entertainment and car expenses.
The employer did not clearly show how
much of the $3,000 was for the cost of
deductible entertainment. Rob actually
spent $6,500 during the year ($2,000 for
airfare, $2,000 for entertainment, and
$2,500 for car expenses).
Since the airfare allowance was clearly
identified, Rob knows that $2,000 of the
payment goes in Column A, line 7 of Form
2106. To allocate the remaining $3,000,
Rob uses the worksheet from the in-
structions for Form 2106. His completed
worksheet follows.
On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $3,668
($2,000 airfare and $1,668 of the $3,000) in
Column A and $1,332 (of the $3,000) in
Column B.
After you complete the form.After you
have completed your Form 2106 or
2106–EZ, follow the directions on that form
to deduct your expenses on the appropriate
line of your tax return. For most taxpayers,
this is line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
However, if you are a government official
paid on a fee basis, a performing artist, or
a disabled employee with impairment-
related work expenses, see Special Rules,
later.
Limits on employee business expenses.
Your employee business expenses may be
subject to any of the three limits described
next. These limits are figured in the follow-
ing order on the specified form.
1. Limit on meals and entertainment.
Certain meal and entertainment expenses
are subject to a 50% limit. Employees fig-
ure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line
5 of Form 2106–EZ. See 50% Limit under
Entertainment Expenses, earlier.
2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized
deductions. Employees deduct employee
business expenses (as figured on Form
2106 or 2106–EZ) on line 20 of Schedule
A (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous item-
ized deductions, including employee busi-
ness expenses, are subject to a
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. This
limit is figured on line 25 of Schedule A
(Form 1040).
3. Limit on total itemized deductions.
If your adjusted gross income (line 34 of
Form 1040) is more than $128,950 ($64,475
if you are married filing separately), the total
of certain itemized deductions, including
employee business expenses, may be lim-
ited. See chapter 22 for more information
on this limit.
Special Rules
This section discusses special rules that
apply only to government officials who are
paid on a fee basis, performing artists, and
disabled employees with impairment-related
work expenses.
Officials paid on a fee basis.Certain
fee-basis officials can claim their employee
business expenses whether or not they
itemize their other deductions on Schedule
A (Form 1040).
Fee-basis officials are persons who are
employed by a state or local government
and who are paid in whole or in part on a
fee basis. They can deduct their business
expenses in performing services in that job
as an adjustment to gross income rather
than as a miscellaneous itemized deduction.
If you are a fee-basis official, include
your employee business expenses from line
10 of Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ
in the total on line 32 of Form 1040. Write
“FBO” and the amount of your employee
business expenses in the space to the left
of line 32 of Form 1040.
Expenses of certain performing artists.
If you are a performing artist, you may
qualify to deduct your employee business
expenses as an adjustment to gross income
rather than as a miscellaneous itemized
deduction. To qualify, you must meet all
of the following requirements.
1) During the tax year, you perform ser-
vices in the performing arts for at least
two employers.
2) You receive at least $200 each from
any two of these employers.
3) Your related performing-arts business
expenses are more than 10% of your
gross income from the performance of
those services.
4) Your adjusted gross income is not
more than $16,000 before deducting
these business expenses.
Special rules for married persons.If
you are married, you must file a joint return
unless you lived apart from your spouse at
all times during the tax year.
If you file a joint return, you must figure
requirements (1), (2), and (3) separately for
both you and your spouse. However, re-
quirement (4) applies to your and your
spouse's combined adjusted gross income.
Where to report.If you meet all of the
above requirements, you should first com-
plete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ. Then you in-
clude your performing-arts-related ex-
penses from line 10 of Form 2106 or line 6
of Form 2106–EZ in the total on line 32 of
Form 1040. Write “QPA” and the amount
of your performing-arts-related expenses in
the space to the left of line 32 of Form 1040.
If you do not meet all of the above re-
quirements, you do not qualify to deduct
your expenses as an adjustment to gross
income. Instead, you must complete Form
2106 or 2106–EZ and deduct your em-
ployee business expenses as an itemized
deduction on line 20 of Schedule A (Form
1040).
Impairment-related work expenses of
disabled employees. If you are an em-
ployee with a physical or mental disability,
your impairment-related work expenses are
not subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that ap-
plies to most other employee business ex-
penses. After you complete Form 2106 or
2106–EZ, enter your impairment-related
work expenses from line 10 of Form 2106
or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ on line 27 of
Schedule A (Form 1040), and identify the
type and amount of this expense on the
dotted line next to line 27. Enter your em-
ployee business expenses that are unre-
lated to your disability from line 10 of Form
2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ on line 20
of Schedule A.
Impairment-related work expenses are
your allowable expenses for attendant care
at your workplace and other expenses you
have in connection with your workplace that
are necessary for you to be able to work.
For more information, see chapter 23.
Illustrated Example
Bill Wilson is an employee of Fashion
Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a typical
week, Bill leaves his home on Long Island
on Monday morning and drives to Albany to
exhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to pro-
spective customers. Then he drives to Troy
to show Fashion's new line of merchandise
to Town Department Store, an old cus-
tomer. While in Troy, he talks with Tom
Brown, purchasing agent for Town Depart-
ment Store, to discuss the new line. He later
takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to dinner
to discuss Attire Co.'s buying Fashion's new
line of clothing.
Bill purchased his car on January 3,
1997. He uses the standard mileage rate for
car expense purposes. He records his total
mileage, business mileage, parking fees,
and tolls for the year. Bill timely records his
expenses and other pertinent information in
a travel expense log (not shown). He ob-
tains receipts for his expenses for lodging
and for any other expenses of $75 or more.
During the year, Bill drove a total of
25,000 miles of which 20,000 miles were for
business. He answers all the questions in
Part II of Form 2106. He figures his car ex-
pense to be $6,500 (20,000 business miles
× 32
1 / 2 cents standard mileage rate).
His total employee business expenses
are shown in the following table.
Bill received an allowance of $3,600
($300 per month) to help offset his ex-
penses. Bill did not have to account to his
1. Enter the total amount of reimburse-
ments your employer gave you that
were not reported to you in box 1
of Form W–2 .................................... $3,000
2. Enter the total amount of your ex-
penses for the periods covered by
this reimbursement ........................... 4,500
3. Of the amount on line 2, enter your
total expense for meals and enter-
tainment ............................................ 2,000
4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the re-
sult as a decimal (rounded to at least
three places) .................................... .444
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter the
result here and in Column B, line 7 . 1,332
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter the
result here and in Column A, line 7 . 1,668
 Type of Expense Amount
Parking fees and tolls .................. $ 325
Car expenses .............................. 6,500
Meals ........................................... 2,632
Lodging, laundry, dry
cleaning ..................................... 8,975
Entertainment .............................. 1,870
Gifts, education, etc. ................... 430
Total ...........................................$ 20,732
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 187

employer for the reimbursement, and the
$3,600 was included as income in box 1 of
his Form W–2.
Because Bill's reimbursement was in-
cluded in his income and he is using the
standard mileage rate for his car expenses,
he files Form 2106–EZ with his tax return.
His filled-in form is shown on the next page.
Page 188 Chapter 28  Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
6,500
325
8,975
430
2,251
18,481
4,502
13 9 7
20,000 2,600 2,400
OMB No. 1545-1441
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
1
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multipy line 8a by 321⁄2¢
(.325)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and entertainment4 4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ x 50% (.50) (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses by 60%
(.60) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
(Fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with
disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2000)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting expenses attributable to your job.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2000.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2000, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
General Instructions
Section references are to the Internal
Revenue Code.
Purpose of Form
You may use Form 2106-EZ instead of Form
2106 to claim your unreimbursed employee
business expenses if you meet all the
requirements listed above Part I.
A Change To Note
The standard mileage rate has been
increased to 32
1⁄2 cents for each mile of
business use in 2000.
Recordkeeping
You cannot deduct expenses for travel
(including meals, unless you used the
standard meal allowance), entertainment,
gifts, or use of a car or other listed property,
unless you keep records to prove the time,
place, business purpose, business
relationship (for entertainment and gifts), and
amounts of these expenses. Generally, you
must also have receipts for all lodging
expenses (regardless of the amount) and any
other expense of $75 or more.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2000 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage
rate for the first year you placed the vehicle in service or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the
portion of the lease period after 1997.
Additional Information
For more details about employee business
expenses, see:
Pub. 463, Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Pub. 529, Miscellaneous Deductions
Pub. 587, Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care Providers)
Pub. 946, How To Depreciate Property
2000
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 189

29.
Tax Benefits for
Work-Related
Education
Important Change
Standard mileage rate.Generally, if you
drive your car to and from school, you can
deduct 32
1 / 2 cents per mile. SeeUsing your
car under What Educational Expenses Are
Deductible?
Introduction
If you are working and have work-related
educational expenses, you may be able to
deduct all or part of the cost of your edu-
cation as a business expense deduction.
This chapter discusses:
 Qualifying education
 Nonqualifying education
 What educational expenses are
deductible, and
 Where to deduct expenses.
Educational expenses that are not work
related, such as the costs of sending your
children to college, are personal expenses
that you cannot deduct as business ex-
penses. However, you may be eligible for
other tax benefits. Information on the edu-
cation tax credits is in chapter 36, on the
education IRA and making withdrawals from
IRAs for educational expenses in chapter
18, and on cancellation of student loans in
chapter 13. Information on student loan in-
terest is in Publication 970, Tax Benefits for
Higher Education.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and
Car Expenses
/H18554508 Tax Benefits for Work-Related
Education
/H18554970 Tax Benefits for Higher Educa-
tion
Form (and Instructions)
/H185542106 Employee Business Expenses
/H185542106–EZ  Unreimbursed Employee
Business Expenses
/H18554Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
Deductions
Qualifying Education
You can deduct the costs of qualifying ed-
ucation. This is education that meets at
least one of the following two tests.
1) The education is required by your em-
ployer or the law to keep your present
salary, status, or job. The required ed-
ucation must serve a bona fide busi-
ness purpose of your employer.
2) The education maintains or improves
skills needed in your present work.
You can deduct the expenses for quali-
fying education even if the education could
lead to a degree.
You can use Figure 29–A as a quick
check to see if your education qualifies.
Education Required by
Employer or by Law
Once you have met the minimum educa-
tional requirements for your job, your em-
ployer or the law may require you to get
more education. This additional education
is qualifying education if it is required for you
to keep your present salary, status, or job,
and the requirement serves a business
purpose of your employer. The education
must not be part of a program that will
qualify you for a new trade or business.
When you get more education than your
employer or the law requires, the additional
education is qualifying only if it maintains
or improves skills required in your present
work. See Education To Maintain or Im-
prove Skills.
Example. You are a teacher who has
satisfied the minimum requirements for
teaching. Your employer requires you to
take an additional college course each year
to keep your teaching job. This is qualifying
education even if you eventually receive a
master's degree and an increase in salary
because of this extra education.
Education To Maintain
or Improve Skills
If your education is not required by your
employer or the law, it is qualifying educa-
tion only if it maintains or improves skills
needed in your present work. This could
include refresher courses, courses on cur-
rent developments, and academic or voca-
tional courses.
Example. You repair televisions, radios,
and stereo systems for XYZ Store. To keep
up with the latest changes, you take special
courses in radio and stereo service. These
courses maintain and improve skills re-
quired in your work.
Present work. Unless required by your
employer or the law, education that relates
to work you may enter or return to in the
future is not qualifying education. Education
that prepares you for a future occupation
includes any education that keeps you up-
to-date for a return to work or that qualifies
you to reenter a job you had in the past.
Temporary absence. If you stop work
for a year or less and then go back to the
same kind of work, your absence is ordi-
narily considered temporary. Education
during a vacation, temporary leave, or other
temporary absence from your job is con-
sidered related to your present job.
Example. You quit your biology re-
search job to become a full-time biology
graduate student for one year. If you return
to work in biology research after completing
the courses, the education is related to your
present work even if you do not go back to
work with the same employer.
Nonqualifying
Education
You cannot deduct the costs of nonqualify-
ing education, even if it meets both of the
tests described earlier for qualifying educa-
tion. Nonqualifying education is education
that:
1) Is needed to meet the minimum edu-
cational requirements of your present
trade or business, or
2) Is part of a program of study that can
qualify you for a new trade or business.
Education To Meet
Minimum Requirements
Education needed to meet the minimum
educational requirements for your present
trade or business is nonqualifying educa-
tion. The minimum education necessary is
determined by:
1) Laws and regulations, 
2) Standards of your profession, trade,
or business, and 
3) Your employer's requirements.
Once you have met the minimum edu-
cational requirements that were in effect
when you were hired, you do not have to
meet minimum educational requirements
again. This means that if the minimum re-
quirements change after you were hired,
any education you need to meet the new
requirements is qualifying education.
CAUTION
!
You have not necessarily met the
minimum educational requirements
of your trade or business simply
because you are already doing the work.
Example 1. You are a full-time engi-
neering student. You work part time as an
engineer for a firm that will employ you as
a full-time engineer after you finish college.
Although your college engineering courses
improve your skills in your present job, you
have not met the minimum job requirements
for a full-time engineer. The education is
nonqualifying education.
Example 2. You are an accountant and
you have met the minimum educational re-
quirements of your employer. Your em-
ployer later changes the minimum educa-
tional requirements and requires you to take
college courses to keep your job. These
additional courses are not minimum re-
quirements because you have already sat-
isfied the initial minimum requirements. The
education is qualifying education.
Page 190 Chapter 29  Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Figure 29–A. Does Your Education Qualify?
Start Here
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
No
Is the education needed
to meet the minimum
educational requirements
of your trade or business?
Is the education part of a
study program that can
qualify you in a new trade
or business?
Is the education required
by your employer, or by
law, to keep your present
salary, status, or job?
Does the education
maintain or improve skills
required in doing your
present work?
Your education qualifies.
Your education does not
qualify.
/H17074
No
No
No
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
Although you do not have all the required
courses, you have already met the minimum
educational requirements.
Example 3. Assume the same facts as
in Example 1 except that you are hired with
only 3 years of college. The courses you
take that lead to a bachelor's degree (in-
cluding those in education) are nonqualify-
ing education. They are needed to meet the
minimum educational requirements for em-
ployment as a teacher.
Example 4. You have a bachelor's de-
gree and you work as a temporary instructor
at a university. At the same time, you take
graduate courses toward an advanced de-
gree. The rules of the university state that
you can become a faculty member only if
you get a graduate degree. Also, you can
keep your job as an instructor only as long
as you show satisfactory progress toward
getting this degree. You have not met the
minimum educational requirements to qual-
ify you as a faculty member. The graduate
courses are nonqualifying education.
Certification in a new state.Once you
have met the minimum educational re-
quirements for teachers for your state, you
are considered to have met the minimum
educational requirements in all states. This
is true even if you must get additional edu-
cation to be certified in another state. Any
additional education you need is qualifying
education. You have already met the mini-
mum requirements for teaching and teach-
ing in another state is not a new trade or
business.
Example. You hold a permanent
teaching certificate in State A and are em-
ployed as a teacher in that state for several
years. You move to State B and are
promptly hired as a teacher. You are re-
quired, however, to complete certain pre-
scribed courses to get a permanent teach-
ing certificate in State B. These additional
courses are qualifying education because
the teaching position in State B involves the
same general kind of work for which you
were qualified in State A.
Education That
Qualifies You for a
New Trade or Business
Education that is part of a program of study
that can qualify you for a new trade or
business is nonqualifying education. This
is true even if you do not plan to enter that
trade or business.
If you are an employee, a change of
duties that involves the same general kind
of work is not a new trade or business.
Example 1. You are an accountant.
Your employer requires you to get a law
degree at your own expense. You register
at a law school for the regular curriculum
that leads to a law degree. Even if you do
not intend to become a lawyer, the educa-
tion is nonqualifying because the law de-
gree will qualify you for a new trade or
business.
Example 2. You are a general practi-
tioner of medicine. You take a 2-week
course to review developments in several
specialized fields of medicine. The course
does not qualify you for a new profession.
However, education that a new ac-
countant coming into the firm needs to sat-
isfy the new minimum requirements would
be nonqualifying education for the new ac-
countant.
Requirements for Teachers
This discussion applies to teachers and
others employed by educational organiza-
tions. 
The state or school district usually sets
the minimum educational requirements for
teachers. The requirement is the college
degree or the minimum number of college
hours usually required of a person hired for
that position.
If no requirements exist, you will have
met the minimum educational requirements
when you become a faculty member. You
generally will be considered a faculty mem-
ber when one or more of the following oc-
curs.
1) You have tenure.
2) Your years of service count toward
obtaining tenure.
3) You have a vote in faculty decisions.
4) Your school makes contributions for
you to a retirement plan other than
social security or a similar program.
Example 1. The law in your state re-
quires beginning secondary school teachers
to have a bachelor's degree, including ten
professional education courses. In addition,
to keep the job, a teacher must complete a
fifth year of training within 10 years from the
date of hire. If the employing school certifies
to the state Department of Education that
qualified teachers cannot be found, the
school can hire persons with only 3 years
of college. However, to keep their jobs,
these teachers must get a bachelor's de-
gree and the required professional educa-
tion courses within 3 years.
Under these facts, the bachelor's de-
gree, whether or not it includes the ten
professional education courses, is consid-
ered the minimum educational requirement
for qualification as a teacher in your state.
If you have all of the required education
except the fifth year, you have met the
minimum educational requirements. The
fifth year of training is qualifying education
unless it is part of a program of study that
will qualify you for a new trade or business.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as
in Example 1 except that you have a bach-
elor's degree and only six professional ed-
ucation courses. The additional four edu-
cation courses are qualifying education.
Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related EducationPage 191

It is qualifying education because it main-
tains or improves skills required in your
present profession.
Bar or CPA Review Course
Review courses to prepare for the bar ex-
amination or the certified public accountant
(CPA) examination are nonqualifying edu-
cation. They are part of a program of study
that can qualify you for a new profession.
Teaching and Related Duties
All teaching and related duties are consid-
ered the same general kind of work. A
change in duties in any of the following
ways is not considered a change to a new
business.
1) Elementary school teacher to second-
ary school teacher.
2) Teacher of one subject, such as biol-
ogy, to teacher of another subject,
such as art.
3) Classroom teacher to guidance coun-
selor.
4) Classroom teacher to school adminis-
trator.
What Educational
Expenses Are
Deductible?
If your education meets the requirements
described earlier under Qualifying Educa-
tion, you can generally deduct your educa-
tional expenses. If you are not self-
employed, you can deduct educational
expenses only if you itemize your de-
ductions.
You cannot deduct expenses related to
tax-exempt and excluded income.
Deductible expenses.The following edu-
cational expenses can be deducted.
 Tuition, books, supplies, lab fees, and
similar items.
 Certain transportation and travel costs.
 Other educational expenses, such as
costs of research and typing when
writing a paper as part of an educational
program.
Nondeductible expenses. Educational
expenses do not include personal or capital
expenses. For example, you cannot deduct
the dollar value of vacation time or annual
leave you take to attend classes. This
amount is a personal expense.
Unclaimed reimbursement. If you do
not claim reimbursement that you are enti-
tled to receive from your employer, you
cannot deduct the expenses that apply to
the reimbursement.
Example. Your employer agrees to pay
your educational expenses if you file a
voucher showing your expenses. You do
not file a voucher, and you do not get re-
imbursed. Because you did not file a
voucher, you cannot deduct the expenses
on your tax return.
Transportation Expenses
If your education qualifies, you can deduct
local transportation costs of going directly
from work to school. If you are regularly
employed and go to school on a temporary
basis, you can also deduct the costs of re-
turning from school to home.
If your attendance at school is realis-
tically expected to last (and does in fact last)
for 1 year or less, you go to school on a
temporary basis (unless there are facts and
circumstances that would indicate other-
wise). If your attendance at school is real-
istically expected to last for more than 1
year or if there is no realistic expectation
that the attendance will last for 1 year or
less, the attendance is not temporary, re-
gardless of whether it actually lasts for more
than 1 year. If attendance at school initially
is realistically expected to last for 1 year or
less, but at some later date the attendance
is realistically expected to last more than 1
year, that attendance will be treated as
temporary (unless there are facts and cir-
cumstances that would indicate otherwise)
until your expectation changes. It will not
be treated as temporary after the date you
determine it will last more than 1 year.
CAUTION
!
Attendance at school on a tempo-
rary basis was formerly defined as
attendance on an irregular or short-
term basis (generally a matter of days or
weeks).
TIP
You can file an amended return on
Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi-
vidual Income Tax Return, for any
year in which you used the former definition
of attendance on a temporary basis. How-
ever, you generally must file the amend-
ment within 3 years from the time you filed
the return or within 2 years from the time
you paid the tax, whichever is later.
If you are regularly employed and go
directly from home to school on a temporary
basis, you can deduct the round-trip costs
of transportation between your home and
school. This is true regardless of the lo-
cation of the school, the distance traveled,
or whether you attend school on nonwork
days.
Transportation expenses include the
actual costs of bus, subway, cab, or other
fares, as well as the costs of using your car.
Transportation expenses do not include
amounts spent for travel, meals, or lodging
while you are away from home overnight.
Example 1. You regularly work in
Camden, New Jersey, and go directly from
work to home. You also attend school every
night for 3 months to take a course that
improves your job skills. Since you are at-
tending school on a temporary basis, you
can deduct your daily round-trip transporta-
tion expenses in going between home and
school. This is true regardless of the dis-
tance traveled.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as
in Example 1 except that on certain nights
you go directly from work to school and then
home. You can deduct your transportation
expenses from your regular work site to
school and then home.
Example 3. Assume the same facts as
in Example 1 except that you attend the
school for 9 months on Saturdays, nonwork
days. Since you are attending school on a
temporary basis, you can deduct your
round-trip transportation expenses in going
between home and school.
Example 4. Assume the same facts as
in Example 1 except that you attend classes
twice a week for 15 months. Since your at-
tendance in school is not considered tem-
porary, you cannot deduct your transporta-
tion expenses in going between home and
school. If you go directly from work to
school, you can deduct the one-way trans-
portation expenses of going from work to
school. If you go from work to home to
school and return home, your transportation
expenses cannot be more than if you had
gone directly from work to school.
Using your car. If you use your car
(whether you own or lease it) for transpor-
tation to school, you can deduct your actual
expenses or use the standard mileage rate
to figure the amount you can deduct. The
standard mileage rate for 2000 is 32
1/2 cents
per mile. Whichever method you use, you
can also deduct parking fees and tolls. See
Car Expenses in chapter 28 for information
on deducting your actual expenses of using
a car.
Travel Expenses
You can deduct expenses for travel, meals
(subject to the 50% limit discussed later),
and lodging if:
1) You travel overnight to obtain qualified
education, and
2) The main purpose of the trip is to at-
tend a work-related course or seminar.
Travel expenses for qualifying education are
treated the same as travel expenses for
other employee business purposes. For
more information, see chapter 28.
CAUTION
!
You cannot deduct expenses for
personal activities, such as sight-
seeing, visiting, or entertaining.
Mainly personal travel.If your travel away
from home is mainly personal, you cannot
deduct all of your expenses for travel,
meals, and lodging. You can deduct only
your expenses for lodging and 50% of your
expenses for meals during the time you at-
tend the qualified educational activities.
Whether a trip's purpose is mainly per-
sonal or educational depends upon the facts
and circumstances. An important factor is
the comparison of time spent on personal
activities with time spent on educational
activities. If you spend more time on per-
sonal activities, the trip is considered mainly
educational only if you can show a sub-
stantial nonpersonal reason for traveling to
a particular location.
Example 1. John works in Newark, New
Jersey. He traveled to Chicago to take a
deductible 1-week course at the request of
his employer. While there, he took a
sightseeing trip, entertained some friends,
and took a side trip to Pleasantville for a
day. Since the trip was mainly for business,
he can deduct his round-trip airfare to
Chicago, but he cannot deduct his trans-
portation expenses of going to Pleasantville.
He can deduct only the meals (subject to
the 50% limit) and lodging connected with
his educational activities.
Page 192 Chapter 29  Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Example 2. Dave works in Nashville
and recently traveled to California to take a
deductible 2-week seminar. While there, he
spent an extra 8 weeks on personal activ-
ities. The facts, including the extra 8-week
stay, show that his main purpose was to
take a vacation. He cannot deduct his
round-trip airfare or his meals and lodging
for the 8 weeks. He can deduct only his
expenses for meals (subject to the 50%
limit) and lodging for the 2 weeks he at-
tended the seminar.
Cruises and conventions.Certain cruises
and conventions offer seminars or courses
as part of their itinerary. Even if these are
work related, your deduction for travel may
be limited. This applies to:
1) Travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or
other form of luxury water transporta-
tion, and
2) Conventions outside the North Ameri-
can area.
For a discussion of the limits on travel ex-
pense deductions that apply to cruises and
conventions, see Luxury Water Travel and
Conventions in Publication 463.
Meal Expenses
If your educational expenses qualify for de-
duction, you can deduct the cost of meals
that qualify as travel expenses.
50% limit. You can deduct only 50% of
your qualifying business-related meals if
you were not reimbursed by your employer.
This includes meals while traveling away
from home to obtain your education.
 Employees must use Form 2106 or
Form 2106–EZ to apply the 50% limit.
Travel as Education
You cannot deduct the cost of travel that is
a form of education, even if it is directly re-
lated to your duties in your work or busi-
ness.
Example. You are a French language
teacher. While on sabbatical leave granted
for travel, you traveled through France to
improve your knowledge of the French lan-
guage. You chose your itinerary and most
of your activities to improve your French
language skills. You cannot deduct your
travel expenses as educational expenses.
This is true even if you spent most of your
time learning French by visiting French
schools and families, attending movies or
plays, and engaging in similar activities.
Student Loan
Interest Expense
You may be able to deduct interest you pay
on a qualified student loan. This deduction
is available whether or not the education is
work-related, and even if you do not itemize
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). For
more information on the deduction of stu-
dent loan interest, see Publication 970.
Expenses Relating to
Tax-Exempt and
Excluded Income
Some educational assistance you receive
may be tax-exempt or excluded from your
income. Since you do not pay tax on this
income, you may not be able to deduct the
related expenses. Examples of tax-exempt
or excluded income include scholarships,
veterans' educational assistance, and the
Education Savings Bond Program. If you
received assistance from any of these
sources, see Expenses Relating to Tax-
Exempt and Excluded Income in Publication
508.
Employer-Provided
Educational Assistance
If you receive educational assistance bene-
fits from your employer under an educa-
tional assistance program, you can exclude
up to $5,250 of those benefits each year.
This means your employer should not in-
clude the benefits with your wages, tips, and
other compensation shown in box 1 of your
Form W–2. This also means that you do not
include the benefits on your income tax re-
turn.
CAUTION
!
You must reduce your deductible
educational expenses by the
amount of any tax-free educational
assistance benefits you received for those
expenses.
Educational assistance program. To
qualify as an educational assistance pro-
gram, the plan must be written and must
meet certain other requirements. Your em-
ployer can tell you whether there is a qual-
ified program where you work.
Educational assistance.Tax-free educa-
tional assistance benefits include payments
for tuition, fees and similar expenses,
books, supplies, and equipment. The pay-
ments must be for undergraduate-level
courses that begin before January 1, 2002.
The payments do not have to be for work-
related courses.
Educational assistance benefits do not
include payments for the following items.
1) Meals, lodging, transportation, or tools
or supplies (other than textbooks) that
you can keep after completing the
course of instruction.
2) Education involving sports, games, or
hobbies unless the education has a
reasonable relationship to the business
of your employer, or is required as part
of a degree program.
3) Graduate-level courses that are
normally taken under a program lead-
ing to a law, business, medical, or
other advanced academic or profes-
sional degree.
Benefit over $5,250. If your employer
gives you more than $5,250 of educational
assistance benefits during the year, the
amount over $5,250 is generally taxable.
Your employer should include the taxable
amount in your wages (box 1 of your Form
W–2).
However, if the payments also qualify
as a working condition fringe benefit, your
employer can exclude all of the payments
from your wages. A working condition fringe
benefit is a benefit which, had you paid for
it, you could deduct as an employee busi-
ness expense.
Where To Deduct
Expenses
Self-employed persons and employees re-
port their educational expenses differently.
The following information explains what
forms you must use to deduct your qualified
educational expenses.
Self-Employed Persons
If you are self-employed, you must report
your qualified educational expenses on the
appropriate form used to report your busi-
ness income and expenses (Schedule C,
C–EZ, or F). If your educational expenses
include expenses for a car or truck, travel,
or meals, report them the same way you
report other business expenses for those
items. See the instructions for the form you
file for information on how to complete it.
Employees
If you are an employee, you can deduct
qualified educational expenses only if they
were not reimbursed by your employer or if
they exceeded your reimbursement.
(Amounts your employer paid under a non-
accountable plan and included in box 1 of
your Form W–2 are not considered re-
imbursements.) How you treat any re-
imbursement you receive depends on the
type of reimbursement arrangement and the
amount of the reimbursement. For informa-
tion on how to report your reimbursement,
see chapter 28.
Include your qualified educational ex-
penses with your deduction for any other
employee business expenses on line 20 of
Schedule A (Form 1040). (Special rules for
expenses of certain performing artists and
fee-basis officials and for impairment-
related work expenses are explained later.)
This deduction is subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that ap-
plies to most miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions.
Form 2106 or 2106–EZ. To figure your
deduction for employee business expenses,
including qualified educational expenses,
you generally must complete Form 2106 or
Form 2106–EZ.
Form not required. Do not complete
either Form 2106 or Form 2106–EZ if:
 You were not reimbursed for any of
your expenses, and
 You are not claiming travel, transporta-
tion, or meal expenses.
If you meet both of these requirements,
enter the expenses directly on line 20 of
Schedule A (Form 1040). (Special rules for
expenses of certain performing artists and
fee-basis officials and for impairment-
related work expenses are explained later.)
Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related EducationPage 193

Using Form 2106 –EZ. This form is
shorter and easier to use than Form 2106.
You can use this form if:
 You were not reimbursed for any of
your expenses, and 
 You are using the standard mileage rate
if you are claiming vehicle expenses.
If you do not meet both of these re-
quirements, use Form 2106.
Performing artists and fee-basis offi-
cials.If you are a qualified performing art-
ist, or a state (or local) government official
who is paid in whole or in part on a fee ba-
sis, you can deduct your qualified educa-
tional expenses as an adjustment to gross
income rather than as an itemized de-
duction.
For more information on qualified per-
forming artists and fee-basis officials, see
chapter 28.
Impairment-related work expenses. If
you are disabled and have impairment-
related work expenses that enable you to
get qualifying education, you can deduct
them on line 27 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
They are not subject to the 2%-of-
adjusted-gross-income limit.
For more information on impairment-
related work expenses, see chapter 28.
Recordkeeping
RECORDS
You must keep records as proof of
any deduction claimed on your tax
return. Generally, you should keep
your records for 3 years from the date of
filing the return and claiming the deduction.
For specific information about keeping
records of business expenses, see
Recordkeeping in chapter 28.
Page 194 Chapter 29  Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

30.
Miscellaneous
Deductions
Important Reminder
Limit on itemized deductions. If your
adjusted gross income is more than
$128,950 ($64,475 if you are married filing
separately), you may have to reduce the
amount of certain itemized deductions, in-
cluding your miscellaneous deductions.
Introduction
This chapter explains which expenses you
can claim as miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). You
must reduce the total of most miscellaneous
itemized deductions by 2% of your adjusted
gross income. This chapter covers the fol-
lowing topics.
 Deductions subject to the 2% limit. 
 Deductions not subject to the 2% limit.
 Expenses you cannot deduct. 
RECORDS
You must keep records to verify
your deductions. You should keep
receipts, canceled checks, financial
account statements, and other documentary
evidence. For more information on
recordkeeping, get Publication 552,
Recordkeeping for Individuals.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and
Car Expenses
/H18554525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
/H18554 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
/H18554 535 Business Expenses
/H18554587 Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care
Providers)
/H18554946 How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
/H185542106 Employee Business Expenses
/H185542106–EZ  Unreimbursed Employee
Business Expenses 
Deductions Subject
to the 2% Limit
You can deduct certain expenses as mis-
cellaneous itemized deductions on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040). You can claim the
amount of expenses that is more than 2%
of your adjusted gross income. You figure
your deduction on Schedule A by subtract-
ing 2% of your adjusted gross income from
the total amount of these expenses. Your
adjusted gross income is the amount on line
34, Form 1040.
Generally, you apply the 2% limit after
you apply any other deduction limit. For
example, the 50% (or 60%) limit on
business-related meals and entertainment
(discussed in chapter 28) is applied before
you subtract 2% of your adjusted gross in-
come.
Deductions subject to the 2% limit are
discussed in the three categories in which
you report them on Schedule A: unreim-
bursed employee expenses (line 20), tax
preparation fees (line 21), and other ex-
penses (line 22).
Impairment-related work expenses. If
you have a physical or mental disability,
certain expenses you incur that allow you
to work may not be subject to the 2% limit.
See Impairment-Related Work Expenses,
under Deductions Not Subject to the 2%
Limit, later.
Performing artists.If you are a qualifying
performing artist, you may be able to deduct
your employee business expenses as an
adjustment to gross income rather than as
a miscellaneous itemized deduction. See
Special Rules in chapter 28 if you need
more information about this exception.
State and local government officials paid
on a fee basis.If you performed services
as an employee of a state or local govern-
ment and you were paid in whole or in part
on a fee basis, you can claim your trade or
business expenses in performing those
services as an adjustment to gross income,
rather than as a miscellaneous deduction.
See Officials Paid on a Fee Basis under
Deductions Not Subject to the 2% Limit,
later.
Unreimbursed
Employee Expenses
You can deduct only unreimbursed em-
ployee expenses that are:
1) Paid or incurred during your tax year, 
2) For carrying on your trade or business
of being an employee, and 
3) Ordinary and necessary.
An expense is ordinary if it is common and
accepted in your type of trade or business.
An expense is necessary if it is appropriate
and helpful to your trade or business.
You may be able to deduct the following
items as unreimbursed employee expenses.
 Business bad debt of an employee.
 Education that is employment related
(see chapter 29).
 Licenses and regulatory fees.
 Malpractice insurance premiums.
 Medical examinations required by an
employer.
 Occupational taxes.
 Passport for a business trip.
 Subscriptions to professional journals
and trade magazines related to your
work.
 Travel, transportation, entertainment,
gift, and car expenses related to your
work (see chapter 28).
Business Liability Insurance
You can deduct insurance premiums you
paid for protection against personal liability
for wrongful acts on the job.
Damages for Breach
of Employment Contract
If you break an employment contract, you
can deduct damages you pay your former
employer if the damages are attributable to
the pay you received from that employer.
Depreciation on Computers
or Cellular Telephones 
You can claim a depreciation deduction for
a computer or cellular telephone that you
use in your work as an employee if its use
is:
1) For the convenience of your employer,
and 
2) Required as a condition of your em-
ployment.
For more information about the rules and
exceptions to the rules affecting the allow-
able deductions for a home computer or
cellular telephone, see Publication 529.
Dues to Chambers of Commerce
and Professional Societies
You may be able to deduct dues paid to
professional organizations (such as bar as-
sociations and medical associations) and to
chambers of commerce, and similar organ-
izations, if membership helps you carry out
the duties of your job. Similar organizations
include:
 Boards of trade, 
 Business leagues, 
 Civic or public service organizations, 
 Real estate boards, and 
 Trade associations. 
You cannot deduct dues paid to an or-
ganization if one of its main purposes is to:
1) Conduct entertainment activities for
members or their guests, or
2) Provide members or their guests with
access to entertainment facilities.
Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon
clubs are not deductible. See Club Dues
under Nondeductible Expenses for more
information.
Lobbying and political activities.You
may not be able to deduct that part of your
dues that is for certain lobbying and political
Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 195

activities. See Dues used for lobbying under
Lobbying Expenses, later.
Home Office
If you use a part of your home regularly and
exclusively for business purposes, you may
be able to deduct a part of the operating
expenses and depreciation of your home.
You can claim this deduction for the
business use of a part of your home only if
you use that part of your home regularly
and exclusively: :
1) As your principal place of business for
any trade or business,
2) A place to meet or deal with your pa-
tients, clients, or customers in the
normal course of your trade or busi-
ness. 
3) Or, in the case of a separate structure
not attached to your home, in con-
nection with your trade or business.
The regular and exclusive business use
must be for the convenience of your em-
ployer and not just appropriate and helpful
in your job. Get Publication 587 for more
detailed information and a worksheet.
Job Search Expenses
You can deduct certain expenses you have
in looking for a new job in your present oc-
cupation, even if you do not get a new job.
You cannot deduct these expenses if:
1) You are looking for a job in a new oc-
cupation, or
2) There was a substantial break between
the ending of your last job and your
looking for a new one.
CAUTION
!
You cannot deduct your expenses
if you are seeking employment for
the first time.
Employment and outplacement agency
fees. You can deduct employment and
outplacement agency fees you pay in look-
ing for a new job in your present occupation.
Employer pays you back.If, in a later
year, your employer pays you back for em-
ployment agency fees, you must include the
amount you receive in your gross income
up to the amount of your tax benefit in the
earlier year (see Recoveries in chapter 13).
Employer pays the employment
agency. If your employer pays the fees
directly to the employment agency and you
are not responsible for them, you do not
include them in your gross income.
Résumé.  You can deduct amounts you
spend for typing, printing, and mailing
copies of a résumé to prospective employ-
ers if you are looking for a new job in your
present occupation.
Travel and transportation expenses.  If
you travel to an area and, while there, you
look for a new job in your present occupa-
tion, you may be able to deduct travel ex-
penses to and from the area. You can de-
duct the travel expenses if the trip is
primarily to look for a new job. The amount
of time you spend on personal activity
compared to the amount of time you spend
in looking for work is important in determin-
ing whether the trip is primarily personal or
is primarily to look for a new job.
Even if you cannot deduct the travel ex-
penses to and from an area, you can deduct
the expenses of looking for a new job in
your present occupation, while in the area.
You may elect to use the standard
mileage rate to figure your car expenses.
The standard mileage rate for 2000 is 32.5
cents per mile. See chapter 28 for more in-
formation.
Licenses and Regulatory Fees
You can deduct the amount you pay each
year to state or local governments for li-
censes and regulatory fees for your trade,
business, or profession.
Occupational Taxes
You can deduct an occupational tax
charged at a flat rate by a locality for the
privilege of working or conducting a busi-
ness in the locality. If you are an employee,
you can claim occupational taxes only as a
miscellaneous deduction subject to the 2%
limit; you cannot claim them as a deduction
for taxes elsewhere on your return.
Repayment of
Income Aid Payment
An “income aid payment” is one that is re-
ceived under an employer's plan to aid em-
ployees who lose their jobs because of lack
of work. If you repay a lump-sum income
aid payment that you received and included
in income in an earlier year, you can deduct
the repayment.
Research Expenses of
a College Professor
If you are a college professor, you can de-
duct research expenses, including travel
expenses, for teaching, lecturing, or writing
and publishing on subjects that relate di-
rectly to the field of your teaching duties.
You must have undertaken the research as
a means of carrying out the duties expected
of a professor and without expectation of
profit apart from salary. However, you can-
not deduct the cost of travel as a form of
education.
Tools Used in Your Work
Generally, you can deduct amounts you
spend for tools used in your work if the tools
wear out and are thrown away within one
year from the date of purchase. You can
depreciate the cost of tools that have a
useful life substantially beyond the tax year.
For more information about depreciation,
get Publication 946.
Union Dues and Expenses
You can deduct dues and initiation fees you
pay for union membership.
You can also deduct assessments for
benefit payments to unemployed union
members. However, you cannot deduct the
part of the assessments or contributions
that provides funds for the payment of sick,
accident, or death benefits. Also, you can-
not deduct contributions to a pension fund,
even if the union requires you to make the
contributions.
You may not be able to deduct amounts
you pay to the union that are related to
certain lobbying and political activities. See
Lobbying Expenses under Nondeductible
Expenses, later.
Work Clothes and Uniforms
You can deduct the cost and upkeep of
work clothes if the following two require-
ments are met.
1) You must wear them as a condition of
your employment.
2) The clothes are not suitable for every-
day wear. 
CAUTION
!
It is not enough that you wear dis-
tinctive clothing. The clothing must
be specifically required by your em-
ployer. Nor is it enough that you do not, in
fact, wear your work clothes away from
work. The clothing must not be suitable for
taking the place of your regular clothing.
Examples of workers who may be able
to deduct the cost and upkeep of work
clothes are: delivery workers, firefighters,
health care workers, law enforcement offi-
cers, letter carriers, professional athletes,
and transportation workers (air, rail, bus,
etc.).
Musicians and entertainers can deduct
the cost of theatrical clothing and accesso-
ries if they are not suitable for everyday
wear.
However, work clothing consisting of
white cap, white shirt or white jacket, white
bib overalls, and standard work shoes,
which a painter is required by his union to
wear on the job, is not distinctive in char-
acter or in the nature of a uniform. Similarly,
the costs of buying and maintaining blue
work clothes worn by a welder at the re-
quest of a foreman are not deductible.
Protective clothing.You can deduct the
cost of protective clothing required in your
work, such as safety shoes or boots, safety
glasses, hard hats, and work gloves.
Examples of workers who may be re-
quired to wear safety items are: carpenters,
cement workers, chemical workers, electri-
cians, fishing boat crew members,
machinists, oil field workers, pipe fitters,
steamfitters, and truck drivers.
Military uniforms.You generally cannot
deduct the cost of your uniforms if you are
on full-time active duty in the armed forces.
However, if you are an armed forces
reservist, you can deduct the unreimbursed
cost of your uniform if military regulations
restrict you from wearing it except while on
duty as a reservist. In figuring the de-
duction, you must reduce the cost by any
nontaxable allowance you receive for these
expenses.
If local military rules do not allow you to
wear fatigue uniforms when you are off duty,
you can deduct the amount by which the
cost of buying and keeping up these uni-
forms is more than the uniform allowance
you receive.
You can deduct the cost of your uniforms
if you are a civilian faculty or staff member
of a military school.
Page 196 Chapter 30  Miscellaneous Deductions

Tax Preparation Fees
You can usually deduct tax preparation fees
in the year you pay them. Thus, on your
2000 return, you can deduct fees paid in
2000 for preparing your 1999 return.
These fees include the cost of tax prep-
aration software programs and tax publica-
tions. They also include any fee you paid for
electronic filing of your return.
Deduct expenses of preparing tax
schedules relating to profit or loss from
business (Schedule C or C–EZ), rentals or
royalties (Schedule E), or farm income and
expenses (Schedule F) on the appropriate
schedule. Deduct the expenses of prepar-
ing the remainder of the return on line 21,
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Other Expenses
You can deduct certain other expenses as
miscellaneous itemized deductions subject
to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.
These are expenses you pay:
1) To produce or collect income that must
be included in your gross income, 
2) To manage, conserve, or maintain
property held for producing such in-
come, or 
3) To determine, contest, pay, or claim a
refund of any tax.
You can deduct expenses you pay for the
purposes in (1) and (2) above only if they
are reasonably and closely related to these
purposes. Some of these other expenses
are explained in the following discussions.
If the expenses you pay produce income
that is only partially taxable, see Tax-
Exempt Income Expenses, later, under
Nondeductible Expenses.
Appraisal Fees
You can deduct appraisal fees if you pay
them to figure a casualty loss or the fair
market value of donated property.
Certain Casualty and
Theft Losses
You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as
a miscellaneous itemized deduction subject
to the 2% limit if you used the damaged or
stolen property in performing services as
an employee. First report the loss in Section
B of Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts. You
may also have to include the loss on Form
4797, Sales of Business Property, if you are
otherwise required to file that form. Your
deduction is the amount of the loss included
on lines 32 and 38b of Form 4684 and line
18b of Form 4797. For other casualty and
theft losses, see chapter 27.
Clerical Help and Office Rent
You can deduct office expenses, such as
rent and clerical help, that you have in
connection with your investments and col-
lecting the taxable income on them.
Depreciation on
Home Computer
You can deduct depreciation on your home
computer if you use it to produce income
(for example, to manage your investments
that produce taxable income). You generally
must depreciate the computer using the
straight line method over the Alternative
Depreciation System (ADS) recovery pe-
riod. But if you work as an employee and
also use the computer in that work, see
Publication 946.
Excess Deductions of an Estate
If an estate's total deductions in its last tax
year are more than its gross income for that
year, the beneficiaries succeeding to the
estate's property can deduct the excess.
Do not include deductions for personal ex-
emptions and charitable contributions when
figuring the estate's total deductions. The
beneficiaries can claim the deduction only
for the tax year in which, or with which, the
estate terminates, whether the year of ter-
mination is a normal year or a short tax
year. For more information, see Termination
of an Estate in Publication 559, Survivors,
Executors, and Administrators.
Fees to Collect
Interest and Dividends
You can deduct fees you pay to a broker,
bank, trustee, or similar agent to collect your
taxable bond interest or dividends on shares
of stock. But you cannot deduct a fee you
pay to a broker to buy investment property,
such as stocks or bonds. You must add the
fee to the cost of the property.
You cannot deduct the fee you pay to a
broker to sell securities. You can use the
fee only to figure gain or loss from the sale.
See the instructions for columns (d) and (e)
of Schedule D (Form 1040) for information
on how to report the fee.
Hobby Expenses
You can generally deduct hobby expenses,
but only up to the amount of hobby income.
A hobby is not a business because it is not
carried on to make a profit. See Activity not
for profit in chapter 13 under Other Income.
Indirect Deductions of
Pass-Through Entities
Pass-through entities include partnerships,
S corporations, and mutual funds that are
not publicly offered. Deductions of pass-
through entities are passed through to the
partners or shareholders. The partners or
shareholders can deduct their share of
passed-through deductions for investment
expenses as miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions subject to the 2% limit.
Example. You are a member of an in-
vestment club that is formed solely to invest
in securities. The club is treated as a part-
nership. The partnership's income is solely
from taxable dividends, interest, and gains
from sales of securities. In this case, you
can deduct your share of the partnership's
operating expenses as miscellaneous item-
ized deductions subject to the 2% limit.
However, if the investment club partnership
has investments that also produce nontax-
able income, you cannot deduct your share
of the partnership's expenses that produce
the nontaxable income.
Publicly offered mutual funds. Publicly
offered mutual funds do not pass de-
ductions for investment expenses through
to shareholders. A mutual fund is “publicly
offered” if it is:
1) Continuously offered pursuant to a
public offering,
2) Regularly traded on an established
securities market, or 
3) Held by or for at least 500 persons at
all times during the tax year. 
A publicly offered mutual fund will send
you a Form 1099–DIV, or a substitute form,
showing the net amount of dividend income
(gross dividends minus investment ex-
penses). This net figure is the amount you
report on your return as income. You can-
not deduct investment expenses.
Information returns.You should receive
information returns from pass-through enti-
ties.
Partnerships and S corporations.
These entities issue Schedule K–1, which
lists the items and amounts you must report,
and identifies the tax return schedules and
lines to use.
Nonpublicly offered mutual funds.
These funds will send you a Form
1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions, or
a substitute form, showing your share of
gross income and investment expenses.
You can claim the expenses only as a mis-
cellaneous itemized deduction subject to the
2% limit.
Investment Fees and Expenses
You can deduct investment fees, custodial
fees, trust administration fees, and other
expenses you paid for managing your in-
vestments that produce taxable income.
Legal Expenses
You can usually deduct legal expenses that
you incur in attempting to produce or collect
taxable income or that you pay in con-
nection with the determination, collection,
or refund of any tax.
You can also deduct legal expenses that
are:
 Related to either doing or keeping your
job, such as those you paid to defend
yourself against criminal charges aris-
ing out of your trade or business,
 For tax advice related to a divorce if the
bill specifies how much is for tax advice
and it is determined in a reasonable
way, or
 To collect taxable alimony.
You can deduct expenses of resolving
tax issues relating to profit or loss from
business (Schedule C or C–EZ), rentals or
royalties (Schedule E), or farm income and
expenses (Schedule F), on the appropriate
schedule. You deduct expenses of resolving
nonbusiness tax issues on Schedule A
(Form 1040).
Loss on Deposits
For information on whether, and if so, how
you may deduct a loss on your deposit in a
qualified financial institution, see Deposit in
insolvent or bankrupt financial institution in
chapter 15.
Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 197

Repayments of Income
If you had to repay an amount that you in-
cluded in income in an earlier year, you may
be able to deduct the amount you repaid. If
the amount you had to repay was ordinary
income of $3,000 or less, the deduction is
subject to the 2% limit. If it was more than
$3,000, see Repayments Under Claim of
Right under Deductions Not Subject to the
2% Limit, later.
Repayments of
Social Security Benefits
For information on how to deduct your re-
payments of certain social security benefits,
see Repayments More Than Gross Benefits
in chapter 12.
Safe Deposit Box Rent
You can deduct safe deposit box rent if you
use the box to store taxable income-
producing stocks, bonds, or investment-
related papers and documents. You cannot
deduct the rent if you use the box only for
jewelry, other personal items, or tax-exempt
securities.
Service Charges on
Dividend Reinvestment Plans
You can deduct service charges you pay
as a subscriber in a dividend reinvestment
plan. These service charges include pay-
ments for:
1) Holding shares acquired through a
plan, 
2) Collecting and reinvesting cash divi-
dends, and 
3) Keeping individual records and provid-
ing detailed statements of accounts. 
Trustee's Administrative
Fees for IRA
Trustee's administrative fees that are billed
separately and paid by you in connection
with your individual retirement arrangement
(IRA) are deductible (if they are ordinary
and necessary) as a miscellaneous itemized
deduction subject to the 2% limit. For more
information about IRAs, see chapter 18.
Deductions
Not Subject to
the 2% Limit
You can deduct the items listed below as
miscellaneous itemized deductions. They
are not subject to the 2% limit. Report these
items on line 27, Schedule A (Form 1040).
List of Deductions
 Amortizable premium on taxable bonds.
 Casualty and theft losses from income-
producing property.
 Federal estate tax on income in respect
of a decedent.
 Gambling losses up to the amount of
gambling winnings.
 Impairment-related work expenses of
persons with disabilities.
 Repayments of more than $3,000 under
a claim of right.
 Unrecovered investment in an annuity.
Amortizable Premium
on Taxable Bonds
In general, if the amount you pay for a bond
is greater than its stated principal amount,
the excess is bond premium. You can elect
to amortize the premium on taxable bonds.
The amortization of the premium is gener-
ally an offset to interest income on the bond
rather than a separate deduction item.
Part of the premium on some bonds may
be a miscellaneous deduction not subject
to the 2% limit. For more information, see
Amortizable Premium on Taxable Bonds in
Publication 529, and Bond Premium
Amortization in chapter 3 of Publication 550,
Investment Income and Expenses.
Certain Casualty and
Theft Losses
You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as
a miscellaneous itemized deduction not
subject to the 2% limit if the damaged or
stolen property was income-producing
property (property held for investment, such
as stocks, notes, bonds, gold, silver, vacant
lots, and works of art). First report the loss
in Section B of Form 4684, Casualties and
Thefts. You may also have to include the
loss on Form 4797, Sales of Business
Property, if you are otherwise required to file
that form. Your deduction is the amount of
the loss included on lines 32 and 38b of
Form 4684 and line 18b of Form 4797. For
more information on casualty and theft
losses, see chapter 27.
Federal Estate Tax on Income
in Respect of a Decedent
You can deduct the federal estate tax at-
tributable to income in respect of a decedent
that you as a beneficiary include in your
gross income. Income in respect of the de-
cedent is gross income that the decedent
would have received had death not oc-
curred and that was not properly includible
in the decedent's final income tax return.
See Publication 559 for more information.
Gambling Losses Up to the
Amount of Gambling Winnings 
You must report the full amount of your
gambling winnings for the year on line 21,
Form 1040. You deduct your gambling
losses for the year on line 27, Schedule A
(Form 1040). You cannot deduct gambling
losses that are more than your winnings.
CAUTION
!
You cannot reduce your gambling
winnings by your gambling losses.
You must report the full amount of
your winnings as income and claim your
losses as an itemized deduction. Therefore,
your records should show your winnings
separately from your losses.
RECORDS
Diary of winnings and losses. 
You must keep an accurate diary
or similar record of your losses and
winnings. Your diary should contain at least
the following information.
1) The date and type of your specific
wager or wagering activity.
2) The name and address or location of
the gambling establishment.
3) The names of other persons present
with you at the gambling establish-
ment.
4) The amount(s) you won or lost.
See Publication 529 for more informa-
tion.
Impairment-Related
Work Expenses 
If you have a physical or mental disability
that limits your being employed, or sub-
stantially limits one or more of your major
life activities, such as performing manual
tasks, walking, speaking, breathing, learn-
ing, and working, you can deduct your
impairment-related work expenses.
Impairment-related work expenses are
ordinary and necessary business expenses
for attendant care services at your place of
work and other expenses in connection with
your place of work that are necessary for
you to be able to work.
Where to report.If you are an employee,
you enter impairment-related work ex-
penses on Form 2106 or Form 2106–EZ.
Enter on line 27, Schedule A (Form 1040)
that part of the amount on line 10 of Form
2106, or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ that is re-
lated to your impairment. Enter the amount
that is unrelated to your impairment on line
20, Schedule A (Form 1040).
Repayments Under
Claim of Right
If you had to repay more than $3,000 that
you included in your income in an earlier
year because at the time you thought you
had an unrestricted right to it, you may be
able to deduct the amount you repaid, or
take a credit against your tax. See Repay-
ments in chapter 13 for more information.
Unrecovered Investment
in Annuity
A retiree who contributed to the cost of an
annuity can exclude from income a part of
each payment received as a tax-free return
of the retiree's investment. If the retiree dies
before the entire investment is recovered
tax free, any unrecovered investment can
be deducted on the retiree's final income tax
return. See chapter 11 for more information
about the tax treatment of pensions and
annuities.
Officials Paid on
a Fee Basis
If you are a fee-basis official, you can claim
your expenses in performing services in that
job as an adjustment to income rather than
as a miscellaneous itemized deduction. To
qualify as a fee-basis official, you must be
employed by a state or local government
and be paid in whole or in part on a fee
basis.
Where to report.If you qualify as a fee-
basis official, you should first complete
Form 2106 or Form 2106–EZ. Then include
Page 198 Chapter 30  Miscellaneous Deductions

your expenses in performing services in that
job (line 10 of Form 2106 or line 6 of Form
2106–EZ) on line 32 of Form 1040. Then
write “FBO” and the amount of those ex-
penses on the dotted line next to line 32
(Form 1040).
Nondeductible
Expenses
Examples of nondeductible expenses are
listed next. The list is followed by dis-
cussions of additional nondeductible ex-
penses that are more common.
List of Nondeductible
Expenses
 Broker's commissions that you paid in
connection with your IRA or other in-
vestment property.
 Burial or funeral expenses, including
the cost of a cemetery lot.
 Capital expenses.
 Fees and licenses, such as car li-
censes, marriage licenses, and dog
tags.
 Hobby losses.
 Home repairs, insurance, and rent.
 Illegal bribes and kickbacks—See
Bribes and kickbacks in chapter 13 of
Publication 535.
 Losses from the sale of your home,
furniture, personal car, etc.
 Personal disability insurance premiums.
 Personal, living, or family expenses.
 The value of wages never received or
lost vacation time.
Campaign Expenses
You cannot deduct campaign expenses of
a candidate for any office, even if the can-
didate is running for reelection to the office.
These include qualification and registration
fees for primary elections.
Legal fees. You cannot deduct legal
fees paid to defend charges that arise from
participation in a political campaign.
Check-Writing Fees
on Personal Account
If you have a personal checking account,
you cannot deduct fees charged by the bank
for the privilege of writing checks, even if the
account pays interest.
Club Dues
Generally, you cannot deduct the cost of
membership in any club organized for busi-
ness, pleasure, recreation, or other social
purpose. This includes business, social,
athletic, luncheon, sporting, airline, and ho-
tel clubs. For exceptions, see Dues to
Chambers of Commerce and Professional
Societies under Unreimbursed Employee
Expenses, earlier.
Commuting Expenses
You cannot deduct commuting expenses
(the cost of transportation between your
home and your main or regular place of
work). If you haul tools, instruments, or
other items, in your car to and from work,
you can deduct only the additional cost of
hauling the items, such as the rent on a
trailer to carry the items.
Fines or Penalties
You cannot deduct fines or penalties you
pay to a governmental unit for violating a
law. This includes an amount paid in
settlement of your actual or potential liability
for a fine or penalty (civil or criminal). Fines
or penalties include parking tickets, tax
penalties, and penalties deducted from
teachers' paychecks after an illegal strike.
Health Spa Expenses
You cannot deduct health spa expenses,
even if there is a job requirement to stay in
excellent physical condition, such as might
be required of a law enforcement officer.
Home Security System
You cannot deduct the cost of a home se-
curity system as a miscellaneous deduction.
However, you may be able to claim a de-
duction for a home security system as a
business expense if you have a home office.
See Home Office, under Unreimbursed
Employee Expenses, and Publication 587.
Homeowners' Insurance
Premiums
You cannot deduct premiums that you pay
or that are placed in escrow for insurance
on your home, such as fire and liability or
mortgage insurance.
Investment-Related Seminars
You cannot deduct any expenses for at-
tending a convention, seminar, or similar
meeting for investment purposes.
Life Insurance Premiums
You cannot deduct premiums you pay on
your life insurance. You may be able to
deduct, as alimony, premiums you pay on
life insurance policies assigned to your for-
mer spouse. See chapter 20 for information
on alimony.
Lobbying Expenses
You generally cannot deduct amounts paid
or incurred for lobbying expenses. These
include expenses to:
1) Influence legislation, 
2) Participate or intervene in any political
campaign for, or against, any candi-
date for public office, 
3) Attempt to influence the general public,
or segments of the public, about
elections, legislative matters, or refer-
endums, or 
4) Communicate directly with covered
executive branch officials in any at-
tempt to influence the official actions
or positions of such officials.
Lobbying expenses also include any
amounts paid or incurred for research,
preparation, planning, or coordination of any
of these activities.
Dues used for lobbying. If a tax-
exempt organization notifies you that part
of the dues or other amounts you pay to the
organization are used to pay nondeductible
lobbying expenses, you cannot deduct that
part. See Lobbying Expenses in Publication
529 for information on exceptions.
Lost or Mislaid
Cash or Property
You cannot deduct a loss based on the
mere disappearance of money or property.
However, an accidental loss or disappear-
ance of property can qualify as a casualty
if it results from an identifiable event that is
sudden, unexpected, or unusual. See chap-
ter 27.
Example. A car door is accidentally
slammed on your hand, breaking the setting
of your diamond ring. The diamond falls
from the ring and is never found. The loss
of the diamond is a casualty.
Lunches With Coworkers
You cannot deduct the expenses of lunches
with co-workers, except while traveling
away from home on business. See chapter
28 for information on deductible expenses
while traveling away from home.
Meals While Working Late
You cannot deduct the cost of meals while
working late. However, you may be able to
claim a deduction if the cost of meals is a
deductible entertainment expense or if you
are traveling away from home. See chapter
28 for information on deductible enter-
tainment expenses and expenses while
traveling away from home.
Personal Legal Expenses
You cannot deduct personal legal expenses
such as those for the following.
1) Custody of children.
2) Breach of promise (to marry) suit.
3) Civil or criminal charges resulting from
a personal relationship.
4) Damages for personal injury.
5) Preparation of a title (or defense or
perfection of a title).
6) Preparation of a will.
7) Property claims or property settlement
in a divorce.
You cannot deduct these expenses even
if a result of the legal proceeding is the loss
of income-producing property.
Political Contributions
You cannot deduct contributions made to a
political candidate, a campaign committee,
or a newsletter fund. Advertisements in
convention bulletins and admissions to din-
ners or programs that benefit a political
party or political candidate are not deduct-
ible.
Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 199

Professional Accreditation Fees
You cannot deduct professional accredi-
tation fees such as the following.
1) Accounting certificate fees paid for the
initial right to practice accounting. 
2) Bar exam fees and incidental ex-
penses in securing admission to the
bar. 
3) Medical and dental license fees paid
to get initial licensing. 
Professional Reputation
You cannot deduct expenses of radio and
TV appearances to increase your personal
prestige or establish your professional rep-
utation.
Relief Fund Contributions
You cannot deduct contributions paid to a
private plan that pays benefits to any cov-
ered employee who cannot work because
of any injury or illness not related to the job.
Residential Telephone Service
You cannot deduct any charge (including
taxes) for basic local telephone service for
the first telephone line to your residence,
even if it is used in a trade or business.
Stockholders' Meetings
You cannot deduct transportation and other
expenses you pay to attend stockholders'
meetings of companies in which you own
stock but have no other interest. You cannot
deduct these expenses even if you are at-
tending the meeting to get information that
would be useful in making further invest-
ments.
Tax-Exempt Income Expenses
You cannot deduct expenses to produce
tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct in-
terest on a debt incurred or continued to buy
or carry tax-exempt securities.
If you have expenses to produce both
taxable and tax-exempt income, but you
cannot identify the expenses that produce
each type of income, you must divide the
expenses based on the amount of each type
of income to determine the amount that you
can deduct.
Example. During the year, you received
taxable interest of $4,800 and tax-exempt
interest of $1,200. In earning this income,
you had total expenses of $500 during the
year. You cannot identify the amount of
each expense item that is for each income
item. Therefore, you calculate that 80%
($4,800/$6,000) of the expense is for the
taxable interest and 20% ($1,200/$6,000) is
for the tax-exempt interest. You can deduct,
subject to the 2% limit, expenses of $400
(80% of $500).
Travel Expenses for
Another Individual
You generally cannot deduct travel ex-
penses you pay or incur for a spouse, de-
pendent, or other individual who accompa-
nies you (or your employee) on business
travel. See chapter 28 for more information
on deductible travel expenses.
Voluntary Unemployment
Benefit Fund Contributions
You cannot deduct voluntary unemployment
benefit fund contributions you make to a
union fund or a private fund. However, you
can deduct contributions as taxes if state
law requires you to make them to a state
unemployment fund that covers you for the
loss of wages from unemployment caused
by business conditions.
Wristwatches
You cannot deduct the cost of a wristwatch,
even if there is a job requirement that you
know the correct time to properly perform
your duties.
Page 200 Chapter 30  Miscellaneous Deductions

The eight chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax and how
to figure the tax of certain children who have more than $1,400 of
investment income. They also discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions
are subtracted directly from your tax and reduce your tax, dollar for
dollar. Chapter 37 discusses the earned income credit and how you may
be able to get part of the credit paid to you in advance throughout the
year.
Part Six.
Figuring
Your Taxes
and Credits
31.
How To Figure
Your Tax
Introduction
After you have figured your income and
deductions as explained in Parts One
through Five, your next step is to figure your
tax. This chapter discusses:
 The general steps you take to figure
your tax,
 An additional tax you may have to pay
called the alternative minimum tax, and
 The conditions you must meet if you
want the IRS to figure your tax.
Figuring Your Tax
Your income tax is based on your taxable
income. After you figure your income tax,
subtract your tax credits and add any other
taxes you may owe. The result is your total
tax. Compare your total tax with your total
payments to determine whether you are
entitled to a refund or owe additional tax.
This section provides a general outline
of how to figure your tax. You can find
step-by-step directions in the instructions for
Forms 1040EZ, 1040A, and 1040. If you are
unsure of which tax form you should file,
see Which Form Should I Use? in chapter
1.
Tax. Most taxpayers use either the Tax
Table or the Tax Rate Schedules to figure
their income tax. However, there are special
methods if your income includes any of the
following items.
 Capital gains (see chapter 17).
 Lump-sum distributions (see chapter
11).
 Farm income (see Schedule J (Form
1040), Farm Income Averaging).
 Investment income over $1,400 for
children under age 14 (see chapter 32).
Credits.After you figure your income tax,
determine your tax credits. This chapter
does not explain whether you are eligible for
these credits. You can find that information
in chapters 33 through 38 and your form
instructions. See the following table for
credits you may be able to subtract from
your income tax.
Some credits (such as the earned in-
come credit) are not listed above because
they are treated as payments. See Pay-
ments, later.
There are other credits that are not dis-
cussed in this publication. These include
the following items.
 General business credit, which is made
up of several separate business-related
credits. These generally are reported
on Form 3800, General Business
Credit, and are discussed in chapter 4
of Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small
Business.
 Empowerment zone employment credit,
which is for certain employers whose
employees work and live in an em-
powerment zone. See Publication 954,
Tax Incentives for Empowerment Zones
and Other Distressed Communities,
and the instructions for Form 8844,
Empowerment Zone Employment
Credit.
 District of Columbia first-time
homebuyer credit, which is for certain
persons who buy a main home in the
District. See the instructions for Form
8859, District of Columbia First-Time
Homebuyer Credit.
 Credit for fuel from a nonconventional
source, which is for the person who sold
the fuel. See the instructions for line 50
of Form 1040 and section 29 of the
Code.
Other taxes. After you subtract your tax
credits, determine whether there are any
other taxes you must pay. This chapter does
not explain these other taxes. You can find
that information in other chapters of this
publication and your form instructions. See
the following table for other taxes you may
need to add to your income tax.
Another tax you may have to pay, the
alternative minimum tax, is discussed later
in this chapter.
There are other taxes that are not dis-
cussed in this publication. These include
the following items.
1) Self-employment tax.  You must figure
this tax if either of the following applies
to you (or your spouse if you file a joint
return):
a) You were self-employed and your
net earnings from self-employ-
ment were $400 or more, or
b) You had church employee income
of $108.28 or more. 
See the instructions for Schedule
SE (Form 1040) and Publication 533,
Self-Employment Tax.
2) Recapture taxes. You may have to pay
these taxes if you previously claimed
an investment credit, a low-income
housing credit, a mortgage interest
credit, a qualified electric vehicle credit,
or an Indian employment credit. See
the instructions for line 57 of Form
1040.
3) Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax.
If you are (or were) a 5% owner of a
business and you received a distribu-
tion that exceeds the benefits provided
for you under the qualified pension or
annuity plan formula, you may have to
pay this additional tax. See Publication
560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-
ness (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified
Plans).
4) Uncollected social security and Medi-
care tax on group-term life insurance.
If your former employer provides you
with more than $50,000 of group-term
life insurance coverage, you must pay
the employee part of social security
and Medicare taxes on those premi-
ums. The amount should be shown in
box 13 of your Form W-2 with codes
M and N.
5) Tax on golden parachute payments.
This tax applies if you, as a key em-
ployee, received an “excess parachute
 OTHER TAXES
See
For information on: chapter:
Tax on qualified retirement
plans and IRAs ................................. 11, 18
Advance earned income credit
payments .......................................... 37CREDITS Household employment taxes ............. 33See Social security and Medicare tax on
unreported tips .................................. 7For information on: chapter:
Uncollected social security and Medi-
care tax on tips .................................... 7
Adoption ............................................... 38
Child and dependent care ................... 33
Child tax credit ..................................... 35
Education ............................................. 36
Elderly or disabled ............................... 34
Foreign tax ........................................... 38
Mortgage interest ................................. 38
Prior year minimum tax ....................... 38
Qualified electric vehicle ...................... 38
Chapter 31 How To Figure Your Tax Page 201

payment” (EPP) due to a change in a
corporation's ownership or control. See
the instructions for line 57 of Form
1040.
6) Tax on accumulation distribution of
trusts. This applies if you are the ben-
eficiary of a trust that accumulated its
income instead of distributing it cur-
rently. See the instructions for Form
4970, Tax on Accumulation Distribution
of Trusts.
7) Additional tax on MSAs. If amounts
contributed to, or distributed from, your
medical savings account do not meet
the rules for these accounts, you may
have to pay additional taxes. See
Publication 969, Medical Savings Ac-
counts (MSAs), and Forms 8853,
Medical Savings Accounts and Long-
Term Care Insurance Contracts, and
5329, Additional Taxes Attributable to
IRAs, Other Qualified Retirement
Plans, Annuities, Modified Endowment
Contracts, and MSAs.
Payments. After you determine your total
tax, figure the total payments you have al-
ready made for the year. Include credits that
are treated as payments. This chapter does
not explain these payments and credits.
You can find that information in other
chapters of this publication and your form
instructions. See the following table for
amounts you can include in your total pay-
ments.
Another credit that is treated as a pay-
ment is the credit for federal excise tax paid
on fuels. This credit is for persons who have
a nontaxable use of certain fuels, such as
diesel fuel and kerosene. It is claimed on
line 64 of Form 1040. See Publication 378,
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds, and Form
4136, Credit for Federal Tax Paid on Fuels.
Refund or balance due. To determine
whether you are entitled to a refund or owe
additional tax, compare your total payments
with your total tax. If you are entitled to a
refund, see your form instructions for infor-
mation on having it directly deposited into
your financial account instead of receiving
a paper check.
Alternative
Minimum Tax
This section briefly discusses an additional
tax you may have to pay.
The tax law gives special treatment to
some kinds of income and allows special
deductions and credits for some kinds of
expenses. Taxpayers who benefit from the
law in these ways may have to pay at least
a minimum amount of tax through an addi-
tional tax. This additional tax is called the
alternative minimum tax (AMT).
You may have to pay the alternative
minimum tax if your taxable income for
regular tax purposes, combined with certain
adjustments and tax preference items, is
more than:
 $45,000 if your filing status is married
filing a joint return (or a qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child),
 $33,750 if your filing status is single or
head of household, or
 $22,500 if your filing status is married
filing a separate return.
Adjustments and tax preference items.
The more common adjustments and tax
preference items include:
 Addition of personal exemptions,
 Addition of the standard deduction (if
claimed),
 Addition of itemized deductions
claimed for state and local taxes, cer-
tain interest, most miscellaneous de-
ductions, and part of medical expenses,
 Subtraction of any refund of state and
local taxes included in gross income,
 Changes to accelerated depreciation
of certain property,
 Difference between gain or loss on the
sale of property reported for regular tax
purposes and AMT purposes,
 Addition of certain income from incen-
tive stock options, 
 Change in certain passive activity
loss deductions,
 Addition of certain depletion that is
more than the adjusted basis of the
property,
 Addition of part of the deduction for
certain intangible drilling costs, and
 Addition of tax-exempt interest on
certain private activity bonds.
More information. For more information
about the alternative minimum tax, see the
instructions for Form 1040, line 41, and
Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax —  In-
dividuals.
Tax Figured by IRS
If you file by April 16, 2001, you can have
the IRS figure your tax for you on Form
1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 1040.
If the IRS figures your tax and you paid
too much, you will receive a refund. If you
did not pay enough, you will receive a bill
for the balance. To avoid interest or the
penalty for late payment, you must pay the
bill within 30 days of the date of the bill or
by the due date for your return, whichever
is later.
When the IRS cannot figure your tax.
The IRS cannot figure your tax for you if any
of the following apply.
1) You want your refund directly depos-
ited.
2) You want any of your refund applied to
your 2001 estimated tax.
3) Any of your income for the year was
from other than wages, salaries, tips,
interest, dividends, taxable social se-
curity benefits, unemployment com-
pensation, IRA distributions, pensions,
and annuities.
4) Your taxable income is $100,000 or
more.
5) You itemize deductions.
6) You file any of the following forms.
a) Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-
come.
b) Form 2555–EZ, Foreign Earned
Income Exclusion.
c) Form 4137, Social Security and
Medicare Tax on Unreported Tip
Income.
d) Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation
Distribution of Trusts.
e) Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum
Distributions.
f) Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations.
g) Form 6251, Alternative Minimum
Tax— Individuals.
h) Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs,
on which a conversion to a Roth
IRA is reported.
i) Form 8615, Tax for Children Un-
der Age 14 Who Have Investment
Income of More Than $1,400.
j) Form 8814, Parents' Election To
Report Child's Interest and Divi-
dends.
k) Form 8839, Qualified Adoption
Expenses.
l) Form 8853, Medical Savings Ac-
counts and Long-Term Care In-
surance Contracts.
Filing the Return
After you complete the line entries for the
tax form you are filing (discussed next), at-
tach the peel-off label, enter your social
security number(s), sign the return, and mail
it. If you do not have a peel-off label, fill in
your name and address. See chapter 1 for
more information.
Form 1040EZ Line Entries
Read lines 1 through 8 and fill in the lines
that apply to you. If you are filing a joint
return, write your taxable income and your
spouse's taxable income to the left of line
6.
Earned income credit.If you can take this
credit, as discussed in chapter 37, the IRS
can figure it for you. Print “EIC” in the space
to the right of the word “below” on line 8b.
Enter the amount and type of any nontaxa-
ble earned income in the boxes for line 8b.
Form 1040A Line Entries
Read lines 1 through 25 and fill in the lines
that apply to you. If you are filing a joint
return, write your taxable income and your
spouse's taxable income to the left of line
25. Complete lines 27, 28, and 36 through
38b if they apply to you. Do not fill in lines
28 and 38a if you want the IRS to figure the
credits shown on those lines. Also, enter
 PAYMENTS
See
For information on: chapter:
Child tax credit (additional) .................. 35
Earned income credit .......................... 37
Estimated tax paid ............................... 5
Excess social security and RRTA
tax withheld ....................................... 38
Federal income tax withheld ............... 5
Regulated investment company credit . 38
Tax paid with extension ....................... 1
Page 202 Chapter 31  How To Figure Your Tax

any write-in information that applies to you
in the space to the left of line 40.
Credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-
cussed in chapter 33, complete Schedule 2
and attach it to your return. Enter the
amount of the credit on line 27 (Form
1040A). The IRS will not figure this credit.
Credit for the elderly or the disabled.If
you can take this credit, as discussed in
chapter 34, attach Schedule 3. Print
“CFE” in the space to the left of line 28. The
IRS will figure this credit for you. On
Schedule 3, check the box in Part I for your
filing status and age. Complete Part II and
lines 11 and 13 of Part III if they apply.
Earned income credit.If you can take this
credit, as discussed in chapter 37, the IRS
will figure it for you. Print “EIC” directly to the
right of line 38a. Enter the amount and type
of any nontaxable earned income in the
spaces provided on line 38b. If you have a
qualifying child, you must fill in Schedule
EIC and attach it to your return.
Form 1040 Line Entries
Read lines 1 through 39 and fill in the
lines that apply to you.
If you are filing a joint return, write your
taxable income and your spouse's taxable
income in the space above the words “Ad-
justed Gross Income” on the front of your
return. 
Read lines 41 through 64. Fill in the lines
that apply to you, but do not fill in the
“Total” lines. Do not fill in lines 45 and 60a
if you want the IRS to figure the credits
shown on those lines.
Fill in any forms or schedules asked for
on the lines you completed, and attach them
to your return.
Credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-
cussed in chapter 33, complete Form 2441
and attach it to your return. Enter the
amount of the credit on line 44. The IRS
will not figure this credit.
Credit for the elderly or the disabled.If
you can take this credit, as discussed in
chapter 34, attach Schedule R. Print “CFE”
on the dotted line next to line 45 of Form
1040. The IRS will figure the credit for you.
On Schedule R, check the box in Part I for
your filing status and age. Complete Part II
and lines 11 and 13 of Part III if they apply.
Earned income credit.If you can take this
credit, as discussed in chapter 37, the IRS
will figure it for you. Print “EIC” directly to the
right of line 60a of Form 1040. Enter the
amount and type of any nontaxable earned
income in the spaces provided on line 60b.
If you have a qualifying child, you must fill
in Schedule EIC and attach it to your return.
Chapter 31 How To Figure Your Tax Page 203

32.
Tax on
Investment
Income of
Certain Minor
Children
Important Reminder
Parent's election to report child's inter-
est and dividends.You may be able to
elect to include your child's interest and
dividends on your tax return. If you make
this election, the child does not have to file
a return. See Parent's Election To Report
Child's Interest and Dividends, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses two special tax rules
that apply to certain investment income of
a child under age 14.
1) If the child's interest, dividends, and
other investment income total more
than $1,400, part of that income may
be taxed at the parent's tax rate in-
stead of the child's tax rate. (SeeTax
for Children Under Age 14 Who Have
Investment Income of More Than
$1,400, later.)
2) The child's parent may be able to
choose to include the child's interest
and dividend income (including capital
gain distributions) on the parent's re-
turn rather than file a return for the
child. (See Parent's Election To Report
Child's Interest and Dividends, later.)
For these rules, the term “child” includes a
legally adopted child and a stepchild. These
rules apply whether or not the child is a
dependent.
These rules do not apply if:
1) The child is not required to file a tax
return, or
2) Neither of the child's parents were liv-
ing at the end of the tax year.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554929 Tax Rules for Children and De-
pendents
Form (and Instructions)
/H185548615 Tax for Children Under Age 14
Who Have Investment Income
of More Than $1,400
/H185548814 Parents' Election To Report
Child's Interest and Dividends
Which Parent's
Return To Use
If a child's parents are married to each other
and file a joint return, use the joint return to
figure the tax on the investment income of
a child under 14. For parents who do not file
a joint return, the following discussions ex-
plain which parent's tax return must be used
to figure the tax. Only the parent whose tax
return is used can make the election de-
scribed under Parent's Election To Report
Child's Interest and Dividends. The tax rate
and other return information from that par-
ent's return are used to compute the child's
tax as explained later under Tax for Children
Under Age 14 Who Have Investment In-
come of More Than $1,400.
Parents are married.If the child's parents
file separate returns, use the return of the
parent with the greater taxable income.
Parents not living together.If the
child's parents are married to each other but
not living together, and the parent with
whom the child lives (the custodial parent)
is considered unmarried, use the return of
the custodial parent. If the custodial parent
is not considered unmarried, use the return
of the parent with the greater taxable in-
come.
For an explanation of when a married
person living apart from his or her spouse
is considered unmarried, see Head of
Household in chapter 2.
Parents are divorced.If the child's parents
are divorced or legally separated, and the
parent who had custody of the child for the
greater part of the year (the custodial par-
ent) has not remarried, use the return of the
custodial parent.
Custodial parent remarried. If the
custodial parent has remarried, the
stepparent (rather than the noncustodial
parent) is treated as the child's other parent.
Therefore, if the custodial parent and the
stepparent file a joint return, use that joint
return. Do not use the return of the non-
custodial parent.
If the custodial parent and the
stepparent are married, but file separate
returns, use the return of the one with the
greater taxable income. If the custodial
parent and the stepparent are married but
not living together, the earlier discussion
under Parents not living together, applies.
Parents never married.If a child's parents
did not marry each other, but lived together
all year, use the return of the parent with the
greater taxable income. If the parents did
not live together all year, the rules explained
earlier under Parents are divorced, apply.
Widowed parent remarried.If a widow or
widower remarries, the new spouse is
treated as the child's other parent. The rules
explained earlier under Custodial parent
remarried, apply.
Parent's Election
To Report Child's
Interest and
Dividends
You may be able to elect to include your
child's interest and dividend income (in-
cluding capital gain distributions) on your
tax return. If you do, your child will not have
to file a return.
You can make this election for 2000 only
if all the following conditions are met.
1) Your child was under age 14 on Janu-
ary 1, 2001.
2) Your child is required to file a return for
2000 unless you make this election.
3) Your child had income only from inter-
est and dividends (including capital
gain distributions and Alaska Perma-
nent Fund dividends).
4) The dividend and interest income was
less than $7,000.
5) No estimated tax payment was made
for 2000 and no 1999 overpayment
was applied to 2000 under your child's
name and social security number.
6) No federal income tax was taken out
of your child's income under the
backup withholding rules.
7) You are the parent whose return must
be used when applying the special tax
rules for children under 14. (See Which
Parent's Return To Use, earlier.)
These conditions are also shown in Figure
32–A.
How to make the election. Make the
election by attaching Form 8814 to your
Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. Attach a
separate Form 8814 for each child for whom
you make the election. You can make the
election for one or more children and not for
others. 
If you file Form 8814, you cannot file
Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. 
Effect of Making the
Election
The federal income tax on your child's in-
come may be more if you make the Form
8814 election rather than file a return for the
child.
Rates may be higher. If you use Form
8814, the child's income may be taxed at a
higher rate on your return than it would be
on the child's own return.
Deductions you cannot take. By making
the Form 8814 election, you cannot take
any of the following deductions the child
would be entitled to on his or her return.
1) The higher standard deduction for a
blind child.
2) The deduction for a penalty on an early
withdrawal of your child's savings.
Page 204 Chapter 32  Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Figure 32–A. Can You Include Your Child’s Income On Your Tax
Return?
Start Here
/H17074
Was your child under age 14 on
January 1, 2001?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is your child required to file a tax return
in 2000 if you do not make this election?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s only income interest and
dividends (including capital gain
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund
dividends)?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child ’s income less than
$7,000?
/H17074
Yes
Did the child make any estimated tax
payments for 2000?
/H17074
No
Did the child have an overpayment of
tax on his or her 1999 return applied to
the 2000 estimated tax?
/H17074
No
Was any federal income tax withheld from
the child’s income (backup withholding)?
/H17074
No
Are you the parent whose return must
be used?*
/H17074
Yes
You can include your child ’s income on
your tax return by completing Form 8814
and attaching it to your return. If you do,
your child is not required to file a return.
You cannot include
your child’s income
on your return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Penalty for underpayment of estimated
tax. If you make this election for 2000 and
did not have enough tax withheld or pay
enough estimated tax to cover the tax you
owe, you may be subject to a penalty. If you
plan to make this election for 2001, you may
need to increase your federal income tax
withholding or your estimated tax payments
to avoid the penalty. See chapter 5 for more
information.
Figuring Child's Income
Use Part I of Form 8814 to figure your
child's interest and dividend income to re-
port on your return. Only the amount over
$1,400 is added to your income. This
amount is shown on line 6 of Form 8814.
Include this amount on line 21 of Form 1040
or Form 1040NR. Write “Form 8814” in the
space next to line 21. If you file more than
one Form 8814, include the total amounts
from line 6 of all your Forms 8814 on line
21.
Capital gain distributions.If your child's
dividend income included any capital gain
distributions, see Capital gain distributions,
under Figuring Child's Income in Publication
929.
Figuring Additional Tax
Use Part II of Form 8814 to figure the tax
on the $1,400 of your child's interest and
dividends that you do not include in your
income. This tax is added to the tax figured
on your income.
This additional tax is the smaller of:
1) 15% × (your child's gross income −
$700), or
 2) $105.
Include the amount from line 9 of all your
Forms 8814 in the total on line 40, Form
1040, or line 39, Form 1040NR. Check box
a on Form 1040, line 40, or Form 1040NR,
line 39.
Illustrated Example
David and Linda Parks are married and will
file separate tax returns for 2000. Their only
child, Philip, is 8. Philip received a Form
1099–INT showing $3,200 taxable interest
income and a Form 1099–DIV showing
$300 ordinary dividends. His parents de-
cide to include that income on one of their
returns so they will not have to file a return
for Philip.
First, David and Linda each figure their
taxable income (Form 1040, line 39) without
regard to Philip's income. David's taxable
income is $41,700 and Linda's is $59,300.
Because her taxable income is greater,
Linda can elect to include Philip's income
on her return.
On Form 8814, Linda enters her name
and social security number, then Philip's
name and social security number. She en-
ters Philip's taxable interest income, $3,200,
on line 1a. Philip had no tax-exempt inter-
est income, so she leaves line 1b blank.
Linda enters Philip's ordinary dividends,
$300, on line 2. Philip did not have any
capital gain distributions, so she leaves line
3 blank.
Linda adds lines 1a and 2 and enters the
result, $3,500, on line 4. From that amount
3) Itemized deductions (such as your
child's investment expenses or chari-
table contributions).
Reduced deductions or credits. If you use
Form 8814, your increased adjusted gross
income may reduce certain deductions or
credits on your return. These include your
deduction for contributions to a traditional
individual retirement arrangement (IRA),
itemized deductions for medical expenses,
casualty and theft losses, and certain mis-
cellaneous expenses. Your increased ad-
justed gross income may also reduce your
child tax credit, education credit, or earned
income credit.
Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 205

she subtracts the $1,400 base amount
shown on line 5 and enters the result,
$2,100, on line 6. This is the part of Philip's
income that Linda must add to her income.
Linda includes the $2,100 in the total on
line 21 of her Form 1040 and in the space
next to that line prints “Form 8814 –
$2,100.” Adding that amount to her income
increases each of the amounts on lines 22,
33, 34, 37, and 39 of her Form 1040 by
$2,100. Linda is not claiming any de-
ductions or credits that are affected by the
increase to her income. Therefore, her re-
vised taxable income on line 39 is $61,400
($59,300 + $2,100).
On Form 8814, Linda subtracts the $700
shown on line 7 from the $3,500 on line 4
and enters the result, $2,800, on line 8.
Because that amount is not less than $700,
she enters $105 on line 9. This is the tax
on the first $1,400 of Philip's income, which
Linda did not have to add to her income.
She must add this additional tax to the tax
figured on her revised taxable income.
The tax on her $61,400 revised taxable
income is $14,602. She adds $105, and
enters the $14,707 total on line 40 of Form
1040, and checks box a.
Linda attaches Form 8814 to her Form
1040.
Tax for Children
Under Age 14 Who
Have Investment
Income of More Than
$1,400
Part of a child's 2000 investment income
may be subject to tax at the parent's tax rate
if:
1) The child was under age 14 on Janu-
ary 1, 2001,
2) The child's investment income was
more than $1,400, and
3) The child is required to file a return for
2000.
Figure 32–B illustrates these requirements.
If the parent does not or cannot choose
to include the child's income on the parent's
return, figure the child's tax on Form 8615.
Attach the form to the child's Form 1040,
Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
On Form 8615, enter the parent's name
and social security number and the child's
name and social security number in the
spaces provided. (If the parents filed a joint
return, enter the name and social security
number listed first on the joint return.) Check
the box for the parent's filing status. Then
figure the child's tax on Form 8615 in these
steps.
1. Figure the child's net investment income.
2. Figure a tentative tax on the net invest-
ment income based on the parent's tax
rate.
3. Figure the child's tax.
Alternative minimum tax.A child may be
subject to alternative minimum tax (AMT) if
he or she has certain items given preferen-
Figure 32–B. Do You Have To Use Form 8615 To Figure Your
Child’s Tax?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the child under age 14 on January 1, 2001?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is the child required to file a tax return for 2000?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child ’s investment income more than $1,400?
/H17074
Yes
Use Form 8615 to figure the child ’s tax. Attach it to the
child’s return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Note: If the child’s parent chooses to report the child ’s income
by filing Form 8814, the child is not required to file a tax return.
Do not use Form 8615. (See Parent’s Election To Report Child ’s
Interest and Dividends.)
Do not use
Form 8615 to
figure the
child’s tax.
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
tial treatment under the tax laws or certain
adjustments to taxable income that total
more than an exemption amount. See Al-
ternative Minimum Tax in chapter 31.
AMT is figured on Form 6251. For infor-
mation on special limits that apply to a child
who files Form 6251, Alternative Minimum
Tax— Individuals see Alternative Minimum
Tax in Publication 929.
Parent's Return 
See Which Parent's Return To Use, at the
beginning of this chapter, for information on
which parent's return information must be
used on Form 8615.
Different tax years.If the parent and
the child do not have the same tax year,
complete Form 8615 using the information
on the parent's return for the tax year that
ends in the child's tax year.
Estimated information.If the informa-
tion needed from the parent's return is not
known by the time the child's return is due
(usually April 15), you can file the return
using estimates.
You can use any reasonable estimate.
This includes using information from last
year's return. If you use an estimated
amount on Form 8615, write “Estimated” on
the line next to the amount.
When you get the correct information,
file an amended return on Form 1040X,
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-
turn. 
Instead of using estimated information,
you may want to request an extension of
time to file. Extensions are discussed in
chapter 1.
Part I. Figuring
Net Investment Income
The first step in figuring a child's tax using
Form 8615 is to figure the child's net in-
vestment income. To do that, use Part I of
Form 8615.
Line 1 (investment income).If the child
had no earned income, enter the adjusted
gross income shown on the child's return.
Adjusted gross income is shown on line 33
of Form 1040; line 19 of Form 1040A; or line
33 of Form 1040NR. Form 1040EZ cannot
be used if Form 8615 must be filed.
If the child had earned income, figure
the amount to enter on line 1 of Form 8615
by using the worksheet in the instructions
for the form.
However, if the child has excluded any
foreign earned income or deducted either a
loss from self-employment or a net operat-
ing loss from another year, use the work-
sheet in Publication 929 to figure the
amount to enter on line 1 of Form 8615.
Investment income defined. Invest-
ment income is generally all income other
than salaries, wages, and other amounts
received as pay for work actually done. It
includes taxable interest, dividends, capital
gains, the taxable part of social security and
pension payments, and certain distributions
from trusts. Investment income includes
amounts produced by assets the child ob-
tained with earned income (such as interest
on a savings account into which the child
deposited wages).
Page 206 Chapter 32  Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Proof as of
October 12, 2000(subject to change)
Linda P arks
Philip P arks
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
000 00 0000
3,200
300
3,500
2,100
2,800
105
OMB No. 1545-1128Parents’ Election To Report
Child’s Interest and Dividends
Form 8814
/H17075See instructions below and on back.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 40/H17075Attach to parents’ Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
How To Make the Election. To make the
election, complete and attach Form(s) 8814
to your tax return and file your return by
the due date (including extensions). A
separate Form 8814 must be filed for each
child whose income you choose to report.
● Had no estimated tax payments for 2000
(including any overpayment of tax from his
or her 1999 return applied to 2000
estimated tax).
General Instructions
Purpose of Form. Use this form if you
elect to report your child ’s income on your
return. If you do, your child will not have to
file a return. You can make this election if
your child meets all of the following
conditions.
● Had no Federal income tax withheld
from his or her income.
● Was under age 14 on January 1, 2001.
You must also qualify. See Parents Who
Qualify To Make the Election below.
● Had income only from interest and
dividends, including Alaska Permanent
Fund dividends.
● Had gross income for 2000 that was less
than $7,000.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on your return
Child’s social security numberChild’s name (first, initial, and last)
If more than one Form 8814 is attached, check here /H17075
Child’s Interest and Dividends To Report on Your Return
Enter your child ’s taxable interest. If this amount is different from the amounts shown on the
child’s Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID, see the instructions
1a
1a
b Enter your child ’s tax-exempt interest. Do not include this
amount on line 1a 1b
2 Enter your child’s ordinary dividends, including any Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. If your
child received any ordinary dividends as a nominee, see the instructions
Enter your child’s capital gain distributions. If your child received any capital gain distributions
as a nominee, see the instructions
Add lines 1a, 2, and 3. If the total is $1,400 or less, skip lines 5 and 6 and go to line 7. If the
total is $7,000 or more, do not file this form. Your child must file his or her own return to report
the income
3
1,400 00
4
Base amount
4
5
Subtract line 5 from line 4. If you checked the box on line C above or if you entered an amount
on line 3, see the instructions. Also, include this amount in the total on Form 1040, line 21, or
Form 1040NR, line 21. In the space next to line 21, enter “Form 8814” and show the amount.
Go to line 7 below
/H170756
Tax on the First $1,400 of Child ’s Interest and Dividends
700 00Amount not taxed
9
77
Subtract line 7 from line 4. If the result is zero or less, enter -0-
No. Enter $105 here and see the Note below.
Tax. Is the amount on line 8 less than $700?
8 8
Yes. Multiply line 8 by 15% (.15). Enter the result here and see the Note below.
Note: If you checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Otherwise, include the amount from line 9 in the tax you enter
on Form 1040, line 40, or Form 1040NR, line 39. Be sure to check box a on Form 1040, line 40, or Form 1040NR, line 39.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form. Form 8814 (2000)Cat. No. 10750J
/H20854
A B
C
● Is required to file a 2000 return.
(99)
3
6
2
5
Part I
Part II
9
Parents Who Qualify To Make the
Election. You qualify to make this election
if you file Form 1040 or Form 1040NR and
any of the following apply.
● You are filing a joint return for 2000 with
the child’s other parent.
● You were unmarried, treated as
unmarried for Federal income tax
purposes, or separated from the child ’s
other parent by a divorce or separate
maintenance decree. You must have had
custody of your child for most of the year
(you were the custodial parent). If you were
the custodial parent and you remarried,
you may make the election on a joint
return with your new spouse. But if you
and your new spouse do not file a joint
return, you qualify to make the election
only if you had higher taxable income than
your new spouse.
Caution: The Federal income tax on your child ’s income, including capital gain distributions, may be less if you file a separate tax
return for the child instead of making this election. This is because you cannot take certain tax benefits that your child coul d take
on his or her own return. For details, see Tax Benefits You May Not Take on the back.
● You and the child ’s other parent were
married to each other but file separate
returns for 2000 and you had the higher
taxable income. If you do not know if you
had the higher taxable income, see Pub.
929, Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents.
(continued)
2000
Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 207

Nontaxable income. For this purpose,
investment income includes only amounts
that the child must include in total income.
Nontaxable investment income, such as
tax-exempt interest and the nontaxable part
of social security and pension payments, is
not included.
Income from property received as a
gift.A child's investment income includes
all income produced by property belonging
to the child. This is true even if the property
was transferred to the child regardless of
when the property was transferred or pur-
chased or who transferred it.
A child's investment income includes in-
come produced by property given as a gift
to the child. This includes gifts to the child
from grandparents or any other person and
gifts made under the Uniform Gift to Minors
Act.
Example. Amanda Black, 13, received
the following income:
 Dividends — $600
 Wages — $2,100
 Taxable interest — $1,200
 Tax-exempt interest — $100
 Net capital gains — $100.
The dividends were on stock given to her
by her grandparents.
Amanda's investment income is $1,900.
This is the total of the dividends ($600),
taxable interest ($1,200), and net capital
gains ($100). Her wages are earned (not
investment) income because they are pay
received for work actually done. Her tax-
exempt interest is not included because it
is nontaxable.
Trust income. If a child is the benefi-
ciary of a trust, distributions of taxable in-
terest, dividends, capital gains, and other
investment income from the trust are in-
vestment income to the child.
Line 2 (deductions).If the child does not
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form
1040 or Form 1040NR), enter $1,400 on line
2.
If the child does itemize deductions, en-
ter on line 2 the larger of:
1) $700 plus the child's itemized de-
ductions that are directly connected
with the production of investment in-
come, or
 2) $1,400.
Directly connected. Itemized de-
ductions are directly connected with the
production of investment income if they are
for expenses paid to produce or collect
taxable income or to manage, conserve, or
maintain property held for producing in-
come. These expenses include custodian
fees and service charges, service fees to
collect taxable interest and dividends, and
certain investment counsel fees.
These expenses are added to certain
other miscellaneous deductions on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040). Only the amount greater
than 2% of the child's adjusted gross in-
come can be deducted. See chapter 30 for
more information.
Example 1. Roger, 12, has investment
income of $8,000, no other income, no ad-
justments to income, and itemized de-
ductions of $300 (net of the 2% of adjusted
gross income limit) that are directly con-
nected with his investment income. His ad-
justed gross income is $8,000, which is en-
tered on line 1. Line 2 is $1,400 because
that is more than the sum of $700 and his
directly-connected itemized deductions of
$300.
Example 2. Eleanor, 8, has investment
income of $16,000 and an early withdrawal
penalty of $100. She has no other income.
She has itemized deductions of $1,050 (net
of the 2% of adjusted gross income limit)
that are directly connected with the pro-
duction of her investment income. Her ad-
justed gross income, entered on line 1, is
$15,900 ($16,000 − $100). Line 2 is $1,750.
This is the larger of:
1) $700 plus the $1,050 of directly con-
nected itemized deductions, or
 2) $1,400.
Part II. Figuring
Tentative Tax at
Parent's Tax Rate
The tentative tax is the difference between
the tax on the parent's taxable income fig-
ured with the child's net investment income
and the tax figured without it.
When figuring the tentative tax, do not
refigure any of the exclusions, deductions,
or credits on the parent's return because of
the child's net investment income. For ex-
ample, do not refigure the medical expense
deduction.
 Figure the tentative tax on lines 6
through 13 of Form 8615.
Note. If the child has any capital gains
or losses, get Publication 929 for help in
completing Part II of Form 8615.
TIP
You may be able to skip lines 7
through 16 of Form 8615. See the
Form 8615 instructions for line 6 for
details.
Line 7 (net investment income of other
children).If the tax return information of
the parent is also used on any other child's
Form 8615, enter on line 7 the total of the
amounts from line 5 of all the other chil-
dren's Forms 8615. Do not include the
amount from line 5 of the Form 8615 being
completed.
Example. Paul and Jane Persimmon
have three children, Sharon, Jerry, and
Mike, who must attach Form 8615 to their
tax returns. The children's net investment
income amounts on line 5 of their Forms
8615 are:
 Sharon — $800
 Jerry — $600
 Mike — $1,000
Line 7 of Sharon's Form 8615 would
show $1,600, the total of the amounts on
line 5 of Jerry's and Mike's Forms 8615.
Line 7 of Jerry's Form 8615 would show
$1,800 ($800 + $1,000).
Line 7 of Mike's Form 8615 would show
$1,400 ($800 + $600).
Other children's information not
available.If the net investment income of
the other children is not available when the
return is due, either file the return using
estimates or get an extension of time to file.
See Estimated information, earlier.
Lines 12a and 12b (dividing the tentative
tax).If line 7 is blank, skip lines 12a and
12b and enter the amount from line 11 on
line 13.
If an amount is entered on line 7, divide
the tentative tax shown on line 11 among
the children according to each child's share
of the total net investment income. This is
done on lines 12a, 12b, and 13. Add the
amount on line 7 to the amount on line 5
and enter the total on line 12a. Divide the
amount on line 5 by the amount on line 12a
and enter the result as a decimal on line
12b.
Example. In the earlier example under
Line 7 (net investment income of other
children), Sharon's Form 8615 shows
$1,600 on line 7. Line 12a is $2,400, the
total of lines 5 and 7 ($800 + $1,600). The
decimal on line 12b is .333, figured as fol-
lows and rounded to three places.
$800
$2,400 .333=
Part III. Figuring
the Child's Tax
The final step in figuring a child's tax using
Form 8615 is to determine the larger of:
1) The total of:
a) The child's share of the tentative
tax based on the parent's tax rate,
plus
b) The tax on the child's taxable in-
come in excess of net investment
income, figured at the child's tax
rate, or
2) The tax on the child's taxable income,
figured at the child's tax rate.
This is the child's tax. It is figured on
lines 14 through 18 of Form 8615.
Illustrated Example
The following example includes a completed
Form 8615.
John and Laura Brown have one child,
Sara. She is 13 and has $2,750 taxable in-
terest and dividend income and $1,500
earned income. She does not itemize de-
ductions. John and Laura file a joint return
with John's name and social security num-
ber listed first. They claim three exemptions,
including an exemption for Sara, on their
return.
Because Sara is under age 14 and has
more than $1,400 investment income, part
of her income may be subject to tax at her
parents' rate. A completed Form 8615 must
be attached to her return.
Sara's father, John, fills out Sara's return
for her.
John enters his name and social security
number on Sara's Form 8615 because his
name and number are listed first on the joint
return he and Laura are filing. He checks
the box for married filing jointly.
He enters Sara's investment income,
$2,750, on line 1. Sara does not itemize
Page 208 Chapter 32  Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

deductions, so John enters $1,400 on line
2. He enters $1,350 ($2,750 − $1,400) on
line 3.
Sara's taxable income, as shown on line
25 of her Form 1040A, is $2,500. This is her
total income ($4,250) minus her standard
deduction ($1,750). Her standard deduction
is limited to the amount of her earned in-
come plus $250. John enters $2,500 on line
4.
John compares lines 3 and 4 and enters
the smaller amount, $1,350, on line 5.
John enters $48,000 on line 6. This is
the taxable income from line 39 of their joint
Form 1040 return. Sara is an only child, so
line 7 is blank. He adds line 5 ($1,350), line
6 ($48,000), and line 7 and enters $49,350
on line 8.
Using the column for married filing jointly
in the Tax Table, John finds the tax on
$49,350. He enters the tax, $8,125, on line
9. He enters $7,747 on line 10. This is the
tax from line 40 of John and Laura's Form
1040. He enters $378 on line 11 ($8,125 −
$7,747).
Because line 7 is blank, John skips lines
12a and 12b and enters $378 on line 13.
John subtracts line 5 ($1,350) from line
4 ($2,500) and enters the result, $1,150, on
line 14. Using the column for single filing
status in the Tax Table, John finds the tax
on $1,150. He enters this tax, $174, on line
15. He adds lines 13 ($378) and 15 ($174)
and enters $552 on line 16.
Using the column for single filing status
in the Tax Table, John finds the tax on
$2,500 (line 4). He enters this tax, $377, on
line 17.
John compares lines 16 and 17 and en-
ters the larger amount, $552, on line 18 of
Sara's Form 8615. He also enters that
amount on line 26 of Sara's Form 1040A.
John also completes Schedule 1 (Form
1040A) for Sara.
Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 209

Proof as of
October 17, 2000(subject to change)
Sara L. Brown
John J. Brown
1 1 7 00 1 1 1 1
007 00 0001
2,750
1,400
1,350
2,500
1,350
48,000
49,350
8,125
7,747
378
378
1,150
174
552
377
552
OMB No. 1545-0998Tax for Children Under Age 14
Who Have Investment Income of More Than $1,400
Form 8615
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 33
/H17075Attach only to the child ’s Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
Child’s social security numberChild’s name shown on return
Parent’s social security numberParent’s name (first, initial, and last). Caution: See instructions before completing.
Parent’s filing status (check one):
Child’s Net Investment Income
Enter the child ’s investment income, such as taxable interest, ordinary dividends, and capital
gain distributions. See instructions. If this amount is $1,400 or less, stop; do not file this form
1
1
If the child did not itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR), enter
$1,400. If the child did itemize deductions, see instructions
2
2
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If the result is zero or less, stop; do not complete the rest of this
form but do attach it to the child ’s return
3
3
4
Enter the child’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 39; Form 1040A, line 25; or Form 1040NR,
line 38
4
Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 45 5
Tentative Tax Based on the Tax Rate of the Parent Listed on Line A
Enter the parent’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 39; Form 1040A, line 25; Form 1040EZ,
line 6; TeleFile Tax Record, line K; Form 1040NR, line 38; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14. If less
than zero, enter -0-
6
6
Enter the total net investment income, if any, from Forms 8615, line 5, of all other children of
the parent identified above. Do not include the amount from line 5 above
7
7
8Add lines 5, 6, and 78
9
Enter the tax on line 8 based on the parent’s filing status. See instructions. If the Capital Gain
Tax Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here /H17075
9
10 Enter the parent ’s tax from Form 1040, line 40; Form 1040A, line 26, minus any alternative
minimum tax; Form 1040EZ, line 10; TeleFile Tax Record, line K; Form 1040NR, line 39; or Form
1040NR-EZ, line 15. If any tax is from Form 4972 or 8814, see instructions. If the Capital Gain
Tax Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) was used to figure the tax, check here
/H1707510
Subtract line 10 from line 9 and enter the result. If line 7 is blank, also enter this amount on line
13 and go to Part III
11
11
12aAdd lines 5 and 712a
12b .Divide line 5 by line 12a. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at least three places)b
Multiply line 11 by line 12b13 13
Child’s Tax— If lines 4 and 5 above are the same, enter -0- on line 15 and go to line 16.
1414 Subtract line 5 from line 4
15
15 Enter the tax on line 14 based on the child’s filing status. See instructions. If the Capital Gain
Tax Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here /H17075
1616 Add lines 13 and 15
17
17 Enter the tax on line 4 based on the child’s filing status. See instructions. If the Capital Gain
Tax Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here /H17075
18 Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 here and on Form 1040, line 40; Form 1040A, line 26; or
Form 1040NR, line 39 18
Form 8615 (2000)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 2 of the instructions.
A B
C
Single Married filing jointly Married filing separately Head of household Qualifying widow(er)
Cat. No. 64113U
/H11003
Part III
Part I
Part II
(99)
2000
/H17075See separate instructions.
Note: If the total of lines 4 and 6 above is not more than $43,850, lines 7 through 16 may not
have to be completed. For details, see the instructions for line 6.
Before you begin: If the child, the parent, or any of the parent ’s other children under age 14 received capitals gain distributions (including)
or farm income, see Pub. 929, Tax Rules for Children and Dependents. It explains how to figure the child ’s tax using the
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions or Schedule D or J (Form 1040).
Page 210 Chapter 32  Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

33.
Child and
Dependent Care
Credit
Important Change
Limit on credit.For 2000, your credit can
offset both your regular tax (after reduction
by any foreign tax credit) and your alterna-
tive minimum tax, if any. Previously, the
credit could offset only your regular tax.
Important Reminders
Taxpayer identification number needed
for each qualifying person. You must in-
clude on line 2 of Form 2441 or Schedule
2 (Form 1040A) the name and taxpayer
identification number (generally the social
security number) of each qualifying person.
See Taxpayer identification number under
Qualifying Person Test, later.
You may have to pay employment taxes.
If you pay someone to come to your home
and care for your dependent or spouse, you
may be a household employer who has to
pay employment taxes. Usually, you are not
a household employer if the person who
cares for your dependent or spouse does
so at his or her home or place of business.
See Employment Taxes for Household
Employers, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the credit for child
and dependent care expenses and covers
the following topics.
 Tests you must meet to claim the credit.
 How to figure the credit.
 How to claim the credit.
 Employment taxes you may have to pay
as a household employer.
You may be able to claim the credit if
you pay someone to care for your depend-
ent who is under age 13 or for your spouse
or dependent who is not able to care for
himself or herself. The credit can be up to
30% of your expenses. To qualify, you must
pay these expenses so you can work or look
for work.
CAUTION
!
This credit should not be confused
with the child tax credit discussed in
chapter 35.
Dependent care benefits. If you received
any dependent care benefits from your em-
ployer during the year, you may be able to
exclude from your income all or part of
them. You must complete Part III of Form
2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) before
you can figure the amount of your credit.
See Employer-Provided Dependent Care
Benefits under How To Figure the Credit.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554501 Exemptions, Standard De-
duction, and Filing Information
/H18554503 Child and Dependent Care Ex-
penses 
/H18554926 Household Employer's Tax
Guide 
Form (and Instructions)
/H185542441 Child and Dependent Care Ex-
penses 
/H18554Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) Child and
Dependent Care Expenses for
Form 1040A Filers 
/H18554Schedule H (Form 1040) Household
Employment Taxes 
/H18554W–7 Application for IRS Individual
Taxpayer Identification Number
/H18554W–10 Dependent Care Provider's
Identification and Certification 
Tests To Claim
the Credit
To be able to claim the credit for child and
dependent care expenses, you must file
Form 1040 or Form 1040A, not Form
1040EZ, and meet all the following tests.
1) The care must be for one or more
qualifying persons who are identified
on the form you use to claim the credit.
(See Qualifying Person Test.)
2) You (and your spouse if you are mar-
ried) must keep up a home that you live
in with the qualifying person or per-
sons. (See Keeping Up a Home
Test.)
3) You (and your spouse if you are mar-
ried) must have earned income during
the year. (However, see Rule for
student-spouse or spouse not able to
care for self under Earned Income
Test.)
4) You must pay child and dependent
care expenses so you (and your
spouse if you are married) can work
or look for work. (See Work-Related
Expense Test.)
5) You must make payments for child and
dependent care to someone you (or
your spouse) cannot claim as a de-
pendent. If you make payments to your
child, he or she cannot be your de-
pendent and must be age 19 or older
by the end of the year. (See Payments
to Relatives under Work-Related Ex-
pense Test.)
6) Your filing status must be single, head
of household, qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child, or married filing
jointly. You must file a joint return if
you are married, unless an exception
discussed later under Joint Return Test
applies to you.
7) You must identify the care provider on
your tax return. (See Provider Identifi-
cation Test.)
8) If you exclude dependent care assist-
ance benefits provided by your em-
ployer, you must exclude less than the
dollar limit for qualifying expenses
(generally, less than $2,400 if one
qualifying person was cared for, or less
than $4,800 if two or more qualifying
persons were cared for). (See Re-
duced Dollar Limit under How To Fig-
ure the Credit, later.)
These tests are presented in Figure 33–A
and are also explained in detail in this
chapter.
Qualifying Person Test
Your child and dependent care expenses
must be for the care of one or more quali-
fying persons.
A qualifying person is:
1) Your dependent who was under age
13 when the care was provided and for
whom you can claim an exemption,
2) Your spouse who was physically or
mentally not able to care for himself
or herself, or
3) Your dependent who was physically
or mentally not able to care for himself
or herself and for whom you can claim
an exemption (or could claim an ex-
emption except the person had $2,800
or more of gross income).
If you are divorced or separated, see
Child of Divorced or Separated Parents to
determine which parent may treat the child
as a qualifying person.
Physically or mentally not able to care
for oneself.Persons who cannot dress,
clean, or feed themselves because of
physical or mental problems are considered
not able to care for themselves. Also, per-
sons who must have constant attention to
prevent them from injuring themselves or
others are considered not able to care for
themselves.
Person qualifying for part of year.You
determine a person's qualifying status each
day. For example, if the person for whom
you pay child and dependent care expenses
no longer qualifies on September 16, count
only those expenses through September 15.
Also see Dollar Limit under How To Figure
the Credit, later.
Taxpayer identification number. You
must include on your return the name and
taxpayer identification number (generally
the social security number) of the qualifying
person(s). If the correct information is not
shown, the credit may be reduced or disal-
lowed.
Individual taxpayer identification
number (ITIN) for aliens. If your qualifying
person is a nonresident or resident alien
who does not have and cannot get a social
security number (SSN), use that person's
ITIN. To apply for an ITIN, file Form W–7
with the IRS. The ITIN is entered wherever
an SSN is requested on a tax return.
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 211

Figure 33–A. Can You Claim the Credit?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the care for one or more qualifying persons?
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you
1 
keep up a home for you and that qualifying person or
persons?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you
2 
have earned income during the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you pay the expenses to allow you
2 
to work or look for work?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to someone you or your spouse could
claim as a dependent?
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your child who was under the age of
19 at the end of the year?
No
Yes
/H17075
Are you single?
Are you filing a joint return?
Do you meet the requirements
to be considered unmarried?
Do you know the care provider ’s name, address,
and identifying number?
Did you make a reasonable effort to get this
information? (See Due diligence.)
Did you exclude at least $2,400 of dependent
care benefits ($4,800 if two or more qualifying
persons)?
You CAN claim the child and
dependent care credit. Fill out
Form 2441 or Schedule 2
(Form 1040A).
You CANNOT claim the child
and dependent care credit.
3
/H17074
No
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17075
1
This includes your spouse if you were married.
2
This also applies to your spouse, unless your spouse was disabled or a full-time student.
3
If you had expenses that met the requirements for 1999, except that you did not pay them until 2000, you may be able to claim t hose expenses in 2000.
See Expenses not paid until the following year under How To Figure the Credit.
Page 212 Chapter 33  Child and Dependent Care Credit

An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not
entitle the holder to social security benefits
or change the holder's employment or im-
migration status under U.S. law.
Adoption taxpayer identification
number (ATIN).  If your qualifying person
is a child who was placed in your home for
adoption and for whom you do not have an
SSN, you must get an ATIN for the child.
File Form W–7A, Application for Taxpayer
Identification Number for Pending U.S.
Adoptions.
Child of Divorced
or Separated Parents
To be a qualifying person, your child usually
must be your dependent for whom you can
claim an exemption. But an exception may
apply if you are divorced or separated. Un-
der the exception, if you are the custodial
parent, you can treat your child as a quali-
fying person even if you cannot claim the
child's exemption. If you are the noncusto-
dial parent, you cannot treat your child as
a qualifying person even if you can claim the
child's exemption.
This exception applies if all of the fol-
lowing are true.
1) One or both parents had custody of the
child for more than half of the year.
2) One or both parents provided more
than half of the child's support for the
year.
 3) Either—
a) The custodial parent signed Form
8332, Release of Claim to Ex-
emption for Child of Divorced or
Separated Parents, or a similar
statement, agreeing not to claim
the child's exemption for the year,
or
b) The noncustodial parent provided
at least $600 for the child's sup-
port and can claim the child's ex-
emption under a pre-1985 decree
of divorce or separate mainte-
nance, or written agreement.
For purposes of 3(a), a similar statement
includes a divorce decree or separation
agreement that went into effect after 1984
that allows the noncustodial parent to claim
the child's exemption without any condi-
tions, such as payment of support.
You can use Figure 33–B to see whether
this exception applies to you. If it applies,
only the custodial parent can treat the child
as a qualifying person. If the exception does
not apply, follow the regular rules for a
qualifying person under Qualifying Person
Test, earlier.
Example. You are divorced and have
custody of your 8-year-old child. You sign
Form 8332 to allow your ex-spouse to take
the exemption. You pay child care ex-
penses so you can work. Your child is a
qualifying person and you, the custodial
parent, can claim the credit for those ex-
penses, even though your ex-spouse claims
an exemption for the child.
Custodial parent.You are the custodial
parent if, during the year, you have custody
of your child longer than your child's other
parent has custody.
Divorced or separated.For purposes of
determining whether your child is a qualify-
ing person, you are considered divorced or
separated if either of the following applies.
1) You are divorced or separated under
a decree of divorce or separate main-
tenance or a written separation agree-
ment, or
2) You lived apart from your spouse for
all of the last 6 months of the year.
Keeping Up a Home Test
To claim the credit, you must keep up a
home. You and one or more qualifying per-
sons must live in the home. 
You are keeping up a home if you (and
your spouse if you are married) pay more
than half the cost of running it for the year.
Home. The home you keep up must be the
main home for both you and the qualifying
person. Your home can be the qualifying
person's main home even if he or she does
not live there all year because of his or her:
 1) Birth,
 2) Death, or
3) Temporary absence due to:
 a) Sickness,
 b) School,
 c) Business,
 d) Vacation,
e) Military service, or
 f) Custody agreement.
Costs of keeping up home.The costs of
keeping up a home normally include prop-
erty taxes, mortgage interest, rent, utility
charges, home repairs, insurance on the
home, and food eaten at home.
Costs not included. The costs of
keeping up a home do not include payments
for clothing, education, medical treatment,
vacations, life insurance, transportation, or
mortgage principal. 
They also do not include the purchase,
permanent improvement, or replacement of
property. For example, you cannot include
the cost of replacing a water heater. How-
ever, you can include the cost of repairing
a water heater.
Earned Income Test
To claim the credit, you (and your spouse
if you are married) must have earned in-
come during the year.
Earned income. Earned income includes
wages, salaries, tips, other employee com-
pensation, and net earnings from self-
employment. A net loss from self-employ-
ment reduces earned income. Earned
income also includes strike benefits and any
disability pay you report as wages. 
Certain nontaxable earned income in-
cluded. It also includes nontaxable earned
income such as parsonage allowances,
meals and lodging furnished for the con-
venience of the employer, voluntary salary
deferrals, military basic quarters and
subsistence allowances and in-kind quar-
ters and subsistence, and military pay
earned in a combat zone.
Members of certain religious faiths
opposed to social security.Certain in-
come earned by persons who are members
of certain religious faiths that are opposed
to participation in Social Security Act Pro-
grams and have an IRS-approved form that
exempts certain income from social security
and Medicare taxes may not be considered
earned income for this purpose. See
Earned Income Test in Publication 503.
What is not earned income? Earned in-
come does not include pensions or annui-
ties, social security payments, workers'
compensation, interest, dividends, or un-
employment compensation. It also does not
include scholarship or fellowship grants,
except for amounts paid to you (and re-
ported on Form W–2) for teaching, re-
search, or other services.
Rule for student-spouse or spouse not
able to care for self. Your spouse is
treated as having earned income for any
month that he or she is:
1) A full-time student, or
2) Physically or mentally not able to care
for himself or herself.
Figure the earned income of the non-
working spouse described under (1) or (2)
above as explained under Earned Income
Limit, later.
This rule applies to only one spouse for
any one month. If, in the same month, both
you and your spouse do not work and are
either full-time students or physically or
mentally not able to care for yourselves,
only one of you can be treated as having
earned income in that month.
Full-time student.You are a full-time
student if you are enrolled at and attend a
school for the number of hours or classes
that the school considers full time. You must
have been a student for some part of each
of 5 calendar months during the year. (The
months need not be consecutive.) If you
attend school only at night, you are not a
full-time student. However, as part of your
full-time course of study, you may attend
some night classes.
School. The term school includes ele-
mentary schools, junior and senior high
schools, colleges, universities, and techni-
cal, trade, and mechanical schools. It does
not include on-the-job training courses,
correspondence schools, and night schools.
Work-Related
Expense Test
Child and dependent care expenses must
be work related to qualify for the credit. Ex-
penses are considered work related only if
both of the following are true.
 They allow you (and your spouse if you
are married) to work or look for work.
 They are for a qualifying person's care.
Working or Looking for Work
To be work related, your expenses must
allow you to work or look for work. If you
are married, generally both you and your
spouse must work or look for work. Your
spouse is treated as working during any
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 213

Figure 33–B. Is a Child of Divorced or Separated Parents a Qualifying Person?
Start Here
/H17074
Is the child’s exemption claimed under a
multiple support agreement?
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17076
/H17074
Were you divorced or legally separated, or
did you live apart from your spouse the last 6
months of the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you and the other parent together have
custody of the child for more than half of the
year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you and the other parent together provide
more than half the child ’s support for the year?
Yes
Yes
/H17075
Did you have custody of the child for more of
the year than the other parent?
No
No
/H17075
Do not use this chart. Determine whether
your child is a qualifying person using the
regular rules. (See Qualifying Person Test).
Yes
/H17075
Could you claim the child ’s exemption except
that you signed an agreement to let the other
parent claim it?
Could you claim the child ’s exemption except
that the other parent claims it under a
pre-1985 agreement?
This child is a qualifying person.
This child is not a qualifying
person.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No Yes
/H17076
/H17075
Can you claim the child ’s exemption?
Was the child capable of
caring for himself or herself?
Was the child under age 13
when the care was provided?
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
No
/H17076
Yes
/H17076
/H17074
No Yes
Page 214 Chapter 33  Child and Dependent Care Credit

month he or she is a full-time student or is
physically or mentally not able to care for
himself or herself.
Your work can be for others or in your
own business or partnership. It can be ei-
ther full time or part time. 
Work also includes actively looking for
work. However, if you do not find a job and
have no earned income for the year, you
cannot take this credit. See Earned Income
Test, earlier.
Whether your expenses allow you to
work or look for work depends on the facts.
For example, the cost of a sitter while you
and your spouse go out to eat is not
normally a work-related expense. 
Expenses are not considered work re-
lated merely because you had them while
you were working. They must enable you to
be gainfully employed.
Volunteer work. You are not gainfully em-
ployed if you do unpaid volunteer work or
volunteer work for a nominal salary.
Work for part of year.If you work or ac-
tively look for work during only part of the
period covered by the expenses, then you
must figure your expenses for each day. For
example, if you work all year and pay care
expenses of $200 a month ($2,400 for the
year), all the expenses are work related.
However, if you work or look for work for
only 2 months and 15 days during the year
and pay expenses of $200 a month, your
work-related expenses are limited to $500
(2
1 / 2 months × $200).
Payments while you are out sick.Do not
count as work-related expenses amounts
you pay for child and dependent care while
you are off work because of illness. These
amounts are not paid to allow you to work.
This applies even if you get sick pay and
are still considered an employee.
Care of a Qualifying Person
To be work related, your expenses must be
to provide care for a qualifying person. You
do not have to choose the least expensive
way of providing the care.
 Expenses are for the care of a qualifying
person only if their main purpose is the
person's well-being and protection.
Expenses for household services
qualify if part of the services is for the care
of qualifying persons. See Household ser-
vices, later.
Expenses not for care.Expenses for care
do not include amounts you pay for food,
clothing, education, and entertainment.
However, you can include amounts paid for
these items if they are incident to and can-
not be separated from the cost of caring for
the qualifying person.
Education. Expenses to attend first
grade or a higher grade are not expenses
for care. Do not use these expenses to fig-
ure your credit.
Example 1. You take your 3-year-old
child to a nursery school that provides lunch
and educational activities as a part of its
preschool child-care service. You can count
the total cost in figuring the credit.
Example 2. You place your 10-year-old
child in a boarding school so you can work
full time. Only the part of the boarding
school expense that is for the care of your
child is a work-related expense. You cannot
count any part of the amount you pay the
school for your child's education.
Care outside your home. You can count
the cost of care provided outside your home
if the care is for your dependent under age
13, or any other qualifying person who reg-
ularly spends at least 8 hours each day in
your home.
Dependent care center.You can count
care provided outside your home by a de-
pendent care center only if the center com-
plies with all state and local regulations that
apply to these centers. 
A dependent care center is a place that
provides care for more than six persons
(other than persons who live there) and re-
ceives a fee, payment, or grant for providing
services for any of those persons, even if
the center is not run for profit.
Camp. The cost of sending your child
to an overnight camp is not considered a
work-related expense.
Transportation. The cost of getting a
qualifying person from your home to the
care location and back, or from the care lo-
cation to school and back, is not considered
a work-related expense. This includes the
costs of bus, subway, taxi, or private car.
Also, if you pay the transportation cost for
the care provider to come to your home, you
cannot count this cost as a work-related
expense.
Household services. Expenses you pay
for household services meet the work-
related expense test if they are at least
partly for the well-being and protection of a
qualifying person.
Household services are ordinary and
usual services done in and around your
home that are necessary to run your home.
They include the services of a housekeeper,
maid, or cook. However, they do not in-
clude the services of a chauffeur, bartender,
or gardener. See Household Services in
Publication 503 for more information.
In this chapter, the term housekeeper
refers to any household employee whose
services include the care of a qualifying
person.
Taxes paid on wages. The taxes you
pay on wages for qualifying child and de-
pendent care services are work-related ex-
penses. See Employment Taxes for
Household Employers, later.
Payments to Relatives
You can count work-related payments you
make to relatives who are not your depen-
dents, even if they live in your home.
However, do not count any amounts you
pay to:
1) A dependent for whom you (or your
spouse if you are married) can claim
an exemption, or
2) Your child who was under age 19 at
the end of the year, even if he or she
is not your dependent.
Joint Return Test
Generally, married couples must file a joint
return to take the credit. However, if you are
legally separated or living apart from your
spouse, you may be able to file a separate
return and still take the credit.
Legally separated.You are not considered
married if you are legally separated from
your spouse under a decree of divorce or
separate maintenance. You are eligible to
take the credit on a separate return.
Married and living apart.You are not
considered married and are eligible to take
the credit if all the following apply.
1) You file a separate return.
2) Your home is the home of a qualifying
person for more than half the year.
3) You pay more than half the cost of
keeping up your home for the year.
4) Your spouse does not live in your
home for the last 6 months of the year.
Death of spouse. If your spouse died
during the year and you do not remarry be-
fore the end of the year, you generally must
file a joint return to take the credit. If you
do remarry before the end of the year, the
credit can be claimed on your deceased
spouse's separate return.
Provider
Identification Test
You must identify all persons or organiza-
tions that provide care for your child or de-
pendent. Use Part I of Form 2441 or
Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) to show the in-
formation.
Information needed.To identify the care
provider, you must give the provider's:
 1) Name,
 2) Address, and
3) Taxpayer identification number.
If the care provider is an individual, the
taxpayer identification number is his or her
social security number or individual tax-
payer identification number. If the care pro-
vider is an organization, then it is the em-
ployer identification number (EIN).
You do not have to show the taxpayer
identification number if the care provider is
one of certain tax-exempt organizations
(such as a church or school). In this case,
write “Tax-Exempt” in the space where the
tax form calls for the number.
If you cannot provide all of the informa-
tion, or the information is incorrect, you must
be able to show that you used due diligence
(discussed later) in trying to furnish the
necessary information.
Getting the information.You can use 
Form W–10 to request the required infor-
mation from the care provider. If you do not
use Form W–10, you can get the informa-
tion from:
1) A copy of the provider's social security
card,
2) A copy of the provider's driver's license
(in a state where the license includes
the social security number),
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 215

3) A copy of the provider's completed
Form W–4 if he or she is your house-
hold employee,
4) A copy of the statement furnished by
your employer if the provider is your
employer's dependent care plan, or
5) A letter or invoice from the provider if
it shows the information.
RECORDS
You should keep this information
with your tax records. Do not send
Form W–10 (or other document
containing this information) to the Internal
Revenue Service.
Due diligence.If the care provider infor-
mation you give is incorrect or incomplete,
your credit may not be allowed. However,
if you can show that you used due diligence
in trying to supply the information, you can
still claim the credit.
You can show due diligence by getting
and keeping the provider's completed Form
W–10 or one of the other sources of infor-
mation listed earlier. Care providers can be
penalized if they do not provide this infor-
mation to you or if they provide incorrect
information.
Provider refusal.If the provider refuses
to give you their identifying information, you
should report whatever information you
have (such as the name and address) on
the form you use to claim the credit. Write
“See page 2” in the columns calling for the
information you do not have. On the bottom
of page 2, explain that you requested the
information from the care provider, but the
provider did not give you the information.
This statement will show that you used due
diligence in trying to furnish the necessary
information.
How To Figure
the Credit
Your credit is a percentage of your work-
related expenses. Your expenses are sub-
ject to the earned income limit and the dollar
limit. The percentage is based on your ad-
justed gross income.
Figuring Total
Work-Related Expenses
To figure the credit for 2000 work-related
expenses, count only those you paid by
December 31, 2000.
Expenses prepaid in an earlier year.If
you pay for services before they are pro-
vided, you can count the prepaid expenses
only in the year the care is received. Claim
the expenses for the later year as if they
were actually paid in that later year.
Expenses not paid until the following
year.Do not count 1999 expenses that you
paid in 2000 as work-related expenses for
2000. You may be able to claim an addi-
tional credit for them on your 2000 return,
but you must figure it separately. See Pay-
ments for previous year's expenses under
Amount of Credit in Publication 503.
TIP
If you had expenses in 2000 that
you did not pay until 2001, you
cannot count them when figuring
your 2000 credit. You may be able to claim
a credit for them on your 2001 return.
Expenses reimbursed. If a state social
services agency pays you a nontaxable
amount to reimburse you for some of your
child and dependent care expenses, you
cannot count the expenses that are reim-
bursed as work-related expenses.
Example. You paid work-related ex-
penses of $3,000. You are reimbursed
$2,000 by a state social services agency.
You can use only $1,000 to figure your
credit.
Medical expenses. Some expenses for the
care of qualifying persons who are not able
to care for themselves may qualify as
work-related expenses and also as medical
expenses. You can use them either way,
but you cannot use the same expenses to
claim both a credit and a medical expense
deduction.
If you use these expenses to figure the
credit and they are more than the earned
income limit or the dollar limit, discussed
later, you can add the excess to your med-
ical expenses. However, if you use your
total expenses to figure your medical ex-
pense deduction, you cannot use any part
of them to figure your credit.
CAUTION
!
Amounts excluded from your in-
come under your employer's de-
pendent care benefits plan cannot
be used to claim a medical expense de-
duction.
Employer-Provided Dependent
Care Benefits
Dependent care benefits include:
1) Amounts your employer pays directly
to either you or your care provider for
the care of your qualifying person while
you work, and
2) The fair market value of care in a day-
care facility provided or sponsored by
your employer.
Your salary may have been reduced to pay
for these benefits. If you received benefits,
they should be shown on your W–2 form.
See Statement for employee, later.
Exclusion. If your employer provides de-
pendent care benefits under a qualified
plan, you may be able to exclude these
benefits from your income. Your employer
can tell you whether your benefit plan qual-
ifies. If it does, you must complete Part III
of either Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form
1040A) to claim the exclusion even if you
cannot take the credit. You cannot use Form
1040EZ.
The amount you can exclude is limited
to the smallest of:
1) The total amount of dependent care
benefits you received during the year,
2) The total amount of qualified expenses
you incurred during the year,
3) Your earned income,
4) Your spouse's earned income, or
5) $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-
rately).
Statement for employee.Your employer
must give you a Form W–2, Wage and Tax
Statement (or similar statement), showing
in box 10 the total amount of dependent
care benefits provided to you during the
year under a qualified plan. Your employer
will also include any dependent care bene-
fits over $5,000 in your wages shown in box
1 of your Form W–2.
Forfeitures.Forfeitures are amounts
credited to your dependent care benefit ac-
count (flexible spending account) and in-
cluded in the amount shown in box 10 of
your Form W–2, but not received because
you did not incur the expense. When figur-
ing your exclusion, subtract any forfeitures
from the total dependent care benefits re-
ported by your employer. To do this, enter
the forfeited amount on line 11 of Form
2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).
CAUTION
!
Forfeitures do not include amounts
that you expect to receive in the fu-
ture.
Effect of exclusion.If you exclude de-
pendent care benefits from your income, the
amount of the excluded benefits:
1) Is not included in your work-related
expenses, and
2) Reduces the dollar limit, discussed
later.
Earned Income Limit
The amount of work-related expenses you
use to figure your credit cannot be more
than:
1) Your earned income for the year, if you
are single at the end of the year, or
2) The smaller of your earned income or
your spouse's earned income for the
year, if you are married at the end of
the year.
Earned income is defined under Earned
Income Test, earlier.
TIP
For purposes of item (2), use your
spouse's earned income for the en-
tire year, even if you were married
for only part of the year.
Separated spouse. If you are legally sep-
arated or married and living apart from your
spouse (as described under Joint Return
Test, earlier), you are not considered mar-
ried for purposes of the earned income limit.
Use only your income in figuring the earned
income limit.
Surviving spouse. If your spouse died
during the year and you file a joint return
as a surviving spouse, you are not consid-
ered married for purposes of the earned in-
come limit. Use only your income in figuring
the earned income limit.
Community property laws. You should
disregard community property laws when
you figure earned income for this credit.
Student-spouse or spouse not able to
care for self.Your spouse who is either a
full-time student or not able to care for
Page 216 Chapter 33  Child and Dependent Care Credit

himself or herself is treated as having
earned income. His or her earned income
for each month is considered to be at least
$200 if there is one qualifying person in your
home, or at least $400 if there are two or
more.
Spouse works. If your spouse works
during that month, use the higher of $200
(or $400) or his or her actual earned income
for that month.
Spouse qualifies for part of month. If
your spouse is a full-time student or not able
to care for himself or herself for only part
of a month, the full $200 (or $400) still ap-
plies for that month.
Both spouses qualify.If, in the same
month, both you and your spouse are either
full-time students or not able to care for
yourselves, only one spouse can be con-
sidered to have this earned income of $200
(or $400) for that month.
Dollar Limit
There is a dollar limit on the amount of your
work-related expenses you can use to figure
the credit. This limit is $2,400 for one qual-
ifying person, or $4,800 for two or more
qualifying persons.
Yearly limit.The dollar limit is a yearly
limit. The amount of the dollar limit remains
the same no matter how long, during the
year, you have a qualifying person in your
household. Use the $2,400 limit if you paid
work-related expenses for the care of one
qualifying person at any time during the
year. Use $4,800 if you paid work-related
expenses for the care of more than one
qualifying person at any time during the
year.
Reduced Dollar Limit
If you received dependent care benefits
from your employer that you exclude from
your income, you must subtract that amount
from the dollar limit that applies to you. Your
reduced dollar limit is figured on lines 20
through 24 of Form 2441 or Schedule 2
(Form 1040A). See Employer-Provided De-
pendent Care Benefits, earlier, for informa-
tion on excluding these benefits.
Example. George is a widower with one
child and earns $24,000 a year. He pays
work-related expenses of $1,900 for the
care of his 4-year-old child and qualifies to
claim the credit for child and dependent care
expenses. His employer pays an additional
$1,000 under a dependent care benefit
plan. This $1,000 is excluded from George's
income.
Although the dollar limit for his work-
related expenses is $2,400 (one qualifying
person), George figures his credit on only
$1,400 of the $1,900 work-related expenses
he paid. This is because his dollar limit is
reduced as shown next.
Amount of Credit
To determine the amount of your credit,
multiply your work-related expenses (after
applying the earned income and dollar lim-
its) by a percentage. This percentage de-
pends on your adjusted gross income
shown on line 34 of Form 1040 or line 19
of Form 1040A. The following table shows
the percentage to use based on adjusted
gross income.
How To Claim
the Credit
To claim the credit, you can file Form 1040
or Form 1040A. You cannot claim the credit
on Form 1040EZ.
Form 1040. You must complete Form 2441
and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the
credit on line 44 of your Form 1040. An ex-
ample of a filled-in Form 2441 is at the end
of this chapter.
Form 1040A. You must complete Sched-
ule 2 (Form 1040A) and attach it to your
Form 1040A. Enter the credit on line 27 of
your Form 1040A.
Limit on credit.The amount of credit you
can claim is limited to the amount of your
regular tax (after reduction by any allowable
foreign tax credit) plus your alternative
minimum tax, if any. For more information,
see the instructions for Form 2441 or
Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).
Tax credit not refundable. You cannot
get a refund for any part of the credit that
is more than this limit.
RECORDS
Recordkeeping. You should keep
records of your work-related ex-
penses. Also, if your dependent or
spouse is not able to care for himself or
herself, your records should show both the
nature and the length of the disability. Other
records you should keep to support your
claim for the credit are described earlier
under Provider Identification Test.
Employment Taxes
for Household
Employers
If you pay someone to come to your home
and care for your dependent or spouse, you
may be a household employer. If you are a
household employer, you will need an em-
ployer identification number (EIN) and you
may have to pay employment taxes. If the
individuals who work in your home are
self-employed, you are not liable for any of
the taxes discussed in this section. Self-
employed persons who are in business for
themselves are not household employees.
Usually, you are not a household employer
if the person who cares for your dependent
or spouse does so at his or her home or
place of business.
If you use a placement agency that ex-
ercises control over what work is done and
how it will be done by a babysitter or com-
panion who works in your home, that person
is not your employee. This control could in-
clude providing rules of conduct and ap-
pearance and requiring regular reports. In
this case, you do not have to pay employ-
ment taxes. But, if an agency merely gives
you a list of sitters and you hire one from
that list, the sitter may be your employee.
If you have a household employee you
may be subject to:
1) Social security and Medicare taxes,
2) Federal unemployment tax, and
3) Federal income tax withholding.
Social security and Medicare taxes are
generally withheld from the employee's pay
and matched by the employer. Federal un-
employment (FUTA) tax is paid by the em-
ployer only and provides for payments of
unemployment compensation to workers
who have lost their jobs. Federal income tax
is withheld from the employee's total pay if
the employee asks you to do so and you
agree.
For more information on a household
employer's tax responsibilities, see Publi-
cation 926 and Schedule H (Form 1040)
and its instructions.
State employment taxes. You may also
have to pay state unemployment tax. Con-
tact your state unemployment tax office for
information. You should also find out
whether you need to pay or collect other
state employment taxes or carry workers'
compensation insurance. A list of state em-
ployment tax agencies, including addresses
and phone numbers, is in Publication 926.
Example
The following example shows how to figure
the credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses for two children when employer de-
pendent care benefits are involved. The
filled-in Form 2441 is shown at the end of
this chapter.
Illustrated example.Joan Thomas is di-
vorced and has two children, ages 3 and
9. She works at ACME Computers. Her
If your adjusted gross in-
come is
Then the per-
centage is
Over But not over
$0 $10,000 30%
10,000 12,000 29%
12,000 14,000 28%
14,000 16,000 27%
16,000 18,000 26%
18,000 20,000 25%
20,000 22,000 24%
22,000 24,000 23%
24,000 26,000 22%
26,000 28,000 21%
28,000 No limit 20%
George's Reduced Dollar Limit
1) Maximum allowable expenses
for one qualifying person ....... $2,400
2) Minus: Dependent care bene-
fits George excludes from in-
come .......................................−1,000
3) Reduced dollar limit on ex-
penses George can use for the
credit ....................................... $1,400
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 217

adjusted gross income (AGI) is $29,000,
and the entire amount is earned income.
Joan's younger child (Susan) stays at
her employer's on-site child-care center
while she works. The benefits from this
child-care center qualify to be excluded from
her income. Her employer reports the value
of this service as $3,000 for the year. This
$3,000 is shown in box 10 of her Form W–2,
but is not included in taxable wages in box
1.
A neighbor cares for Joan's older child
(Seth) after school, on holidays, and during
the summer. She pays her neighbor $2,400
for this care.
Joan figures her credit on Form 2441 as
follows.
Work-related expenses Joan paid ......... $2,400
Dollar limit ............................................... $4,800
Minus: Dependent care benefits
excluded from Joan's income ............−3,000
Reduced dollar limit ................................ $1,800
Lesser of expenses paid ($2,400) or
dollar limit ($1,800) ............................. $1,800
Percentage for AGI of $29,000 .............. x .20
Amount of credit (20% of $1,800) $ 360
Page 218 Chapter 33  Child and Dependent Care Credit

Joan Thomas 559 00 3436
P at Green
ACME Computers
12 Ash Avenue
Hometown, TX 75240
(See W-2)
240-00-3811 2,400
1,800
29,000
29,000
1,800
29,000
20
360
Seth
Susan
Thomas
Thomas
2,400559 00 1234
559 00 5678
OMB No. 1545-0068Child and Dependent Care Expenses2441Form
/H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 21/H17075See separate instructions.
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Persons or Organizations Who Provided the Care — You must complete this part. 
(If you need more space, use the bottom of page 2.)
(b) Address
(number, street, apt. no., city, state, and ZIP code)
(d) Amount paid
(see instructions)
(c) Identifying number
(SSN or EIN)1 (a) Care provider’s
name
Credit for Child and Dependent Care Expenses
2
Add the amounts in column (c) of line 2. Do not enter more than $2,400 for one qualifying
person or $4,800 for two or more persons. If you completed Part III, enter the amount
from line 24
Enter YOUR earned income 
3
3
If married filing a joint return, enter YOUR SPOUSE’S earned income (if your spouse was
a student or was disabled, see the instructions); all others, enter the amount from
line 4
4 4
Enter the smallest of line 3, 4, or 5
5
5
6
7Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 347
/H11003
Decimal
amount
is
If line 7 is —Decimal
amount
is
If line 7 is —
But not
overOver
But not
overOver
.24$20,000— 22,000.30$0— 10,000
.2322,000— 24,000.2910,000— 12,000
.2224,000— 26,000.2812,000— 14,000
.2126,000— 28,000.2714,000— 16,000
.2028,000— No limit.2616,000— 18,000
.2518,000— 20,000
9
Multiply line 6 by the decimal amount on line 8. Enter the result here and on Form 1040,
line 44. But if this amount is more than the amount on Form 1040, line 42, minus any
amount on line 43, or you paid 1999 expenses in 2000, see the instructions for the amount
to enter on line 44
9
Form 2441 (2000)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3 of the instructions.
Before you begin: You need to understand the following terms. See Definitions on page 1 of the instructions.
Cat. No. 11862M
Part I
Part II
Enter on line 8 the decimal amount shown below that applies to the amount on line 7
Did you receive
dependent care benefits? Yes
No
8
Complete only Part II below.
Complete Part III on the back next.
/H17075
/H17075
Caution: If the care was provided in your home, you may owe employment taxes. See the instructions for Form 1040, line 56.
.
(99)
Information about your qualifying person(s). If you have more than two qualifying persons, see the instructions.
(a) Qualifying person’s name
First Last
(b) Qualifying person’s social
security number
(c) Qualified expenses you
incurred and paid in 2000 for the
person listed in column (a)
8
6
● Dependent Care Benefits ● Qualifying Person(s) ● Qualified Expenses ● Earned Income
2000
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 219

3,000
3,000
5,400
3,000
29,000
29,000
3,000
3,000
-0-
4,800
3,000
1,800
2,400
1,800
Page 2Form 2441 (2000)
Dependent Care Benefits
Enter the total amount of dependent care benefits you received for 2000. This amount
should be shown in box 10 of your W-2 form(s). Do not include amounts that were
reported to you as wages in box 1 of Form(s) W-2
Enter the amount forfeited, if any. See the instructions
Subtract line 11 from line 10
Enter the total amount of qualified expenses incurred
in 2000 for the care of the qualifying person(s)
11
13
14Enter the smaller of line 12 or 13
12
Enter YOUR earned income
13
15
If married filing a joint return, enter YOUR SPOUSE ’S
earned income (if your spouse was a student or was
disabled, see the instructions for line 5); if married filing
a separate return, see the instructions for the amount to
enter; all others, enter the amount from line 15
16
Enter the smallest of line 14, 15, or 16
14
17
Excluded benefits. Enter here the smaller of the following:
15
18
● The amount from line 17 or
● $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing a separate return
and you were required to enter your spouse ’s
earned income on line 16).
Taxable benefits. Subtract line 18 from line 12. Also, include this amount on Form 1040,
line 7. On the dotted line next to line 7, enter “DCB”
16
19
Part III
/H20854
To claim the child and dependent care
credit, complete lines 20 –24 below.
20
21
22
17
18
19
20 Enter $2,400 ($4,800 if two or more qualifying persons)
Subtract line 21 from line 20. If zero or less, stop. You cannot take the credit.
Exception. If you paid 1999 expenses in 2000, see the instructions for line 9
Enter the smaller of line 22 or 23. Also, enter this amount on line 3 on the front of this
form and complete lines 4 –9
Enter the amount from line 18
24
21
22
24
11
12
10
10
Complete line 2 on the front of this form. Do not include in column (c) any benefits shown
on line 18 above. Then, add the amounts in column (c) and enter the total here
23
23
Form 2441 (2000)
Page 220 Chapter 33  Child and Dependent Care Credit

34.
Credit for the
Elderly or the
Disabled
Important Change
Limit on credit.For 2000 and 2001, your
credit can offset both your regular tax (after
reduction by the foreign tax credit) and your
alternative minimum tax, if any. See Limit
on credit, later.
Introduction
If you qualify, the law provides a number of
credits that can reduce the tax you owe for
a year. One of these credits is the credit for
the elderly or the disabled. 
This chapter explains:
 Who qualifies for the credit for the el-
derly or the disabled, and
 How to figure this credit.
The maximum credit available is $1,125.
You may be able to take this credit if you
are:
 Age 65 or older, or
 Retired on permanent and total disabil-
ity.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554524 Credit for the Elderly or the Dis-
abled 
/H18554554 Older Americans' Tax Guide
Forms (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule 3 (Form 1040A) Credit for
the Elderly or the Disabled for
Form 1040A Filers 
/H18554Schedule R (Form 1040) Credit for
the Elderly or the Disabled 
Can You Take
the Credit?
You can take the credit for the elderly or the
disabled if:
1) You are a qualified individual, and
2) Your income is not more than certain
limits.
You can use Figure 34–A and Figure 34–B
as guides to see if you qualify.
Use Figure 34–A first to see if you are
a qualified individual. If you are, go to Fig-
ure 34–B to make sure your income is not
too high to take the credit.
TIP
You can take the credit only if you
file Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You
cannot take the credit if you file
Form 1040EZ.
Qualified Individual
You are a qualified individual for this credit
if you are a U.S. citizen or resident and, at
the end of the tax year, you are:
1) Age 65 or older, or
2) Under age 65, retired on permanent
and total disability, and
a) Received taxable disability in-
come, and
b) Did not reach mandatory retire-
ment age (defined later under
Disability income) before the tax
year.
Age 65. You are considered to be age 65
on the day before your 65th birthday.
Therefore, you are 65 at the end of the year
if your 65th birthday is on January 1 of the
following year.
U.S. Citizen or Resident
You must be a U.S. citizen or resident (or
be treated as a resident) to take the credit.
Generally, you cannot take the credit if you
were a nonresident alien at any time during
the tax year.
Exceptions. You may be able to take the
credit if you are a nonresident alien who is
married to a U.S. citizen or resident at the
end of the tax year and you and your
spouse choose to treat you as a U.S. resi-
dent. If you make that choice, both you and
your spouse are taxed on your worldwide
income.
If you were a nonresident alien at the
beginning of the year and a resident at the
end of the year, and you were married to a
U.S. citizen or resident at the end of the
year, you may be able to choose to be
treated as a U.S. resident for the entire
year. In that case, you may be allowed to
take the credit. For information on these
choices, see chapter 1 of Publication 519,
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Married Persons
Generally, if you are married at the end of
the tax year, you and your spouse must file
a joint return to take the credit. However, if
you and your spouse did not live in the
same household at any time during the tax
year, you can file either joint or separate
returns and still take the credit.
Head of household.You can file as head
of household and qualify to take the credit,
even if your spouse lived with you during the
first 6 months of the year, if you meet all the
tests. See Head of Household in chapter 2
for the tests you must meet.
Under Age 65
If you are under age 65, you can qualify for
the credit only if you are retired on perma-
nent and total disability. If you retired after
January 1, 1977, you are retired on perma-
nent and total disability if you were perma-
nently and totally disabled when you retired.
Even if you do not retire formally, you
are considered retired on disability when
you have stopped working because of your
disability.
Permanent and total disability. You are
permanently and totally disabled if you
cannot engage in any substantial gainful
activity because of your physical or mental
condition. A physician must certify that the
condition has lasted or can be expected to
last continuously for 12 months or more, or
that the condition can be expected to result
in death. See Physician's statement, later.
Substantial gainful activity.Substan-
tial gainful activity is the performance of
significant duties over a reasonable period
of time while working for pay or profit, or in
work generally done for pay or profit.
Full-time work (or part-time work done
at your employer's convenience) in a com-
petitive work situation for at least the mini-
mum wage conclusively shows that you are
able to engage in substantial gainful activity.
Substantial gainful activity is not work
you do to take care of yourself or your
home. It is not unpaid work on hobbies, in-
stitutional therapy or training, school at-
tendance, clubs, social programs, and sim-
ilar activities. However, doing this kind of
work may show that you are able to engage
in substantial gainful activity.
The fact that you have not worked for
some time is not, of itself, conclusive evi-
dence that you cannot engage in substantial
gainful activity.
Sheltered employment. Certain work
offered at qualified locations to physically
or mentally impaired persons is considered
sheltered employment. These qualified lo-
cations are in sheltered workshops, hospi-
tals and similar institutions, homebound
programs, and Department of Veterans Af-
fairs (VA) sponsored homes. 
Compared to commercial employment,
pay is lower for sheltered employment.
Therefore, one usually does not look for
sheltered employment if he or she can get
other employment. The fact that one has
accepted sheltered employment is not proof
of that person's ability to engage in sub-
stantial gainful activity.
Physician's statement.If you are under
age 65, you must have your physician
complete a statement certifying that you
were permanently and totally disabled on
the date you retired. 
You do not have to file this statement
with your Form 1040 or Form 1040A, but
you must  keep it for your records. The in-
structions for either Schedule R (Form
1040) or Schedule 3 (Form 1040A) include
a statement your physician can complete
and that you can keep for your records.
Veterans. If the Department of Veter-
ans Affairs (VA) certifies that you are per-
manently and totally disabled, you can
substitute VA Form 21–0172, Certification
of Permanent and Total Disability, for the
physician's statement you are required to
keep. VA Form 21–0172 must be signed by
a person authorized by the VA to do so.
You can get this form from your local VA
regional office.
Physician's statement obtained in
earlier year.If you got a physician's state-
ment in an earlier year and, due to your
continued disabled condition, you were un-
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 221

Figure 34–A. Are You a Qualified Individual?
/H17074
Are you a U.S. citizen or resident?
1
Yes
Yes
No
/H17076
/H17074
Were you 65 or older at the end of the
year?
No
/H17074
Are you retired on permanent and total
disability?
Yes
/H17074
Did you reach mandatory retirement
age before this year?
2
No
Did you receive taxable disability
benefits this year?
You are a qualified
individual and may be
able to take the credit
for the elderly or the
disabled unless your
income exceeds the
limits in Figure 34–B.
/H17076
/H17074
Yes
/H17076
You are not a qualified
individual and cannot
take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled.
/H17074
Yes
/H17073/H17073
No
/H17076
No
1
If you were a nonresident alien at any time during the tax year and were married to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of th e tax year, see U.S. Citizen or
Resident under Qualified Individual. If you and your spouse choose to treat you as a U.S. resident, answer yes to this question.
2
Mandatory retirement age is the age set by your employer at which you would have been required to retire, had you not become di sabled.
Figure 34–B. Income Limits
IF your filing status is ...
Your adjusted gross income (AGI)*
is equal to or more than ...
Single, Head of household, or
Qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child
$17,500
Married filing a joint return
and both spouses qualify in
Figure 34-A
$25,000
Married filing a joint return
and only one spouse qualifies
in Figure 34-A
$20,000
Married filing a separate return and
you did not live with your spouse
at any time during the year
$12,500
THEN even if you qualify (see Figure 34-A), you CANNOT take the
credit if ...
OR your nontaxable social security
and other nontaxable pension(s)
is equal to or more than ...
$5,000
$7,500
$5,000
$3,750
*AGI is the amount on Form 1040A, line 19, or Form 1040, line 34
START HERE
Page 222 Chapter 34  Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Table 34–1. Initial Amounts
IF your filing status is ... THEN enter on line 10 of
Schedule R (Form 1040) or
Schedule 3 (Form 1040A) ...
Single, head of household, or qualifying widow or
widower with dependent child and by the end of
2000, you were
$5,000
$5,000
1
Amount cannot be more than the taxable disability income.
● 65 or older
● under 65 and retired on permanent and total
disability
1
Married filing a joint return and by the end of 2000
$7,500
$5,000
● both of you were 65 or older
● both of you were under 65 and one of you retired
on permanent and total disability
1
$7,500
● both of you were under 65 and both of you
retired on permanent and total disability
2
$7,500
● one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under
65 and retired on permanent and total disability
3
$5,000
● one of you was 65 or older, and the other was
under 65 and not retired on permanent and total
disability
Married filing a separate return and did not live
with your spouse at any time during the year and, by
the end of 2000, you were
$3,750
$3,750
● 65 or older
● under 65 and retired on permanent and total
disability
1
2
Amount cannot be more than your combined taxable disability income.
3
Amount is $5,000 plus the taxable disability income of the spouse under age 65, but not more than
$7,500.
Next, fill out Part III of either Schedule R or
Schedule 3.
There are four steps in Part III to
determine the amount of your credit:
1) Determine your initial amount (lines
10–12).
2) Total any nontaxable social security
and certain other nontaxable pensions
and disability benefits you received
(lines 13a, 13b, and 13c).
3) Determine your excess adjusted
gross income (lines 14–17).
4) Determine your credit (lines 18–20).
These steps are discussed in more detail
next.
Step 1. Determine Initial
Amount
To figure the credit, you must first determine
your initial amount. See Table 34–1.
Initial amounts for persons under age 65.
If you are a qualified individual under age
65, your initial amount cannot be more than
your taxable disability income.
Step 2. Total Certain
Nontaxable Pensions and
Benefits
You must reduce your initial amount by the
total amount of nontaxable social security
and certain other nontaxable payments
(listed below) you receive during the year.
Enter these nontaxable payments on
lines 13a or 13b, and total them on line 13c.
If you are married filing a joint return, you
must enter the combined amount of non-
taxable payments both you and your spouse
receive.
TIP
Worksheets are provided in the
Form 1040 or Form 1040A in-
structions to help you determine if
any part of your social security benefits (or
equivalent railroad retirement benefits) is
taxable.
Include the following nontaxable pay-
ments in the amounts you enter on lines 13a
and 13b.
 Nontaxable social security payments.
This is the nontaxable part of the
amount of benefits shown in box 5 of
Form SSA–1099, which includes disa-
bility benefits, before deducting any
amounts withheld to pay premiums on
supplementary Medicare insurance,
and before any reduction because of
receipt of a benefit under worker's
compensation.
Do not include a lump-sum death
benefit payment you may receive as a
surviving spouse, or a surviving child's
insurance benefit payments you may
receive as a guardian.
 Social security equivalent part of tier 1
railroad retirement pension payments
that are not taxed. This is the nontaxa-
ble part of the amount of benefits shown
in box 5 of Form RRB–1099.
able to engage in any substantial gainful
activity during 2000, you may not need to
get another physician's statement for 2000.
For a detailed explanation of the conditions
you must meet, see the instructions for Part
II of Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule
3 (Form 1040A). If you meet the required
conditions, check the box on line 2 of Part
II of Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule
3 (Form 1040A).
If you checked box 4, 5, or 6 in Part I
of either Schedule R or Schedule 3, print in
the space above the box on line 2 in Part
II, the first name(s) of the spouse(s) for
whom the box is checked.
Disability income. If you are under age 65,
you can qualify for the credit only if you have
taxable disability income. Disability income
must meet the following two requirements.
1) The income must be paid under your
employer's accident or health plan or
pension plan.
2) The income must be wages (or pay-
ments in lieu of wages) for the time you
are absent from work because of per-
manent and total disability.
Payments that are not disability in-
come. Any payment you receive from a
plan that does not provide for disability re-
tirement is not disability income. Any lump-
sum payment for accrued annual leave that
you receive when you retire on disability is
a salary payment and is not disability in-
come.
For purposes of the credit for the elderly
or the disabled, disability income does not
include amounts you receive after you reach
mandatory retirement age. Mandatory re-
tirement age is the age set by your em-
ployer at which you would have had to re-
tire, had you not become disabled.
Income Limits
To determine if you can claim the credit, you
must consider two income limits. The first
limit is the amount of your adjusted gross
income (AGI). The second limit is the
amount of nontaxable social security and
other nontaxable pensions you received.
The limits are shown in Figure 34–B, earlier.
If the amount of your AGI and nontaxa-
ble pensions are less than the income limits,
you may be able to claim the credit. See
Figuring the Credit, next.
CAUTION
!
If the amount of your AGI or non-
taxable pensions is equal to or more
than the income limits, you cannot
take the credit.Figuring the Credit
You can figure the credit yourself (see the
explanation that follows) or the IRS will fig-
ure it for you. See Credit Figured for You,
later.
Figuring the credit yourself. If you figure
the credit yourself, fill out the front of either
Schedule R (if you are filing Form 1040) or
Schedule 3 (if you are filing Form 1040A).
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 223

 Nontaxable pension or annuity pay-
ments or disability benefits that are paid
under a law administered by the De-
partment of Veterans Affairs (VA). 
Do not include amounts received as
a pension, annuity, or similar allowance
for personal injuries or sickness result-
ing from active service in the armed
forces of any country or in the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis-
tration or the Public Health Service, or
as a disability annuity under section 808
of the Foreign Service Act of 1980.
 Pension or annuity payments or disa-
bility benefits that are excluded from
income under any provision of federal
law other than the Internal Revenue
Code.
Do not include amounts that are a
return of your cost of a pension or an-
nuity. These amounts do not reduce
your initial amount.
CAUTION
!
You should be sure to take into ac-
count all of the nontaxable amounts
you receive. These amounts are
verified by the IRS through information
supplied by other government agencies.
Step 3. Determine Excess
Adjusted Gross Income
You also must reduce your initial amount
by your excess adjusted gross income.
Figure your excess adjusted gross income
on lines 14 through 17.
You figure your excess adjusted gross
income as follows:
1) Subtract from your adjusted gross in-
come (line 34 of Form 1040 or line 19
of Form 1040A) the amount shown for
your filing status in the following list:
a) $7,500 if you are single, a head
of household, or a qualifying
widow(er) with a dependent child,
b) $10,000 if you are married filing
a joint return, or
c) $5,000 if you are married filing a
separate return and you and your
spouse did not live in the same
household at any time during the
tax year.
2) Divide the result of (1) by 2.
Step 4. Determine Your
Credit
To determine if you can take the credit, you
must add the amounts in Step 2 and Step
3.
IF the total of
Steps 2 and 3 is ...
THEN ...
Equal to or
more than the
amount in Step 1
Less than the
amount in Step 1
You cannot take
the credit.
You can take the
credit.
Figuring the credit.If you can take the
credit, subtract the total of Step 2 and Step
3 from the amount in Step 1 and multiply the
result by 15%. This is your credit.
In certain cases, the amount of your
credit may be limited. See Limit on Credit,
later.
Example. You are 66 years old and
your spouse is 64. Your spouse is not dis-
abled. You file a joint return on Form 1040.
Your adjusted gross income is $14,630.
Together you received $3,200 from social
security, which was nontaxable. You figure
the credit as follows:
You cannot take the credit since your
nontaxable social security (line 2a) plus
your excess adjusted gross income (line 2b)
is more than your amount on line 1.
Limit on Credit
The amount of credit you can claim may be
limited. Use one of the following worksheets
(or the worksheet in the instructions for
Schedule 3, Form 1040A, or Schedule R,
Form 1040, whichever applies) to determine
the amount of credit you can claim if any
of the following apply.
1) You file Form 1040A and the credit you
figured on line 20 of Schedule 3 is
more than the tax on Form 1040A, line
26.
2) You file Form 1040 and the credit you
figured on line 20 of Schedule R is
more than the amount on Form 1040,
line 42 (regular tax plus any alternative
minimum tax), minus any foreign tax
credit on Form 1040, line 43. 
3) You are claiming the credit for child
and dependent care expenses on:
a) Form 1040A, line 27, or
b) Form 1040, line 44.
If 1, 2, and 3 above do not apply, you
do not need to use a worksheet to figure a
limit on your credit. Claim the full amount
of the credit you figured on Schedule 3
(Form 1040A) or Schedule R (Form 1040).
Credit Figured for You
If you choose to have the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) figure the credit for you, read
the following discussions for filing Form
1040 or Form 1040A. If you want the IRS
to figure your tax, see chapter 31.
Form 1040. If you want the IRS to figure
your credit, see Form 1040 Line Entries
under Tax Figured by IRS in chapter 31.
Form 1040A. If you want the IRS to figure
your credit, see Form 1040A Line Entries
under Tax Figured by IRS in chapter 31.
Examples
The following examples illustrate the credit
for the elderly or the disabled. The initial
amounts are taken from Table 34–1, shown
earlier.
Example 1. James Davis is 58 years
old and single, and files Form 1040A. In
1998 he retired on permanent and total
disability, and he is still permanently and
totally disabled. He got the required physi-
cian's statement in 1998, and kept it with
his records. His physician signed on line B
of the statement. This year James checks
the box in Part II of Schedule 3. He does
not need to get another statement for 2000.
He received the following income for the
year:
James' adjusted gross income is $9,500
($9,400 + $100). He figures the credit on
Schedule 3 as follows:
His credit is $225. He enters $225 on
line 28 of Form 1040A.
Example 2. William White is 53. His
wife Helen is 49. William had a stroke 10
years ago and retired on permanent and
total disability. He is still permanently and
totally disabled because of the stroke. In
November of last year, Helen was injured
in an accident at work and retired on per-
manent and total disability.
William received nontaxable social se-
curity disability benefits of $3,000 during the
year and a taxable disability pension of
$6,000. Helen earned $9,200 from her job
Credit Limit Worksheet (Form 1040A)
1) Enter the amount from Form 1040A,
 line 26 ...................................................
2) Enter the amount, if any from
 Form 1040A, line 27 .............................
3) Subtract line 2 from line 1 ....................
4) Enter the credit you first figured on
 Schedule 3, line 20 ...............................
5) Credit. Enter the smaller of line 3 or
 line 4 here and on Form 1040A, line 28.
 If line 3 is the smaller amount, also
 replace the amount on Schedule 3,
 line 20, with that amount ......................
1) Initial amount ........................................ $5,000
2) Subtract the total of:
a) Nontaxable social security
and other
nontaxable pensions ............. $3,200
b) Excess adjusted gross
income
[($14,630 − $10,000) ÷ 2] ..... 2,315
5,515
3) Balance (Not less than –0–) ................ –0–
4) Credit ................................................... –0–
Nontaxable social security ........................ $2,500
Interest (taxable) ....................................... 100
Taxable disability pension ........................ 9,400
1) Initial amount ........................................ $5,000
2) Taxable disability pension .................... $9,400
3) Smaller of (1) or (2) .............................. $5,000
4) Subtract the total of:
a) Nontaxable disability benefits
(social security) ........................ $2,500
b) Excess adjusted gross in-
come
[($9,500 − $7,500) ÷ 2] ............ 1,000
3,500
5) Balance (Not less than 0) .................... $1,500
6) Credit (15% of $1,500) ........................ $  225
Credit Limit Worksheet (Form 1040)
1) Enter the amount from Form 1040,
 line 42, minus any amount on
 Form 1040, line 43 ...............................
2) Enter the amount, if any, from
 Form 1040, line 44 ...............................
3) Subtract line 2 from line 1 ....................
4) Enter the credit you first figured on
 Schedule R, line 20 ..............................
5) Credit. Enter the smaller of line 3 or
 line 4 here and on Form 1040, line 45.
 If line 3 is the smaller amount, also
 replace the amount on Schedule R,
 line 20, with that amount ......................
Page 224 Chapter 34  Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

and received a taxable disability pension of
$1,000. Their joint return on Form 1040
shows adjusted gross income of $16,200
($6,000 + $9,200 + $1,000).
Helen got her doctor to complete the
physician's statement in the instructions for
Schedule R. Helen is not required to include
the statement with her return, but she must
keep it for her records.
William had filed a physician's statement
with their return for the year he had the
stroke. His doctor had signed on line B of
that physician's statement to certify that
William was permanently and totally disa-
bled. William must fill out Part II of Schedule
R. He checks the box in Part II and writes
his first name in the space above line 2.
William and Helen use Schedule R to
figure their $135 credit for the elderly or the
disabled. They attach Schedule R to their
joint return and enter $135 on line 45 of
Form 1040. See their filled-in Schedule R
and Helen's filled-in physician's statement
on the next three pages.
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 225

William M. White and Helen A. White 220 00 3333
William
/H12011
/H12011
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled(Form 1040)
Attachment
Sequence No. 16/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule R (Form 1040).
Your social security number
You may be able to take this credit and reduce your tax if by the end of 2000:
● You were age 65 or older or
You filed a physician ’s statement for this disability for 1983 or an earlier year, or you filed or got a
statement for tax years after 1983 and your physician signed line B on the statement, and
If:
Due to your continued disabled condition, you were unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity
in 2000, check this box /H17075
● If you checked this box, you do not have to get another statement for 2000.
OMB No. 1545-0074Schedule R
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Name(s) shown on Form 1040
But you must also meet other tests. See page R-1.
In most cases, the IRS can figure the credit for you. See page R-1.
Check the Box for Your Filing Status and Age
Statement of Permanent and Total Disability (Complete only if you checked box 2, 4, 5, 6, or 9 above.)
1
Schedule R (Form 1040) 2000
2
If your filing status is:
You were 65 or older1 1
You were under 65 and you retired on permanent and total disability2 2
3 3Both spouses were 65 or older
4 Both spouses were under 65, but only one spouse retired on
permanent and total disability 4
5 Both spouses were under 65, and both retired on permanent and total
disability 5
Married filing a
joint return
6 One spouse was 65 or older, and the other spouse was under 65 and
retired on permanent and total disability 6
7 One spouse was 65 or older, and the other spouse was under 65 and
not retired on permanent and total disability 7
8 You were 65 or older and you lived apart from your spouse for all of
2000 8Married filing a
separate return
9 You were under 65, you retired on permanent and total disability, and
you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2000 9
Did you check
box 1, 3, 7,
or 8?
Single,
Head of household, or 
Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child
And by the end of 2000: Check only one box:
Cat. No. 11359K
Part I
Part II
● You were under age 65, you retired on permanent and total disability, and
you received taxable disability income.
Yes Skip Part II and complete Part III on back.
No Complete Parts II and III.
/H17075
/H17075
● If you did not check this box, have your physician complete the statement on page R-4. You must
keep the statement for your records.
(99)
2000
Page 226 Chapter 34  Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

7,500
7,000
7,000
3,000
3,000
16,200
10,000
6,200
3,100
6,100
900
135
Page 2Schedule R (Form 1040) 2000
Figure Your Credit
Box 1, 2, 4, or 7 $5,000
Enter:10
10
● Box 6 in Part I, add $5,000 to the taxable disability income
of the spouse who was under age 65. Enter the total.
11
If you completed line 11, enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11; all others, enter the
amount from line 10
12
12
Enter the following pensions, annuities, or disability income
that you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) received in
2000:
13
a Nontaxable part of social security benefits and
13aNontaxable part of railroad retirement benefits
treated as social security. See page R-3.
Nontaxable veterans’ pensions andb
13bAny other pension, annuity, or disability benefit that
is excluded from income under any other provision
of law. See page R-3.
Add lines 13a and 13b. (Even though these income items are
not taxable, they must be included here to figure your credit.)
If you did not receive any of the types of nontaxable income
listed on line 13a or 13b, enter -0- on line 13c
c
13c
14
Enter the amount from Form 1040,
line 34
14
15
15
Subtract line 15 from line 14. If zero or
less, enter -0-
16
16
17Enter one-half of line 1617
18Add lines 13c and 1718
Subtract line 18 from line 12. If zero or less, stop; you cannot take the credit. Otherwise,
go to line 20
19
19
20
20 Multiply line 19 by 15% (.15). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 45. But if
this amount is more than the amount on Form 1040, line 42, minus any amount on line
43, or you are filing Form 2441, see page R-3 for the amount of credit you may take
Did you check
box 2, 4, 5, 6,
or 9 in Part I?
Box 3, 5, or 6
$7,500
Box 8 or 9 $3,750
If you checked (in Part I):
Box 1 or 2 $7,500
Enter:
Box 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 $10,000
Box 8 or 9 $5,000
If you checked (in Part I):
Part III
/H20854
/H20854
/H20854
● Box 2, 4, or 9 in Part I, enter your taxable disability income.
● Box 5 in Part I, add your taxable disability income to your
spouse’s taxable disability income. Enter the total.
For more details on what to include on line 11, see page R-3.
11
If you checked:
/H20854
You must complete line 11.Yes
No Enter the amount from line 10
on line 12 and go to line 13.
/H17075
/H17075
/H20854
Schedule R (Form 1040) 2000
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 227

Instructions for Physician’s Statement
If you retired after 1976, enter the date you retired in
the space provided on the statement below. 2. A physician determines that the disability has
lasted or can be expected to last continuously for at
least a year or can lead to death.
Taxpayer
Physician
A person is permanently and totally disabled if both of
the following apply:
1. He or she cannot engage in any substantial
gainful activity because of a physical or mental
condition, and
I certify that
was permanently and totally disabled on January 1, 1976, or January 1, 1977, OR was permanently and totally disabled
on the date he or she retired. If retired after 1976, enter the date retired. /H17075
Physician: Sign your name on either line A or B below.
Physician’s signature
Physician’s signature Date
Physician’s Statement (keep for your records)
Name of disabled person
The disability has lasted or can be expected
to last continuously for at least a year
Date
There is no reasonable probability that the
disabled condition will ever improve
Physician’s addressPhysician’s name
A
B
Helen A. White
November 30, 2000
2/7/01
Juanita D. Doctor 1900 Green St., Hometown, MD 20000
Juanita D. Doctor
Page 228 Chapter 34  Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

35.
Child Tax Credit
Important Reminder
Child tax credit increased.The maximum
child tax credit for each qualifying child is
$500.
Introduction
The child tax credit is a credit that can re-
duce your tax. You may be able to take a
credit on your tax return of up to $500 for
each of your qualifying children. 
The child tax credit is not the same as
the credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses. For information on the credit for
child and dependent care expenses, see
chapter 33.
This chapter gives you information about
the child tax credit. It explains:
 Who is a qualifying child?
 How much is the credit?
 How do I claim the credit?
 Why should I check my tax withholding?
If you have no tax. Credits, such as the
child tax credit, the adoption credit, or the
credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses, are used to reduce tax. If the tax
on line 42 (Form 1040) or line 26 (Form
1040A) is zero, do not figure the child tax
credit because there is no tax to reduce.
However, if you have three or more quali-
fying children, you may qualify for the addi-
tional child tax credit on line 62 (Form 1040)
or line 39 (Form 1040A).
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Form (and Instructions)
/H185548812 Additional Child Tax Credit
/H18554W–4 Employee's Withholding Allow-
ance Certificate
Qualifying Child
A qualifying child for purposes of the child
tax credit must be all of the following.
1) Under age 17 at the end of 2000.
2) A citizen or resident of the United
States.
3) Claimed as your dependent.
 4) Your:
a) Son or daughter,
b) Stepson or stepdaughter,
 c) Adopted child,
 d) Grandchild, or
e) Eligible foster child.
Example. Your son turned 17 on De-
cember 30, 2000. He is a citizen of the
United States and you claimed him as a
dependent on your return. He is not a
qualifying child for the child tax credit be-
cause he was not under age 17 at the end
of 2000.
Adopted child.A child placed with you by
an authorized placement agency for legal
adoption is an adopted child even if the
adoption is not final.
Grandchild. A grandchild is any descend-
ant of your son, daughter, or adopted child
and includes your great-grandchild, great-
great-grandchild, etc.
Eligible foster child.An eligible foster
child is any child you cared for as your own
and who is:
1) Your brother, sister, stepbrother,
stepsister, or
2) A descendent (such as a child) of your
brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsister,
or
3) A child placed with you by an author-
ized placement agency. 
In addition, the child must have lived with
you for all of 2000. A child who was born
and died in 2000 is considered to have lived
with you for all of 2000 if your home was the
child's home for the entire time he or she
was alive.
Amount of Credit
The maximum credit you can claim is $500
for each qualifying child.
Limits on the Credit
Your credit may be limited.
You must reduce your child tax credit if:
1) The amount on line 42 (Form 1040) or
line 26 (Form 1040A) is less than the
credit. If this amount is zero, you can-
not take this credit because there is no
tax to reduce. But if you have three or
more qualifying children, you may be
able to take the additional child tax
credit. See Additional Child Tax Credit,
later.
2) Your modified AGI is above the amount
shown below for your filing status.
 Married filing jointly – $110,000
 Single, head of household, or qualifying
widow(er) – $75,000
 Married filing separately – $55,000
Modified AGI.For purposes of the child tax
credit, your modified AGI is your AGI plus
the following amounts that may apply to
you.
 Any amount excluded from income be-
cause of the exclusion of income from
Puerto Rico. 
 Any amount on lines 43 and 48 of Form
2555, Foreign Earned Income.
 Any amount on line 18 of Form
2555–EZ, Foreign Earned Income Ex-
clusion.
 Any amount on line 15 of Form 4563,
Exclusion of Income for Bona Fide
Residents of American Samoa.
If you do not have any of the above,
modified AGI is the AGI amount on line 34
(Form 1040) or line 20 (Form 1040A).
Claiming the Credit
To claim the child tax credit, you must file
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You must pro-
vide the name and identification number
(usually a social security number) on your
tax return for each qualifying child.
Answer the Questions in your form in-
structions for line 47 (Form 1040) or line 30
(Form 1040A) to find out which child tax
credit worksheet you can use to compute
the credit. (See the filled-in example, later.)
CAUTION
!
If you answer “Yes” to question 1,
2, or 4 in your Form 1040 in-
structions or question 1 or 3 in your
Form 1040A instructions, you must com-
plete the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in
Publication 972, Child Tax Credit.
Example. Amy Brown files as head of
household and has three dependent chil-
dren under age 17. The children are quali-
fying children for purposes of the child tax
credit. Amy's only income is her salary of
$33,500, of which total social security and
Medicare taxes withheld were $2,563. Amy
chooses to itemize her deductions and file
Form 1040. Her AGI, shown on line 34 of
her Form 1040, is $33,500.
Amy does not file Form 2555, 2555–EZ,
or 4563. She does not exclude income from
Puerto Rico. Her modified AGI is $33,500.
Amy's tax, shown on line 42 of her Form
1040, is $1,789. She claims a $960 credit
for child and dependent care expenses on
line 44. She has no other credits. 
 After answering the Questions in the
Form 1040 instructions for line 47, she
completes the child tax credit worksheet to
figure her child tax credit of $829. Amy's
completed questions and child tax credit
worksheet are shown later.
Amy reads the TIP in the worksheet and
finds that she may be able to take the ad-
ditional child tax credit. See Additional Child
Tax Credit, and Amy's completed Form
8812, later.
Additional Child Tax
Credit
This credit is for certain people who have
three or more qualifying children, as defined
earlier. The additional child tax credit may
give you a refund even if you do not owe
any tax.
How to claim the additional child tax
credit. To claim the additional child tax
credit, follow the steps below.
1) Make sure you figured the amount, if
any, of your child tax credit. See
Claiming the Credit, earlier.
Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit Page 229

Filled-in Questions for Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
Who Must Use Pub. 972
1. Are you excluding income from Puerto Rico or are you
filing any of the following forms?
● Form 2555 or 2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned
income)
● Form 4563 (exclusion of income for residents of
American Samoa)
No. Continue Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit instead
of the worksheet on
page 37.
2. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 34, more than the amount
shown below for your filing status?
● Married filing jointly – $110,000
● Single, head of household, or qualifying widow(er) –
$75,000
● Married filing separately – $55,000
3. Do you have three or more qualifying children for the child
tax credit?
4. Are you claiming any of the following credits?
● Adoption credit, Form 8839 (see the instructions for
Form 1040, line 48, on page 38)
● Mortgage interest credit, Form 8396 (see the instructions
for Form 1040, line 49, on page 38)
● District of Columbia first-time homebuyer credit,
Form 8859
No. Use the
worksheet on
page 37 to figure
your child tax credit.
Yes. Y ou must use
Pub. 972 to figure your
child tax credit instead of
the worksheet on page 37.
Y ou will also need the
form(s) listed above for
any credit(s) you are
claiming.
/H17074
STOP
No. Continue Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit instead
of the worksheet on
page 37.
/H17074
STOP
No. ContinueYes.
Use the worksheet
on page 37 to figure
your credit.
/H17074
STOP
Questions Pub.
972
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
2) Use Form 8812 to see if you can take
the additional child tax credit only if:
a) You answered “Yes” on line 4 or
line 5 of the Child Tax Credit
Worksheet, and
b) The amount on line 1 of your Child
Tax Credit Worksheet is $1,500
or more.
3) If you have an additional child tax
credit on line 9 of Form 8812, carry it
to line 62 (Form 1040) or line 39 (Form
1040A).
Checking Your
Withholding
The child tax credit decreases your tax. You
can check your tax withholding by using
Worksheet 7 in Publication 919, How Do I
Adjust My Tax Withholding?
If you are having too much tax withheld,
and you prefer to have the money during the
year, you may be able to decrease your
withholding. You do this by completing a
new Form W–4 and giving it to your em-
ployer.
Page 230 Chapter 35  Child Tax Credit

Filled-in Child Tax Credit Worksheet— Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
3
1,500
1,789
960
829
829
/H12011
Form 1040— Line 47
/H12011
Child Tax Credit Worksheet— Line 47
1040
Yes. STOP
Keep for Your Records
Do not use this worksheet if you answered “Yes” to question 1, 2, or 4 on page 36.
Instead, use Pub. 972.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1
2
Number of qualifying children: /H11003$500. Enter the result.
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 42.
Add the amounts from Form 1040:
Line 43
Line 45
Line 46 + Enter the total.
Are the amounts on lines 2 and 3 the same?
Y ou cannot take this credit because there is no tax
to reduce. However, see the TIP below before
completing the rest of your Form 1040.
No. Subtract line 3 from line 2.
Is the amount on line 1 more than the amount on line 4?
Yes. Enter the amount from line 4.
See the TIP below .
No. Enter the amount from line 1.
This is your child tax
credit.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 47.
You may be able to take the additional child tax credit
on Form 1040, line 62, only if you answered “Yes” on
line 4 or line 5 above and the amount on line 1 is
$1,500 or more.
● First, complete your Form 1040 through line 61.
● Then, use Form 8812 to figure any additional child
tax credit.
+
3
4
/H20854
5
/H17076
Line 44 + 960
Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit Page 231

Amy Brown 012 567800
2,563
0
2,563
0
2,563
671
671
1,500
829
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
OMB No. 1545-1620
Additional Child Tax Credit8812Form
Complete and attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 47
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Form 8812 (2000)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form. Cat. No. 10644E
3
2
4
5
7
6
Enter the total of the withheld social security and Medicare taxes from Form(s) W -2, boxes 4 and 6.
Add lines 1 and 2.
Is the amount on line 5 more than the amount on line 8?
1
Before you begin: /H12011
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines 27 and 53, plus any
uncollected social security and Medicare or RRTA taxes included on line 57.
Enter -0-.
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines 60a and 61.
Enter the total of the amount from Form 1040A, line 38a, plus any excess
social security and RRTA taxes withheld that you entered to the left of line 40.
Is the amount on line 3 more than the amount on line 4?
Enter the amount from line 1 of your Child T ax Credit W orksheet on
page 37 of the Form 1040 instructions or page 38 of the Form 1040A
instructions. If you used Pub. 972, enter the amount from line 8 of
the worksheet on page 3 of the publication.
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 47, or Form 1040A, line 30.
Is the amount on line 6 more than the amount on line 7?
8
9
/H20854
1
2
3
4
5
/H12011
/H12011
/H20854
● If married filing jointly , include your spouse’s amounts with yours.
● If you worked for a railroad, see the instructions on back.
1040A filers:
1040 filers:
1040 filers:
1040A filers:
No.
Y ou cannot take this credit.
Complete the rest of your
Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Ye s .Subtract line 4 from line 3.
No.
Y ou cannot take this credit.
Complete the rest of your
Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Ye s .Subtract line 7 from line 6.
No.
Ye s .
Enter the amount from line 5.
Enter the amount from line 8.
6
7
8
9
/H20854
This is your additional
child tax credit.
1040
1040A
. . . . . . . . . .
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 62, or
Form 1040A, line 39.
/H17076
STOP
STOP
Complete the Child T ax Credit W orksheet that applies to you. See the instructions for
Form 1040, line 47, or Form 1040A, line 30.
1040A filers: If you, or your spouse if filing jointly , had more than one employer for
2000 and total wages of over $56,700, figure any excess social security and railroad
retirement (RRTA) taxes withheld. See the instructions for Form 1040A, line 40.
Have your W -2 form(s) available.
/H17076
8812
1040
1040A
. . . . . . . . . .
2000
Page 232 Chapter 35  Child Tax Credit

36.
Education
Credits
Important Reminder
Tax from recapture of education credits.
You may owe this tax if you claimed an
education credit on your 1999 tax return
and, in 2000, you, your spouse if filing
jointly, or your dependent received a refund
of qualified tuition and related expenses or
tax-free educational assistance. See Re-
capture of credit under No double benefit
allowed.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the Hope credit and
the lifetime learning credit. It will:
 Give you general information that ap-
plies to both of the credits,
 Give you specific information about
each of the credits,
 Help you choose which of the credits to
claim, and
 Show you how to figure the credit you
choose.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554970 Tax Benefits for Higher Educa-
tion
Form (and Instructions)
/H185548863 Education Credits (Hope and
Lifetime Learning Credits)
Education Tax
Credits
The following two tax credits are available
to persons who pay higher education costs.
 The Hope credit.
 The lifetime learning credit.
CAUTION
!
If a student receives a tax-free
withdrawal from an education IRA in
a particular tax year, none of that
student's expenses can be used as the ba-
sis of a higher education credit for that tax
year. However, the student can waive the
tax-free treatment. See Waiver of tax-free
treatment under No double benefit allowed.
Rules That Apply to
Both Credits
The amount of each credit is determined by
the amount you pay for qualified tuition and
related expenses for students and the
amount of your modified adjusted gross in-
come. Education credits are subtracted from
your tax but they are nonrefundable. This
means if the credits are more than your tax,
the excess is not refunded to you.
CAUTION
!
If you are married filing separately
you cannot claim the higher educa-
tion credits.
What expenses qualify. The credits are
based on qualified tuition and related ex-
penses you pay for yourself, your spouse,
or a dependent for whom you claim an ex-
emption on your tax return. The credits are
allowed for qualified tuition and related ex-
penses paid for an academic period begin-
ning in the same year as the year the pay-
ment is made (but see Prepaid expenses,
later). 
In general, qualified tuition and related
expenses are tuition and fees required for
enrollment or attendance at an eligible ed-
ucational institution. Student-activity fees
and fees for course-related books, supplies,
and equipment are included in qualified tui-
tion and related expenses only if the fees
must be paid to the institution as a condi-
tion of enrollment or attendance.
Prepaid expenses. If you paid qualified
tuition and related expenses in 2000 for an
academic period that begins in the first three
months of 2001, you can use the prepaid
amount in figuring your credit. 
For example, if you paid $2,000 in De-
cember 2000 for qualified tuition for the
winter 2001 semester beginning in January
2001, you can use that $2,000 in figuring
your 2000 credit.
Payments with borrowed funds.You
can claim an education credit for the qual-
ified tuition and related expenses paid with
the proceeds of a loan. The credit is claimed
in the year in which the expenses are paid,
not in the year in which the loan is repaid.
What expenses do not qualify.Qualified
tuition and related expenses do not include
the cost of insurance, medical expenses
(including student health fees), room and
board, transportation or similar personal,
living or family expenses, even if the fee
must be paid to the institution as a condition
of enrollment or attendance.
Qualified tuition and related expenses
generally do not include expenses that re-
late to any course of instruction or other
education that involves sports, games, or
hobbies, or any noncredit course. However,
if the course of instruction or other educa-
tion is part of the student's degree program
or, in the case of the lifetime learning credit,
is taken by the student to acquire or improve
job skills, these expenses can qualify.
Dependent for whom you claim an ex-
emption. You claim an exemption for a
dependent if you list his or her name on line
6c, Form 1040 (or Form 1040A). (See
chapter 3 for details on exemptions for de-
pendents.)
Eligible educational institution.An eligi-
ble educational institution is any college,
university, vocational school, or other post-
secondary educational institution eligible to
participate in a student aid program admin-
istered by the Department of Education. It
includes virtually all accredited, public,
nonprofit, and proprietary (privately owned
profit-making) postsecondary institutions.
The educational institution should be able
to tell you if it is an eligible educational in-
stitution.
Academic period. An academic period
includes a semester, trimester, quarter, or
other period of study (such as a summer
school session) as reasonably determined
by an educational institution.
No double benefit allowed.  You cannot:
 Deduct higher education expenses on
your income tax return and also claim
a Hope credit based on those same
expenses,
 Claim a Hope credit and a lifetime
learning credit based on the same
qualified education expenses, or
 Claim a credit based on expenses paid
with tax-free scholarship, grant, or em-
ployer-provided educational assistance.
See Adjustments to qualified expenses,
next.
Adjustments to qualified expenses.
If you pay higher education expenses with
certain tax-free funds, you cannot claim a
credit for those amounts. You must reduce
the qualified expenses by the amount of any
tax-free educational assistance you re-
ceived. Tax-free educational assistance
could include:
 Scholarships,
 Pell grants,
 Employer-provided educational assist-
ance,
 Veterans' educational assistance, and
 Any other nontaxable payments (other
than gifts, bequests, or inheritances)
received for educational expenses.
Do not reduce the qualified expenses
by amounts paid with the student's:
 Earnings,
 Loans,
 Gifts,
 Inheritances, and
 Personal savings.
Also, do not reduce the qualified ex-
penses by any scholarship reported as in-
come on the student's return or any schol-
arship which, by its terms, cannot be applied
to qualified tuition and related expenses.
Waiver of tax-free treatment. The
designated beneficiary of an education IRA
can waive the tax-free treatment of the
withdrawal and elect to pay any tax that
would otherwise be owed on the withdrawal.
The beneficiary or the beneficiary's parents
may then be eligible to claim a Hope credit
or lifetime learning credit for qualified higher
education expenses paid in that tax year.
See Education IRAs in Publication 970.
Refunds. Qualified tuition and related
expenses do not include expenses for which
you receive a refund. If you paid expenses
in 2000, and you received a refund of those
Chapter 36 Education Credits Page 233

expenses in 2000 or 2001, but before you
file your tax return for 2000, simply reduce
the amount of the expenses by the amount
of the refund received. If you receive the
refund after you file your tax return, see
Recapture of credit, next.
Recapture of credit.If, after you file
your 2000 tax return, you receive tax-free
educational assistance for, or a refund of,
an expense you used to figure a higher ed-
ucation credit, you may have to recapture
all or part of the credit. You must refigure
your education credits as if the assistance
or refund was received in 2000. Subtract the
amount of the refigured credit from the
amount of the credit you claimed. See the
instructions for the 2000 tax return for in-
formation about how and where to report the
recapture.
Who can claim the credit. If there are
higher education costs for your dependent
child, either you or your child, but not both
of you, can claim a credit for a particular
year. If you claim an exemption for your
child on your tax return, only you can claim
a credit. If you do not claim an exemption
for your child on your tax return, only your
child can claim a credit.
Expenses paid by others.If someone
other than you, your spouse, or your de-
pendent (such as a relative or former
spouse) makes a payment directly to an el-
igible educational institution to pay for a
student's qualified tuition and related ex-
penses, the student is treated as receiving
the payment from the other person. The
student is treated as paying the qualified
tuition and related expenses to the institu-
tion. If the student is your dependent, you
are considered to have paid the expenses.
Example. Ms. Allen makes a payment
directly to an eligible educational institution
in 2000 for her grandson Todd's qualified
tuition and related expenses. For purposes
of claiming an education credit, Todd is
treated as receiving the money from Ms.
Allen and, in turn, paying his qualified tuition
and related expenses himself.
If Todd is not listed as a dependent on
anyone's return, he can use the payment to
claim an education credit.
If anyone, such as his parents, lists him
as a dependent on their tax return, whoever
lists him as a dependent may be able to use
the expenses to claim an education credit.
Expenses paid by dependent. If you
claim an exemption for the student on your
tax return, treat any expenses paid by the
student as if you had paid them. Include
these expenses when figuring the amount
of your Hope or lifetime learning credit.
TIP
Qualified tuition and related ex-
penses paid directly to an eligible
educational institution for your de-
pendent under a court-approved divorce
decree are treated as paid by your de-
pendent.
Nonresident alien.You cannot claim an
education credit if you (or your spouse)
were a nonresident alien for any part of
2000, and the nonresident alien did not elect
to be treated as a resident alien.
Income Phaseout
Your education credits are phased out
(gradually reduced) if your modified ad-
justed gross income is between $40,000
and $50,000 ($80,000 and $100,000 if you
file a joint return).
CAUTION
!
You cannot claim any higher edu-
cation credits if your modified ad-
justed gross income is $50,000 or
more ($100,000 or more if you file a joint
return).
Modified adjusted gross income. For
most taxpayers, modified adjusted gross
income will be their adjusted gross income
(AGI) as figured on their federal income tax
return. On Form 1040, AGI is line 34. On
Form 1040A, AGI is line 19. However, you
must make adjustments to your AGI if you
excluded income earned abroad or from
certain U.S. territories or possessions. If this
applies to you, increase your AGI by the
following amounts you excluded from your
income.
1) Foreign earned income of U.S. citizens
or residents living abroad.
2) Housing costs of U.S. citizens or resi-
dents living abroad.
3) Income from sources within Puerto
Rico, Guam, American Samoa, or the
Northern Mariana Islands.
How the phaseout works. The phaseout
(reduction) works on a sliding scale. The
higher your modified adjusted gross income,
the more your credits are reduced. You fig-
ure the reduction, if any, in Part III of Form
8863.
Hope Credit
You may be able to claim a Hope credit of
up to $1,500 for qualified tuition and related
expenses paid for each eligible student. 
Eligible student for the Hope credit.You
can claim a Hope credit only for an eligible
student who meets all of the following re-
quirements.
1) Did not have expenses that were used
to figure a Hope credit in any 2 earlier
years.
2) Had not completed the first 2 years
of postsecondary education (generally,
the freshman and sophomore years of
college).
3) Was enrolled at least half-time in a
program that leads to a degree, certif-
icate, or other recognized educational
credential, for at least one academic
period beginning in 2000.
4) Was free of any federal or state felony
conviction for possessing or distribut-
ing a controlled substance as of the
end of 2000.
Completion of first 2 years.A student
awarded 2 years of academic credit for
postsecondary work completed prior to the
beginning of the year has completed the first
2 years of postsecondary education.
Any academic credit awarded solely on
the basis of the student's performance on
proficiency examinations is disregarded in
determining whether the student has com-
pleted 2 years of postsecondary education.
Half of normal full-time workload.The
standard for what is half of the normal full-
time work load is determined by each eligi-
ble educational institution. However, the
standard may not be lower than standards
for half-time established by the Department
of Education under the Higher Education
Act of 1965.
Amount of credit.The amount of the Hope
credit is 100% of the first $1,000 plus 50%
of the next $1,000 you pay for each eligible
student's qualified tuition and related ex-
penses. The maximum amount of Hope
credit you can claim in 2000 is $1,500 times
the number of eligible students. You can
claim the full $1,500 for each eligible stu-
dent for whom you pay at least $2,000 for
qualified expenses. However, the credit may
be reduced based on your modified ad-
justed gross income. See Income Phaseout,
earlier.
Example. Jon and Karen are married
and file a joint tax return. For 2000, they
claim an exemption for their dependent
daughter on their tax return and their modi-
fied adjusted gross income is $70,000. Their
daughter is in her sophomore (second) year
of studies at the local university and Jon and
Karen pay qualified tuition and related ex-
penses of $4,300 in 2000.
Jon and Karen, their daughter, and the
local university meet all of the requirements
for the Hope credit. Jon and Karen can
claim a $1,500 Hope credit in 2000. This is
the maximum amount allowed for 2000.
How to figure the Hope credit.The Hope
credit is figured in Parts I and III of Form
8863. An illustrated example using Form
8863 appears later.
Lifetime Learning Credit
You may be able to claim a lifetime learning
credit of up to $1,000 for qualified tuition
and related expenses paid for all students
enrolled in eligible educational institutions.
The lifetime learning credit is different
than the Hope credit in the following ways.
1) The lifetime learning credit is not based
on the student's work load. It is allowed
for one or more courses.
2) The lifetime learning credit is not lim-
ited to students in the first 2 years of
postsecondary education.
3) Expenses for graduate-level degree
work are eligible.
4) Expenses related to a course of in-
struction or other education that in-
volves sports, games, hobbies, or other
noncredit courses are eligible if they
are part of a course of instruction to
acquire or improve job skills.
5) There is no limit on the number of
years for which the lifetime learning
credit can be claimed for each student.
6) The amount you can claim as a lifetime
learning credit does not vary (increase)
based on the number of students for
whom you pay qualified expenses.
Amount of credit.The amount of the life-
time learning credit is 20% of the first
$5,000 of qualified tuition and related ex-
Page 234 Chapter 36  Education Credits

penses you pay for all eligible students. The
maximum amount of lifetime learning credit
you can claim for 2000 is $1,000 (20% ×
$5,000). However, that amount may be re-
duced based on your modified adjusted
gross income. See Income Phaseout, ear-
lier.
Example. Bruce and Toni are married
and file a joint tax return. For 2000, their
modified adjusted gross income is $50,000.
Toni is attending the community college (an
eligible educational institution) to earn
credits towards an associate's degree in
nursing; she already has a bachelor's de-
gree in history and wants to become a
nurse. In August 2000, Toni paid $2,000 for
her fall 2000 semester. Bruce and Toni can
claim a $400 (20% × $2,000) lifetime learn-
ing credit on their 2000 joint tax return.
How to figure the lifetime learning credit.
The lifetime learning credit is figured in
Parts II and III of Form 8863. An illustrated
example using Form 8863 appears later.
Choosing Which Credit
To Claim
For each student, you can elect for any tax
year only one of the credits or a tax-free
withdrawal from an education IRA. (See
Education IRAs in chapter 18 for more in-
formation.) For example, if you elect to take
the Hope credit for a child on your 2000 tax
return, you cannot, for that same child, also
claim the lifetime learning credit for 2000
or take a tax-free withdrawal from an edu-
cation IRA for 2000.
Lifetime learning credit after Hope credit.
You can claim the Hope credit for the first
2 years of a student's postsecondary edu-
cation and claim the lifetime learning credit
for that same student in later tax years.
More than one student.If you pay qual-
ified expenses for more than one student in
the same year, you can choose to take
credits on a per-student, per-year basis.
This means that, for example, you can claim
the Hope credit for one student and the
lifetime learning credit for another student
in the same tax year.
How To Claim the Credits
You elect to claim education credits and you
figure their amount by completing Form
8863.  Use Part I for the Hope credit and
Part II for the lifetime learning credit. In both
parts, you enter the student's name and
taxpayer identification number (usually a
social security number) and the amount of
qualified expenses paid in 2000. You then
complete Part III to compute the amount to
enter on line 46 of Form 1040 or line 29 of
Form 1040A. Attach the completed Form
8863 to your return.
An eligible educational institution (such
as a college or university) that receives
payment of qualified tuition and related ex-
penses should issue Form 1098–T , Tuition
Payments Statement, to each student by
February 1, 2001. The information on Form
1098–T will help you determine whether you
can claim an education tax credit for 2000.
The following information should be in-
cluded on the 2000 form.
1) The name, address, and taxpayer
identification number of the educational
institution.
2) The name, address, and taxpayer
identification number of the student.
3) Whether the student was enrolled for
at least half of the full-time academic
workload.
4) Whether the student was enrolled ex-
clusively in a graduate-level program.
The eligible educational institution may ask
for a completed Form W–9S , Request for
Student's or Borrower's Social Security
Number and Certification,  or similar state-
ment, to obtain the information needed to
complete (2) above.
Illustrated Example
Dave and Valerie are married and file a joint
tax return. For 2000, they claim exemptions
for their two dependent children on their tax
return, and their modified adjusted gross
income is $72,000. Their son, Sean, will
receive his bachelor's degree in psychology
from the state college in May 2001. Their
daughter, Corey, enrolled full-time at that
same college in August 1999 to begin
working on her bachelor's degree in phys-
ical education. In December 1999, Dave
and Valerie paid $2,000 for each child's tu-
ition for the winter 2000 semester. In July
2000, they paid $2,200 in tuition costs for
each of them for the fall 2000 semester.
Dave and Valerie, their children, and the
college meet all of the requirements for the
higher education credits. Because Sean is
beyond the second (sophomore) year of his
postsecondary education, his expenses do
not qualify for the Hope credit. But,
amounts paid for Sean's expenses in 2000
for academic periods after 1999 and before
April 1, 2001, qualify for the lifetime learning
credit. Corey is in her first (freshman) year
of postsecondary education and expenses
paid for her in 2000 for academic periods
beginning after 1999 and before April 1,
2001, qualify for the Hope credit. 
Dave and Valerie figure their total higher
education credits for 2000, $1,940, as
shown in the completed Form 8863. They
can claim the full amount because their
modified adjusted gross income is not more
than $80,000. They carry the amount from
Form 8863 to line 46 of Form 1040, and
they attach the Form 8863 to their return.
Chapter 36 Education Credits Page 235

Dave and Valerie Jones 987 00 6543
Corey Jones
137 00 9642 2,000 1,000 500
1,500
5001,000
Sean Jones 246 00 9731 2,200
2,200
2,200
440
1,940
1,940
100,000
72,000
20,000
28,000
9,475
1,940
-0-
9,475
-0-
OMB No. 1545-1618Education Credits
Form 8863
/H17075See instructions on pages 2 and 3.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 51
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Hope Credit. Caution: The Hope credit may be claimed for no more than 2 tax years for each student.
1
2
3
Lifetime Learning Credit
Form 8863 (2000)
Part I
Part II
3
(a) Student’s name
(as shown on page 1
of your tax return)
Cat. No. 25379M
Add the amounts in columns (d) and (f)
Tentative Hope credit. Add the amounts on line 2, columns (d) and (f) /H17075
8
Add the amounts on line 4, column (c), and enter the total
9
9
Enter the smaller of line 5 or $5,000
10
Subtract line 10 from line 9. If line 10 is equal to or more than
line 9, stop; you cannot take any education credits
10
12
16
17
4
11
11
15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
First, Last
(f) Enter one-half
of the amount in
column (e)
(e) Subtract
column (d) from
column (c)
(d) Enter the
smaller of the
amount in
column (c) or
$1,000
(c) Qualified
expenses
(but do not
enter more than
$2,000 for each
student). See
instructions
2
Caution: You
cannot take the
Hope credit and
the lifetime learning
credit for the same
student.
(a) Student’s name (as shown on page 1
of your tax return)
First Last
(c) Qualified
expenses. See
instructions
Tentative lifetime learning credit. Multiply line 6 by 20% (.20) /H17075
5
6
7
5
6
7
Part III Allowable Education Credits
Tentative education credits. Add lines 3 and 78
Enter: $100,000 if married filing jointly; $50,000 if single, head of
household, or qualifying widow(er)
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 34 (or Form 1040A, line 20)*
If line 11 is equal to or more than line 12, enter the amount from line 8 on line 14 and
go to line 15. If line 11 is less than line 12, divide line 11 by line 12. Enter the result as
a decimal (rounded to at least three places)
13
Multiply line 8 by line 13 /H1707514
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 42 (or Form 1040A, line 26)15
Enter the total, if any, of your credits from Form 1040, lines 43 through 45 (or from
Form 1040A, lines 27 and 28)
16
Subtract line 16 from line 15. If line 16 is equal to or more than line 15, stop; you cannot
take any education credits
17
18 Education credits. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 17 here and on Form 1040,
line 46 (or Form 1040A, line 29) /H1707518
14
13 /H11003.
(Hope and Lifetime Learning Credits)
(b) Student’s
social security
number (as
shown on page 1
of your tax return)
(b) Student’s social security
number (as shown on page
1 of your tax return)
Enter: $20,000 if married filing jointly; $10,000 if single, head of
household, or qualifying widow(er) 12
*See Pub. 970 for the amount to enter if you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ, or 4563 or you are excluding income from Puerto Ric o.
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
2000
Page 236 Chapter 36  Education Credits

37.
Earned Income
Credit
Important Changes
Earned income amount is more. The
amount you can earn and still get the credit
has increased for 2000. The amount you
earn must be less than:
 $27,413 with one qualifying child,
 $31,152 with more than one qualifying
child, or
 $10,380 if you do not have a qualifying
child.
Investment income amount is more.The
maximum amount of investment income you
can have and still get the credit has in-
creased for 2000. You can have investment
income up to $2,400. For most people, in-
vestment income is taxable interest and
dividends, tax-exempt interest, and capital
gain net income. To get more detailed in-
formation, see  Rule 5.
New definition of eligible foster child.
For tax years after 1999, the definition of
an eligible foster child for the earned in-
come credit has changed. The child now
must be either your brother, sister,
stepbrother, or stepsister; a descendant
(including a child or adopted child) of your
brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister; or
a child placed with you by an authorized
placement agency. Eligible foster children
are discussed in Rule 7.
Important Reminders
Certain people must use Publication 596.
Certain people must use Publication 596 to
see if they meet the rules to take the EIC
and to figure the amount of the credit. You
must use Publication 596 if any of the fol-
lowing situations applies to you.
 The amount on Form 1040, line 21, in-
cludes an amount from Form 8814,
Parent's Election To Report Child's In-
terest and Dividends.
 Your investment income (Rule 5) is
$2,400 or more and you are filing Form
4797, Sales of Business Property.
 You are filing Schedule E, Supple-
mental Income and Loss, (Form 1040).
 You are reporting income or a loss from
the rental of personal property not used
in a trade or business.
 You are claiming a loss on Form 1040,
line 12, 13, or 18.
 You (or your spouse if filing a joint re-
turn) received distributions from a pen-
sion, annuity, or IRA that are not fully
taxable.
 You owe alternative minimum tax
(AMT), found on Form 1040, line 41,
or included in the total found on Form
1040A, line 35.
For information on how you can get
Publication 596, Earned Income Credit, or
other free IRS publications, see How To Get
Tax Help in the back of this publication.
Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). 
Your modified AGI used to limit your credit
includes:
1) Tax-exempt interest, and
2) The nontaxable part of a pension, an-
nuity, or individual retirement arrange-
ment (IRA) distribution, except any
amount that is nontaxable because it
was a trustee-to-trustee transfer or a
rollover distribution.
Also, the amount of business losses that
must be added back to AGI to figure modi-
fied AGI is 75%.
See Publication 596 for more detailed
information on modified AGI.
Advance payment of the earned income
credit in your paycheck.If you qualify for
the earned income credit in 2001, you can
receive part of it in each paycheck
throughout the year. See Advance Earned
Income Credit, later, for more information.
Earned income credit has no effect on
certain welfare benefits.Any refund you
receive because of the earned income
credit and any advance earned income
credit payments you receive will not be used
to determine whether you are eligible for the
following benefit programs, or how much
you can receive from these programs.
 Temporary assistance for needy fami-
lies (TANF). 
 Medicaid and supplemental security in-
come (SSI).
 Food stamps.
 Low-income housing.
Social security numbers. To claim the
EIC, you must have a valid social security
number (SSN) for you and your spouse (if
filing a joint return) and any qualifying chil-
dren. If an SSN is missing or incorrect, you
may not get the credit. See Rule 1, later.
Form 8862 to claim EIC after disallow-
ance. If your EIC for any year after 1996
was denied or reduced for any reason other
than a mathematical or clerical error, you
must attach a completed Form 8862, Infor-
mation To Claim Earned Income Credit Af-
ter Disallowance, to your next return if you
wish to claim the EIC. The date on which
your EIC was denied and the date on which
you file your 2000 return affect whether you
need to attach Form 8862 to your 2000 re-
turn or to a later return. See chapter 5 in
Publication 596 for more information.
Introduction
The earned income credit (EIC) is a tax
credit for people who work and have earned
income under $31,152. A tax credit usually
means more money in your pocket. It re-
duces the amount of tax you owe. The EIC
may also give you a refund.
How do you get the earned income
credit? To get the earned income credit,
you must:
1) Qualify by meeting certain rules, and
2) File a tax return, even if you: 
a) Do not owe any tax, 
b) Did not earn enough money to file
a return, or
c) Did not have income taxes with-
held from your pay.
When you complete your return, you can
figure your earned income credit by using
a worksheet in the instructions for Form
1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ. Or, if
you prefer, you can let the IRS figure the
credit for you.
How will this chapter help you? This
chapter will explain the following:
 What rules you must meet to qualify for
the credit, 
 How to figure the credit, and 
 How to get advance payment of the
credit in your paycheck. 
To learn about the rules you must meet,
first read Do You Qualify for the Credit,
later.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554504 Divorced or Separated Individ-
uals 
/H18554533 Self-Employment Tax 
/H18554596 Earned Income Credit 
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule EIC Earned Income Credit
(Qualifying Child Information)
/H18554Schedule SE (Form 1040) Self-
Employment Tax
/H18554W–5 Earned Income Credit Advance
Payment Certificate
/H185548862 Information To Claim Earned
Income Credit After Disallow-
ance
Do You Qualify for
the Credit?
To see if you can claim the EIC, you must
first meet all of the rules explained in Part
A, Rules for Everyone. Then you must meet
the rules in Part B, Rules If you Have a
Qualifying Child, or Part C, Rules If You Do
Not Have a Qualifying Child. There are two
final rules you must meet in Part D, Figuring
and Claiming the EIC. You qualify for the
credit if you meet all the rules in each part
that applies to you. For example:
 If you have a qualifying child, the rules
in Parts A, B,and D apply to you.
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 237

 If you do not have a qualifying child, the
rules in Parts A, C, and D apply to you.
Table 37–1. Earned Income Credit in a
Nutshell. Use Table 37–1 as a guide to
Parts A, B, C, and D. The table is a sum-
mary list of all the rules in each part. Each
rule listed has a rule number. Use the rule
number to find a more detailed discussion
of that rule in this chapter.
Do you have a qualifying child? Bas-
ically, a qualifying child is a child who:
1) Is your son, daughter, adopted child,
grandchild, stepchild, or eligible foster
child, and 
2) Was (at the end of 2000) under age
19, under age 24 and a full-time stu-
dent, or any age and permanently and
totally disabled during the year, and 
3) Lived with you in the United States for
more than half of 2000 (for all of 2000
if the child is your eligible foster child).
See Rule 7 for more detailed information.
If Improper Claim
Made in Prior Year
You must file Form 8862 if for any year after
1996 your EIC was denied or reduced for
any reason other than a math or clerical
error. But do not file Form 8862 if, after your
EIC was denied or reduced in an earlier
year, you filed Form 8862 (or other docu-
ments) and your EIC was then allowed.
If it was determined that your error was
due to reckless or intentional disregard of
the EIC rules or fraud, you cannot claim the
EIC for the next 2 years (10 years in the
case of fraud).
More information.See chapter 5 in Pub-
lication 596 for more detailed information
about the disallowance period and Form
8862.
Part A. Rules for
Everyone
This part of the chapter discusses Rules 1
through 6. You must meet all six rules to
qualify for the earned income credit. If you
do not meet all six rules, you cannot get the
credit and you do not need to read the rest
of the chapter.
If you meet all six rules in this part, then
read either Part B or Part C (whichever ap-
plies) for more rules you must meet. 
Rule 1. You Must Have a
Valid Social Security
Number (SSN)
To claim the earned income credit, you
must have a valid SSN for you and your
spouse (if filing a joint return), and any
qualifying child. (See Rule 7 if you have a
qualifying child.)
Valid SSN. A valid SSN is one that allows
you to work. SSNs are issued by the Social
Security Administration. Most SSNs are is-
sued to U.S. citizens or to persons who
have permission from the Immigration and
Naturalization Service to work in the United
States. Some SSNs are issued only for use
in applying for or receiving federally funded
benefits. You can claim the EIC only if you
have an SSN that allows you to work. If
your social security card says “Not valid for
employment,” you cannot get the EIC.
U. S. citizen.If you were a U. S. citizen
when you received your SSN, you have a
valid SSN.
CAUTION
!
If an SSN for you or your spouse is
missing from your tax return or is
incorrect, you may not get the EIC.
Other taxpayer identification number.
You cannot get the EIC if, instead of an
SSN, you (or your spouse if filing a joint
return) have an individual taxpayer identifi-
cation number (ITIN). ITINs are issued by
the Internal Revenue Service to noncitizens
who cannot get an SSN.
No SSN. If you do not have a valid SSN
that allows you to work, put “No” directly to
the right of line 60a (Form 1040), line 38a
(Form 1040A), or to the right of the word
“below” on line 8b (Form 1040EZ). You
cannot claim the EIC.
Getting an SSN.If you (or your spouse
if filing a joint return) do not have an SSN,
you can apply for one by filing Form SS–5,
Application for a Social Security Card, with
the Social Security Administration.
Filing deadline approaching and still
no SSN. If the filing deadline is approach-
ing and you still do not have an SSN, you
have two choices.
1) Request an automatic 4-month exten-
sion of time to file your return. You can
get this extension by filing Form 4868,
Application for Automatic Extension of
Time to File U.S. Individual Income Tax
Return, or by paying at least part of any
tax you owe by credit card or direct
debit. Getting an extension does not
give you extra time to pay any tax
owed. You should pay any amount you
expect to owe to avoid interest or
penalty charges. For more information,
see the instructions for Form 4868.
2) File the return on time without claiming
the EIC. After receiving the SSN, file
an amended return (Form 1040X,
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
Return) claiming the EIC. Attach a
filled-in Schedule EIC if you have a
qualifying child. 
Rule 2. Your Filing Status
Cannot Be Married Filing
Separately
If you are married, you usually must file a
joint return to claim the EIC. Your filing sta-
tus cannot be “Married filing separately.”
Spouse did not live with you.If you are
married and your spouse did not live in your
home at any time during the last 6 months
of the year, you may be able to file as head
of household, instead of married filing sep-
arately. In that case, you may be able to
claim the EIC. For detailed information
about filing as head of household, see
chapter 2.
Rule 3. You Must Be a
U. S. Citizen or Resident
Alien All Year
You cannot claim the earned income credit
if you are a nonresident alien for any part
of the year, unless:
1) You are married to a U.S. citizen or a
resident alien, and
2) You choose to be treated as a resident
for all of 2000 by filing a joint return. If
you need more information on making
this choice, get Publication 519, U.S.
Tax Guide for Aliens.
Note. If you make the choice in (2) above,
you and your spouse are taxed on your
worldwide income. You cannot claim any
tax treaty benefits as a resident of a foreign
country during a tax year in which the
choice is in effect.
Rule 4. You Cannot File
Form 2555 or Form
2555–EZ
You cannot claim the earned income credit
if you file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-
come, or Form 2555–EZ, Foreign Earned
Income Exclusion. You file these forms to
exclude income earned in foreign countries
from your gross income, or to deduct or
exclude a foreign housing amount. U. S.
possessions are not foreign countries. See
Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens
and Resident Aliens Abroad, for more de-
tailed information.
Rule 5. Your Investment
Income Must Be $2,400 or
Less
You cannot claim the earned income credit
unless your investment income is $2,400
or less. If your investment income is more
than $2,400, you cannot claim the credit.
For most people, investment income is the
total of the following amounts.
 Taxable interest (line 8a of Form 1040
or 1040A).
 Tax-exempt interest (line 8b of Form
1040 or 1040A).
 Dividend income (line 9 of Form 1040
or 1040A).
 Capital gain net income (line 13 of Form
1040, if more than zero, or line 10 of
Form 1040A).
However, if you are reporting income
from the rental of personal property on Form
1040, line 21, or are filing Schedule E (Form
1040), or Form 8814, or are reporting a gain
on Form 4797, see Rule 5 in chapter 1 of
Publication 596 for more information.
Rule 6. You Must Have
Earned Income
This credit is called the “earned income
credit” because, to qualify, you must work
and have earned income. If you are married
and file a joint return, you meet this rule if
at least one spouse works and has earned
income. Earned income includes all the in-
Page 238 Chapter 37  Earned Income Credit

Table 37–1. Earned Income Credit in a Nutshell
Part A
Rule 1. You must have a valid social
security number that allows you to work.
Rule 7. Your child must meet the
relationship, age, and residency tests.
Part B
Rule 10. You must be at least age 25 but
under age 65.
Part C
Rules for Everyone Rules If You Have
a Qualifying Child
Rules If You Do Not
Have a Qualifying Child
Rule 4. You cannot file Form 2555 or Form
2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned
income.)
Rule 2. Your filing status cannot be
“Married filing separately.”
Rule 3. You must be a U.S. citizen or
resident alien all year.
Rule 5. Your investment income must be
$2,400 or less.
Rule 6. You must have earned income.
Rule 11. You cannot be the dependent of
another person.
Rule 12. You cannot be a qualifying child
of another person.
Rule 13. You must have lived in the United
States more than half of the year.
Rule 8. Your qualifying child cannot be the
qualifying child of another person with a
higher modified AGI.
Rule 9. You cannot be a qualifying child of
another person.
Rule 14. Your earned income must be less than:
● $31,152 if you have more than one qualifying child.
● $27,413 if you have one qualifying child, or
● $10,380 if you do not have a qualifying child.
Rule 15. Your modified AGI must be less than:
● $31,152 if you have more than one qualifying child.
● $27,413 if you have one qualifying child, or
● $10,380 if you do not have a qualifying child.
Part D Figuring and Claiming the EIC
come you get from working — even if it is
not taxable.
Taxable Earned Income
Taxable earned income includes:
1) Wages, salaries, and tips,
2) Net earnings from self-employment,
and
3) Gross income received as a statutory
employee.
For some examples of items that are
included or not included in earned income,
see Table 37–2, later. Some of the items
listed are discussed in more detail later.
Wages, salaries, and tips.Wages, sala-
ries, and tips you receive for working are
reported to you on Form W–2, box 1. You
should report these on line 1 (Form 1040EZ)
or line 7 (Forms 1040A and 1040).
CAUTION
!
If you were a household employee
who did not receive a Form W–2
because your employer paid you
less than $1,200 in 2000, be sure to include
the amount you were paid on line 7 (Form
1040 or 1040A) or line 1 (Form 1040EZ).
Self-employed persons and statutory
employees. If you are self-employed or
received income as a statutory employee,
you must use Form 1040 or Publication 596
to see if you qualify to get the EIC and to
figure the amount of the EIC.
Nontaxable Earned Income
This includes anything of value (money,
goods, or services) that is not taxable that
you received from your employer for your
work. Common types of nontaxable earned
income are listed in the following para-
graphs.
Salary deferrals and reductions.
 Salary deferrals. These are contribu-
tions from your pay to certain retirement
plans (such as a 401(k) plan or the
Federal Thrift Savings Plan). These
amounts are shown in box 13 of your
Form W–2. The “Deferred compen-
sation” box (box 15) of your Form W–2
should be checked.
 Salary reductions, such as under a
cafeteria plan, unless they are included
in box 1 of your Form W–2. A cafeteria
plan is a benefit plan offered by your
employer that allows you to choose
among two or more benefits consisting
of cash and benefits that are not taxed.
If you choose a benefit that is not taxed
(such as accident and health insur-
ance), the amount of the salary re-
duction is nontaxable earned income
when figuring the EIC.
 Mandatory contributions to a state or
local retirement plan.
Meals and lodging. 
 Military employee basic housing and
subsistence allowances, the value of
in-kind housing and subsistence, and
combat zone compensation. These
amounts are shown in box 13 of your
Form W–2 with code “Q.” See Publica-
tion 3, Armed Forces' Tax Guide, for
detailed information.
 Meals and lodging provided for the
convenience of your employer.
 Housing allowance or rental value of a
parsonage for the clergy.
Excludable employer-provided benefits.
 Dependent care benefits (line 18 of
Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form
1040A)).
 Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line 26).
 Educational assistance benefits (these
may be shown in box 14 of your Form
W–2).
Native Americans
If you are a Native American and received
amounts for services performed as an em-
ployee that are exempt from federal income
tax under the Internal Revenue Code or
because of a treaty, agreement, Act of
Congress, or other federal law, these
amounts are nontaxable earned income
when figuring the EIC. (However, any tax-
exempt income you received for performing
services as a self-employed individual is not
earned income when figuring the EIC.)
Approved Form 4361 or Form
4029
This section is for persons who have an
approved:
 Form 4361, Application for Exemption
from Self-Employment Tax for Use by
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 239

Ministers, Members of Religious Orders
and Christian Science Practitioners, or
 Form 4029, Application for Exemption
from Social Security and Medicare
Taxes and Waiver of Benefits.
Each approved form exempts certain
income from social security taxes. Each
form is discussed in this section in terms of
what is or is not earned income for purposes
of the EIC.
Form 4361. Even if you have an approved
Form 4361, amounts you received for per-
forming ministerial duties as an employee
count as earned income. This includes
wages, salaries, tips, and “other employee
compensation.” “Other employee compen-
sation” includes nontaxable compensation
such as housing allowances or the rental
value of a parsonage that you receive for
services as an employee. Amounts you re-
ceived for performing ministerial duties, but
not as an employee, do not count as earned
income. Examples include fees for per-
forming marriages and honoraria for deliv-
ering speeches.
Form 4029. Even if you have an approved
Form 4029, all wages, salaries, tips, and
other employee compensation count as
earned income. However, amounts you
received as a self-employed individual do
not count as earned income. Also, in figur-
ing earned income, do not subtract losses
on Schedule C, C–EZ, or F from wages on
line 7 of Form 1040.
Disability Benefits
If you retired on disability, benefits you re-
ceive under your employer's disability re-
tirement plan are considered earned income
until you reach minimum retirement age.
Minimum retirement age generally is the
earliest age at which you could have re-
ceived a pension or annuity if you were not
disabled. You must report your taxable dis-
ability payments on line 7 of either Form
1040 or Form 1040A until you reach mini-
mum retirement age.
Beginning on the day after you reach
minimum retirement age, payments you re-
ceive are taxable as a pension and are not
considered earned income. Report taxable
pension payments on Form 1040, lines 16a
and 16b (or Form 1040A, lines 12a and
12b).
Disability insurance payments. Pay-
ments you received from a disability insur-
ance policy that you paid the premiums for
are not earned income. It does not matter
whether you have reached minimum retire-
ment age. If this policy is through your em-
ployer, the amount may be shown in box
13 of your Form W–2 with code “J.”
Income That is Not Earned
Income
Examples of items that are NOT earned
income include interest and dividends,
pensions and annuities, social security and
railroad retirement benefits, alimony and
child support, welfare benefits, workers'
compensation benefits, unemployment
compensation (insurance), nontaxable fos-
ter care payments, and veterans' benefits,
including VA rehabilitation payments. Do
NOT include any of these items in your
nontaxable or taxable earned income.
Earnings while an inmate. Amounts re-
ceived for work performed while an inmate
in a penal institution are not earned income
when figuring the earned income credit.
These amounts include amounts received
through a work release program or while in
a halfway house.
Workfare payments. Nontaxable workfare
payments are not earned income for the
EIC. These are cash payments certain
people receive from a state or local agency
that administers public assistance programs
funded under the federal Temporary As-
sistance for Needy Families (TANF) pro-
gram in return for certain work activities
such as (1) work experience activities (in-
cluding remodeling or repairing public
housing) if sufficient private sector employ-
ment is not available, or (2) community
service program activities.
Community property. If you are married,
but qualify to file as head of household un-
der special rules for married taxpayers living
apart (see Rule 2), and live in a state that
has community property laws, your earned
income for the EIC does not include any
amount earned by your spouse that is
treated as belonging to you under those
laws. That amount is not earned income for
the EIC, even though you must include it in
your gross income on your income tax re-
turn. Your earned income includes the en-
tire amount you earned, even if part of it is
treated as belonging to your spouse under
your state's community property laws.
Part B. Rules
If You Have a
Qualifying Child
Use Part B if you:
1) Have a qualifying child, and
2) Have met all the rules in Part A.
This part of the chapter discusses Rules
7 through 9. You must meet all three of
these rules, in addition to the rules in Parts
A and D, to qualify for the earned income
credit with a qualifying child.
You must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A
to claim the EIC with a qualifying child. (You
cannot file Form 1040EZ). You must also
complete Schedule EIC and attach it to your
return. If you meet all the rules in Part A and
this part, read Part D to find out what to do
next.
TIP
If you do not meet Rule 7, you do
not have a qualifying child. Read
Part C to find out if you can get the
earned income credit.
Rule 7. Your Child Must
Meet the Relationship, Age,
and Residency Tests
Your child is a qualifying child if your child
meets three tests. The three tests are:
 1) Relationship,
 2) Age, and
 3) Residency.
The three tests are illustrated in Figure
37–1. The paragraphs that follow contain
more information about each test.
Relationship Test
Your child must be either your son, daugh-
ter, adopted child, grandchild, stepchild, or
eligible foster child. The following definitions
clarify the relationship test.
Adopted child. Your adopted child in-
cludes a child placed with you for adoption
by an authorized placement agency, even
if the adoption is not final.
Grandchild. For the EIC, this means any
descendant of your son, daughter, or
adopted child. For example, a grandchild
includes your great-grandchild, great-great-
grandchild, etc.
Child not a dependent.Your child does
not have to be your dependent to be a
qualifying child, unless he or she is married.
Married child.If your child was married
at the end of the year, he or she does not
meet the relationship test unless either of
these two situations applies to you:
1) You can claim the child's exemption,
or
2) The reason you cannot claim the
child's exemption is that you gave that
right to your child's other parent:
a) When you completed Form 8332
or a similar written statement, or
b) In a pre-1985 agreement (such
as a separation agreement or di-
vorce decree).
Eligible foster child.For the EIC, a person
is your eligible foster child if all the following
are true.
1) You cared for that child as you would
your own child.
2) The child lived with you for the whole
year, except for temporary absences
(explained later). (A child who was
born or died during the year is consid-
ered to have lived with you for the
whole year if your home was the child's
home for the entire time he or she was
alive during the year.)
3) The child is your brother, sister,
stepbrother, or stepsister; a descend-
ant (including a child or adopted child)
of your brother, sister, stepbrother, or
stepsister; or a child placed with you
by an authorized placement agency.
Example. You and your sister live to-
gether. You are 30. Your sister is 15. When
your parents died 2 years ago, you took
over the care of your sister, but you did not
adopt her. She is considered your eligible
foster child because she lived with you all
year and because you cared for her as you
would your own child.
Page 240 Chapter 37  Earned Income Credit

AND
AND
A qualifying child is a child who is your ...
Son
Daughter
Adopted child
Grandchild
Stepchild
Foster child (See Eligible foster
child.)
was at the end of 2000...
Under age 19
OR
Under age 24 and a student
Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year regardless of age.
who...
Lived with you in the United States for more than half
of 2000 (or, if a foster child, for all of 2000).
OR
Relationship
Age
Residency
Figure 37–1. Tests for Qualifying Child
Age Test
Your child must be:
1) Under age 19 at the end of 2000,
2) A full-time student under age 24 at the
end of 2000, or
3) Permanently and totally disabled at
any time during 2000, regardless of
age.
. The following example and definitions
clarify the age test. 
Example. Your son turned 19 on De-
cember 10. Unless he was disabled or a
full-time student, he is not a qualifying child
because, at the end of the year, he was not
under age 19.
Full-time student.A full-time student is a
student who is enrolled for the number of
hours or courses the school considers to
be full-time attendance.
Student defined.To qualify as a stu-
dent, your child must be, during some part
of each of any 5 calendar months during the
calendar year:
1) A full-time student at a school that has
a regular teaching staff, course of
study, and regularly enrolled student
body, or
2) A student taking a full-time, on-farm
training course given by a school de-
scribed in (1), or a state, county, or lo-
cal government. The 5 calendar
months need not be consecutive.
School defined. A school can be an
elementary school, junior or senior high
school, college, university, or technical,
trade, or mechanical school. However, on-
the-job training courses, correspondence
schools, and night schools do not count as
schools for the EIC. (But see Night school,
later.)
Vocational high school students.
Students who work on co-op jobs in private
industry as a part of a school's regular
course of classroom and practical training
are considered full-time students.
Night school. Your child is not a full-
time student if he or she attends school only
at night. However, full-time attendance at a
school may include some attendance at
night as part of a full-time course of study.
Permanently and totally disabled.Your
child is permanently and totally disabled if
both of the following apply.
1) He or she cannot engage in any sub-
stantial gainful activity because of a
physical or mental condition.
2) A doctor determines the condition has
lasted or can be expected to last con-
tinuously for at least a year or can lead
to death.
Residency Test
Your child must have lived with you in the
United States for more than half of 2000 (all
of 2000 if an eligible foster child). The fol-
lowing definitions clarify the residency test.
Home. Your home can be any location
where you regularly live within one of the
50 states or the District of Columbia.
Homeless shelter. You do not need a
traditional home. For example, if your child
lived with you for more than half the year in
one or more homeless shelters, your child
meets the residency test.
Military personnel stationed outside the
United States.  U.S. military personnel
stationed outside the United States on ex-
tended active duty are considered to live in
the United States during that duty period for
purposes of the EIC.
Extended active duty. Extended active
duty means you are called or ordered to
duty for an indefinite period or for a period
of more than 90 days. Once you begin
serving your extended active duty, you are
still considered to have been on extended
active duty even if you do not serve more
than 90 days.
Birth or death of a child.A child who was
born or died in 2000 meets the residency
test if your home was the child's home the
entire time he or she was alive in 2000.
Temporary absences. Count time that you
or your child is away from home on a tem-
porary absence due to a special circum-
stance as time lived at home. Examples of
a special circumstance include:
 Illness,
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 241

 School attendance,
 Detention in a juvenile facility,
 Business,
 Vacation, and
 Military service.
Social security number.Your qualifying
child must have a valid social security
number (SSN) unless the child was born
and died in 2000. You cannot claim the EIC
if:
1) Your qualifying child's SSN is missing
from your tax return or is incorrect,
2) Your qualifying child's SSN was issued
only for use in applying for or receiving
federally funded benefits,
3) Your qualifying child's social security
card says “Not valid for employment”,
or
4) Instead of an SSN, your qualifying child
has:
a) An individual taxpayer identifica-
tion number (ITIN), which is is-
sued to a noncitizen who cannot
get an SSN, or
b) An adoption taxpayer identifica-
tion number (ATIN), which is is-
sued to adopting parents who
cannot get an SSN for the child
being adopted until the adoption
is final.
If you have two qualifying children and
only one has a valid SSN, you can claim the
EIC only for that child. For more information
about SSNs, see Rule 1, earlier.
Rule 8. Your Qualifying
Child Cannot Be the
Qualifying Child of Another
Person With a Higher
Modified AGI
Sometimes a child meets the rules to be a
qualifying child of more than one person.
However, only one person can claim the
credit using that child. The paragraphs that
follow will help you decide who can claim
the EIC when more than one person has the
same qualifying child.
Which person can claim the EIC.If you
and someone else have the same qualifying
child, the person with the higher modified
adjusted gross income (AGI) is the only one
who may be able to claim the EIC using that
child. The person with the lower modified
AGI cannot use that child to claim the EIC.
This is true even if the person with the
higher modified AGI does not claim the EIC
or meet all of the rules to claim the EIC. If
the other person is your spouse and you file
a joint return, this rule does not apply. If
three or more persons have the same
qualifying child, the person with the highest
modified AGI is the only one who may be
able to claim the EIC using that child.
Note. For most people modified AGI is
the same as AGI (line 33, Form 1040, line
19, Form 1040A, or line 4, Form 1040EZ).
Modified AGI is explained in Part D.
If your qualifying child meets the tests to
be a qualifying child of any other person for
2000 and you have the higher modified AGI,
you meet this rule. If you do not have the
higher modified AGI, STOP . You cannot
claim the credit either with or without a
qualifying child. Put “No” beside line 60a
(Form 1040) or line 38a (Form 1040A).
Example 1. You and your son lived with
your mother all year. You are 25 years old.
Your only income was $9,300 from a part-
time job. Your mother's only income was
$15,000 from her job. Your son is a quali-
fying child of both you and your mother be-
cause he meets the relationship, age, and
residency tests for both you and your
mother. However, because you both have
the same qualifying child, only one of you
can claim the EIC. Because your mother's
modified AGI ($15,000) is more than your
modified AGI ($9,300), only your mother
may be able to claim the EIC. You cannot
claim the credit for persons either with or
without a qualifying child.
Example 2. The facts are the same as
in Example 1, but your mother had invest-
ment income of $3,000. Your mother cannot
claim the EIC because her investment in-
come is more than $2,400. (See Rule 5.)
Even though your mother cannot claim the
EIC, you cannot claim it either because your
mother's modified AGI is more than yours.
Example 3. You and your sister shared
a household for the entire year. You have
three young children who lived in the
household. Your sister does not have any
children. However, she cares for your chil-
dren as if they were her own. You earn
$15,000 and she earns $20,000. Neither of
you had any other income.
The children meet the age and residency
tests for both you and your sister. They
meet the relationship test for you because
they are your children. They also meet the
relationship test for your sister because they
lived with her for the whole year, she cared
for them as if they were her own, and they
are her sister's children. Therefore, they
qualify as her eligible foster children. Your
children are qualifying children of both you
and your sister. However, because your
sister's modified AGI is higher than yours,
she is the only one who can claim the EIC.
CAUTION
!
You and your sister cannot split the
three qualifying children between
you. You cannot claim the credit
even though your sister enters the names
of only two of the children on her Schedule
EIC. (Schedule EIC has spaces for the
names of only two qualifying children be-
cause the credit is the same amount for two
or more qualifying children.)
Example 4. The facts are the same as
in Example 3, except that your oldest child
is 20 years old and a full-time college stu-
dent. Your sister does not care for this child
as if the child were her own. Only the two
younger children are qualifying children of
both you and your sister. Your sister is the
only one who may be able to claim the EIC
using these two children because her mod-
ified AGI is higher than yours. Your oldest
child is a qualifying child of you, but not your
sister. Only you may be able to claim the
EIC using this child.
Example 5. You, your spouse, and your
10-year-old-son lived together until July 15,
2000, when your spouse moved out of the
household. In November 2000, you and
your spouse were divorced. Your modified
AGI was $13,000. Your former spouse's
modified AGI was $18,000. Your son is a
qualifying child of both you and your former
spouse because your son lived with each
of you for more than half the year and be-
cause he met the relationship and age tests
for both of you. However, because your
former spouse's modified AGI ($18,000)
was more than your modified AGI
($13,000), only your former spouse can
claim the earned income credit for 2000.
Rule 9. You Cannot Be a
Qualifying Child of Another
Person
You are a qualifying child of another person
(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.)
if all of the following statements are true.
 You are that person's son, daughter,
adopted child, stepchild, grandchild, or
eligible foster child.
 At the end of the year you were under
age 19, under age 24 and a full-time
student, or any age if you were perma-
nently and totally disabled at any time
during the year.
 You lived with that person in the United
States for more than half of the year (all
year if you were an eligible foster child).
For more details about the tests to be
a qualifying child, see Rule 7.
If you (or your spouse if filing a joint re-
turn) are a qualifying child of another per-
son, you cannot claim the EIC. This is true
even if the person for whom you are a
qualifying child does not claim the EIC or
meet all of the rules to claim the EIC. Put
“No” beside line 60a (Form 1040) or line 38a
(Form 1040A).
Example. You and your daughter lived
with your mother all year. You are 22 years
old and attended a trade school full time.
You had a part-time job and earned $5,700.
You had no other income. Because you
meet the relationship, age, and residency
tests, you are a qualifying child of your
mother. She can claim the EIC if she meets
all the other requirements. Because you are
your mother's qualifying child, you cannot
claim the EIC. This is so even if your mother
cannot or does not claim the EIC.
Part C. Rules
If You Do Not Have
a Qualifying Child
Use Part C if you:
1) Do not have a qualifying child, and
2) Have met all the rules in Part A.
This part of the chapter discusses Rules
10 through 13. You must meet all four of
these rules, in addition to the rules in Parts
A and D, to qualify for the earned income
credit without a qualifying child.
Page 242 Chapter 37  Earned Income Credit

CAUTION
!
If you have a qualifying child, the
rules in this part do not apply to you.
You can claim the credit only if you
meet all the rules in Parts A, B, and D. See
Rule 7 to find out if you have a qualifying
child.
Rule 10. You Must Be at
Least Age 25 but Under
Age 65
You must be at least age 25 but under age
65 at the end of 2000. If you are married
filing a joint return, either you or your
spouse must be at least age 25 but under
age 65 at the end of 2000. It does not matter
which spouse meets the age test, as long
as one of the spouses does.
If neither you nor your spouse meets the
age test, you cannot claim the EIC. Put
“No” directly to the right of line 60a (Form
1040), line 38a (Form 1040A), or to the right
of the word “below” on line 8b (Form
1040EZ).
Example 1. You are age 28 and un-
married. You meet the age test.
Example 2. You are married and filing
a joint return. You are age 23 and your
spouse is age 27. You meet the age test
because your spouse is at least age 25 but
under age 65.
Rule 11. You Cannot Be the
Dependent of Another
Person
If you are not filing a joint return, you meet
this rule if:
 You checked box 6a on Form 1040 or
1040A, or
 You checked the “No” box on line 5 of
Form 1040EZ.
If you are filing a joint return, you meet
this rule if:
 You checked both box 6a and box 6b
on Form 1040 or 1040A, or
 You and your spouse checked the
“No” box on line 5 of Form 1040EZ.
If you are not sure whether someone
else can claim you (or your spouse if filing
a joint return) as a dependent, read the
rules for claiming a dependent in chapter
3.
If someone else can claim you (or your
spouse if filing a joint return) as a dependent
on his or her return, but does not, you still
cannot claim the credit.
Example 1. In 2000, you were age 25,
single, and living at home with your parents.
You worked and were not a student. You
earned $7,500. Your parents cannot claim
you as a dependent. When you file your
return, you claim an exemption for yourself
by checking the “No” box on line 5 of your
Form 1040EZ. You meet this rule.
Example 2. The facts are the same as
in Example 1, except that you earned
$2,000. Your parents can claim you as a
dependent but decide not to. You do not
meet this rule. You cannot claim the credit
because your parents could have claimed
you as a dependent.
Rule 12. You Cannot Be a
Qualifying Child of Another
Person
You are a qualifying child of another person
(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.)
if all of the following statements are true.
 You are that person's son, daughter,
adopted child, stepchild, grandchild, or
eligible foster child.
 At the end of the year you were under
age 19, under age 24 and a full-time
student, or any age if you were perma-
nently and totally disabled at any time
during the year.
 You lived with that person in the United
States for more than half of the year (all
year if you were an eligible foster child).
If you (or your spouse if filing a joint re-
turn) are a qualifying child of another per-
son, you cannot claim the EIC. This is true
even if the person for whom you are a
qualifying child does not claim the EIC or
meet all of the rules to claim the EIC. Put
“No” beside line 60a (Form 1040), line 38a
(Form 1040A), or to the right of the word
“below” on line 8b (Form 1040EZ).
Example. You lived with your mother all
year. You are age 26 and permanently and
totally disabled. Your only income was from
a community center where you went twice
a week to answer telephones. You earned
$1,500 for the year. Because you meet the
relationship, age, and residency tests, you
are a qualifying child of your mother. She
can claim the EIC if she meets all the other
requirements. Because you are a qualifying
child of your mother, you cannot claim the
EIC. This is so even if your mother cannot
or does not claim the EIC.
Rule 13. You Must Have
Lived in the United States
More Than Half of the Year
Your home (and your spouse's if filing a joint
return) must have been in the United States
for more than half the year.
If not, put “No” directly to the right of line
60a (Form 1040), line 38a (Form 1040A),
or to the right of the word “below” on line
8b (Form 1040EZ).
Home. Your home can be any location
where you regularly live within one of the
50 states or the District of Columbia.
Homeless shelter. You do not need a
traditional home. If you lived in one or more
homeless shelters in the United States for
more than half the year, you meet this rule.
Military personnel stationed outside the
United States. U.S. military personnel
stationed outside the United States on ex-
tended active duty (defined in Rule 7) are
considered to live in the United States dur-
ing that duty period for the EIC.
Part D. Figuring and
Claiming the EIC
Use this part if you have met all the rules in
Parts A and B, or all the rules in Parts A and
C.
This part of the chapter discusses Rules
14 and 15. You must meet both rules, in
addition to the rules in Parts A and B, or
Parts A and C, to qualify for the earned in-
come credit.
This part of the chapter also explains
how to figure the amount of your credit. You
have two choices.
1) Have the IRS figure the EIC for you. If
you want to do this, see IRS Will Figure
the EIC for You. 
2) Figure the EIC yourself. If you want to
do this, see How To Figure the EIC
Yourself.
Rule 14. Your Total Earned
Income Must Be Less
Than:
 $31,152 if you have more than one
qualifying child,
 $27,413 if you have one qualifying child,
or
 $10,380 if you do not have a qualifying
child.
Earned income is explained in Rule 6 in
Part A and some examples are shown in
Table 37–2. You figure your total earned
income by adding together your taxable
earned income and your nontaxable earned
income.
Self-employed persons and statutory
employees. If you are self-employed or
received income as a statutory employee,
you must use Form 1040 or Publication 596
to see if you qualify to get the EIC and to
figure the amount of your total earned in-
come and the amount of EIC.
Church employee. In this publication, this
term means an employee (other than a
minister or member of a religious order) of
a church or qualified church-controlled or-
ganization that is exempt from employer
social security and Medicare taxes.
Taxable earned income. You figure your
taxable earned income by starting with the
amount on the Wages line on your tax re-
turn (line 7, Forms 1040 and 1040A, or line
1, Form 1040EZ). You then subtract the
following amounts from the amount on the
Wages line on your tax return.
 Any taxable scholarship or fellowship
grant not reported on a Form W–2.
 Any amount you received for work done
while an inmate in a penal institution
that is included in the total on line 7
(Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or line 1
(Form 1040EZ).
 Any amount on line 2 of Schedule SE
that was also reported on line 7 (Form
1040), if you are a member of the
clergy.
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 243

Table 37–2. Examples of Taxable and Nontaxable Earned Income
Taxable Earned Income
Salary deferrals and reductions.
Nontaxable Earned Income
Wages and salaries.
Union strike benefits.
Excludable dependent care benefits and
excludable adoption benefits.
Taxable long-term disability benefits
received before minimum retirement age.
Net earnings from self-employment.
Meals and lodging provided for the
convenience of your employer.
Gross income received as a statutory
employee.
Excludable educational assistance
benefits.
Military basic housing and subsistence
allowances.
Tips.
Excluded combat pay.
be reduced or disallowed. Attach
Schedule EIC to your return.
Form 1040A
If you file Form 1040A and want the IRS to
figure your credit for you, follow these steps.
1) Print EIC directly to the right of line
38a. Also, if you have earned income
that is not taxed, enter the amount and
type of that income on line 38b. See
Table 37–2 for examples of earned in-
come that is not taxed. Then, if you
have any of the situations listed later
under Special Instructions, follow those
instructions.
2) Complete all other parts of your return
that apply to you (including line 34), but
do not fill in lines 40, 41, 42, and 44.
If you do not have a qualifying child,
stop here.
3) If you have a qualifying child, complete
Schedule EIC according to its in-
structions. Be sure to enter the child's
social security number on line 2 of that
schedule. If you do not, your credit may
be reduced or disallowed. Attach
Schedule EIC to your return.
Form 1040EZ
If you file Form 1040EZ and want the IRS
to figure your credit for you, follow these
steps.
1) Print EIC in the space to the right of the
word “below” on line 8b. Also, if you
have earned income that is not taxed,
enter the amount and type in the
spaces marked “Type” and “$” on line
8b. See Table 37–2 for examples of
earned income that is not taxed. Then,
if you have any of the situations listed
later under Special Instructions, follow
those instructions.
2) Complete all other parts of your return
that apply to you, but do not fill in lines
9, 11a, or 12. 
Special Instructions
Use the following special instructions, if the
situation applies to you.
Qualifying child information (Schedule
EIC). Whether the IRS figures your credit
or you figure it yourself, you must give the
IRS information about your qualifying child.
To do this, complete Schedule EIC and at-
tach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
The information you enter on Schedule
EIC must show that the child meets all the
tests for a qualifying child. (See Rule 7.)
The schedule has space for information
about only two qualifying children because
the amount of your credit is the same
whether you have two, three, or more qual-
ifying children.
CAUTION
!
Do not file Form 1040EZ if you have
a qualifying child and qualify for the
credit. You must file Form 1040 or
Form 1040A.
Minister or member of a religious order.
If you are filing Schedule SE and line 2 of
that schedule includes an amount that is
also included on Form 1040, line 7, print
“Clergy” directly to the right of line 60a
(Form 1040). Also show the amount in-
 Any amount you included on both line
5a of Schedule SE and line 7 (Form
1040).
Nontaxable earned income. You figure
your nontaxable earned income by adding
the amounts of any nontaxable earned in-
come items you had during the year. Ex-
amples of nontaxable earned income items
are shown in Rule 6 andTable 37–2.
Total earned income.You figure your total
earned income by adding together your
taxable earned income and your nontaxable
earned income. You will need this amount
when you figure the amount of your EIC.
If your total earned income is more than:
 $31,152 if you have more than one
qualifying child,
 $27,413 if you have one qualifying child,
or
 $10,380 if you do not have a qualifying
child, 
you cannot get the EIC. You do not need to
read the rest of this chapter. You can go
back and finish the rest of your tax return.
Rule 15. Your Modified AGI
Must Be Less Than:
 $31,152 if you have more than one
qualifying child,
 $27,413 if you have one qualifying child,
or
 $10,380 if you do not have a qualifying
child.
Modified adjusted gross income (AGI).
Modified AGI for most people is the same
as AGI. AGI is the amount on line 33 (Form
1040), line 20 (Form 1040A), or line 4 (Form
1040EZ). To find your modified AGI, you
must add certain amounts such as tax-
exempt interest and some other gains and
losses. But if you are filing Schedule C,
C–EZ, D, E, or F, or if you claim a loss from
the rental of personal property not used in
a trade or business, you must get Publica-
tion 596 to figure your modified AGI. You
must also get Publication 596 if you (or your
spouse if filing a joint return) received any
distributions from a pension, annuity, or IRA
that are not fully taxable.
Community property. If you are mar-
ried, but qualify to file as head of household
under special rules for married taxpayers
living apart (see Rule 2), and live in a state
that has community property laws, your ad-
justed gross income (AGI) for the EIC in-
cludes that portion of both your and your
spouse's wages that you are required to in-
clude in gross income. This is different from
the community property rules that apply
under Rule 6.
Example. Bob will file Form 1040A. His
AGI (line 20) is $12,000. He will report $300
of tax-exempt interest from a municipal
bond on line 8b. His modified AGI for the
EIC is $12,300 ($12,000 + $300).
IRS Will Figure
the EIC for You
The IRS will figure the amount of your EIC
for you if you follow the steps explained in
this section. If you have a qualifying child,
complete and attach Schedule EIC.
CAUTION
!
Please do not ask the IRS to figure
your EIC unless you are eligible for
it. Read the rules in Parts A, B, C,
and D  to see if you qualify.
TIP
If you want the IRS to also figure the
amount of your income tax, see
chapter 31.
Form 1040 
If you file Form 1040 and want the IRS to
figure your credit for you, follow these steps.
1) Print EIC directly to the right of line
60a. Also, if you have any earned in-
come that is not taxed, enter the
amount and type of that income on line
60b. See Table 37–2 for examples of
earned income that is not taxed. Then,
if you have any of the situations listed
later under Special Instructions, follow
those instructions.
2) Complete all other parts of your return
that apply to you (including line 55), but
do not fill in lines 65, 66, 67, and 69.
If you do not have a qualifying child,
stop here.
3) If you have a qualifying child, complete
Schedule EIC according to its in-
structions. Be sure to enter the child's
social security number on line 2 of that
schedule. If you do not, your credit may
Page 244 Chapter 37  Earned Income Credit

cluded on both lines (for example, “Clergy
$800”). If you received a housing allowance
or were provided housing and you were re-
quired to include the allowance or the rental
value of the parsonage on Schedule SE,
line 2, do not include it as nontaxable
earned income on line 60b of Form 1040. 
Household employee. If you were a
household employee who did not receive a
Form W–2 because your employer paid you
less than $1,200 in 2000, print “HSH” and
the amount paid that was not reported on
Form W–2 in the space to the right of the
words “W–2 form(s)” on line 1 (Form
1040EZ), or on the dotted line next to line
7 (Form 1040), or in the space to the left
of line 7 (Form 1040A). Also, be sure to in-
clude that amount in the total for line 1 of
Form 1040EZ or line 7 of either Form 1040
or Form 1040A.
Inmates. If you were an inmate in a penal
institution and the total on line 7 (Form 1040
or Form 1040A), or line 1 (Form 1040EZ)
includes an amount paid to you for work
performed while an inmate, print “PRI” and
the amount paid on the dotted line next to
line 7 (Form 1040), in the space to the left
of line 7 (Form 1040A), or in the space to
the right of the words “W–2 form(s)” on line
1 (Form 1040EZ).
How To Figure the
EIC Yourself
This part of this chapter explains how to use
the EIC Worksheet and how to report the
credit on your return. To figure the amount
of your earned income credit, you can use
the Earned Income Credit Worksheet (EIC
Worksheet) in the instruction booklet for
Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ,
and the Earned Income Credit (EIC) Table
in the tax form instruction booklet. How-
ever, certain people must use Publication
596 to see if they meet the rules to take the
EIC and to figure the amount of the credit.
You must use Publication 596 if any of the
following situations applies to you.
 The amount on Form 1040, line 21, in-
cludes an amount from Form 8814 (re-
lating to a child's interest and divi-
dends).
 Your investment income (Rule 5) is
$2,400 or more and you are filing Form
4797 (relating to the sale of business
property).
 You are filing Schedule E, Supple-
mental Income and Loss, (Form 1040).
 You are reporting income or a loss from
the rental of personal property not used
in a trade or business.
 You are claiming a loss on Form 1040,
line 12, 13, or 18.
 You (or your spouse if filing a joint re-
turn) received distributions from a pen-
sion, annuity, or IRA that are not fully
taxable.
 You owe alternative minimum tax
(AMT), found on Form 1040, line 41,
or included in the total found on Form
1040A, line 35.
The amount of your earned income
credit depends on:
 Whether you have no qualifying child,
one qualifying child, or two or more
qualifying children,
 The amount of your earned income
(defined in Rule 7) and modified AGI
(defined in Rule 15), and 
 Whether you owe AMT. 
Form 1040 and EIC Worksheet.If you file
Form 1040 and want to figure the credit
yourself, follow these steps.
1) Go to your form instruction booklet and
turn to the instructions for Lines 60a
and 60b and look for Worksheet A or
Worksheet B.
2) Complete the EIC Worksheet that ap-
plies to your situation according to its
instructions. If you were self-employed
or a church employee or used Sched-
ule C or C–EZ as a statutory employee,
complete Worksheet B. Find the
amount of your credit in the EIC Table
in your instruction booklet. 
3) Enter the amount of your earned in-
come credit from Worksheet A or B on
Form 1040, line 60a.
4) Enter the amount and type of any
nontaxable earned income on Form
1040, line 60b.
5) Keep the EIC Worksheet for your rec-
ords. Do not attach it to your income
tax return. If you do not have a quali-
fying child, stop here.
6) If you have a qualifying child, complete
Schedule EIC according to its in-
structions. Be sure to enter the child's
social security number on line 2 of that
schedule. If you do not, your credit may
be reduced or disallowed. Attach
Schedule EIC to your return.
Form 1040A and EIC Worksheet. If you
file Form 1040A and want to figure the credit
yourself, follow these steps.
1) Go to your form instruction booklet and
turn to the instructions for Lines 38a
and 38b and look for the EIC Work-
sheet. 
2) Complete the EIC Worksheet accord-
ing to its instructions. Find the amount
of your credit in the EIC Table in your
form instruction booklet.
3) Enter the amount of your earned in-
come credit from line 6 of the EIC
Worksheet on Form 1040A, line 38a. 
4) Enter the amount and type of any
nontaxable earned income on Form
1040A, line 38b.
5) Keep the EIC Worksheet for your rec-
ords. Do not attach it to your income
tax return. If you do not have a quali-
fying child, stop here.
6) If you have a qualifying child, complete
Schedule EIC according to its in-
structions. Be sure to enter the child's
social security number on line 2 of that
schedule. If you do not, your credit may
be reduced or disallowed. Attach
Schedule EIC to your return.
Form 1040EZ and EIC Worksheet. If you
file Form 1040EZ and want to figure the
credit yourself, follow these steps.
1) Go to your form instruction booklet and
turn to the instructions for Lines 8a
and 8b and look for the EIC Work-
sheet.
2) Complete the EIC Worksheet accord-
ing to its instructions. Find the amount
of your credit in the EIC Table in your
form instruction booklet.
3) Enter the amount of your earned in-
come credit from line 6 of the EIC
Worksheet on Form 1040EZ, line 8a.
4) Enter the amount and type of any
nontaxable earned income on Form
1040EZ, line 8b.
5) Keep the EIC Worksheet for your rec-
ords. Do not attach it to your income
tax return.
Examples
The following two comprehensive examples
(complete with filled-in forms) may be help-
ful when figuring the earned income credit.
The two examples are:
1) John and Janet Smith with one quali-
fying child and using Form 1040A, and
2) Kelly Green, age 30, a student, with
no qualifying child and using Form
1040EZ.
Example 1. John and Janet
Smith (Form 1040A)
John and Janet Smith are married and will
file a joint return. They have one
child—Amy, who is 3 years old. Amy lived
with John and Janet for all of 2000. John
worked and earned $9,500. Janet worked
part of the year and earned $1,500. Their
total earned income and modified AGI is
$11,000. John and Janet qualify for the
earned income credit and fill out the EIC
Worksheet and Schedule EIC. The Smiths
will attach Schedule EIC to Form 1040A
when they send their completed return to
the IRS.
They took the following steps to com-
plete Schedule EIC and the EIC Worksheet.
Completing Schedule EIC
The Smiths complete Schedule EIC be-
cause they have a qualifying child. They
enter “John and Janet Smith” and John's
SSN (the SSN that appears first on their
Form 1040A) on the line at the top of
Schedule EIC. The Smiths fill out  Qualifying
Child Information (lines 1–6).
Line 1. The Smiths enter the first name
and last name for Amy in the column “Child
1.”
Line 2. They enter Amy's SSN. (See
Rule 7, earlier.)
Line 3. They enter the year of birth for
Amy (1997).
Lines 4a and 4b. The Smiths skip these
lines because Amy was not born before
1982.
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 245

Filled-in Schedule EIC— John and Janet Smith
(Page references are to the Schedule EIC instructions.)
John and Janet Smith 02
Amy
97
Daughter
1
Smith
2
04 22200 00
022 2222
91
/H17076 OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE EIC Earned Income Credit(Form 1040A or 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 43
Qualifying Child Information
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040A
or 1040 instructions.
Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040) 2000Cat. No. 13339M
Before you begin: See the instructions for Form 1040A, lines 38a and 38b, or Form 1040, lines 60a and 60b,
to make sure that (1) you can take the EIC and (2) you have a qualifying child.
Qualifying Child Information
● It will take us longer to process your return and issue your refund if you do not fill in all lines that apply
for each qualifying child.
3
4
2
5
6
1 Child ’s name
Child’s year of birth
Child’s SSN
If the child was born before 1982 —
Child’s relationship to you
Number of months child lived with
you in the United States during 2000
months
Yes.
months
Was the child under age 24 at the end
of 2000 and a student?
Was the child permanently and totally
disabled during any part of 2000?
a
b
Yes.
First name Last name First name Last name
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
(99)
EIC
1040A
1040
Complete and attach to Form 1040A or 1040
only if you have a qualifying child.
● Be sure the child ’s name on line 1 and social security number (SSN) on line 2 agree with the child ’s
social security card. Otherwise, at the time we process your return, we may reduce or disallow your
EIC. If the name or SSN on the child ’s social security card is not correct, call the Social Security
Administration at 1-800-772-1213.
Child 1 Child 2
If you have more than two qualifying children, you
only have to list two to get the maximum credit.
The child must have an SSN as defined on page 43
of the Form 1040A or 1040 instructions unless the
child was born and died in 2000. If your child was
born and died in 2000 and did not have an SSN,
enter “Died” on this line and attach a copy of the
child’s birth certificate.
Year
If born after 1981, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
Year
No. No.
Go to line 5. Go to line 5.Continue Continue
Yes. Yes. No. No.
Continue ContinueThe child is not a
qualifying child.
The child is not a
qualifying child.
● If the child lived with you for more than half of
2000 but less than 7 months, enter“7”.
● If the child was born or died in 2000 and your
home was the child’s home for the entire time he
or she was alive during 2000, enter“12”.
Do not enter more than 12 months. Do not enter more than 12 months.
Do you want part of the EIC added to your take-home pay in
2001? To see if you qualify, get Form W-5 from your employer or
by calling the IRS at 1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676).
+$
. . . . . . . . . .
● If you take the EIC even though you are not eligible, you may not be allowed to take the credit for up
to 10 years. See back of schedule for details.
If born after 1981, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
2000
(for example, son, daughter, grandchild,
foster child, etc.)
Page 246 Chapter 37  Earned Income Credit

Line 5. The Smiths enter “Daughter” for
Amy. This column shows Amy's relationship
to John and Janet.
Line 6. The Smiths enter “12” for Amy.
This is how many months Amy lived with
them in 2000. 
Completing the EIC Worksheet
Next, the Smiths will complete the EIC
Worksheet to figure their earned income
credit amount.
Line 1. The Smiths enter $11,000 (their
total earned income).
Line 2. The Smiths go to the Earned
Income Credit Table in the Form 1040A
instructions. The Smiths find their income
of $11,000 within the range of $10,400 to
$12,700. They follow this line across to the
column “One child” and find $2,353 and
enter it on this line 2.
Line 3. The Smiths enter their modified
AGI of $11,000.
Line 4. The Smiths check the “Yes” box
because lines 1 and 3 are the same
($11,000). They skip line 5 and enter the
amount from line 2 ($2,353) on line 6.
Line 6. The Smiths' EIC is $2,353.
Example 2. Kelly Green
(Form 1040EZ)
Kelly Green is age 30 and a full-time stu-
dent. She lived with her parents in the
United States for all of 2000. She had a
part-time job and earned $6,040. She
earned $20 interest on a savings account.
She is not eligible to be claimed as a de-
pendent on her parents' return. Although
she lived with her parents, she is not their
qualifying child because she does not meet
the age test. She does not have any chil-
dren. 
Kelly qualifies for the earned income
credit. Kelly will file Form 1040EZ and
complete the EIC Worksheet.
Completing the EIC Worksheet
Kelly figures the amount of her earned in-
come credit on the EIC Worksheet as fol-
lows.
Line 1. She enters $6,040 (her total
earned income).
Line 2.Kelly goes to the Earned Income
Credit Table in the forms instruction booklet.
She finds her earned income of $6,040 in
the range of $6,000 to $6,050. Kelly follows
this line across to the column “No children”
and finds $333. She enters $333 on line 2.
Line 3. Kelly enters $6,060 (her modi-
fied AGI).
Line 4. Kelly checks the “No” box be-
cause lines 1 and 3 are not the same
($6,040 and $6,060).
Line 5. Kelly checks the “No” box be-
cause the amount on line 3 ($6,060) is not
less than $5,770. She goes to the Earned
Income Credit Table in the forms instruction
booklet. She finds her modified adjusted
gross income of $6,060 in the range of
$6,050 to $6,100. Kelly follows this line
across to the column “No children” and finds
$329. She enters $329 on line 5. She looks
at the amounts on lines 5 and 2. $329 is the
smaller amount.
Line 6. She enters $329 here and on
Form 1040EZ, line 8a. The $329 is Kelly's
earned income credit.
Advance Earned
Income Credit
Would you like to get part of your earned
income credit now instead of waiting until
after the end of the year? If you work for
someone and expect to qualify for the
earned income credit in 2001, you can
choose to get part of the credit in advance.
Give your employer a 2001 Form W–5,
Earned Income Credit Advance Payment
Certificate, and your employer will include
part of the credit regularly in your pay. The
advance payment is only available if you
have at least one qualifying child.
Who can get the advance payment of the
earned income credit?To get part of the
earned income credit paid to you throughout
the year in your paycheck, you must meet
all the following rules.
1) You must expect that your earned in-
come and modified AGI will each be
less than a certain amount. The
amount in 2000 was $27,413. The
amount for 2001 will be higher. (See
the 2001 Form W–5 for the 2001
amount.)
2) You must have a qualifying child. 
3) You must expect to meet all the rules
in Parts A, B, and D of this chapter or
in the instructions for Form W–5. 
Persons who are not entitled to receive
advance payments.  Under certain cir-
cumstances, even if you meet these rules,
you may not be entitled to get EIC. If your
wages are not subject to federal income tax,
social security tax, or Medicare tax with-
holding, you cannot get the advance pay-
ment of the earned income credit. If you are
a farm worker and are paid on a daily basis,
your employer is not required to pay you the
advance amount of the credit.
How To Get Advance
Payments for 2001
To get part of the credit in advance, you
must fill out a 2001 Form W–5. After you
have read the instructions and answered
the questions on Form W–5, give the lower
part of the form to your employer. Keep the
top part for your records.
More than one employer. If you have more
than one employer, give a certificate to only
one of them. If you are married and both you
and your spouse are employed and expect
to qualify for the credit, you may give a Form
W–5 to your employer and your spouse may
give one to his or her employer.
CAUTION
!
If you receive advance earned in-
come credit payments in 2001, you
must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A
for tax year 2001. You must file a return to
report what you already received and to
take advantage of any additional earned
income credit that you may qualify for.
Receipt of advance payments you do not
qualify for. If you receive advance pay-
ments and later find out that you do not
qualify for the EIC, you will have to pay back
any advance payment you are not entitled
to when you file your Form 1040 or Form
1040A.
When to give your employer a new Form
W–5. The 2001 Form W–5 you give to your
employer is valid until December 31, 2001.
If you expect to qualify for the earned in-
come credit in 2002 and you want to receive
advance payments, you must give your
employer a new Form W–5 in 2002. Do this
each year you think you are eligible for the
credit.
If you no longer want to get advance
payments or if your situation changes and
you no longer qualify for the earned income
credit, you must give your employer a new
Form W–5. Check the No box on line 1 of
the new form.
If your spouse files a Form W–5 with his
or her employer, you must file a new Form
W–5 with your employer. Check the Yes
box on line 4.
Advance Payments
Received in 2000
If you received advance payments of the
earned income credit in 2000, you must file
a tax return to report the payments. Report
the amount on line 55 (Form 1040), or line
34 (Form 1040A). Your Form W–2, box 9,
will show the amount you received.
CAUTION
!
You cannot use Form 1040EZ to
report your advance payments.
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 247

Filled-in EIC Worksheet—John and Janet Smith
(Page references are to the Form 1040A Instructions)
11,000
11,000
2,353
2,353
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Lines 38a and 38b
1040A
Yes. Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your total earned income from Step 8,
Box D, on page 42.
Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC T able on pages 45–47
to find the credit. Enter the credit here.
Enter your modified adjusted gross income from
Step 6, Box A, on page 41.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
No. Go to line 5.
Is the amount on line 3 less than:
Yes. Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC T able on
pages 45–47 to find the credit. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040A, line 38a.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
If line 2 is zero, Y ou cannot take the credit.
Put “No” directly to the right of line 38a.
● $5,800 if you do not have a qualifying child or
● $12,700 if you have one or more qualifying children?
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
/H12011
Reminder—
Be sure you entered the amount and the type of any nontaxable earned
income (Step 7, Box B, on page 42) on Form 1040A, line 38b.
If you have a qualifying child, complete and attach Schedule EIC.
If your 1997, 1998, or 1999 EIC was reduced or disallowed, see
page 43 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the
credit for 2000.
/H12011
/H17076
/H17076
EIC
1040A
/H12011
Page 248 Chapter 37  Earned Income Credit

Filled-in EIC Worksheet — Kelly Green
(Page references are to the Form 1040EZ instructions.)
6,040
6,060
333
329
329
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet — Lines 8a and 8b
1040EZ
Yes. Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your total earned income from Step 4,
Box D, on page 16.
Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC T able on page 19 to
find the credit. Enter the credit here.
Enter your modified adjusted gross income from
Step 2, Box A, on page 15.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
No. Go to line 5.
Is the amount on line 3 less than $5,800?
Yes. Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC T able on page 19
to find the credit. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040EZ, line 8a.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
If line 2 is zero, Y ou cannot take the credit.
Print“No ” to the right of the word“below” on line 8b.
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
/H12011
Reminder—
Be sure you entered the type and amount of any nontaxable earned
income (Step 3, Box B, on page 16) on Form 1040EZ, line 8b.
If your 1997, 1998, or 1999 EIC was reduced or disallowed, see page 16
to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the credit for 2000.
/H17076
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 249

EIC Eligibility Checklist
Is your total earned income at least $1 but less than:
You may claim the EIC if you answer YES to all the following questions.*
1.
YES NO
2.
Do you, your spouse, and your qualifying child each have a valid SSN that allows you to work? (See
Rule 1.)
Is your filing status married filing jointly, head of household, qualifying widow(er), or single? (See Rule 2.)
Caution: If you are a nonresident alien, answer YES only if your filing status is married filing jointly and
you are married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien. (See Rule 3.)
3. Answer YES if you are not filing Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ. Otherwise, answer NO. (See Rule 4.)
4. Is your investment income $2,400 or less? (See Rule 5.)
5.
Is your modified AGI less than:6.
Answer YES if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) are not a qualifying child of another person.
(See Rules 9 and 12.)
STOP: If you have a qualifying child, answer questions 8 and 9 and skip 10 –12. If you do not
have a qualifying child, skip questions 8 and 9 and answer 10 –12.*
7.
Does your child meet the age, residency, and relationship tests for a qualifying child? (See Rule 7.)
Is your child a qualifying child only for you? Answer YES if your qualified child is also a qualifying child
for another person but your modified AGI is higher than the other person ’s. (See Rule 8.)
8.
Was your main home (and your spouse ’s if filing a joint return) in the United States for more than half
the year? (See Rule 13.)
Were you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) at least age 25 but under 65 at the end of 2000? (See
Rule 10.)
Answer YES if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) cannot be claimed as a dependent on
anyone else’s return. Answer NO if you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) can be claimed as a
dependent on someone else ’s return. (See Rule 11.)
* PERSONS WITH A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered YES to questions 1 through 9, you can claim the EIC. Remember to
fill out Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use Form 1040EZ.
PERSONS WITHOUT A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered YES to questions 1 through 7, and 10 through 12, you can claim
the EIC.
If you answered NO to any question that applies to you: You cannot claim the EIC.
9.
10.
11.
12.
● $10,380 if you do not have a qualifying child.
● $27,413 if you have one qualifying child, or
● $31,152 if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rules 6 and 14.)
● $10,380 if you do not have a qualifying child.
● $27,413 if you have one qualifying child, or
● $31,152 if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rule 15.)
Page 250 Chapter 37  Earned Income Credit

38.
Other Credits
Important Change
Excess withholding of social security tax
and tier 1 railroad retirement tax. Social
security and tier 1 railroad retirement tax
(RRTA) were both withheld at a rate of 6.2%
on the first $76,200 of wages in 2000. If you
had two or more employers and they with-
held too much social security or RRTA tax
during 2000, you may be entitled to a credit
of the excess withholding. For more infor-
mation about the credit and how to get it,
see Credit for Excess Social Security Tax
or Railroad Retirement Tax Withheld under
Refundable Credits, later.
Introduction
In addition to the child and dependent care
credit (chapter 33), the credit for the elderly
or the disabled (chapter 34), the child tax
credit (chapter 35), the education credits
(chapter 36), and the earned income credit
(chapter 37), you may be able to claim other
tax credits. Even though the general busi-
ness credit is one of the other tax credits
that you may be able to claim, it is not dis-
cussed in this chapter. See Publication 334,
Tax Guide for Small Business, for a dis-
cussion of the credits that are included in
the general business credit. This chapter
discusses seven other credits which you
subtract directly from your tax to reduce
your tax liability. It is divided into two parts,
Nonrefundable credits, and Refundable
credits.
Nonrefundable credits.The first part of
the chapter, Nonrefundable Credits, covers
five credits that you subtract directly from
your tax. These credits may reduce your tax
to zero. If these credits are more than your
tax, the excess is not refunded to you.
Refundable credits.The second part of
this chapter, Refundable Credits, covers two
credits that are treated as payments and are
refundable to you. These credits are added
to the federal income tax withheld and any
estimated tax payments you made. If this
total is more than your total tax, the excess
will be refunded to you.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554514 Foreign Tax Credit for
Individuals
/H18554564 Mutual Fund Distributions
/H18554936 Home Mortgage Interest
Deduction
/H18554968 Tax Benefits of Adoption
Form (and Instructions)
/H185541116 Foreign Tax Credit (Individual,
Estate, Trust, or Nonresident
Alien Individual)
/H185548396 Mortgage Interest Credit
/H185548801 Credit For Prior Year Minimum
Tax—Individuals, Estates, and
Trusts
/H185548828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage
Subsidy
/H185548834 Qualified Electric Vehicle Credit
/H185548839 Qualified Adoption Expenses
Nonrefundable
Credits
The following credits are discussed in this
part.
 Adoption credit.
 Foreign tax credit.
 Mortgage interest credit.
 Credit for prior year minimum tax.
 Credit for electric vehicles.
Adoption Credit
You may be able to take a tax credit of up
to $5,000 for qualifying expenses paid to
adopt an eligible child. The credit can be
as much as $6,000 if the expenses are for
the adoption of a child with special needs.
Qualifying expenses. Qualifying adoption
expenses are reasonable and necessary
adoption fees, court costs, attorney fees,
traveling expenses (including amounts
spent for meals and lodging) while away
from home, and other expenses directly re-
lated to, and whose principal purpose is for,
the legal adoption of an eligible child.
Nonqualifying expenses. Qualifying
adoption expenses do not include ex-
penses:
 That violate state or federal law,
 For carrying out any surrogate parent-
ing arrangement,
 For the adoption of your spouse's child,
 Paid using funds received from any
federal, state, or local program,
 Allowed as a credit or deduction under
any other federal income tax rule, or
 Paid or reimbursed by your employer
or any other person or organization.
Eligible child.The term “eligible child”
means any individual:
1) Under 18 years old, or
2) Physically or mentally incapable of
caring for himself or herself.
TIP
After December 31, 2001, the
adoption credit applies only if the
eligible child is a child with special
needs.
Child with special needs.An eligible
child is a child with special needs if:
1) He or she is a citizen or resident of the
United States (including the District of
Columbia and U.S. possessions) and 
2) A state determines that the child can-
not or should not be returned to his or
her parents' home and probably will not
be adopted unless adoption assistance
is provided to the adoptive parents.
Factors used by states to determine if a
child has special needs could include:
 The child's ethnic background,
 The child's age,
 Whether the child is a member of a mi-
nority or sibling group, or
 Whether the child has a medical condi-
tion or physical, mental, or emotional
handicap.
CAUTION
!
A foreign child cannot be treated as
a child with special needs.
How to claim the credit. To claim the
credit, you must complete Form 8839 and
attach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Enter the credit on line 48, Form 1040, or
line 31, Form 1040A.
Foreign Tax Credit 
You generally can choose to claim income
taxes you paid or accrued during the year
to a foreign country or U.S. possession as
a credit against your U.S. income tax. Or,
you can deduct them as an itemized de-
duction.
How to claim the credit.Your foreign tax
credit is subject to a limit based on your
taxable income from foreign sources. You
generally figure your limit and the credit on
Form 1116.
Election not to file Form 1116.You
will not be subject to the limit and may be
able to claim the credit without using Form
1116 if all the following requirements are
met.
1) You are an individual.
2) Your only foreign source income for the
tax year is passive income (dividends,
interest, royalties, etc.) that is reported
to you on a payee statement (such as
a Form 1099–DIV or 1099–INT).
3) Your qualified foreign taxes for the tax
year are not more than $300 ($600 if
filing a joint return) and are reported
on a payee statement.
4) You elect this procedure for the tax
year.
CAUTION
!
If you make this election, you cannot
carry back or carry over any unused
foreign tax to or from this tax year.
Enter the credit on line 43, Form 1040.
For more information on the foreign tax
credit, see Publication 514.
Chapter 38 Other Credits Page 251

Mortgage Interest Credit 
Mortgage credit certificates issued by state
and local governments may entitle a certif-
icate holder to a mortgage interest credit.
The certificate must be used in connection
with the purchase, qualified rehabilitation,
or qualified home improvement of the cer-
tificate holder's main home.
Who qualifies.You may be able to claim
a mortgage interest credit if you were issued
a mortgage credit certificate (MCC) under
a qualified MCC program. The MCC must
relate to your main home.
Amount of credit. If your mortgage is
equal to (or smaller than) the certified
indebtedness amount (loan) shown on your
MCC, you multiply the certified credit rate,
shown on your MCC, by all the interest you
paid on your mortgage during the year.
If your mortgage is larger than the certi-
fied indebtedness amount shown on your
MCC, you multiply the certified credit rate,
shown on your MCC, by only the interest
allocated to the certified indebtedness
amount shown on your MCC.
CAUTION
!
If the certificate credit rate is more
than 20%, the credit cannot be more
than $2,000.
Carryforward. If your allowable credit is
more than your tax liability reduced by cer-
tain credits, you can carry forward the un-
used portion of the credit to your next 3 tax
years or until used, whichever comes first.
If you are subject to the $2,000 limit be-
cause your certificate credit rate is more
than 20%, no amount over the $2,000 (or
your prorated share of the $2,000 if you
must allocate the credit) may be carried
forward.
Reduced home mortgage interest de-
duction. If you claim the credit and itemize
your deductions on Schedule A (Form
1040), you must reduce your home mort-
gage interest deduction. Reduce your de-
duction by the amount on line 3 of Form
8396, even if part of that amount is to be
carried forward to 2001. For more informa-
tion about the home mortgage interest de-
duction, see chapter 25.
Recapture of federal mortgage subsidy.
If your home was financed with a mortgage
from a qualified mortgage bond program or
you received an MCC after December 31,
1990, you may be subject to a recapture
rule. The recapture would generally occur
if you sold or disposed of your home during
the first 9 years after the date you closed
your mortgage loan. See Publication 523,
Selling Your Home, for more information.
How to claim the credit.Figure the credit
and any carryforward to next year on  Form
8396, and attach it to your Form 1040. Be
sure to include any carryforward from 1997,
1998, and 1999. You cannot use a
carryforward from 1996 on your tax return
for 2000 or any year after 2000.
Include the credit in your total for line 49
(Form 1040), and check box b.
Credit for Prior Year
Minimum Tax 
The tax laws give special treatment to some
kinds of income and allow special de-
ductions and credits for some kinds of ex-
penses. If you benefit from these laws, you
may have to pay at least a minimum amount
of tax in addition to any other tax on these
items. This is called the alternative minimum
tax.
The special treatment of some items of
income and expenses only allows you to
postpone paying tax until a later year. If in
prior years you paid alternative minimum tax
because of these tax postponement items,
you may be able to claim a credit for prior
year minimum tax against your current
year's regular tax. The amount of the credit
cannot reduce your current year's tax below
your current year's tentative alternative
minimum tax.
You may be able to take a credit against
your regular tax if you:
1) Paid alternative minimum tax in 1999,
2) Had an unused minimum tax credit that
you are carrying forward from 1999 to
2000, or
3) Had unallowed qualified electric vehi-
cle credits in 1999.
How to claim the credit.Figure your 2000
credit and any carryforward to 2001 on
Form 8801, and attach it to your Form 1040.
Include the credit in your total for line 49,
Form 1040, and check box c. You can carry
forward any unused credit for prior year
minimum tax to later years until it is com-
pletely used.
For additional information about the
credit, see the instructions for Form 8801.
Credit for Electric Vehicles
You may be allowed a tax credit if you
placed a qualified electric vehicle in service
during the year.
Qualified electric vehicle.This is a motor
vehicle that:
1) Has at least four wheels and is manu-
factured primarily for use on public
streets, roads, and highways,
2) Is powered primarily by an electric
motor that draws its power from re-
chargeable batteries, fuel cells, or
other portable sources of electrical
current,
3) Is originally used by you, and
4) Is acquired for your own use, not for
resale.
Amount of credit. The credit is equal to
10% of the cost of the vehicle. However, if
the vehicle is a depreciable business asset,
you must reduce the cost by any section
179 deduction before figuring the credit. Get
Publication 463, Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses, for information on the
section 179 deduction.
The credit is limited to $4,000 for each
vehicle.
Special rules.You cannot take the credit
if you use the vehicle predominately outside
the United States.
The credit will be subject to recapture if,
within 3 years after the date you place the
vehicle in service, the vehicle is used
predominately outside the United States or
is modified so that it is no longer eligible for
the credit.
How to claim the credit.  To claim the
credit, complete Form 8834, and attach it to
your Form 1040. Include the credit in your
total for line 49, check box d, and write
“8834” on the line next to box d.
Refundable Credits
The following credits are refundable and are
treated as payments of tax.
 Credit for excess social security tax or
railroad retirement tax withheld.
 Credit from a regulated investment
company.
Credit for Excess Social
Security Tax or Railroad
Retirement Tax Withheld 
Most employers must withhold social secu-
rity tax from your wages. Certain govern-
ment employers (some federal, state, and
local governments) do not have to withhold
social security tax.
If you work for a railroad employer, that
employer must withhold tier 1 railroad re-
tirement (RRTA) tax and tier 2 RRTA tax.
If you worked for two or more employers
in 2000, you may have had too much social
security tax or RRTA withheld from your
pay. You can claim the excess as a credit
against your income tax. The following table
shows the maximum amount of wages
subject to tax and the maximum amount of
tax that should have been withheld in 2000.
CAUTION
!
All wages are subject to Medicare
tax withholding.
One employer. If any one employer with-
held social security or RRTA tax that ex-
ceeded the amounts in the preceding table,
you cannot claim the extra amount withheld
by that employer as a credit against your
income tax. Your employer must adjust this
for you.
Joint return.If you are filing a joint return,
you cannot add the social security or RRTA
tax withheld from your spouse's wages to
the amount withheld from your wages. Fig-
ure the credit separately for both you and
your spouse to determine if either of you
has excess withholding.
How to claim the credit.If you file Form
1040, enter the credit on line 61. If you file
Form 1040A, include the credit in the total
Type of Tax
Maximum
wages
subject to tax
Maximum tax
that should have
been withheld
Social
 Security or
 RRTA tier 1 $76,200 $4,724.40
RRTA tier 2 $56,700 $2,778.30
Page 252 Chapter 38  Other Credits

on line 40. Print “Excess SST” and show the
amount of the credit in the space to the left
of the line.
How to figure the credit if you did not
work for a railroad.If you did not work for
a railroad during 2000, figure the credit as
follows:
Example. You are married and file a
joint return with your spouse who had no
gross income in 2000. During 2000 you
worked for the Brown Shoe Company and
earned $45,000 in wages. Social security
tax of $2,790 was withheld. You also
worked for another employer in 2000 and
earned $35,000 in wages. $2,170 of social
security tax was withheld from these wages.
Because you worked for more than one
employer and your total wages were more
than $76,200 you can claim a credit of
$235.60 for the excess social security tax
withheld.
How to figure the credit if you worked for
a railroad.If you were a railroad employee
during 2000, figure the credit as follows:
Credit from a Regulated
Investment Company 
You must include in your income any
amounts that an investment company (for
example, a mutual fund) allocated to you
as capital gain distributions, even if you did
not actually receive them. If the investment
company paid a tax on the capital gain, you
are allowed a credit for the tax since it is
considered paid by you. The company will
send you Form 2439, Notice to Shareholder
of Undistributed Long-Term Capital Gains,
showing the undistributed capital gains
amount and the tax paid, if any. Claim the
credit by entering the amount on line 64,
Form 1040, and checking box a. Also attach
Copy B of Form 2439 to your return. See
Capital Gain Distributions in chapter 9 for
more information on undistributed capital
gains.
1. Add all social security and tier 1
RRTA tax withheld (but not more
than $4,724.40 for each em-
ployer). Enter the total here ........
2. Enter any uncollected social se-
curity and tier 1 RRTA tax on tips
or group-term life insurance in-
cluded in the total on Form 1040,
line 57 .........................................
1. Add all social security tax withheld
(but not more than $4,724.40 for
each employer). Enter the total
here ...............................................
2. Enter any uncollected social secu-
rity tax on tips or group-term life
insurance included in the total on
Form 1040, line 57 ........................
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $4,724.40
or less, enter –0– on line 5 and
go to line 6 ..................................
4. Social security and tier 1 RRTA
tax limit ........................................ 4,724.403. Add lines 1 and 2. If $4,724.40 or
less, stop here. You cannot claim
the credit .......................................
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3 ..........
6. Add all tier 2 RRTA tax withheld
(but not more than $2,778.30 for
each employer). Enter the total
here .............................................
4. Social security tax limit ................. 4,724.40
5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.
Enter the result here and on Form
1040, line 61 (or Form 1040A, line
40) .................................................
7. Enter any uncollected tier 2 rail-
road retirement tax on tips or
group-term life insurance included
in the total on Form 1040, line 57
 .....................................................
8. Add lines 6 and 7. If $2,778.30
or less, enter –0– on line 10 and
go to line 11 ................................
9. RRTA tier 2 limit ......................... 2,778.30
10. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..........
11. Credit. Add lines 5 and 10. Enter
the result here and on Form 1040,
line 61 (or Form 1040A, line 40) .1. Add all social security tax withheld
(but not more than $4,724.40 for
each employer). Enter the total
here ............................................... $4,960.00
2. Enter any uncollected social secu-
rity tax on tips or group-term life
insurance included in the total on
Form 1040, line 57 ........................ –0–
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $4,724.40 or
less, stop here. You cannot claim
the credit ....................................... 4,960.00
4. Social security tax limit ................. 4,724.40
5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.
Enter the result here and on Form
1040, line 61 (or Form 1040A, line
40) ................................................. $235.60
Chapter 38 Other Credits Page 253

2000
Tax
Table
Use if your taxable income is less than $100,000.
If $100,000 or more, use the Tax Rate Schedules.
Example. Mr. and Mrs. Brown are filing a joint return. Their
taxable income on line 39 of Form 1040 is $25,300. First,
they find the $25,300–25,350 income line. Next, they find
the column for married filing jointly and read down the
column. The amount shown where the income line and filing
status column meet is $3,799. This is the tax amount they
should enter on line 40 of their Form 1040.
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
Continued on next page
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
25,200
25,250
25,300
25,350
3,784
3,791
3,799
3,806
Sample Table
25,250
25,300
25,350
25,400
3,784
3,791
3,799
3,806
4,213
4,227
4,241
4,255
3,784
3,791
3,799
3,806
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
005 00 0
51 5 22 2 2
15 25 33 3 3
25 50 66 6 6
50 75 99 9 9
75 100 13 13 13 13
100 125 17 17 17 17
125 150 21 21 21 21
150 175 24 24 24 24
175 200 28 28 28 28
200 225 32 32 32 32
225 250 36 36 36 36
250 275 39 39 39 39
275 300 43 43 43 43
300 325 47 47 47 47
325 350 51 51 51 51
350 375 54 54 54 54
375 400 58 58 58 58
400 425 62 62 62 62
425 450 66 66 66 66
450 475 69 69 69 69
475 500 73 73 73 73
500 525 77 77 77 77
525 550 81 81 81 81
550 575 84 84 84 84
575 600 88 88 88 88
600 625 92 92 92 92
625 650 96 96 96 96
650 675 99 99 99 99
675 700 103 103 103 103
700 725 107 107 107 107
725 750 111 111 111 111
750 775 114 114 114 114
775 800 118 118 118 118
800 825 122 122 122 122
825 850 126 126 126 126
850 875 129 129 129 129
875 900 133 133 133 133
900 925 137 137 137 137
925 950 141 141 141 141
950 975 144 144 144 144
975 1,000 148 148 148 148
1,000 1,025 152 152 152 152
1,025 1,050 156 156 156 156
1,050 1,075 159 159 159 159
1,075 1,100 163 163 163 163
1,100 1,125 167 167 167 167
1,125 1,150 171 171 171 171
1,150 1,175 174 174 174 174
1,175 1,200 178 178 178 178
1,200 1,225 182 182 182 182
1,225 1,250 186 186 186 186
1,250 1,275 189 189 189 189
1,275 1,300 193 193 193 193
1,300 1,325 197 197 197 197
1,325 1,350 201 201 201 201
1,350 1,375 204 204 204 204
1,375 1,400 208 208 208 208
1,400 1,425 212 212 212 212
1,425 1,450 216 216 216 216
1,450 1,475 219 219 219 219
1,475 1,500 223 223 223 223
1,500 1,525 227 227 227 227
1,525 1,550 231 231 231 231
1,550 1,575 234 234 234 234
1,575 1,600 238 238 238 238
1,600 1,625 242 242 242 242
1,625 1,650 246 246 246 246
1,650 1,675 249 249 249 249
1,675 1,700 253 253 253 253
1,700 1,725 257 257 257 257
1,725 1,750 261 261 261 261
1,750 1,775 264 264 264 264
1,775 1,800 268 268 268 268
1,800 1,825 272 272 272 272
1,825 1,850 276 276 276 276
1,850 1,875 279 279 279 279
1,875 1,900 283 283 283 283
1,900 1,925 287 287 287 287
1,925 1,950 291 291 291 291
1,950 1,975 294 294 294 294
1,975 2,000 298 298 298 298
2,000 2,025 302 302 302 302
2,025 2,050 306 306 306 306
2,050 2,075 309 309 309 309
2,075 2,100 313 313 313 313
2,100 2,125 317 317 317 317
2,125 2,150 321 321 321 321
2,150 2,175 324 324 324 324
2,175 2,200 328 328 328 328
2,200 2,225 332 332 332 332
2,225 2,250 336 336 336 336
2,250 2,275 339 339 339 339
2,275 2,300 343 343 343 343
2,300 2,325 347 347 347 347
2,325 2,350 351 351 351 351
2,350 2,375 354 354 354 354
2,375 2,400 358 358 358 358
2,400 2,425 362 362 362 362
2,425 2,450 366 366 366 366
2,450 2,475 369 369 369 369
2,475 2,500 373 373 373 373
2,500 2,525 377 377 377 377
2,525 2,550 381 381 381 381
2,550 2,575 384 384 384 384
2,575 2,600 388 388 388 388
2,600 2,625 392 392 392 392
2,625 2,650 396 396 396 396
2,650 2,675 399 399 399 399
2,675 2,700 403 403 403 403
2,700 2,725 407 407 407 407
2,725 2,750 411 411 411 411
2,750 2,775 414 414 414 414
2,775 2,800 418 418 418 418
2,800 2,825 422 422 422 422
2,825 2,850 426 426 426 426
2,850 2,875 429 429 429 429
2,875 2,900 433 433 433 433
2,900 2,925 437 437 437 437
2,925 2,950 441 441 441 441
2,950 2,975 444 444 444 444
2,975 3,000 448 448 448 448
3,000 3,050 454 454 454 454
3,050 3,100 461 461 461 461
3,100 3,150 469 469 469 469
3,150 3,200 476 476 476 476
3,200 3,250 484 484 484 484
3,250 3,300 491 491 491 491
3,300 3,350 499 499 499 499
3,350 3,400 506 506 506 506
3,400 3,450 514 514 514 514
3,450 3,500 521 521 521 521
3,500 3,550 529 529 529 529
3,550 3,600 536 536 536 536
3,600 3,650 544 544 544 544
3,650 3,700 551 551 551 551
3,700 3,750 559 559 559 559
3,750 3,800 566 566 566 566
3,800 3,850 574 574 574 574
3,850 3,900 581 581 581 581
3,900 3,950 589 589 589 589
3,950 4,000 596 596 596 596
4,000 4,050 604 604 604 604
4,050 4,100 611 611 611 611
4,100 4,150 619 619 619 619
4,150 4,200 626 626 626 626
4,200 4,250 634 634 634 634
4,250 4,300 641 641 641 641
4,300 4,350 649 649 649 649
4,350 4,400 656 656 656 656
4,400 4,450 664 664 664 664
4,450 4,500 671 671 671 671
4,500 4,550 679 679 679 679
4,550 4,600 686 686 686 686
4,600 4,650 694 694 694 694
4,650 4,700 701 701 701 701
4,700 4,750 709 709 709 709
4,750 4,800 716 716 716 716
4,800 4,850 724 724 724 724
4,850 4,900 731 731 731 731
4,900 4,950 739 739 739 739
4,950 5,000 746 746 746 746
Page 254

2000 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
Continued on next page* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
11,000
12,000
13,000
5,000 5,050 754 754 754 754
5,050 5,100 761 761 761 761
5,100 5,150 769 769 769 769
5,150 5,200 776 776 776 776
5,200 5,250 784 784 784 784
5,250 5,300 791 791 791 791
5,300 5,350 799 799 799 799
5,350 5,400 806 806 806 806
5,400 5,450 814 814 814 814
5,450 5,500 821 821 821 821
5,500 5,550 829 829 829 829
5,550 5,600 836 836 836 836
5,600 5,650 844 844 844 844
5,650 5,700 851 851 851 851
5,700 5,750 859 859 859 859
5,750 5,800 866 866 866 866
5,800 5,850 874 874 874 874
5,850 5,900 881 881 881 881
5,900 5,950 889 889 889 889
5,950 6,000 896 896 896 896
6,000 6,050 904 904 904 904
6,050 6,100 911 911 911 911
6,100 6,150 919 919 919 919
6,150 6,200 926 926 926 926
6,200 6,250 934 934 934 934
6,250 6,300 941 941 941 941
6,300 6,350 949 949 949 949
6,350 6,400 956 956 956 956
6,400 6,450 964 964 964 964
6,450 6,500 971 971 971 971
6,500 6,550 979 979 979 979
6,550 6,600 986 986 986 986
6,600 6,650 994 994 994 994
6,650 6,700 1,001 1,001 1,001 1,001
6,700 6,750 1,009 1,009 1,009 1,009
6,750 6,800 1,016 1,016 1,016 1,016
6,800 6,850 1,024 1,024 1,024 1,024
6,850 6,900 1,031 1,031 1,031 1,031
6,900 6,950 1,039 1,039 1,039 1,039
6,950 7,000 1,046 1,046 1,046 1,046
7,000 7,050 1,054 1,054 1,054 1,054
7,050 7,100 1,061 1,061 1,061 1,061
7,100 7,150 1,069 1,069 1,069 1,069
7,150 7,200 1,076 1,076 1,076 1,076
7,200 7,250 1,084 1,084 1,084 1,084
7,250 7,300 1,091 1,091 1,091 1,091
7,300 7,350 1,099 1,099 1,099 1,099
7,350 7,400 1,106 1,106 1,106 1,106
7,400 7,450 1,114 1,114 1,114 1,114
7,450 7,500 1,121 1,121 1,121 1,121
7,500 7,550 1,129 1,129 1,129 1,129
7,550 7,600 1,136 1,136 1,136 1,136
7,600 7,650 1,144 1,144 1,144 1,144
7,650 7,700 1,151 1,151 1,151 1,151
7,700 7,750 1,159 1,159 1,159 1,159
7,750 7,800 1,166 1,166 1,166 1,166
7,800 7,850 1,174 1,174 1,174 1,174
7,850 7,900 1,181 1,181 1,181 1,181
7,900 7,950 1,189 1,189 1,189 1,189
7,950 8,000 1,196 1,196 1,196 1,196
8,000 8,050 1,204 1,204 1,204 1,204
8,050 8,100 1,211 1,211 1,211 1,211
8,100 8,150 1,219 1,219 1,219 1,219
8,150 8,200 1,226 1,226 1,226 1,226
8,200 8,250 1,234 1,234 1,234 1,234
8,250 8,300 1,241 1,241 1,241 1,241
8,300 8,350 1,249 1,249 1,249 1,249
8,350 8,400 1,256 1,256 1,256 1,256
8,400 8,450 1,264 1,264 1,264 1,264
8,450 8,500 1,271 1,271 1,271 1,271
8,500 8,550 1,279 1,279 1,279 1,279
8,550 8,600 1,286 1,286 1,286 1,286
8,600 8,650 1,294 1,294 1,294 1,294
8,650 8,700 1,301 1,301 1,301 1,301
8,700 8,750 1,309 1,309 1,309 1,309
8,750 8,800 1,316 1,316 1,316 1,316
8,800 8,850 1,324 1,324 1,324 1,324
8,850 8,900 1,331 1,331 1,331 1,331
8,900 8,950 1,339 1,339 1,339 1,339
8,950 9,000 1,346 1,346 1,346 1,346
9,000 9,050 1,354 1,354 1,354 1,354
9,050 9,100 1,361 1,361 1,361 1,361
9,100 9,150 1,369 1,369 1,369 1,369
9,150 9,200 1,376 1,376 1,376 1,376
9,200 9,250 1,384 1,384 1,384 1,384
9,250 9,300 1,391 1,391 1,391 1,391
9,300 9,350 1,399 1,399 1,399 1,399
9,350 9,400 1,406 1,406 1,406 1,406
9,400 9,450 1,414 1,414 1,414 1,414
9,450 9,500 1,421 1,421 1,421 1,421
9,500 9,550 1,429 1,429 1,429 1,429
9,550 9,600 1,436 1,436 1,436 1,436
9,600 9,650 1,444 1,444 1,444 1,444
9,650 9,700 1,451 1,451 1,451 1,451
9,700 9,750 1,459 1,459 1,459 1,459
9,750 9,800 1,466 1,466 1,466 1,466
9,800 9,850 1,474 1,474 1,474 1,474
9,850 9,900 1,481 1,481 1,481 1,481
9,900 9,950 1,489 1,489 1,489 1,489
9,950 10,000 1,496 1,496 1,496 1,496
10,000 10,050 1,504 1,504 1,504 1,504
10,050 10,100 1,511 1,511 1,511 1,511
10,100 10,150 1,519 1,519 1,519 1,519
10,150 10,200 1,526 1,526 1,526 1,526
10,200 10,250 1,534 1,534 1,534 1,534
10,250 10,300 1,541 1,541 1,541 1,541
10,300 10,350 1,549 1,549 1,549 1,549
10,350 10,400 1,556 1,556 1,556 1,556
10,400 10,450 1,564 1,564 1,564 1,564
10,450 10,500 1,571 1,571 1,571 1,571
10,500 10,550 1,579 1,579 1,579 1,579
10,550 10,600 1,586 1,586 1,586 1,586
10,600 10,650 1,594 1,594 1,594 1,594
10,650 10,700 1,601 1,601 1,601 1,601
10,700 10,750 1,609 1,609 1,609 1,609
10,750 10,800 1,616 1,616 1,616 1,616
10,800 10,850 1,624 1,624 1,624 1,624
10,850 10,900 1,631 1,631 1,631 1,631
10,900 10,950 1,639 1,639 1,639 1,639
10,950 11,000 1,646 1,646 1,646 1,646
11,000 11,050 1,654 1,654 1,654 1,654
11,050 11,100 1,661 1,661 1,661 1,661
11,100 11,150 1,669 1,669 1,669 1,669
11,150 11,200 1,676 1,676 1,676 1,676
11,200 11,250 1,684 1,684 1,684 1,684
11,250 11,300 1,691 1,691 1,691 1,691
11,300 11,350 1,699 1,699 1,699 1,699
11,350 11,400 1,706 1,706 1,706 1,706
11,400 11,450 1,714 1,714 1,714 1,714
11,450 11,500 1,721 1,721 1,721 1,721
11,500 11,550 1,729 1,729 1,729 1,729
11,550 11,600 1,736 1,736 1,736 1,736
11,600 11,650 1,744 1,744 1,744 1,744
11,650 11,700 1,751 1,751 1,751 1,751
11,700 11,750 1,759 1,759 1,759 1,759
11,750 11,800 1,766 1,766 1,766 1,766
11,800 11,850 1,774 1,774 1,774 1,774
11,850 11,900 1,781 1,781 1,781 1,781
11,900 11,950 1,789 1,789 1,789 1,789
11,950 12,000 1,796 1,796 1,796 1,796
12,000 12,050 1,804 1,804 1,804 1,804
12,050 12,100 1,811 1,811 1,811 1,811
12,100 12,150 1,819 1,819 1,819 1,819
12,150 12,200 1,826 1,826 1,826 1,826
12,200 12,250 1,834 1,834 1,834 1,834
12,250 12,300 1,841 1,841 1,841 1,841
12,300 12,350 1,849 1,849 1,849 1,849
12,350 12,400 1,856 1,856 1,856 1,856
12,400 12,450 1,864 1,864 1,864 1,864
12,450 12,500 1,871 1,871 1,871 1,871
12,500 12,550 1,879 1,879 1,879 1,879
12,550 12,600 1,886 1,886 1,886 1,886
12,600 12,650 1,894 1,894 1,894 1,894
12,650 12,700 1,901 1,901 1,901 1,901
12,700 12,750 1,909 1,909 1,909 1,909
12,750 12,800 1,916 1,916 1,916 1,916
12,800 12,850 1,924 1,924 1,924 1,924
12,850 12,900 1,931 1,931 1,931 1,931
12,900 12,950 1,939 1,939 1,939 1,939
12,950 13,000 1,946 1,946 1,946 1,946
13,000 13,050 1,954 1,954 1,954 1,954
13,050 13,100 1,961 1,961 1,961 1,961
13,100 13,150 1,969 1,969 1,969 1,969
13,150 13,200 1,976 1,976 1,976 1,976
13,200 13,250 1,984 1,984 1,984 1,984
13,250 13,300 1,991 1,991 1,991 1,991
13,300 13,350 1,999 1,999 1,999 1,999
13,350 13,400 2,006 2,006 2,006 2,006
13,400 13,450 2,014 2,014 2,014 2,014
13,450 13,500 2,021 2,021 2,021 2,021
13,500 13,550 2,029 2,029 2,029 2,029
13,550 13,600 2,036 2,036 2,036 2,036
13,600 13,650 2,044 2,044 2,044 2,044
13,650 13,700 2,051 2,051 2,051 2,051
13,700 13,750 2,059 2,059 2,059 2,059
13,750 13,800 2,066 2,066 2,066 2,066
13,800 13,850 2,074 2,074 2,074 2,074
13,850 13,900 2,081 2,081 2,081 2,081
13,900 13,950 2,089 2,089 2,089 2,089
13,950 14,000 2,096 2,096 2,096 2,096
Page 255

2000 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
Continued on next page* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
14,000
15,000
16,000
17,000
18,000
19,000
20,000
21,000
22,000
20,00014,000 14,050 2,104 2,104 2,104 2,104
14,050 14,100 2,111 2,111 2,111 2,111
14,100 14,150 2,119 2,119 2,119 2,119
14,150 14,200 2,126 2,126 2,126 2,126
14,200 14,250 2,134 2,134 2,134 2,134
14,250 14,300 2,141 2,141 2,141 2,141
14,300 14,350 2,149 2,149 2,149 2,149
14,350 14,400 2,156 2,156 2,156 2,156
14,400 14,450 2,164 2,164 2,164 2,164
14,450 14,500 2,171 2,171 2,171 2,171
14,500 14,550 2,179 2,179 2,179 2,179
14,550 14,600 2,186 2,186 2,186 2,186
14,600 14,650 2,194 2,194 2,194 2,194
14,650 14,700 2,201 2,201 2,201 2,201
14,700 14,750 2,209 2,209 2,209 2,209
14,750 14,800 2,216 2,216 2,216 2,216
14,800 14,850 2,224 2,224 2,224 2,224
14,850 14,900 2,231 2,231 2,231 2,231
14,900 14,950 2,239 2,239 2,239 2,239
14,950 15,000 2,246 2,246 2,246 2,246
15,000 15,050 2,254 2,254 2,254 2,254
15,050 15,100 2,261 2,261 2,261 2,261
15,100 15,150 2,269 2,269 2,269 2,269
15,150 15,200 2,276 2,276 2,276 2,276
15,200 15,250 2,284 2,284 2,284 2,284
15,250 15,300 2,291 2,291 2,291 2,291
15,300 15,350 2,299 2,299 2,299 2,299
15,350 15,400 2,306 2,306 2,306 2,306
15,400 15,450 2,314 2,314 2,314 2,314
15,450 15,500 2,321 2,321 2,321 2,321
15,500 15,550 2,329 2,329 2,329 2,329
15,550 15,600 2,336 2,336 2,336 2,336
15,600 15,650 2,344 2,344 2,344 2,344
15,650 15,700 2,351 2,351 2,351 2,351
15,700 15,750 2,359 2,359 2,359 2,359
15,750 15,800 2,366 2,366 2,366 2,366
15,800 15,850 2,374 2,374 2,374 2,374
15,850 15,900 2,381 2,381 2,381 2,381
15,900 15,950 2,389 2,389 2,389 2,389
15,950 16,000 2,396 2,396 2,396 2,396
16,000 16,050 2,404 2,404 2,404 2,404
16,050 16,100 2,411 2,411 2,411 2,411
16,100 16,150 2,419 2,419 2,419 2,419
16,150 16,200 2,426 2,426 2,426 2,426
16,200 16,250 2,434 2,434 2,434 2,434
16,250 16,300 2,441 2,441 2,441 2,441
16,300 16,350 2,449 2,449 2,449 2,449
16,350 16,400 2,456 2,456 2,456 2,456
16,400 16,450 2,464 2,464 2,464 2,464
16,450 16,500 2,471 2,471 2,471 2,471
16,500 16,550 2,479 2,479 2,479 2,479
16,550 16,600 2,486 2,486 2,486 2,486
16,600 16,650 2,494 2,494 2,494 2,494
16,650 16,700 2,501 2,501 2,501 2,501
16,700 16,750 2,509 2,509 2,509 2,509
16,750 16,800 2,516 2,516 2,516 2,516
16,800 16,850 2,524 2,524 2,524 2,524
16,850 16,900 2,531 2,531 2,531 2,531
16,900 16,950 2,539 2,539 2,539 2,539
16,950 17,000 2,546 2,546 2,546 2,546
17,000 17,050 2,554 2,554 2,554 2,554
17,050 17,100 2,561 2,561 2,561 2,561
17,100 17,150 2,569 2,569 2,569 2,569
17,150 17,200 2,576 2,576 2,576 2,576
17,200 17,250 2,584 2,584 2,584 2,584
17,250 17,300 2,591 2,591 2,591 2,591
17,300 17,350 2,599 2,599 2,599 2,599
17,350 17,400 2,606 2,606 2,606 2,606
17,400 17,450 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614
17,450 17,500 2,621 2,621 2,621 2,621
17,500 17,550 2,629 2,629 2,629 2,629
17,550 17,600 2,636 2,636 2,636 2,636
17,600 17,650 2,644 2,644 2,644 2,644
17,650 17,700 2,651 2,651 2,651 2,651
17,700 17,750 2,659 2,659 2,659 2,659
17,750 17,800 2,666 2,666 2,666 2,666
17,800 17,850 2,674 2,674 2,674 2,674
17,850 17,900 2,681 2,681 2,681 2,681
17,900 17,950 2,689 2,689 2,689 2,689
17,950 18,000 2,696 2,696 2,696 2,696
18,000 18,050 2,704 2,704 2,704 2,704
18,050 18,100 2,711 2,711 2,711 2,711
18,100 18,150 2,719 2,719 2,719 2,719
18,150 18,200 2,726 2,726 2,726 2,726
18,200 18,250 2,734 2,734 2,734 2,734
18,250 18,300 2,741 2,741 2,741 2,741
18,300 18,350 2,749 2,749 2,749 2,749
18,350 18,400 2,756 2,756 2,756 2,756
18,400 18,450 2,764 2,764 2,764 2,764
18,450 18,500 2,771 2,771 2,771 2,771
18,500 18,550 2,779 2,779 2,779 2,779
18,550 18,600 2,786 2,786 2,786 2,786
18,600 18,650 2,794 2,794 2,794 2,794
18,650 18,700 2,801 2,801 2,801 2,801
18,700 18,750 2,809 2,809 2,809 2,809
18,750 18,800 2,816 2,816 2,816 2,816
18,800 18,850 2,824 2,824 2,824 2,824
18,850 18,900 2,831 2,831 2,831 2,831
18,900 18,950 2,839 2,839 2,839 2,839
18,950 19,000 2,846 2,846 2,846 2,846
19,000 19,050 2,854 2,854 2,854 2,854
19,050 19,100 2,861 2,861 2,861 2,861
19,100 19,150 2,869 2,869 2,869 2,869
19,150 19,200 2,876 2,876 2,876 2,876
19,200 19,250 2,884 2,884 2,884 2,884
19,250 19,300 2,891 2,891 2,891 2,891
19,300 19,350 2,899 2,899 2,899 2,899
19,350 19,400 2,906 2,906 2,906 2,906
19,400 19,450 2,914 2,914 2,914 2,914
19,450 19,500 2,921 2,921 2,921 2,921
19,500 19,550 2,929 2,929 2,929 2,929
19,550 19,600 2,936 2,936 2,936 2,936
19,600 19,650 2,944 2,944 2,944 2,944
19,650 19,700 2,951 2,951 2,951 2,951
19,700 19,750 2,959 2,959 2,959 2,959
19,750 19,800 2,966 2,966 2,966 2,966
19,800 19,850 2,974 2,974 2,974 2,974
19,850 19,900 2,981 2,981 2,981 2,981
19,900 19,950 2,989 2,989 2,989 2,989
19,950 20,000 2,996 2,996 2,996 2,996
20,050 3,004 3,004 3,004 3,004
20,050 20,100 3,011 3,011 3,011 3,011
20,100 20,150 3,019 3,019 3,019 3,019
20,150 20,200 3,026 3,026 3,026 3,026
20,200 20,250 3,034 3,034 3,034 3,034
20,250 20,300 3,041 3,041 3,041 3,041
20,300 20,350 3,049 3,049 3,049 3,049
20,350 20,400 3,056 3,056 3,056 3,056
20,400 20,450 3,064 3,064 3,064 3,064
20,450 20,500 3,071 3,071 3,071 3,071
20,500 20,550 3,079 3,079 3,079 3,079
20,550 20,600 3,086 3,086 3,086 3,086
20,600 20,650 3,094 3,094 3,094 3,094
20,650 20,700 3,101 3,101 3,101 3,101
20,700 20,750 3,109 3,109 3,109 3,109
20,750 20,800 3,116 3,116 3,116 3,116
20,800 20,850 3,124 3,124 3,124 3,124
20,850 20,900 3,131 3,131 3,131 3,131
20,900 20,950 3,139 3,139 3,139 3,139
20,950 21,000 3,146 3,146 3,146 3,146
21,000 21,050 3,154 3,154 3,154 3,154
21,050 21,100 3,161 3,161 3,161 3,161
21,100 21,150 3,169 3,169 3,169 3,169
21,150 21,200 3,176 3,176 3,176 3,176
21,200 21,250 3,184 3,184 3,184 3,184
21,250 21,300 3,191 3,191 3,191 3,191
21,300 21,350 3,199 3,199 3,199 3,199
21,350 21,400 3,206 3,206 3,206 3,206
21,400 21,450 3,214 3,214 3,214 3,214
21,450 21,500 3,221 3,221 3,221 3,221
21,500 21,550 3,229 3,229 3,229 3,229
21,550 21,600 3,236 3,236 3,236 3,236
21,600 21,650 3,244 3,244 3,244 3,244
21,650 21,700 3,251 3,251 3,251 3,251
21,700 21,750 3,259 3,259 3,259 3,259
21,750 21,800 3,266 3,266 3,266 3,266
21,800 21,850 3,274 3,274 3,274 3,274
21,850 21,900 3,281 3,281 3,281 3,281
21,900 21,950 3,289 3,289 3,289 3,289
21,950 22,000 3,296 3,296 3,303 3,296
22,000 22,050 3,304 3,304 3,317 3,304
22,050 22,100 3,311 3,311 3,331 3,311
22,100 22,150 3,319 3,319 3,345 3,319
22,150 22,200 3,326 3,326 3,359 3,326
22,200 22,250 3,334 3,334 3,373 3,334
22,250 22,300 3,341 3,341 3,387 3,341
22,300 22,350 3,349 3,349 3,401 3,349
22,350 22,400 3,356 3,356 3,415 3,356
22,400 22,450 3,364 3,364 3,429 3,364
22,450 22,500 3,371 3,371 3,443 3,371
22,500 22,550 3,379 3,379 3,457 3,379
22,550 22,600 3,386 3,386 3,471 3,386
22,600 22,650 3,394 3,394 3,485 3,394
22,650 22,700 3,401 3,401 3,499 3,401
22,700 22,750 3,409 3,409 3,513 3,409
22,750 22,800 3,416 3,416 3,527 3,416
22,800 22,850 3,424 3,424 3,541 3,424
22,850 22,900 3,431 3,431 3,555 3,431
22,900 22,950 3,439 3,439 3,569 3,439
22,950 23,000 3,446 3,446 3,583 3,446
Page 256

2000 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
Continued on next page* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
3,454 26,000 29,00023,000 23,050 3,454 3,454 3,597
23,050 23,100 3,461 3,461 3,611 3,461
23,100 23,150 3,469 3,469 3,625 3,469
23,150 23,200 3,476 3,476 3,639 3,476
23,200 23,250 3,484 3,484 3,653 3,484
23,250 23,300 3,491 3,491 3,667 3,491
23,300 23,350 3,499 3,499 3,681 3,499
23,350 23,400 3,506 3,506 3,695 3,506
23,400 23,450 3,514 3,514 3,709 3,514
23,450 23,500 3,521 3,521 3,723 3,521
23,500 23,550 3,529 3,529 3,737 3,529
23,550 23,600 3,536 3,536 3,751 3,536
23,600 23,650 3,544 3,544 3,765 3,544
23,650 23,700 3,551 3,551 3,779 3,551
23,700 23,750 3,559 3,559 3,793 3,559
23,750 23,800 3,566 3,566 3,807 3,566
23,800 23,850 3,574 3,574 3,821 3,574
23,850 23,900 3,581 3,581 3,835 3,581
23,900 23,950 3,589 3,589 3,849 3,589
23,950 24,000 3,596 3,596 3,863 3,596
24,000 24,050 3,604 3,604 3,877 3,604
24,050 24,100 3,611 3,611 3,891 3,611
24,100 24,150 3,619 3,619 3,905 3,619
24,150 24,200 3,626 3,626 3,919 3,626
24,200 24,250 3,634 3,634 3,933 3,634
24,250 24,300 3,641 3,641 3,947 3,641
24,300 24,350 3,649 3,649 3,961 3,649
24,350 24,400 3,656 3,656 3,975 3,656
24,400 24,450 3,664 3,664 3,989 3,664
24,450 24,500 3,671 3,671 4,003 3,671
24,500 24,550 3,679 3,679 4,017 3,679
24,550 24,600 3,686 3,686 4,031 3,686
24,600 24,650 3,694 3,694 4,045 3,694
24,650 24,700 3,701 3,701 4,059 3,701
24,700 24,750 3,709 3,709 4,073 3,709
24,750 24,800 3,716 3,716 4,087 3,716
24,800 24,850 3,724 3,724 4,101 3,724
24,850 24,900 3,731 3,731 4,115 3,731
24,900 24,950 3,739 3,739 4,129 3,739
24,950 25,000 3,746 3,746 4,143 3,746
25,000 25,050 3,754 3,754 4,157 3,754
25,050 25,100 3,761 3,761 4,171 3,761
25,100 25,150 3,769 3,769 4,185 3,769
25,150 25,200 3,776 3,776 4,199 3,776
25,200 25,250 3,784 3,784 4,213 3,784
25,250 25,300 3,791 3,791 4,227 3,791
25,300 25,350 3,799 3,799 4,241 3,799
25,350 25,400 3,806 3,806 4,255 3,806
25,400 25,450 3,814 3,814 4,269 3,814
25,450 25,500 3,821 3,821 4,283 3,821
25,500 25,550 3,829 3,829 4,297 3,829
25,550 25,600 3,836 3,836 4,311 3,836
25,600 25,650 3,844 3,844 4,325 3,844
25,650 25,700 3,851 3,851 4,339 3,851
25,700 25,750 3,859 3,859 4,353 3,859
25,750 25,800 3,866 3,866 4,367 3,866
25,800 25,850 3,874 3,874 4,381 3,874
25,850 25,900 3,881 3,881 4,395 3,881
25,900 25,950 3,889 3,889 4,409 3,889
25,950 26,000 3,896 3,896 4,423 3,896
26,050 3,904 3,904 4,437 3,904
26,050 26,100 3,911 3,911 4,451 3,911
26,100 26,150 3,919 3,919 4,465 3,919
26,150 26,200 3,926 3,926 4,479 3,926
26,200 26,250 3,934 3,934 4,493 3,934
26,250 26,300 3,945 3,941 4,507 3,941
26,300 26,350 3,959 3,949 4,521 3,949
26,350 26,400 3,973 3,956 4,535 3,956
26,400 26,450 3,987 3,964 4,549 3,964
26,450 26,500 4,001 3,971 4,563 3,971
26,500 26,550 4,015 3,979 4,577 3,979
26,550 26,600 4,029 3,986 4,591 3,986
26,600 26,650 4,043 3,994 4,605 3,994
26,650 26,700 4,057 4,001 4,619 4,001
26,700 26,750 4,071 4,009 4,633 4,009
26,750 26,800 4,085 4,016 4,647 4,016
26,800 26,850 4,099 4,024 4,661 4,024
26,850 26,900 4,113 4,031 4,675 4,031
26,900 26,950 4,127 4,039 4,689 4,039
26,950 27,000 4,141 4,046 4,703 4,046
27,000 27,050 4,155 4,054 4,717 4,054
27,050 27,100 4,169 4,061 4,731 4,061
27,100 27,150 4,183 4,069 4,745 4,069
27,150 27,200 4,197 4,076 4,759 4,076
27,200 27,250 4,211 4,084 4,773 4,084
27,250 27,300 4,225 4,091 4,787 4,091
27,300 27,350 4,239 4,099 4,801 4,099
27,350 27,400 4,253 4,106 4,815 4,106
27,400 27,450 4,267 4,114 4,829 4,114
27,450 27,500 4,281 4,121 4,843 4,121
27,500 27,550 4,295 4,129 4,857 4,129
27,550 27,600 4,309 4,136 4,871 4,136
27,600 27,650 4,323 4,144 4,885 4,144
27,650 27,700 4,337 4,151 4,899 4,151
27,700 27,750 4,351 4,159 4,913 4,159
27,750 27,800 4,365 4,166 4,927 4,166
27,800 27,850 4,379 4,174 4,941 4,174
27,850 27,900 4,393 4,181 4,955 4,181
27,900 27,950 4,407 4,189 4,969 4,189
27,950 28,000 4,421 4,196 4,983 4,196
28,000 28,050 4,435 4,204 4,997 4,204
28,050 28,100 4,449 4,211 5,011 4,211
28,100 28,150 4,463 4,219 5,025 4,219
28,150 28,200 4,477 4,226 5,039 4,226
28,200 28,250 4,491 4,234 5,053 4,234
28,250 28,300 4,505 4,241 5,067 4,241
28,300 28,350 4,519 4,249 5,081 4,249
28,350 28,400 4,533 4,256 5,095 4,256
28,400 28,450 4,547 4,264 5,109 4,264
28,450 28,500 4,561 4,271 5,123 4,271
28,500 28,550 4,575 4,279 5,137 4,279
28,550 28,600 4,589 4,286 5,151 4,286
28,600 28,650 4,603 4,294 5,165 4,294
28,650 28,700 4,617 4,301 5,179 4,301
28,700 28,750 4,631 4,309 5,193 4,309
28,750 28,800 4,645 4,316 5,207 4,316
28,800 28,850 4,659 4,324 5,221 4,324
28,850 28,900 4,673 4,331 5,235 4,331
28,900 28,950 4,687 4,339 5,249 4,339
28,950 29,000 4,701 4,346 5,263 4,346
29,050 4,715 4,354 5,277 4,354
29,050 29,100 4,729 4,361 5,291 4,361
29,100 29,150 4,743 4,369 5,305 4,369
29,150 29,200 4,757 4,376 5,319 4,376
29,200 29,250 4,771 4,384 5,333 4,384
29,250 29,300 4,785 4,391 5,347 4,391
29,300 29,350 4,799 4,399 5,361 4,399
29,350 29,400 4,813 4,406 5,375 4,406
29,400 29,450 4,827 4,414 5,389 4,414
29,450 29,500 4,841 4,421 5,403 4,421
29,500 29,550 4,855 4,429 5,417 4,429
29,550 29,600 4,869 4,436 5,431 4,436
29,600 29,650 4,883 4,444 5,445 4,444
29,650 29,700 4,897 4,451 5,459 4,451
29,700 29,750 4,911 4,459 5,473 4,459
29,750 29,800 4,925 4,466 5,487 4,466
29,800 29,850 4,939 4,474 5,501 4,474
29,850 29,900 4,953 4,481 5,515 4,481
29,900 29,950 4,967 4,489 5,529 4,489
29,950 30,000 4,981 4,496 5,543 4,496
30,000 30,050 4,995 4,504 5,557 4,504
30,050 30,100 5,009 4,511 5,571 4,511
30,100 30,150 5,023 4,519 5,585 4,519
30,150 30,200 5,037 4,526 5,599 4,526
30,200 30,250 5,051 4,534 5,613 4,534
30,250 30,300 5,065 4,541 5,627 4,541
30,300 30,350 5,079 4,549 5,641 4,549
30,350 30,400 5,093 4,556 5,655 4,556
30,400 30,450 5,107 4,564 5,669 4,564
30,450 30,500 5,121 4,571 5,683 4,571
30,500 30,550 5,135 4,579 5,697 4,579
30,550 30,600 5,149 4,586 5,711 4,586
30,600 30,650 5,163 4,594 5,725 4,594
30,650 30,700 5,177 4,601 5,739 4,601
30,700 30,750 5,191 4,609 5,753 4,609
30,750 30,800 5,205 4,616 5,767 4,616
30,800 30,850 5,219 4,624 5,781 4,624
30,850 30,900 5,233 4,631 5,795 4,631
30,900 30,950 5,247 4,639 5,809 4,639
30,950 31,000 5,261 4,646 5,823 4,646
31,000 31,050 5,275 4,654 5,837 4,654
31,050 31,100 5,289 4,661 5,851 4,661
31,100 31,150 5,303 4,669 5,865 4,669
31,150 31,200 5,317 4,676 5,879 4,676
31,200 31,250 5,331 4,684 5,893 4,684
31,250 31,300 5,345 4,691 5,907 4,691
31,300 31,350 5,359 4,699 5,921 4,699
31,350 31,400 5,373 4,706 5,935 4,706
31,400 31,450 5,387 4,714 5,949 4,714
31,450 31,500 5,401 4,721 5,963 4,721
31,500 31,550 5,415 4,729 5,977 4,729
31,550 31,600 5,429 4,736 5,991 4,736
31,600 31,650 5,443 4,744 6,005 4,744
31,650 31,700 5,457 4,751 6,019 4,751
31,700 31,750 5,471 4,759 6,033 4,759
31,750 31,800 5,485 4,766 6,047 4,766
31,800 31,850 5,499 4,774 6,061 4,774
31,850 31,900 5,513 4,781 6,075 4,781
31,900 31,950 5,527 4,789 6,089 4,789
31,950 32,000 5,541 4,796 6,103 4,796
Page 257

2000 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
Continued on next pageContinued on next page* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
4,804 35,000 38,00032,000 32,050 5,555 4,804 6,117
32,050 32,100 5,569 4,811 6,131 4,811
32,100 32,150 5,583 4,819 6,145 4,819
32,150 32,200 5,597 4,826 6,159 4,826
32,200 32,250 5,611 4,834 6,173 4,834
32,250 32,300 5,625 4,841 6,187 4,841
32,300 32,350 5,639 4,849 6,201 4,849
32,350 32,400 5,653 4,856 6,215 4,856
32,400 32,450 5,667 4,864 6,229 4,864
32,450 32,500 5,681 4,871 6,243 4,871
32,500 32,550 5,695 4,879 6,257 4,879
32,550 32,600 5,709 4,886 6,271 4,886
32,600 32,650 5,723 4,894 6,285 4,894
32,650 32,700 5,737 4,901 6,299 4,901
32,700 32,750 5,751 4,909 6,313 4,909
32,750 32,800 5,765 4,916 6,327 4,916
32,800 32,850 5,779 4,924 6,341 4,924
32,850 32,900 5,793 4,931 6,355 4,931
32,900 32,950 5,807 4,939 6,369 4,939
32,950 33,000 5,821 4,946 6,383 4,946
33,000 33,050 5,835 4,954 6,397 4,954
33,050 33,100 5,849 4,961 6,411 4,961
33,100 33,150 5,863 4,969 6,425 4,969
33,150 33,200 5,877 4,976 6,439 4,976
33,200 33,250 5,891 4,984 6,453 4,984
33,250 33,300 5,905 4,991 6,467 4,991
33,300 33,350 5,919 4,999 6,481 4,999
33,350 33,400 5,933 5,006 6,495 5,006
33,400 33,450 5,947 5,014 6,509 5,014
33,450 33,500 5,961 5,021 6,523 5,021
33,500 33,550 5,975 5,029 6,537 5,029
33,550 33,600 5,989 5,036 6,551 5,036
33,600 33,650 6,003 5,044 6,565 5,044
33,650 33,700 6,017 5,051 6,579 5,051
33,700 33,750 6,031 5,059 6,593 5,059
33,750 33,800 6,045 5,066 6,607 5,066
33,800 33,850 6,059 5,074 6,621 5,074
33,850 33,900 6,073 5,081 6,635 5,081
33,900 33,950 6,087 5,089 6,649 5,089
33,950 34,000 6,101 5,096 6,663 5,096
34,000 34,050 6,115 5,104 6,677 5,104
34,050 34,100 6,129 5,111 6,691 5,111
34,100 34,150 6,143 5,119 6,705 5,119
34,150 34,200 6,157 5,126 6,719 5,126
34,200 34,250 6,171 5,134 6,733 5,134
34,250 34,300 6,185 5,141 6,747 5,141
34,300 34,350 6,199 5,149 6,761 5,149
34,350 34,400 6,213 5,156 6,775 5,156
34,400 34,450 6,227 5,164 6,789 5,164
34,450 34,500 6,241 5,171 6,803 5,171
34,500 34,550 6,255 5,179 6,817 5,179
34,550 34,600 6,269 5,186 6,831 5,186
34,600 34,650 6,283 5,194 6,845 5,194
34,650 34,700 6,297 5,201 6,859 5,201
34,700 34,750 6,311 5,209 6,873 5,209
34,750 34,800 6,325 5,216 6,887 5,216
34,800 34,850 6,339 5,224 6,901 5,224
34,850 34,900 6,353 5,231 6,915 5,231
34,900 34,950 6,367 5,239 6,929 5,239
34,950 35,000 6,381 5,246 6,943 5,246
35,050 6,395 5,254 6,957 5,254
35,050 35,100 6,409 5,261 6,971 5,261
35,100 35,150 6,423 5,269 6,985 5,269
35,150 35,200 6,437 5,276 6,999 5,280
35,200 35,250 6,451 5,284 7,013 5,294
35,250 35,300 6,465 5,291 7,027 5,308
35,300 35,350 6,479 5,299 7,041 5,322
35,350 35,400 6,493 5,306 7,055 5,336
35,400 35,450 6,507 5,314 7,069 5,350
35,450 35,500 6,521 5,321 7,083 5,364
35,500 35,550 6,535 5,329 7,097 5,378
35,550 35,600 6,549 5,336 7,111 5,392
35,600 35,650 6,563 5,344 7,125 5,406
35,650 35,700 6,577 5,351 7,139 5,420
35,700 35,750 6,591 5,359 7,153 5,434
35,750 35,800 6,605 5,366 7,167 5,448
35,800 35,850 6,619 5,374 7,181 5,462
35,850 35,900 6,633 5,381 7,195 5,476
35,900 35,950 6,647 5,389 7,209 5,490
35,950 36,000 6,661 5,396 7,223 5,504
36,000 36,050 6,675 5,404 7,237 5,518
36,050 36,100 6,689 5,411 7,251 5,532
36,100 36,150 6,703 5,419 7,265 5,546
36,150 36,200 6,717 5,426 7,279 5,560
36,200 36,250 6,731 5,434 7,293 5,574
36,250 36,300 6,745 5,441 7,307 5,588
36,300 36,350 6,759 5,449 7,321 5,602
36,350 36,400 6,773 5,456 7,335 5,616
36,400 36,450 6,787 5,464 7,349 5,630
36,450 36,500 6,801 5,471 7,363 5,644
36,500 36,550 6,815 5,479 7,377 5,658
36,550 36,600 6,829 5,486 7,391 5,672
36,600 36,650 6,843 5,494 7,405 5,686
36,650 36,700 6,857 5,501 7,419 5,700
36,700 36,750 6,871 5,509 7,433 5,714
36,750 36,800 6,885 5,516 7,447 5,728
36,800 36,850 6,899 5,524 7,461 5,742
36,850 36,900 6,913 5,531 7,475 5,756
36,900 36,950 6,927 5,539 7,489 5,770
36,950 37,000 6,941 5,546 7,503 5,784
37,000 37,050 6,955 5,554 7,517 5,798
37,050 37,100 6,969 5,561 7,531 5,812
37,100 37,150 6,983 5,569 7,545 5,826
37,150 37,200 6,997 5,576 7,559 5,840
37,200 37,250 7,011 5,584 7,573 5,854
37,250 37,300 7,025 5,591 7,587 5,868
37,300 37,350 7,039 5,599 7,601 5,882
37,350 37,400 7,053 5,606 7,615 5,896
37,400 37,450 7,067 5,614 7,629 5,910
37,450 37,500 7,081 5,621 7,643 5,924
37,500 37,550 7,095 5,629 7,657 5,938
37,550 37,600 7,109 5,636 7,671 5,952
37,600 37,650 7,123 5,644 7,685 5,966
37,650 37,700 7,137 5,651 7,699 5,980
37,700 37,750 7,151 5,659 7,713 5,994
37,750 37,800 7,165 5,666 7,727 6,008
37,800 37,850 7,179 5,674 7,741 6,022
37,850 37,900 7,193 5,681 7,755 6,036
37,900 37,950 7,207 5,689 7,769 6,050
37,950 38,000 7,221 5,696 7,783 6,064
38,050 7,235 5,704 7,797 6,078
38,050 38,100 7,249 5,711 7,811 6,092
38,100 38,150 7,263 5,719 7,825 6,106
38,150 38,200 7,277 5,726 7,839 6,120
38,200 38,250 7,291 5,734 7,853 6,134
38,250 38,300 7,305 5,741 7,867 6,148
38,300 38,350 7,319 5,749 7,881 6,162
38,350 38,400 7,333 5,756 7,895 6,176
38,400 38,450 7,347 5,764 7,909 6,190
38,450 38,500 7,361 5,771 7,923 6,204
38,500 38,550 7,375 5,779 7,937 6,218
38,550 38,600 7,389 5,786 7,951 6,232
38,600 38,650 7,403 5,794 7,965 6,246
38,650 38,700 7,417 5,801 7,979 6,260
38,700 38,750 7,431 5,809 7,993 6,274
38,750 38,800 7,445 5,816 8,007 6,288
38,800 38,850 7,459 5,824 8,021 6,302
38,850 38,900 7,473 5,831 8,035 6,316
38,900 38,950 7,487 5,839 8,049 6,330
38,950 39,000 7,501 5,846 8,063 6,344
39,000 39,050 7,515 5,854 8,077 6,358
39,050 39,100 7,529 5,861 8,091 6,372
39,100 39,150 7,543 5,869 8,105 6,386
39,150 39,200 7,557 5,876 8,119 6,400
39,200 39,250 7,571 5,884 8,133 6,414
39,250 39,300 7,585 5,891 8,147 6,428
39,300 39,350 7,599 5,899 8,161 6,442
39,350 39,400 7,613 5,906 8,175 6,456
39,400 39,450 7,627 5,914 8,189 6,470
39,450 39,500 7,641 5,921 8,203 6,484
39,500 39,550 7,655 5,929 8,217 6,498
39,550 39,600 7,669 5,936 8,231 6,512
39,600 39,650 7,683 5,944 8,245 6,526
39,650 39,700 7,697 5,951 8,259 6,540
39,700 39,750 7,711 5,959 8,273 6,554
39,750 39,800 7,725 5,966 8,287 6,568
39,800 39,850 7,739 5,974 8,301 6,582
39,850 39,900 7,753 5,981 8,315 6,596
39,900 39,950 7,767 5,989 8,329 6,610
39,950 40,000 7,781 5,996 8,343 6,624
40,000 40,050 7,795 6,004 8,357 6,638
40,050 40,100 7,809 6,011 8,371 6,652
40,100 40,150 7,823 6,019 8,385 6,666
40,150 40,200 7,837 6,026 8,399 6,680
40,200 40,250 7,851 6,034 8,413 6,694
40,250 40,300 7,865 6,041 8,427 6,708
40,300 40,350 7,879 6,049 8,441 6,722
40,350 40,400 7,893 6,056 8,455 6,736
40,400 40,450 7,907 6,064 8,469 6,750
40,450 40,500 7,921 6,071 8,483 6,764
40,500 40,550 7,935 6,079 8,497 6,778
40,550 40,600 7,949 6,086 8,511 6,792
40,600 40,650 7,963 6,094 8,525 6,806
40,650 40,700 7,977 6,101 8,539 6,820
40,700 40,750 7,991 6,109 8,553 6,834
40,750 40,800 8,005 6,116 8,567 6,848
40,800 40,850 8,019 6,124 8,581 6,862
40,850 40,900 8,033 6,131 8,595 6,876
40,900 40,950 8,047 6,139 8,609 6,890
40,950 41,000 8,061 6,146 8,623 6,904
Page 258

2000 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
Continued on next page* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
41,000 44,000 47,00041,050 8,075 6,154 8,637 6,918
41,050 41,100 8,089 6,161 8,651 6,932
41,100 41,150 8,103 6,169 8,665 6,946
41,150 41,200 8,117 6,176 8,679 6,960
41,200 41,250 8,131 6,184 8,693 6,974
41,250 41,300 8,145 6,191 8,707 6,988
41,300 41,350 8,159 6,199 8,721 7,002
41,350 41,400 8,173 6,206 8,735 7,016
41,400 41,450 8,187 6,214 8,749 7,030
41,450 41,500 8,201 6,221 8,763 7,044
41,500 41,550 8,215 6,229 8,777 7,058
41,550 41,600 8,229 6,236 8,791 7,072
41,600 41,650 8,243 6,244 8,805 7,086
41,650 41,700 8,257 6,251 8,819 7,100
41,700 41,750 8,271 6,259 8,833 7,114
41,750 41,800 8,285 6,266 8,847 7,128
41,800 41,850 8,299 6,274 8,861 7,142
41,850 41,900 8,313 6,281 8,875 7,156
41,900 41,950 8,327 6,289 8,889 7,170
41,950 42,000 8,341 6,296 8,903 7,184
42,000 42,050 8,355 6,304 8,917 7,198
42,050 42,100 8,369 6,311 8,931 7,212
42,100 42,150 8,383 6,319 8,945 7,226
42,150 42,200 8,397 6,326 8,959 7,240
42,200 42,250 8,411 6,334 8,973 7,254
42,250 42,300 8,425 6,341 8,987 7,268
42,300 42,350 8,439 6,349 9,001 7,282
42,350 42,400 8,453 6,356 9,015 7,296
42,400 42,450 8,467 6,364 9,029 7,310
42,450 42,500 8,481 6,371 9,043 7,324
42,500 42,550 8,495 6,379 9,057 7,338
42,550 42,600 8,509 6,386 9,071 7,352
42,600 42,650 8,523 6,394 9,085 7,366
42,650 42,700 8,537 6,401 9,099 7,380
42,700 42,750 8,551 6,409 9,113 7,394
42,750 42,800 8,565 6,416 9,127 7,408
42,800 42,850 8,579 6,424 9,141 7,422
42,850 42,900 8,593 6,431 9,155 7,436
42,900 42,950 8,607 6,439 9,169 7,450
42,950 43,000 8,621 6,446 9,183 7,464
43,000 43,050 8,635 6,454 9,197 7,478
43,050 43,100 8,649 6,461 9,211 7,492
43,100 43,150 8,663 6,469 9,225 7,506
43,150 43,200 8,677 6,476 9,239 7,520
43,200 43,250 8,691 6,484 9,253 7,534
43,250 43,300 8,705 6,491 9,267 7,548
43,300 43,350 8,719 6,499 9,281 7,562
43,350 43,400 8,733 6,506 9,295 7,576
43,400 43,450 8,747 6,514 9,309 7,590
43,450 43,500 8,761 6,521 9,323 7,604
43,500 43,550 8,775 6,529 9,337 7,618
43,550 43,600 8,789 6,536 9,351 7,632
43,600 43,650 8,803 6,544 9,365 7,646
43,650 43,700 8,817 6,551 9,379 7,660
43,700 43,750 8,831 6,559 9,393 7,674
43,750 43,800 8,845 6,566 9,407 7,688
43,800 43,850 8,859 6,574 9,421 7,702
43,850 43,900 8,873 6,585 9,435 7,716
43,900 43,950 8,887 6,599 9,449 7,730
43,950 44,000 8,901 6,613 9,463 7,744
44,050 8,915 6,627 9,477 7,758
44,050 44,100 8,929 6,641 9,491 7,772
44,100 44,150 8,943 6,655 9,505 7,786
44,150 44,200 8,957 6,669 9,519 7,800
44,200 44,250 8,971 6,683 9,533 7,814
44,250 44,300 8,985 6,697 9,547 7,828
44,300 44,350 8,999 6,711 9,561 7,842
44,350 44,400 9,013 6,725 9,575 7,856
44,400 44,450 9,027 6,739 9,589 7,870
44,450 44,500 9,041 6,753 9,603 7,884
44,500 44,550 9,055 6,767 9,617 7,898
44,550 44,600 9,069 6,781 9,631 7,912
44,600 44,650 9,083 6,795 9,645 7,926
44,650 44,700 9,097 6,809 9,659 7,940
44,700 44,750 9,111 6,823 9,673 7,954
44,750 44,800 9,125 6,837 9,687 7,968
44,800 44,850 9,139 6,851 9,701 7,982
44,850 44,900 9,153 6,865 9,715 7,996
44,900 44,950 9,167 6,879 9,729 8,010
44,950 45,000 9,181 6,893 9,743 8,024
45,000 45,050 9,195 6,907 9,757 8,038
45,050 45,100 9,209 6,921 9,771 8,052
45,100 45,150 9,223 6,935 9,785 8,066
45,150 45,200 9,237 6,949 9,799 8,080
45,200 45,250 9,251 6,963 9,813 8,094
45,250 45,300 9,265 6,977 9,827 8,108
45,300 45,350 9,279 6,991 9,841 8,122
45,350 45,400 9,293 7,005 9,855 8,136
45,400 45,450 9,307 7,019 9,869 8,150
45,450 45,500 9,321 7,033 9,883 8,164
45,500 45,550 9,335 7,047 9,897 8,178
45,550 45,600 9,349 7,061 9,911 8,192
45,600 45,650 9,363 7,075 9,925 8,206
45,650 45,700 9,377 7,089 9,939 8,220
45,700 45,750 9,391 7,103 9,953 8,234
45,750 45,800 9,405 7,117 9,967 8,248
45,800 45,850 9,419 7,131 9,981 8,262
45,850 45,900 9,433 7,145 9,995 8,276
45,900 45,950 9,447 7,159 10,009 8,290
45,950 46,000 9,461 7,173 10,023 8,304
46,000 46,050 9,475 7,187 10,037 8,318
46,050 46,100 9,489 7,201 10,051 8,332
46,100 46,150 9,503 7,215 10,065 8,346
46,150 46,200 9,517 7,229 10,079 8,360
46,200 46,250 9,531 7,243 10,093 8,374
46,250 46,300 9,545 7,257 10,107 8,388
46,300 46,350 9,559 7,271 10,121 8,402
46,350 46,400 9,573 7,285 10,135 8,416
46,400 46,450 9,587 7,299 10,149 8,430
46,450 46,500 9,601 7,313 10,163 8,444
46,500 46,550 9,615 7,327 10,177 8,458
46,550 46,600 9,629 7,341 10,191 8,472
46,600 46,650 9,643 7,355 10,205 8,486
46,650 46,700 9,657 7,369 10,219 8,500
46,700 46,750 9,671 7,383 10,233 8,514
46,750 46,800 9,685 7,397 10,247 8,528
46,800 46,850 9,699 7,411 10,261 8,542
46,850 46,900 9,713 7,425 10,275 8,556
46,900 46,950 9,727 7,439 10,289 8,570
46,950 47,000 9,741 7,453 10,303 8,584
47,050 9,755 7,467 10,317 8,598
47,050 47,100 9,769 7,481 10,331 8,612
47,100 47,150 9,783 7,495 10,345 8,626
47,150 47,200 9,797 7,509 10,359 8,640
47,200 47,250 9,811 7,523 10,373 8,654
47,250 47,300 9,825 7,537 10,387 8,668
47,300 47,350 9,839 7,551 10,401 8,682
47,350 47,400 9,853 7,565 10,415 8,696
47,400 47,450 9,867 7,579 10,429 8,710
47,450 47,500 9,881 7,593 10,443 8,724
47,500 47,550 9,895 7,607 10,457 8,738
47,550 47,600 9,909 7,621 10,471 8,752
47,600 47,650 9,923 7,635 10,485 8,766
47,650 47,700 9,937 7,649 10,499 8,780
47,700 47,750 9,951 7,663 10,513 8,794
47,750 47,800 9,965 7,677 10,527 8,808
47,800 47,850 9,979 7,691 10,541 8,822
47,850 47,900 9,993 7,705 10,555 8,836
47,900 47,950 10,007 7,719 10,569 8,850
47,950 48,000 10,021 7,733 10,583 8,864
48,000 48,050 10,035 7,747 10,597 8,878
48,050 48,100 10,049 7,761 10,611 8,892
48,100 48,150 10,063 7,775 10,625 8,906
48,150 48,200 10,077 7,789 10,639 8,920
48,200 48,250 10,091 7,803 10,653 8,934
48,250 48,300 10,105 7,817 10,667 8,948
48,300 48,350 10,119 7,831 10,681 8,962
48,350 48,400 10,133 7,845 10,695 8,976
48,400 48,450 10,147 7,859 10,709 8,990
48,450 48,500 10,161 7,873 10,723 9,004
48,500 48,550 10,175 7,887 10,737 9,018
48,550 48,600 10,189 7,901 10,751 9,032
48,600 48,650 10,203 7,915 10,765 9,046
48,650 48,700 10,217 7,929 10,779 9,060
48,700 48,750 10,231 7,943 10,793 9,074
48,750 48,800 10,245 7,957 10,807 9,088
48,800 48,850 10,259 7,971 10,821 9,102
48,850 48,900 10,273 7,985 10,835 9,116
48,900 48,950 10,287 7,999 10,849 9,130
48,950 49,000 10,301 8,013 10,863 9,144
49,000 49,050 10,315 8,027 10,877 9,158
49,050 49,100 10,329 8,041 10,891 9,172
49,100 49,150 10,343 8,055 10,905 9,186
49,150 49,200 10,357 8,069 10,919 9,200
49,200 49,250 10,371 8,083 10,933 9,214
49,250 49,300 10,385 8,097 10,947 9,228
49,300 49,350 10,399 8,111 10,961 9,242
49,350 49,400 10,413 8,125 10,975 9,256
49,400 49,450 10,427 8,139 10,989 9,270
49,450 49,500 10,441 8,153 11,003 9,284
49,500 49,550 10,455 8,167 11,017 9,298
49,550 49,600 10,469 8,181 11,031 9,312
49,600 49,650 10,483 8,195 11,045 9,326
49,650 49,700 10,497 8,209 11,059 9,340
49,700 49,750 10,511 8,223 11,073 9,354
49,750 49,800 10,525 8,237 11,087 9,368
49,800 49,850 10,539 8,251 11,101 9,382
49,850 49,900 10,553 8,265 11,115 9,396
49,900 49,950 10,567 8,279 11,129 9,410
49,950 50,000 10,581 8,293 11,143 9,424
Page 259

2000 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
Continued on next page* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
50,000 53,000 56,00050,050 10,595 8,307 11,157 9,438
50,050 50,100 10,609 8,321 11,171 9,452
50,100 50,150 10,623 8,335 11,185 9,466
50,150 50,200 10,637 8,349 11,199 9,480
50,200 50,250 10,651 8,363 11,213 9,494
50,250 50,300 10,665 8,377 11,227 9,508
50,300 50,350 10,679 8,391 11,241 9,522
50,350 50,400 10,693 8,405 11,255 9,536
50,400 50,450 10,707 8,419 11,269 9,550
50,450 50,500 10,721 8,433 11,283 9,564
50,500 50,550 10,735 8,447 11,297 9,578
50,550 50,600 10,749 8,461 11,311 9,592
50,600 50,650 10,763 8,475 11,325 9,606
50,650 50,700 10,777 8,489 11,339 9,620
50,700 50,750 10,791 8,503 11,353 9,634
50,750 50,800 10,805 8,517 11,367 9,648
50,800 50,850 10,819 8,531 11,381 9,662
50,850 50,900 10,833 8,545 11,395 9,676
50,900 50,950 10,847 8,559 11,409 9,690
50,950 51,000 10,861 8,573 11,423 9,704
51,000 51,050 10,875 8,587 11,437 9,718
51,050 51,100 10,889 8,601 11,451 9,732
51,100 51,150 10,903 8,615 11,465 9,746
51,150 51,200 10,917 8,629 11,479 9,760
51,200 51,250 10,931 8,643 11,493 9,774
51,250 51,300 10,945 8,657 11,507 9,788
51,300 51,350 10,959 8,671 11,521 9,802
51,350 51,400 10,973 8,685 11,535 9,816
51,400 51,450 10,987 8,699 11,549 9,830
51,450 51,500 11,001 8,713 11,563 9,844
51,500 51,550 11,015 8,727 11,577 9,858
51,550 51,600 11,029 8,741 11,591 9,872
51,600 51,650 11,043 8,755 11,605 9,886
51,650 51,700 11,057 8,769 11,619 9,900
51,700 51,750 11,071 8,783 11,633 9,914
51,750 51,800 11,085 8,797 11,647 9,928
51,800 51,850 11,099 8,811 11,661 9,942
51,850 51,900 11,113 8,825 11,675 9,956
51,900 51,950 11,127 8,839 11,689 9,970
51,950 52,000 11,141 8,853 11,703 9,984
52,000 52,050 11,155 8,867 11,717 9,998
52,050 52,100 11,169 8,881 11,731 10,012
52,100 52,150 11,183 8,895 11,745 10,026
52,150 52,200 11,197 8,909 11,759 10,040
52,200 52,250 11,211 8,923 11,773 10,054
52,250 52,300 11,225 8,937 11,787 10,068
52,300 52,350 11,239 8,951 11,801 10,082
52,350 52,400 11,253 8,965 11,815 10,096
52,400 52,450 11,267 8,979 11,829 10,110
52,450 52,500 11,281 8,993 11,843 10,124
52,500 52,550 11,295 9,007 11,857 10,138
52,550 52,600 11,309 9,021 11,871 10,152
52,600 52,650 11,323 9,035 11,885 10,166
52,650 52,700 11,337 9,049 11,899 10,180
52,700 52,750 11,351 9,063 11,913 10,194
52,750 52,800 11,365 9,077 11,927 10,208
52,800 52,850 11,379 9,091 11,941 10,222
52,850 52,900 11,393 9,105 11,955 10,236
52,900 52,950 11,407 9,119 11,969 10,250
52,950 53,000 11,421 9,133 11,983 10,264
53,050 11,435 9,147 11,998 10,278
53,050 53,100 11,449 9,161 12,014 10,292
53,100 53,150 11,463 9,175 12,029 10,306
53,150 53,200 11,477 9,189 12,045 10,320
53,200 53,250 11,491 9,203 12,060 10,334
53,250 53,300 11,505 9,217 12,076 10,348
53,300 53,350 11,519 9,231 12,091 10,362
53,350 53,400 11,533 9,245 12,107 10,376
53,400 53,450 11,547 9,259 12,122 10,390
53,450 53,500 11,561 9,273 12,138 10,404
53,500 53,550 11,575 9,287 12,153 10,418
53,550 53,600 11,589 9,301 12,169 10,432
53,600 53,650 11,603 9,315 12,184 10,446
53,650 53,700 11,617 9,329 12,200 10,460
53,700 53,750 11,631 9,343 12,215 10,474
53,750 53,800 11,645 9,357 12,231 10,488
53,800 53,850 11,659 9,371 12,246 10,502
53,850 53,900 11,673 9,385 12,262 10,516
53,900 53,950 11,687 9,399 12,277 10,530
53,950 54,000 11,701 9,413 12,293 10,544
54,000 54,050 11,715 9,427 12,308 10,558
54,050 54,100 11,729 9,441 12,324 10,572
54,100 54,150 11,743 9,455 12,339 10,586
54,150 54,200 11,757 9,469 12,355 10,600
54,200 54,250 11,771 9,483 12,370 10,614
54,250 54,300 11,785 9,497 12,386 10,628
54,300 54,350 11,799 9,511 12,401 10,642
54,350 54,400 11,813 9,525 12,417 10,656
54,400 54,450 11,827 9,539 12,432 10,670
54,450 54,500 11,841 9,553 12,448 10,684
54,500 54,550 11,855 9,567 12,463 10,698
54,550 54,600 11,869 9,581 12,479 10,712
54,600 54,650 11,883 9,595 12,494 10,726
54,650 54,700 11,897 9,609 12,510 10,740
54,700 54,750 11,911 9,623 12,525 10,754
54,750 54,800 11,925 9,637 12,541 10,768
54,800 54,850 11,939 9,651 12,556 10,782
54,850 54,900 11,953 9,665 12,572 10,796
54,900 54,950 11,967 9,679 12,587 10,810
54,950 55,000 11,981 9,693 12,603 10,824
55,000 55,050 11,995 9,707 12,618 10,838
55,050 55,100 12,009 9,721 12,634 10,852
55,100 55,150 12,023 9,735 12,649 10,866
55,150 55,200 12,037 9,749 12,665 10,880
55,200 55,250 12,051 9,763 12,680 10,894
55,250 55,300 12,065 9,777 12,696 10,908
55,300 55,350 12,079 9,791 12,711 10,922
55,350 55,400 12,093 9,805 12,727 10,936
55,400 55,450 12,107 9,819 12,742 10,950
55,450 55,500 12,121 9,833 12,758 10,964
55,500 55,550 12,135 9,847 12,773 10,978
55,550 55,600 12,149 9,861 12,789 10,992
55,600 55,650 12,163 9,875 12,804 11,006
55,650 55,700 12,177 9,889 12,820 11,020
55,700 55,750 12,191 9,903 12,835 11,034
55,750 55,800 12,205 9,917 12,851 11,048
55,800 55,850 12,219 9,931 12,866 11,062
55,850 55,900 12,233 9,945 12,882 11,076
55,900 55,950 12,247 9,959 12,897 11,090
55,950 56,000 12,261 9,973 12,913 11,104
56,050 12,275 9,987 12,928 11,118
56,050 56,100 12,289 10,001 12,944 11,132
56,100 56,150 12,303 10,015 12,959 11,146
56,150 56,200 12,317 10,029 12,975 11,160
56,200 56,250 12,331 10,043 12,990 11,174
56,250 56,300 12,345 10,057 13,006 11,188
56,300 56,350 12,359 10,071 13,021 11,202
56,350 56,400 12,373 10,085 13,037 11,216
56,400 56,450 12,387 10,099 13,052 11,230
56,450 56,500 12,401 10,113 13,068 11,244
56,500 56,550 12,415 10,127 13,083 11,258
56,550 56,600 12,429 10,141 13,099 11,272
56,600 56,650 12,443 10,155 13,114 11,286
56,650 56,700 12,457 10,169 13,130 11,300
56,700 56,750 12,471 10,183 13,145 11,314
56,750 56,800 12,485 10,197 13,161 11,328
56,800 56,850 12,499 10,211 13,176 11,342
56,850 56,900 12,513 10,225 13,192 11,356
56,900 56,950 12,527 10,239 13,207 11,370
56,950 57,000 12,541 10,253 13,223 11,384
57,000 57,050 12,555 10,267 13,238 11,398
57,050 57,100 12,569 10,281 13,254 11,412
57,100 57,150 12,583 10,295 13,269 11,426
57,150 57,200 12,597 10,309 13,285 11,440
57,200 57,250 12,611 10,323 13,300 11,454
57,250 57,300 12,625 10,337 13,316 11,468
57,300 57,350 12,639 10,351 13,331 11,482
57,350 57,400 12,653 10,365 13,347 11,496
57,400 57,450 12,667 10,379 13,362 11,510
57,450 57,500 12,681 10,393 13,378 11,524
57,500 57,550 12,695 10,407 13,393 11,538
57,550 57,600 12,709 10,421 13,409 11,552
57,600 57,650 12,723 10,435 13,424 11,566
57,650 57,700 12,737 10,449 13,440 11,580
57,700 57,750 12,751 10,463 13,455 11,594
57,750 57,800 12,765 10,477 13,471 11,608
57,800 57,850 12,779 10,491 13,486 11,622
57,850 57,900 12,793 10,505 13,502 11,636
57,900 57,950 12,807 10,519 13,517 11,650
57,950 58,000 12,821 10,533 13,533 11,664
58,000 58,050 12,835 10,547 13,548 11,678
58,050 58,100 12,849 10,561 13,564 11,692
58,100 58,150 12,863 10,575 13,579 11,706
58,150 58,200 12,877 10,589 13,595 11,720
58,200 58,250 12,891 10,603 13,610 11,734
58,250 58,300 12,905 10,617 13,626 11,748
58,300 58,350 12,919 10,631 13,641 11,762
58,350 58,400 12,933 10,645 13,657 11,776
58,400 58,450 12,947 10,659 13,672 11,790
58,450 58,500 12,961 10,673 13,688 11,804
58,500 58,550 12,975 10,687 13,703 11,818
58,550 58,600 12,989 10,701 13,719 11,832
58,600 58,650 13,003 10,715 13,734 11,846
58,650 58,700 13,017 10,729 13,750 11,860
58,700 58,750 13,031 10,743 13,765 11,874
58,750 58,800 13,045 10,757 13,781 11,888
58,800 58,850 13,059 10,771 13,796 11,902
58,850 58,900 13,073 10,785 13,812 11,916
58,900 58,950 13,087 10,799 13,827 11,930
58,950 59,000 13,101 10,813 13,843 11,944
Page 260

2000 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
Continued on next page* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
59,000
60,000
61,000
62,000
63,000
64,000
65,000
66,000
67,000
59,000 62,000 65,00059,050 13,115 10,827 13,858 11,958
59,050 59,100 13,129 10,841 13,874 11,972
59,100 59,150 13,143 10,855 13,889 11,986
59,150 59,200 13,157 10,869 13,905 12,000
59,200 59,250 13,171 10,883 13,920 12,014
59,250 59,300 13,185 10,897 13,936 12,028
59,300 59,350 13,199 10,911 13,951 12,042
59,350 59,400 13,213 10,925 13,967 12,056
59,400 59,450 13,227 10,939 13,982 12,070
59,450 59,500 13,241 10,953 13,998 12,084
59,500 59,550 13,255 10,967 14,013 12,098
59,550 59,600 13,269 10,981 14,029 12,112
59,600 59,650 13,283 10,995 14,044 12,126
59,650 59,700 13,297 11,009 14,060 12,140
59,700 59,750 13,311 11,023 14,075 12,154
59,750 59,800 13,325 11,037 14,091 12,168
59,800 59,850 13,339 11,051 14,106 12,182
59,850 59,900 13,353 11,065 14,122 12,196
59,900 59,950 13,367 11,079 14,137 12,210
59,950 60,000 13,381 11,093 14,153 12,224
60,000 60,050 13,395 11,107 14,168 12,238
60,050 60,100 13,409 11,121 14,184 12,252
60,100 60,150 13,423 11,135 14,199 12,266
60,150 60,200 13,437 11,149 14,215 12,280
60,200 60,250 13,451 11,163 14,230 12,294
60,250 60,300 13,465 11,177 14,246 12,308
60,300 60,350 13,479 11,191 14,261 12,322
60,350 60,400 13,493 11,205 14,277 12,336
60,400 60,450 13,507 11,219 14,292 12,350
60,450 60,500 13,521 11,233 14,308 12,364
60,500 60,550 13,535 11,247 14,323 12,378
60,550 60,600 13,549 11,261 14,339 12,392
60,600 60,650 13,563 11,275 14,354 12,406
60,650 60,700 13,577 11,289 14,370 12,420
60,700 60,750 13,591 11,303 14,385 12,434
60,750 60,800 13,605 11,317 14,401 12,448
60,800 60,850 13,619 11,331 14,416 12,462
60,850 60,900 13,633 11,345 14,432 12,476
60,900 60,950 13,647 11,359 14,447 12,490
60,950 61,000 13,661 11,373 14,463 12,504
61,000 61,050 13,675 11,387 14,478 12,518
61,050 61,100 13,689 11,401 14,494 12,532
61,100 61,150 13,703 11,415 14,509 12,546
61,150 61,200 13,717 11,429 14,525 12,560
61,200 61,250 13,731 11,443 14,540 12,574
61,250 61,300 13,745 11,457 14,556 12,588
61,300 61,350 13,759 11,471 14,571 12,602
61,350 61,400 13,773 11,485 14,587 12,616
61,400 61,450 13,787 11,499 14,602 12,630
61,450 61,500 13,801 11,513 14,618 12,644
61,500 61,550 13,815 11,527 14,633 12,658
61,550 61,600 13,829 11,541 14,649 12,672
61,600 61,650 13,843 11,555 14,664 12,686
61,650 61,700 13,857 11,569 14,680 12,700
61,700 61,750 13,871 11,583 14,695 12,714
61,750 61,800 13,885 11,597 14,711 12,728
61,800 61,850 13,899 11,611 14,726 12,742
61,850 61,900 13,913 11,625 14,742 12,756
61,900 61,950 13,927 11,639 14,757 12,770
61,950 62,000 13,941 11,653 14,773 12,784
62,050 13,955 11,667 14,788 12,798
62,050 62,100 13,969 11,681 14,804 12,812
62,100 62,150 13,983 11,695 14,819 12,826
62,150 62,200 13,997 11,709 14,835 12,840
62,200 62,250 14,011 11,723 14,850 12,854
62,250 62,300 14,025 11,737 14,866 12,868
62,300 62,350 14,039 11,751 14,881 12,882
62,350 62,400 14,053 11,765 14,897 12,896
62,400 62,450 14,067 11,779 14,912 12,910
62,450 62,500 14,081 11,793 14,928 12,924
62,500 62,550 14,095 11,807 14,943 12,938
62,550 62,600 14,109 11,821 14,959 12,952
62,600 62,650 14,123 11,835 14,974 12,966
62,650 62,700 14,137 11,849 14,990 12,980
62,700 62,750 14,151 11,863 15,005 12,994
62,750 62,800 14,165 11,877 15,021 13,008
62,800 62,850 14,179 11,891 15,036 13,022
62,850 62,900 14,193 11,905 15,052 13,036
62,900 62,950 14,207 11,919 15,067 13,050
62,950 63,000 14,221 11,933 15,083 13,064
63,000 63,050 14,235 11,947 15,098 13,078
63,050 63,100 14,249 11,961 15,114 13,092
63,100 63,150 14,263 11,975 15,129 13,106
63,150 63,200 14,277 11,989 15,145 13,120
63,200 63,250 14,291 12,003 15,160 13,134
63,250 63,300 14,305 12,017 15,176 13,148
63,300 63,350 14,319 12,031 15,191 13,162
63,350 63,400 14,333 12,045 15,207 13,176
63,400 63,450 14,347 12,059 15,222 13,190
63,450 63,500 14,361 12,073 15,238 13,204
63,500 63,550 14,375 12,087 15,253 13,218
63,550 63,600 14,389 12,101 15,269 13,232
63,600 63,650 14,405 12,115 15,284 13,246
63,650 63,700 14,420 12,129 15,300 13,260
63,700 63,750 14,436 12,143 15,315 13,274
63,750 63,800 14,451 12,157 15,331 13,288
63,800 63,850 14,467 12,171 15,346 13,302
63,850 63,900 14,482 12,185 15,362 13,316
63,900 63,950 14,498 12,199 15,377 13,330
63,950 64,000 14,513 12,213 15,393 13,344
64,000 64,050 14,529 12,227 15,408 13,358
64,050 64,100 14,544 12,241 15,424 13,372
64,100 64,150 14,560 12,255 15,439 13,386
64,150 64,200 14,575 12,269 15,455 13,400
64,200 64,250 14,591 12,283 15,470 13,414
64,250 64,300 14,606 12,297 15,486 13,428
64,300 64,350 14,622 12,311 15,501 13,442
64,350 64,400 14,637 12,325 15,517 13,456
64,400 64,450 14,653 12,339 15,532 13,470
64,450 64,500 14,668 12,353 15,548 13,484
64,500 64,550 14,684 12,367 15,563 13,498
64,550 64,600 14,699 12,381 15,579 13,512
64,600 64,650 14,715 12,395 15,594 13,526
64,650 64,700 14,730 12,409 15,610 13,540
64,700 64,750 14,746 12,423 15,625 13,554
64,750 64,800 14,761 12,437 15,641 13,568
64,800 64,850 14,777 12,451 15,656 13,582
64,850 64,900 14,792 12,465 15,672 13,596
64,900 64,950 14,808 12,479 15,687 13,610
64,950 65,000 14,823 12,493 15,703 13,624
65,050 14,839 12,507 15,718 13,638
65,050 65,100 14,854 12,521 15,734 13,652
65,100 65,150 14,870 12,535 15,749 13,666
65,150 65,200 14,885 12,549 15,765 13,680
65,200 65,250 14,901 12,563 15,780 13,694
65,250 65,300 14,916 12,577 15,796 13,708
65,300 65,350 14,932 12,591 15,811 13,722
65,350 65,400 14,947 12,605 15,827 13,736
65,400 65,450 14,963 12,619 15,842 13,750
65,450 65,500 14,978 12,633 15,858 13,764
65,500 65,550 14,994 12,647 15,873 13,778
65,550 65,600 15,009 12,661 15,889 13,792
65,600 65,650 15,025 12,675 15,904 13,806
65,650 65,700 15,040 12,689 15,920 13,820
65,700 65,750 15,056 12,703 15,935 13,834
65,750 65,800 15,071 12,717 15,951 13,848
65,800 65,850 15,087 12,731 15,966 13,862
65,850 65,900 15,102 12,745 15,982 13,876
65,900 65,950 15,118 12,759 15,997 13,890
65,950 66,000 15,133 12,773 16,013 13,904
66,000 66,050 15,149 12,787 16,028 13,918
66,050 66,100 15,164 12,801 16,044 13,932
66,100 66,150 15,180 12,815 16,059 13,946
66,150 66,200 15,195 12,829 16,075 13,960
66,200 66,250 15,211 12,843 16,090 13,974
66,250 66,300 15,226 12,857 16,106 13,988
66,300 66,350 15,242 12,871 16,121 14,002
66,350 66,400 15,257 12,885 16,137 14,016
66,400 66,450 15,273 12,899 16,152 14,030
66,450 66,500 15,288 12,913 16,168 14,044
66,500 66,550 15,304 12,927 16,183 14,058
66,550 66,600 15,319 12,941 16,199 14,072
66,600 66,650 15,335 12,955 16,214 14,086
66,650 66,700 15,350 12,969 16,230 14,100
66,700 66,750 15,366 12,983 16,245 14,114
66,750 66,800 15,381 12,997 16,261 14,128
66,800 66,850 15,397 13,011 16,276 14,142
66,850 66,900 15,412 13,025 16,292 14,156
66,900 66,950 15,428 13,039 16,307 14,170
66,950 67,000 15,443 13,053 16,323 14,184
67,000 67,050 15,459 13,067 16,338 14,198
67,050 67,100 15,474 13,081 16,354 14,212
67,100 67,150 15,490 13,095 16,369 14,226
67,150 67,200 15,505 13,109 16,385 14,240
67,200 67,250 15,521 13,123 16,400 14,254
67,250 67,300 15,536 13,137 16,416 14,268
67,300 67,350 15,552 13,151 16,431 14,282
67,350 67,400 15,567 13,165 16,447 14,296
67,400 67,450 15,583 13,179 16,462 14,310
67,450 67,500 15,598 13,193 16,478 14,324
67,500 67,550 15,614 13,207 16,493 14,338
67,550 67,600 15,629 13,221 16,509 14,352
67,600 67,650 15,645 13,235 16,524 14,366
67,650 67,700 15,660 13,249 16,540 14,380
67,700 67,750 15,676 13,263 16,555 14,394
67,750 67,800 15,691 13,277 16,571 14,408
67,800 67,850 15,707 13,291 16,586 14,422
67,850 67,900 15,722 13,305 16,602 14,436
67,900 67,950 15,738 13,319 16,617 14,450
67,950 68,000 15,753 13,333 16,633 14,464
Page 261

2000 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
Continued on next page* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
68,000
69,000
70,000
71,000
72,000
73,000
74,000
75,000
76,000
68,000 71,000 74,00068,050 15,769 13,347 16,648 14,478
68,050 68,100 15,784 13,361 16,664 14,492
68,100 68,150 15,800 13,375 16,679 14,506
68,150 68,200 15,815 13,389 16,695 14,520
68,200 68,250 15,831 13,403 16,710 14,534
68,250 68,300 15,846 13,417 16,726 14,548
68,300 68,350 15,862 13,431 16,741 14,562
68,350 68,400 15,877 13,445 16,757 14,576
68,400 68,450 15,893 13,459 16,772 14,590
68,450 68,500 15,908 13,473 16,788 14,604
68,500 68,550 15,924 13,487 16,803 14,618
68,550 68,600 15,939 13,501 16,819 14,632
68,600 68,650 15,955 13,515 16,834 14,646
68,650 68,700 15,970 13,529 16,850 14,660
68,700 68,750 15,986 13,543 16,865 14,674
68,750 68,800 16,001 13,557 16,881 14,688
68,800 68,850 16,017 13,571 16,896 14,702
68,850 68,900 16,032 13,585 16,912 14,716
68,900 68,950 16,048 13,599 16,927 14,730
68,950 69,000 16,063 13,613 16,943 14,744
69,000 69,050 16,079 13,627 16,958 14,758
69,050 69,100 16,094 13,641 16,974 14,772
69,100 69,150 16,110 13,655 16,989 14,786
69,150 69,200 16,125 13,669 17,005 14,800
69,200 69,250 16,141 13,683 17,020 14,814
69,250 69,300 16,156 13,697 17,036 14,828
69,300 69,350 16,172 13,711 17,051 14,842
69,350 69,400 16,187 13,725 17,067 14,856
69,400 69,450 16,203 13,739 17,082 14,870
69,450 69,500 16,218 13,753 17,098 14,884
69,500 69,550 16,234 13,767 17,113 14,898
69,550 69,600 16,249 13,781 17,129 14,912
69,600 69,650 16,265 13,795 17,144 14,926
69,650 69,700 16,280 13,809 17,160 14,940
69,700 69,750 16,296 13,823 17,175 14,954
69,750 69,800 16,311 13,837 17,191 14,968
69,800 69,850 16,327 13,851 17,206 14,982
69,850 69,900 16,342 13,865 17,222 14,996
69,900 69,950 16,358 13,879 17,237 15,010
69,950 70,000 16,373 13,893 17,253 15,024
70,000 70,050 16,389 13,907 17,268 15,038
70,050 70,100 16,404 13,921 17,284 15,052
70,100 70,150 16,420 13,935 17,299 15,066
70,150 70,200 16,435 13,949 17,315 15,080
70,200 70,250 16,451 13,963 17,330 15,094
70,250 70,300 16,466 13,977 17,346 15,108
70,300 70,350 16,482 13,991 17,361 15,122
70,350 70,400 16,497 14,005 17,377 15,136
70,400 70,450 16,513 14,019 17,392 15,150
70,450 70,500 16,528 14,033 17,408 15,164
70,500 70,550 16,544 14,047 17,423 15,178
70,550 70,600 16,559 14,061 17,439 15,192
70,600 70,650 16,575 14,075 17,454 15,206
70,650 70,700 16,590 14,089 17,470 15,220
70,700 70,750 16,606 14,103 17,485 15,234
70,750 70,800 16,621 14,117 17,501 15,248
70,800 70,850 16,637 14,131 17,516 15,262
70,850 70,900 16,652 14,145 17,532 15,276
70,900 70,950 16,668 14,159 17,547 15,290
70,950 71,000 16,683 14,173 17,563 15,304
71,050 16,699 14,187 17,578 15,318
71,050 71,100 16,714 14,201 17,594 15,332
71,100 71,150 16,730 14,215 17,609 15,346
71,150 71,200 16,745 14,229 17,625 15,360
71,200 71,250 16,761 14,243 17,640 15,374
71,250 71,300 16,776 14,257 17,656 15,388
71,300 71,350 16,792 14,271 17,671 15,402
71,350 71,400 16,807 14,285 17,687 15,416
71,400 71,450 16,823 14,299 17,702 15,430
71,450 71,500 16,838 14,313 17,718 15,444
71,500 71,550 16,854 14,327 17,733 15,458
71,550 71,600 16,869 14,341 17,749 15,472
71,600 71,650 16,885 14,355 17,764 15,486
71,650 71,700 16,900 14,369 17,780 15,500
71,700 71,750 16,916 14,383 17,795 15,514
71,750 71,800 16,931 14,397 17,811 15,528
71,800 71,850 16,947 14,411 17,826 15,542
71,850 71,900 16,962 14,425 17,842 15,556
71,900 71,950 16,978 14,439 17,857 15,570
71,950 72,000 16,993 14,453 17,873 15,584
72,000 72,050 17,009 14,467 17,888 15,598
72,050 72,100 17,024 14,481 17,904 15,612
72,100 72,150 17,040 14,495 17,919 15,626
72,150 72,200 17,055 14,509 17,935 15,640
72,200 72,250 17,071 14,523 17,950 15,654
72,250 72,300 17,086 14,537 17,966 15,668
72,300 72,350 17,102 14,551 17,981 15,682
72,350 72,400 17,117 14,565 17,997 15,696
72,400 72,450 17,133 14,579 18,012 15,710
72,450 72,500 17,148 14,593 18,028 15,724
72,500 72,550 17,164 14,607 18,043 15,738
72,550 72,600 17,179 14,621 18,059 15,752
72,600 72,650 17,195 14,635 18,074 15,766
72,650 72,700 17,210 14,649 18,090 15,780
72,700 72,750 17,226 14,663 18,105 15,794
72,750 72,800 17,241 14,677 18,121 15,808
72,800 72,850 17,257 14,691 18,136 15,822
72,850 72,900 17,272 14,705 18,152 15,836
72,900 72,950 17,288 14,719 18,167 15,850
72,950 73,000 17,303 14,733 18,183 15,864
73,000 73,050 17,319 14,747 18,198 15,878
73,050 73,100 17,334 14,761 18,214 15,892
73,100 73,150 17,350 14,775 18,229 15,906
73,150 73,200 17,365 14,789 18,245 15,920
73,200 73,250 17,381 14,803 18,260 15,934
73,250 73,300 17,396 14,817 18,276 15,948
73,300 73,350 17,412 14,831 18,291 15,962
73,350 73,400 17,427 14,845 18,307 15,976
73,400 73,450 17,443 14,859 18,322 15,990
73,450 73,500 17,458 14,873 18,338 16,004
73,500 73,550 17,474 14,887 18,353 16,018
73,550 73,600 17,489 14,901 18,369 16,032
73,600 73,650 17,505 14,915 18,384 16,046
73,650 73,700 17,520 14,929 18,400 16,060
73,700 73,750 17,536 14,943 18,415 16,074
73,750 73,800 17,551 14,957 18,431 16,088
73,800 73,850 17,567 14,971 18,446 16,102
73,850 73,900 17,582 14,985 18,462 16,116
73,900 73,950 17,598 14,999 18,477 16,130
73,950 74,000 17,613 15,013 18,493 16,144
74,050 17,629 15,027 18,508 16,158
74,050 74,100 17,644 15,041 18,524 16,172
74,100 74,150 17,660 15,055 18,539 16,186
74,150 74,200 17,675 15,069 18,555 16,200
74,200 74,250 17,691 15,083 18,570 16,214
74,250 74,300 17,706 15,097 18,586 16,228
74,300 74,350 17,722 15,111 18,601 16,242
74,350 74,400 17,737 15,125 18,617 16,256
74,400 74,450 17,753 15,139 18,632 16,270
74,450 74,500 17,768 15,153 18,648 16,284
74,500 74,550 17,784 15,167 18,663 16,298
74,550 74,600 17,799 15,181 18,679 16,312
74,600 74,650 17,815 15,195 18,694 16,326
74,650 74,700 17,830 15,209 18,710 16,340
74,700 74,750 17,846 15,223 18,725 16,354
74,750 74,800 17,861 15,237 18,741 16,368
74,800 74,850 17,877 15,251 18,756 16,382
74,850 74,900 17,892 15,265 18,772 16,396
74,900 74,950 17,908 15,279 18,787 16,410
74,950 75,000 17,923 15,293 18,803 16,424
75,000 75,050 17,939 15,307 18,818 16,438
75,050 75,100 17,954 15,321 18,834 16,452
75,100 75,150 17,970 15,335 18,849 16,466
75,150 75,200 17,985 15,349 18,865 16,480
75,200 75,250 18,001 15,363 18,880 16,494
75,250 75,300 18,016 15,377 18,896 16,508
75,300 75,350 18,032 15,391 18,911 16,522
75,350 75,400 18,047 15,405 18,927 16,536
75,400 75,450 18,063 15,419 18,942 16,550
75,450 75,500 18,078 15,433 18,958 16,564
75,500 75,550 18,094 15,447 18,973 16,578
75,550 75,600 18,109 15,461 18,989 16,592
75,600 75,650 18,125 15,475 19,004 16,606
75,650 75,700 18,140 15,489 19,020 16,620
75,700 75,750 18,156 15,503 19,035 16,634
75,750 75,800 18,171 15,517 19,051 16,648
75,800 75,850 18,187 15,531 19,066 16,662
75,850 75,900 18,202 15,545 19,082 16,676
75,900 75,950 18,218 15,559 19,097 16,690
75,950 76,000 18,233 15,573 19,113 16,704
76,000 76,050 18,249 15,587 19,128 16,718
76,050 76,100 18,264 15,601 19,144 16,732
76,100 76,150 18,280 15,615 19,159 16,746
76,150 76,200 18,295 15,629 19,175 16,760
76,200 76,250 18,311 15,643 19,190 16,774
76,250 76,300 18,326 15,657 19,206 16,788
76,300 76,350 18,342 15,671 19,221 16,802
76,350 76,400 18,357 15,685 19,237 16,816
76,400 76,450 18,373 15,699 19,252 16,830
76,450 76,500 18,388 15,713 19,268 16,844
76,500 76,550 18,404 15,727 19,283 16,858
76,550 76,600 18,419 15,741 19,299 16,872
76,600 76,650 18,435 15,755 19,314 16,886
76,650 76,700 18,450 15,769 19,330 16,900
76,700 76,750 18,466 15,783 19,345 16,914
76,750 76,800 18,481 15,797 19,361 16,928
76,800 76,850 18,497 15,811 19,376 16,942
76,850 76,900 18,512 15,825 19,392 16,956
76,900 76,950 18,528 15,839 19,407 16,970
76,950 77,000 18,543 15,853 19,423 16,984
Page 262

2000 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
Continued on next page* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
77,000
78,000
79,000
80,000
81,000
82,000
83,000
84,000
85,000
77,000 80,000 83,00077,050 18,559 15,867 19,438 16,998
77,050 77,100 18,574 15,881 19,454 17,012
77,100 77,150 18,590 15,895 19,469 17,026
77,150 77,200 18,605 15,909 19,485 17,040
77,200 77,250 18,621 15,923 19,500 17,054
77,250 77,300 18,636 15,937 19,516 17,068
77,300 77,350 18,652 15,951 19,531 17,082
77,350 77,400 18,667 15,965 19,547 17,096
77,400 77,450 18,683 15,979 19,562 17,110
77,450 77,500 18,698 15,993 19,578 17,124
77,500 77,550 18,714 16,007 19,593 17,138
77,550 77,600 18,729 16,021 19,609 17,152
77,600 77,650 18,745 16,035 19,624 17,166
77,650 77,700 18,760 16,049 19,640 17,180
77,700 77,750 18,776 16,063 19,655 17,194
77,750 77,800 18,791 16,077 19,671 17,208
77,800 77,850 18,807 16,091 19,686 17,222
77,850 77,900 18,822 16,105 19,702 17,236
77,900 77,950 18,838 16,119 19,717 17,250
77,950 78,000 18,853 16,133 19,733 17,264
78,000 78,050 18,869 16,147 19,748 17,278
78,050 78,100 18,884 16,161 19,764 17,292
78,100 78,150 18,900 16,175 19,779 17,306
78,150 78,200 18,915 16,189 19,795 17,320
78,200 78,250 18,931 16,203 19,810 17,334
78,250 78,300 18,946 16,217 19,826 17,348
78,300 78,350 18,962 16,231 19,841 17,362
78,350 78,400 18,977 16,245 19,857 17,376
78,400 78,450 18,993 16,259 19,872 17,390
78,450 78,500 19,008 16,273 19,888 17,404
78,500 78,550 19,024 16,287 19,903 17,418
78,550 78,600 19,039 16,301 19,919 17,432
78,600 78,650 19,055 16,315 19,934 17,446
78,650 78,700 19,070 16,329 19,950 17,460
78,700 78,750 19,086 16,343 19,965 17,474
78,750 78,800 19,101 16,357 19,981 17,488
78,800 78,850 19,117 16,371 19,996 17,502
78,850 78,900 19,132 16,385 20,012 17,516
78,900 78,950 19,148 16,399 20,027 17,530
78,950 79,000 19,163 16,413 20,043 17,544
79,000 79,050 19,179 16,427 20,058 17,558
79,050 79,100 19,194 16,441 20,074 17,572
79,100 79,150 19,210 16,455 20,089 17,586
79,150 79,200 19,225 16,469 20,105 17,600
79,200 79,250 19,241 16,483 20,120 17,614
79,250 79,300 19,256 16,497 20,136 17,628
79,300 79,350 19,272 16,511 20,151 17,642
79,350 79,400 19,287 16,525 20,167 17,656
79,400 79,450 19,303 16,539 20,182 17,670
79,450 79,500 19,318 16,553 20,198 17,684
79,500 79,550 19,334 16,567 20,213 17,698
79,550 79,600 19,349 16,581 20,229 17,712
79,600 79,650 19,365 16,595 20,244 17,726
79,650 79,700 19,380 16,609 20,260 17,740
79,700 79,750 19,396 16,623 20,275 17,754
79,750 79,800 19,411 16,637 20,291 17,768
79,800 79,850 19,427 16,651 20,306 17,782
79,850 79,900 19,442 16,665 20,322 17,796
79,900 79,950 19,458 16,679 20,337 17,810
79,950 80,000 19,473 16,693 20,353 17,824
80,050 19,489 16,707 20,368 17,838
80,050 80,100 19,504 16,721 20,384 17,852
80,100 80,150 19,520 16,735 20,399 17,866
80,150 80,200 19,535 16,749 20,415 17,880
80,200 80,250 19,551 16,763 20,430 17,894
80,250 80,300 19,566 16,777 20,446 17,908
80,300 80,350 19,582 16,791 20,461 17,922
80,350 80,400 19,597 16,805 20,477 17,936
80,400 80,450 19,613 16,819 20,492 17,950
80,450 80,500 19,628 16,833 20,508 17,964
80,500 80,550 19,644 16,847 20,523 17,978
80,550 80,600 19,659 16,861 20,539 17,992
80,600 80,650 19,675 16,875 20,554 18,006
80,650 80,700 19,690 16,889 20,570 18,020
80,700 80,750 19,706 16,903 20,585 18,034
80,750 80,800 19,721 16,917 20,603 18,048
80,800 80,850 19,737 16,931 20,621 18,062
80,850 80,900 19,752 16,945 20,639 18,076
80,900 80,950 19,768 16,959 20,657 18,090
80,950 81,000 19,783 16,973 20,675 18,104
81,000 81,050 19,799 16,987 20,693 18,118
81,050 81,100 19,814 17,001 20,711 18,132
81,100 81,150 19,830 17,015 20,729 18,146
81,150 81,200 19,845 17,029 20,747 18,160
81,200 81,250 19,861 17,043 20,765 18,174
81,250 81,300 19,876 17,057 20,783 18,188
81,300 81,350 19,892 17,071 20,801 18,202
81,350 81,400 19,907 17,085 20,819 18,216
81,400 81,450 19,923 17,099 20,837 18,230
81,450 81,500 19,938 17,113 20,855 18,244
81,500 81,550 19,954 17,127 20,873 18,258
81,550 81,600 19,969 17,141 20,891 18,272
81,600 81,650 19,985 17,155 20,909 18,286
81,650 81,700 20,000 17,169 20,927 18,300
81,700 81,750 20,016 17,183 20,945 18,314
81,750 81,800 20,031 17,197 20,963 18,328
81,800 81,850 20,047 17,211 20,981 18,342
81,850 81,900 20,062 17,225 20,999 18,356
81,900 81,950 20,078 17,239 21,017 18,370
81,950 82,000 20,093 17,253 21,035 18,384
82,000 82,050 20,109 17,267 21,053 18,398
82,050 82,100 20,124 17,281 21,071 18,412
82,100 82,150 20,140 17,295 21,089 18,426
82,150 82,200 20,155 17,309 21,107 18,440
82,200 82,250 20,171 17,323 21,125 18,454
82,250 82,300 20,186 17,337 21,143 18,468
82,300 82,350 20,202 17,351 21,161 18,482
82,350 82,400 20,217 17,365 21,179 18,496
82,400 82,450 20,233 17,379 21,197 18,510
82,450 82,500 20,248 17,393 21,215 18,524
82,500 82,550 20,264 17,407 21,233 18,538
82,550 82,600 20,279 17,421 21,251 18,552
82,600 82,650 20,295 17,435 21,269 18,566
82,650 82,700 20,310 17,449 21,287 18,580
82,700 82,750 20,326 17,463 21,305 18,594
82,750 82,800 20,341 17,477 21,323 18,608
82,800 82,850 20,357 17,491 21,341 18,622
82,850 82,900 20,372 17,505 21,359 18,636
82,900 82,950 20,388 17,519 21,377 18,650
82,950 83,000 20,403 17,533 21,395 18,664
83,050 20,419 17,547 21,413 18,678
83,050 83,100 20,434 17,561 21,431 18,692
83,100 83,150 20,450 17,575 21,449 18,706
83,150 83,200 20,465 17,589 21,467 18,720
83,200 83,250 20,481 17,603 21,485 18,734
83,250 83,300 20,496 17,617 21,503 18,748
83,300 83,350 20,512 17,631 21,521 18,762
83,350 83,400 20,527 17,645 21,539 18,776
83,400 83,450 20,543 17,659 21,557 18,790
83,450 83,500 20,558 17,673 21,575 18,804
83,500 83,550 20,574 17,687 21,593 18,818
83,550 83,600 20,589 17,701 21,611 18,832
83,600 83,650 20,605 17,715 21,629 18,846
83,650 83,700 20,620 17,729 21,647 18,860
83,700 83,750 20,636 17,743 21,665 18,874
83,750 83,800 20,651 17,757 21,683 18,888
83,800 83,850 20,667 17,771 21,701 18,902
83,850 83,900 20,682 17,785 21,719 18,916
83,900 83,950 20,698 17,799 21,737 18,930
83,950 84,000 20,713 17,813 21,755 18,944
84,000 84,050 20,729 17,827 21,773 18,958
84,050 84,100 20,744 17,841 21,791 18,972
84,100 84,150 20,760 17,855 21,809 18,986
84,150 84,200 20,775 17,869 21,827 19,000
84,200 84,250 20,791 17,883 21,845 19,014
84,250 84,300 20,806 17,897 21,863 19,028
84,300 84,350 20,822 17,911 21,881 19,042
84,350 84,400 20,837 17,925 21,899 19,056
84,400 84,450 20,853 17,939 21,917 19,070
84,450 84,500 20,868 17,953 21,935 19,084
84,500 84,550 20,884 17,967 21,953 19,098
84,550 84,600 20,899 17,981 21,971 19,112
84,600 84,650 20,915 17,995 21,989 19,126
84,650 84,700 20,930 18,009 22,007 19,140
84,700 84,750 20,946 18,023 22,025 19,154
84,750 84,800 20,961 18,037 22,043 19,168
84,800 84,850 20,977 18,051 22,061 19,182
84,850 84,900 20,992 18,065 22,079 19,196
84,900 84,950 21,008 18,079 22,097 19,210
84,950 85,000 21,023 18,093 22,115 19,224
85,000 85,050 21,039 18,107 22,133 19,238
85,050 85,100 21,054 18,121 22,151 19,252
85,100 85,150 21,070 18,135 22,169 19,266
85,150 85,200 21,085 18,149 22,187 19,280
85,200 85,250 21,101 18,163 22,205 19,294
85,250 85,300 21,116 18,177 22,223 19,308
85,300 85,350 21,132 18,191 22,241 19,322
85,350 85,400 21,147 18,205 22,259 19,336
85,400 85,450 21,163 18,219 22,277 19,350
85,450 85,500 21,178 18,233 22,295 19,364
85,500 85,550 21,194 18,247 22,313 19,378
85,550 85,600 21,209 18,261 22,331 19,392
85,600 85,650 21,225 18,275 22,349 19,406
85,650 85,700 21,240 18,289 22,367 19,420
85,700 85,750 21,256 18,303 22,385 19,434
85,750 85,800 21,271 18,317 22,403 19,448
85,800 85,850 21,287 18,331 22,421 19,462
85,850 85,900 21,302 18,345 22,439 19,476
85,900 85,950 21,318 18,359 22,457 19,490
85,950 86,000 21,333 18,373 22,475 19,504
Page 263

2000 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
Continued on next page* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
86,000
87,000
88,000
89,000
90,000
91,000
92,000
93,000
94,000
86,000 89,000 92,00086,050 21,349 18,387 22,493 19,518
86,050 86,100 21,364 18,401 22,511 19,532
86,100 86,150 21,380 18,415 22,529 19,546
86,150 86,200 21,395 18,429 22,547 19,560
86,200 86,250 21,411 18,443 22,565 19,574
86,250 86,300 21,426 18,457 22,583 19,588
86,300 86,350 21,442 18,471 22,601 19,602
86,350 86,400 21,457 18,485 22,619 19,616
86,400 86,450 21,473 18,499 22,637 19,630
86,450 86,500 21,488 18,513 22,655 19,644
86,500 86,550 21,504 18,527 22,673 19,658
86,550 86,600 21,519 18,541 22,691 19,672
86,600 86,650 21,535 18,555 22,709 19,686
86,650 86,700 21,550 18,569 22,727 19,700
86,700 86,750 21,566 18,583 22,745 19,714
86,750 86,800 21,581 18,597 22,763 19,728
86,800 86,850 21,597 18,611 22,781 19,742
86,850 86,900 21,612 18,625 22,799 19,756
86,900 86,950 21,628 18,639 22,817 19,770
86,950 87,000 21,643 18,653 22,835 19,784
87,000 87,050 21,659 18,667 22,853 19,798
87,050 87,100 21,674 18,681 22,871 19,812
87,100 87,150 21,690 18,695 22,889 19,826
87,150 87,200 21,705 18,709 22,907 19,840
87,200 87,250 21,721 18,723 22,925 19,854
87,250 87,300 21,736 18,737 22,943 19,868
87,300 87,350 21,752 18,751 22,961 19,882
87,350 87,400 21,767 18,765 22,979 19,896
87,400 87,450 21,783 18,779 22,997 19,910
87,450 87,500 21,798 18,793 23,015 19,924
87,500 87,550 21,814 18,807 23,033 19,938
87,550 87,600 21,829 18,821 23,051 19,952
87,600 87,650 21,845 18,835 23,069 19,966
87,650 87,700 21,860 18,849 23,087 19,980
87,700 87,750 21,876 18,863 23,105 19,994
87,750 87,800 21,891 18,877 23,123 20,008
87,800 87,850 21,907 18,891 23,141 20,022
87,850 87,900 21,922 18,905 23,159 20,036
87,900 87,950 21,938 18,919 23,177 20,050
87,950 88,000 21,953 18,933 23,195 20,064
88,000 88,050 21,969 18,947 23,213 20,078
88,050 88,100 21,984 18,961 23,231 20,092
88,100 88,150 22,000 18,975 23,249 20,106
88,150 88,200 22,015 18,989 23,267 20,120
88,200 88,250 22,031 19,003 23,285 20,134
88,250 88,300 22,046 19,017 23,303 20,148
88,300 88,350 22,062 19,031 23,321 20,162
88,350 88,400 22,077 19,045 23,339 20,176
88,400 88,450 22,093 19,059 23,357 20,190
88,450 88,500 22,108 19,073 23,375 20,204
88,500 88,550 22,124 19,087 23,393 20,218
88,550 88,600 22,139 19,101 23,411 20,232
88,600 88,650 22,155 19,115 23,429 20,246
88,650 88,700 22,170 19,129 23,447 20,260
88,700 88,750 22,186 19,143 23,465 20,274
88,750 88,800 22,201 19,157 23,483 20,288
88,800 88,850 22,217 19,171 23,501 20,302
88,850 88,900 22,232 19,185 23,519 20,316
88,900 88,950 22,248 19,199 23,537 20,330
88,950 89,000 22,263 19,213 23,555 20,344
89,050 22,279 19,227 23,573 20,358
89,050 89,100 22,294 19,241 23,591 20,372
89,100 89,150 22,310 19,255 23,609 20,386
89,150 89,200 22,325 19,269 23,627 20,400
89,200 89,250 22,341 19,283 23,645 20,414
89,250 89,300 22,356 19,297 23,663 20,428
89,300 89,350 22,372 19,311 23,681 20,442
89,350 89,400 22,387 19,325 23,699 20,456
89,400 89,450 22,403 19,339 23,717 20,470
89,450 89,500 22,418 19,353 23,735 20,484
89,500 89,550 22,434 19,367 23,753 20,498
89,550 89,600 22,449 19,381 23,771 20,512
89,600 89,650 22,465 19,395 23,789 20,526
89,650 89,700 22,480 19,409 23,807 20,540
89,700 89,750 22,496 19,423 23,825 20,554
89,750 89,800 22,511 19,437 23,843 20,568
89,800 89,850 22,527 19,451 23,861 20,582
89,850 89,900 22,542 19,465 23,879 20,596
89,900 89,950 22,558 19,479 23,897 20,610
89,950 90,000 22,573 19,493 23,915 20,624
90,000 90,050 22,589 19,507 23,933 20,638
90,050 90,100 22,604 19,521 23,951 20,652
90,100 90,150 22,620 19,535 23,969 20,666
90,150 90,200 22,635 19,549 23,987 20,680
90,200 90,250 22,651 19,563 24,005 20,694
90,250 90,300 22,666 19,577 24,023 20,708
90,300 90,350 22,682 19,591 24,041 20,722
90,350 90,400 22,697 19,605 24,059 20,736
90,400 90,450 22,713 19,619 24,077 20,750
90,450 90,500 22,728 19,633 24,095 20,764
90,500 90,550 22,744 19,647 24,113 20,778
90,550 90,600 22,759 19,661 24,131 20,792
90,600 90,650 22,775 19,675 24,149 20,806
90,650 90,700 22,790 19,689 24,167 20,820
90,700 90,750 22,806 19,703 24,185 20,834
90,750 90,800 22,821 19,717 24,203 20,848
90,800 90,850 22,837 19,731 24,221 20,862
90,850 90,900 22,852 19,745 24,239 20,878
90,900 90,950 22,868 19,759 24,257 20,893
90,950 91,000 22,883 19,773 24,275 20,909
91,000 91,050 22,899 19,787 24,293 20,924
91,050 91,100 22,914 19,801 24,311 20,940
91,100 91,150 22,930 19,815 24,329 20,955
91,150 91,200 22,945 19,829 24,347 20,971
91,200 91,250 22,961 19,843 24,365 20,986
91,250 91,300 22,976 19,857 24,383 21,002
91,300 91,350 22,992 19,871 24,401 21,017
91,350 91,400 23,007 19,885 24,419 21,033
91,400 91,450 23,023 19,899 24,437 21,048
91,450 91,500 23,038 19,913 24,455 21,064
91,500 91,550 23,054 19,927 24,473 21,079
91,550 91,600 23,069 19,941 24,491 21,095
91,600 91,650 23,085 19,955 24,509 21,110
91,650 91,700 23,100 19,969 24,527 21,126
91,700 91,750 23,116 19,983 24,545 21,141
91,750 91,800 23,131 19,997 24,563 21,157
91,800 91,850 23,147 20,011 24,581 21,172
91,850 91,900 23,162 20,025 24,599 21,188
91,900 91,950 23,178 20,039 24,617 21,203
91,950 92,000 23,193 20,053 24,635 21,219
92,050 23,209 20,067 24,653 21,234
92,050 92,100 23,224 20,081 24,671 21,250
92,100 92,150 23,240 20,095 24,689 21,265
92,150 92,200 23,255 20,109 24,707 21,281
92,200 92,250 23,271 20,123 24,725 21,296
92,250 92,300 23,286 20,137 24,743 21,312
92,300 92,350 23,302 20,151 24,761 21,327
92,350 92,400 23,317 20,165 24,779 21,343
92,400 92,450 23,333 20,179 24,797 21,358
92,450 92,500 23,348 20,193 24,815 21,374
92,500 92,550 23,364 20,207 24,833 21,389
92,550 92,600 23,379 20,221 24,851 21,405
92,600 92,650 23,395 20,235 24,869 21,420
92,650 92,700 23,410 20,249 24,887 21,436
92,700 92,750 23,426 20,263 24,905 21,451
92,750 92,800 23,441 20,277 24,923 21,467
92,800 92,850 23,457 20,291 24,941 21,482
92,850 92,900 23,472 20,305 24,959 21,498
92,900 92,950 23,488 20,319 24,977 21,513
92,950 93,000 23,503 20,333 24,995 21,529
93,000 93,050 23,519 20,347 25,013 21,544
93,050 93,100 23,534 20,361 25,031 21,560
93,100 93,150 23,550 20,375 25,049 21,575
93,150 93,200 23,565 20,389 25,067 21,591
93,200 93,250 23,581 20,403 25,085 21,606
93,250 93,300 23,596 20,417 25,103 21,622
93,300 93,350 23,612 20,431 25,121 21,637
93,350 93,400 23,627 20,445 25,139 21,653
93,400 93,450 23,643 20,459 25,157 21,668
93,450 93,500 23,658 20,473 25,175 21,684
93,500 93,550 23,674 20,487 25,193 21,699
93,550 93,600 23,689 20,501 25,211 21,715
93,600 93,650 23,705 20,515 25,229 21,730
93,650 93,700 23,720 20,529 25,247 21,746
93,700 93,750 23,736 20,543 25,265 21,761
93,750 93,800 23,751 20,557 25,283 21,777
93,800 93,850 23,767 20,571 25,301 21,792
93,850 93,900 23,782 20,585 25,319 21,808
93,900 93,950 23,798 20,599 25,337 21,823
93,950 94,000 23,813 20,613 25,355 21,839
94,000 94,050 23,829 20,627 25,373 21,854
94,050 94,100 23,844 20,641 25,391 21,870
94,100 94,150 23,860 20,655 25,409 21,885
94,150 94,200 23,875 20,669 25,427 21,901
94,200 94,250 23,891 20,683 25,445 21,916
94,250 94,300 23,906 20,697 25,463 21,932
94,300 94,350 23,922 20,711 25,481 21,947
94,350 94,400 23,937 20,725 25,499 21,963
94,400 94,450 23,953 20,739 25,517 21,978
94,450 94,500 23,968 20,753 25,535 21,994
94,500 94,550 23,984 20,767 25,553 22,009
94,550 94,600 23,999 20,781 25,571 22,025
94,600 94,650 24,015 20,795 25,589 22,040
94,650 94,700 24,030 20,809 25,607 22,056
94,700 94,750 24,046 20,823 25,625 22,071
94,750 94,800 24,061 20,837 25,643 22,087
94,800 94,850 24,077 20,851 25,661 22,102
94,850 94,900 24,092 20,865 25,679 22,118
94,900 94,950 24,108 20,879 25,697 22,133
94,950 95,000 24,123 20,893 25,715 22,149
Page 264

2000 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
95,000
96,000
97,000
98,000
99,000
$100,000
or over —
use the
Tax Rate
Schedules.
95,000 95,050 24,139 20,907 25,733 22,164
95,050 95,100 24,154 20,921 25,751 22,180
95,100 95,150 24,170 20,935 25,769 22,195
95,150 95,200 24,185 20,949 25,787 22,211
95,200 95,250 24,201 20,963 25,805 22,226
95,250 95,300 24,216 20,977 25,823 22,242
95,300 95,350 24,232 20,991 25,841 22,257
95,350 95,400 24,247 21,005 25,859 22,273
95,400 95,450 24,263 21,019 25,877 22,288
95,450 95,500 24,278 21,033 25,895 22,304
95,500 95,550 24,294 21,047 25,913 22,319
95,550 95,600 24,309 21,061 25,931 22,335
95,600 95,650 24,325 21,075 25,949 22,350
95,650 95,700 24,340 21,089 25,967 22,366
95,700 95,750 24,356 21,103 25,985 22,381
95,750 95,800 24,371 21,117 26,003 22,397
95,800 95,850 24,387 21,131 26,021 22,412
95,850 95,900 24,402 21,145 26,039 22,428
95,900 95,950 24,418 21,159 26,057 22,443
95,950 96,000 24,433 21,173 26,075 22,459
96,000 96,050 24,449 21,187 26,093 22,474
96,050 96,100 24,464 21,201 26,111 22,490
96,100 96,150 24,480 21,215 26,129 22,505
96,150 96,200 24,495 21,229 26,147 22,521
96,200 96,250 24,511 21,243 26,165 22,536
96,250 96,300 24,526 21,257 26,183 22,552
96,300 96,350 24,542 21,271 26,201 22,567
96,350 96,400 24,557 21,285 26,219 22,583
96,400 96,450 24,573 21,299 26,237 22,598
96,450 96,500 24,588 21,313 26,255 22,614
96,500 96,550 24,604 21,327 26,273 22,629
96,550 96,600 24,619 21,341 26,291 22,645
96,600 96,650 24,635 21,355 26,309 22,660
96,650 96,700 24,650 21,369 26,327 22,676
96,700 96,750 24,666 21,383 26,345 22,691
96,750 96,800 24,681 21,397 26,363 22,707
96,800 96,850 24,697 21,411 26,381 22,722
96,850 96,900 24,712 21,425 26,399 22,738
96,900 96,950 24,728 21,439 26,417 22,753
96,950 97,000 24,743 21,453 26,435 22,769
97,000 97,050 24,759 21,467 26,453 22,784
97,050 97,100 24,774 21,481 26,471 22,800
97,100 97,150 24,790 21,495 26,489 22,815
97,150 97,200 24,805 21,509 26,507 22,831
97,200 97,250 24,821 21,523 26,525 22,846
97,250 97,300 24,836 21,537 26,543 22,862
97,300 97,350 24,852 21,551 26,561 22,877
97,350 97,400 24,867 21,565 26,579 22,893
97,400 97,450 24,883 21,579 26,597 22,908
97,450 97,500 24,898 21,593 26,615 22,924
97,500 97,550 24,914 21,607 26,633 22,939
97,550 97,600 24,929 21,621 26,651 22,955
97,600 97,650 24,945 21,635 26,669 22,970
97,650 97,700 24,960 21,649 26,687 22,986
97,700 97,750 24,976 21,663 26,705 23,001
97,750 97,800 24,991 21,677 26,723 23,017
97,800 97,850 25,007 21,691 26,741 23,032
97,850 97,900 25,022 21,705 26,759 23,048
97,900 97,950 25,038 21,719 26,777 23,063
97,950 98,000 25,053 21,733 26,795 23,079
98,000 98,050 25,069 21,747 26,813 23,094
98,050 98,100 25,084 21,761 26,831 23,110
98,100 98,150 25,100 21,775 26,849 23,125
98,150 98,200 25,115 21,789 26,867 23,141
98,200 98,250 25,131 21,803 26,885 23,156
98,250 98,300 25,146 21,817 26,903 23,172
98,300 98,350 25,162 21,831 26,921 23,187
98,350 98,400 25,177 21,845 26,939 23,203
98,400 98,450 25,193 21,859 26,957 23,218
98,450 98,500 25,208 21,873 26,975 23,234
98,500 98,550 25,224 21,887 26,993 23,249
98,550 98,600 25,239 21,901 27,011 23,265
98,600 98,650 25,255 21,915 27,029 23,280
98,650 98,700 25,270 21,929 27,047 23,296
98,700 98,750 25,286 21,943 27,065 23,311
98,750 98,800 25,301 21,957 27,083 23,327
98,800 98,850 25,317 21,971 27,101 23,342
98,850 98,900 25,332 21,985 27,119 23,358
98,900 98,950 25,348 21,999 27,137 23,373
98,950 99,000 25,363 22,013 27,155 23,389
99,000 99,050 25,379 22,027 27,173 23,404
99,050 99,100 25,394 22,041 27,191 23,420
99,100 99,150 25,410 22,055 27,209 23,435
99,150 99,200 25,425 22,069 27,227 23,451
99,200 99,250 25,441 22,083 27,245 23,466
99,250 99,300 25,456 22,097 27,263 23,482
99,300 99,350 25,472 22,111 27,281 23,497
99,350 99,400 25,487 22,125 27,299 23,513
99,400 99,450 25,503 22,139 27,317 23,528
99,450 99,500 25,518 22,153 27,335 23,544
99,500 99,550 25,534 22,167 27,353 23,559
99,550 99,600 25,549 22,181 27,371 23,575
99,600 99,650 25,565 22,195 27,389 23,590
99,650 99,700 25,580 22,209 27,407 23,606
99,700 99,750 25,596 22,223 27,425 23,621
99,750 99,800 25,611 22,237 27,443 23,637
99,800 99,850 25,627 22,251 27,461 23,652
99,850 99,900 25,642 22,265 27,479 23,668
99,900 99,950 25,658 22,279 27,497 23,683
99,950 100,000 25,673 22,293 27,515 23,699
Page 265

2000
Tax Rate
Schedules
Use only if your taxable income (Form 1040, line 39) is $100,000 or more.
If less, use the Tax Table. Even though you cannot use the T ax Rate Schedules
below if your taxable income is less than $100,000, all levels of taxable
income are shown so taxpayers can see the tax rate that applies to each level.
Schedule Z— Use if your filing status is Head of household
Schedule X— Use if your filing status is Single
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 40
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
39, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
$015%$35,150$0
$015%$26,250$0
26,250
35,150$5,272.50 +90,80035,150
26,250$3,937.50 +63,550
63,550 14,381.50 +
90,80020,854.50 +90,800
63,550
Schedule Y-2— Use if your filing status is Married filing separately
Schedule Y-1— Use if your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
$015%$43,850$0
$0$21,925$0 15%
21,925 $3,288.75 + 21,925
$6,577.50 + 43,850105,95043,850
52,975
52,97511,982.75 +52,975
23,965.50 +105,950 105,950
132,600
161,450
147,050
80,725
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 40
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
39, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 40
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
39, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 40
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
39, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
132,600
288,350
288,350 35,787.00 +
91,857.00 +
132,600
288,350
161,450
288,350
288,350 41,170.50 +
86,854.50 +
161,450
288,350
80,725
144,175
144,175 20,585.25 +
43,427.25 +
80,725
144,175
147,050
288,350
288,350 38,292.00 +
89,160.00 +
147,050
288,350
28%
31%
36%
39.6%
28%
31%
36%
39.6%
28%
31%
36%
39.6%
28%
31%
36%
39.6%
Page 266

Your Rights as a Taxpayer
The first part of this section
explains some of your most im-
portant rights as a taxpayer. The
second part explains the exam-
ination, appeal, collection, and
refund processes.
Declaration of
Taxpayer Rights
Protection of your rights.IRS
employees will explain and pro-
tect your rights as a taxpayer
throughout your contact with us.
Privacy and confidentiality.
The IRS will not disclose to any-
one the information you give us,
except as authorized by law. You
have the right to know why we
are asking you for information,
how we will use it, and what
happens if you do not provide
requested information.
Professional and courteous
service. If you believe that an
IRS employee has not treated
you in a professional, fair, and
courteous manner, you should
tell that employee's supervisor.
If the supervisor's response is
not satisfactory, you should write
to the IRS director for your area
or the center where you filed
your return.
Representation. You may ei-
ther represent yourself or, with
proper written authorization,
have someone else represent
you in your place. Your repre-
sentative must be a person al-
lowed to practice before the IRS,
such as an attorney, certified
public accountant, or enrolled
agent. If you are in an interview
and ask to consult such a per-
son, then we must stop and re-
schedule the interview in most
cases. 
You can have someone ac-
company you at an interview.
You may make sound recordings
of any meetings with our exam-
ination, appeal, or collection
personnel, provided you tell us
in writing 10 days before the
meeting.
Payment of only the correct
amount of tax. You are re-
sponsible for paying only the
correct amount of tax due under
the law—no more, no less. If you
cannot pay all of your tax when
it is due, you may be able to
make monthly installment pay-
ments.
Help with unresolved tax
problems. See How To Get Tax
Help.
Appeals and judicial review.
If you disagree with us about the
amount of your tax liability or
certain collection actions, you
have the right to ask the Appeals
Office to review your case. You
may also ask a court to review
your case.
Relief from certain penalties
and interest.The IRS will waive
penalties when allowed by law if
you can show you acted rea-
sonably and in good faith or re-
lied on the incorrect advice of an
IRS employee. We will waive in-
terest that is the result of certain
errors or delays caused by an
IRS employee.
Examinations,
Appeals,
Collections, and
Refunds
Examinations (Audits)
We accept most taxpayers' re-
turns as filed. If we inquire about
your return or select it for exam-
ination, it does not suggest that
you are dishonest. The inquiry
or examination may or may not
result in more tax. We may close
your case without change; or,
you may receive a refund.
The process of selecting a
return for examination usually
begins in one of two ways. First,
we use computer programs to
identify returns that may have
incorrect amounts. These pro-
grams may be based on infor-
mation returns, such as Forms
1099 and W–2, on studies of
past examinations, or on certain
issues identified by compliance
projects. Second, we use infor-
mation from outside sources that
indicates that a return may have
incorrect amounts. These
sources may include newspa-
pers, public records, and individ-
uals. If we determine that the in-
formation is accurate and
reliable, we may use it to select
a return for examination.
Publication 556, Examination
of Returns, Appeal Rights, and
Claims for Refund, explains the
rules and procedures that we
follow in examinations. The fol-
lowing sections give an overview
of how we conduct examinations.
By mail. We handle many ex-
aminations and inquiries by mail.
We will send you a letter with
either a request for more infor-
mation or a reason why we be-
lieve a change to your return
may be needed. You can re-
spond by mail or you can request
a personal interview with an ex-
aminer. If you mail us the re-
quested information or provide
an explanation, we may or may
not agree with you, and we will
explain the reasons for any
changes. Please do not hesitate
to write to us about anything you
do not understand.
By interview.If we notify you
that we will conduct your exam-
ination through a personal inter-
view, or you request such an
interview, you have the right to
ask that the examination take
place at a reasonable time and
place that is convenient for both
you and the IRS. If our examiner
proposes any changes to your
return, he or she will explain the
reasons for the changes. If you
do not agree with these changes,
you can meet with the examin-
er's supervisor.
Repeat examinations. If we
examined your return for the
same items in either of the 2
previous years and proposed no
change to your tax liability,
please contact us as soon as
possible so we can see if we
should discontinue the examina-
tion.
Appeals
If you do not agree with the ex-
aminer's proposed changes, you
can appeal them to the Appeals
Office of IRS. Most differences
can be settled without expensive
and time-consuming court trials.
Your appeal rights are explained
in detail in both Publication 5,
Your Appeal Rights and How To
Prepare a Protest If You Don't
Agree, and Publication 556, Ex-
amination of Returns, Appeal
Rights, and Claims for Refund.
If you do not wish to use the
Appeals Office or disagree with
its findings, you may be able to
take your case to the U.S. Tax
Court, U.S. Court of Federal
Claims, or the U.S. District Court
where you live. If you take your
case to court, the IRS will have
the burden of proving certain
facts if you kept adequate rec-
ords to show your tax liability,
cooperated with the IRS, and
meet certain other conditions. If
the court agrees with you on
most issues in your case and
finds that our position was
largely unjustified, you may be
able to recover some of your
administrative and litigation
costs. You will not be eligible to
recover these costs unless you
tried to resolve your case ad-
ministratively, including going
through the appeals system, and
you gave us the information
necessary to resolve the case.
Collections
Publication 594, The IRS Col-
lection Process, explains your
rights and responsibilities re-
garding payment of federal
taxes. It describes:
 What to do when you owe
taxes. It describes what to
do if you get a tax bill and
what to do if you think your
bill is wrong. It also covers
making installment pay-
ments, delaying collection
action, and submitting an
offer in compromise.
 IRS collection actions. It
covers liens, releasing a lien,
levies, releasing a levy, sei-
zures and sales, and release
of property.
Your collection appeal rights
are explained in detail in Publi-
cation 1660, Collection Appeal
Rights.
Innocent spouse relief.Gen-
erally, both you and your spouse
are responsible, jointly and indi-
vidually, for paying the full
amount of any tax, interest, or
penalties due on your joint re-
turn. However, if you qualify for
innocent spouse relief, you may
not have to pay the tax, interest,
and penalties related to your
spouse (or former spouse). For
information on innocent spouse
relief and two other ways to get
relief, see Publication 971, Inno-
cent Spouse Relief, and Form
8857, Request for Innocent
Spouse Relief (And Separation
of Liability and Equitable Relief).
Refunds
You may file a claim for refund
if you think you paid too much
tax. You must generally file the
claim within 3 years from the
date you filed your original return
or 2 years from the date you paid
the tax, whichever is later. The
law generally provides for inter-
est on your refund if it is not paid
within 45 days of the date you
filed your return or claim for re-
fund. Publication 556, Examina-
tion of Returns, Appeals Rights,
and Claims for Refund, has more
information on refunds.
If you were due a refund but
you did not file a return, you must
file within 3 years from the date
the return was originally due to
get that refund.
Page 267

How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unre-
solved tax issues, order free
publications and forms, ask tax
questions, and get more infor-
mation from the IRS in several
ways. By selecting the method
that is best for you, you will have
quick and easy access to tax
help.
Contacting your Taxpayer Ad-
vocate. If you have attempted
to deal with an IRS problem un-
successfully, you should contact
your Taxpayer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate rep-
resents your interests and con-
cerns within the IRS by protect-
ing your rights and resolving
problems that have not been
fixed through normal channels.
While Taxpayer Advocates can-
not change the tax law or make
a technical tax decision, they can
clear up problems that resulted
from previous contacts and en-
sure that your case is given a
complete and impartial review.
To contact your Taxpayer
Advocate:
 Call the Taxpayer Advocate
at 1–877–777–4778.
 Call the IRS at
1–800–829–1040.
 Call, write, or fax the Tax-
payer Advocate office in
your area.
 Call 1–800–829–4059 if you
are a TTY/TDD user.
For more information, see
Publication 1546, The Taxpayer
Advocate Service of the IRS.
Free tax services.To find out
what services are available, get
Publication 910, Guide to Free
Tax Services. It contains a list
of free tax publications and an
index of tax topics. It also de-
scribes other free tax information
services, including tax education
and assistance programs and a
list of TeleTax topics.
 
Personal computer.
With your personal com-
puter and modem, you
can access the IRS on the Inter-
net at www.irs.gov. While visit-
ing our web site, you can select:
 Frequently Asked Tax
Questions (located under
Taxpayer Help & Ed) to find
answers to questions you
may have.
 Forms & Pubs to download
forms and publications or
search for forms and publi-
cations by topic or keyword.
 Fill-in Forms (located under
Forms & Pubs) to enter in-
formation while the form is
displayed and then print the
completed form.
 Tax Info For You to view
Internal Revenue Bulletins
published in the last few
years.
 Tax Regs in English to
search regulations and the
Internal Revenue Code (un-
der United States Code
(USC)).
 Digital Dispatch and IRS
Local News Net (both lo-
cated under Tax Info For
Business) to receive our
electronic newsletters on hot
tax issues and news.
 Small Business Corner (lo-
cated under Tax Info For
Business) to get information
on starting and operating a
small business.
You can also reach us with your
computer using File Transfer
Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
TaxFax Service. Using
the phone attached to
your fax machine, you
can receive forms and in-
structions by calling
703–368–9694. Follow the di-
rections from the prompts. When
you order forms, enter the cata-
log number for the form you
need. The items you request will
be faxed to you.
Phone. Many services
are available by phone.
 Ordering forms, instructions,
and publications. Call
1–800–829–3676 to order
current and prior year forms,
instructions, and publica-
tions.
 Asking tax questions. Call
the IRS with your tax
questions at
1–800–829–1040.
 TTY/TDD equipment. If you
have access to TTY/TDD
equipment, call 1–800–829–
4059 to ask tax questions
or to order forms and publi-
cations.
 TeleTax topics. Call
1–800–829–4477 to listen to
pre-recorded messages
covering various tax topics.
Evaluating the quality of our
telephone services. To ensure
that IRS representatives give
accurate, courteous, and profes-
sional answers, we evaluate the
quality of our telephone services
in several ways.
 A second IRS representative
sometimes monitors live
telephone calls. That person
only evaluates the IRS
assistor and does not keep
a record of any taxpayer's
name or tax identification
number.
 We sometimes record tele-
phone calls to evaluate IRS
assistors objectively. We
hold these recordings no
longer than one week and
use them only to measure
the quality of assistance.
 We value our customers'
opinions. Throughout this
year, we will be surveying
our customers for their opin-
ions on our service.
Walk-in. You can walk in
to many post offices, li-
braries, and IRS offices
to pick up certain forms, in-
structions, and publications.
Also, some libraries and IRS of-
fices have:
 An extensive collection of
products available to print
from a CD-ROM or photo-
copy from reproducible
proofs.
 The Internal Revenue Code,
regulations, Internal Reve-
nue Bulletins, and Cumula-
tive Bulletins available for
research purposes.
Mail. You can send your
order for forms, in-
structions, and publica-
tions to the Distribution Center
nearest to you and receive a re-
sponse within 10 workdays after
your request is received. Find
the address that applies to your
part of the country.
 Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution
Center
Rancho Cordova, CA
95743–0001
 Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution
Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
 Eastern part of U.S. and
foreign addresses:
Eastern Area Distribution
Center
P.O. Box 85074
Richmond, VA 23261–5074
CD-ROM. You can order
IRS Publication 1796,
Federal Tax Products on
CD-ROM, and obtain:
 Current tax forms, in-
structions, and publications.
 Prior-year tax forms, in-
structions, and publications.
 Popular tax forms which may
be filled in electronically,
printed out for submission,
and saved for
recordkeeping.
 Internal Revenue Bulletins.
The CD-ROM can be pur-
chased from National Technical
Information Service (NTIS) by
calling 1–877–233–6767 or on
the Internet at www.irs.gov/
cdorders. The first release is
available in mid-December and
the final release is available in
late January.
IRS Publication 3207, The
Business Resource Guide, is an
interactive CD-ROM that con-
tains information important to
small businesses. It is available
in mid-February. You can get
one free copy by calling
1–800–829–3676.
Written tax questions.You can
send your written tax questions
to your IRS office. You should
get an answer in about 30 days.
If you do not have the address,
you can get it by calling
1–800–829–1040. (Do not send
tax questions with your return.)
Braille tax materials.Braille tax
materials are available for review
from Regional Libraries for the
Visually Impaired in conjunction
with the National Library Service
for the Blind and Physically
Handicapped. To locate your
nearest library, write to:
National Library Service for
the Blind and Physically
Handicapped
Library of Congress
1291 Taylor St., NW
Washington, DC 20542
You can also visit their Internet
web site at: www.loc.gov/nls.
Braille materials currently
available for review include this
publication, Publication 334, Tax
Guide for Small Business, and
Forms 1040, 1040A, and
1040EZ and their instructions.
Assistance with your return.
IRS offices can help you prepare
your return. An assistor will ex-
plain a Form 1040EZ, 1040A, or
Page 268

1040 with Schedules A and B to
you and other taxpayers in a
group setting. You may also be
able to file your return electron-
ically by computer free of charge
at some IRS offices. To find the
IRS office nearest you, look in
the phone book under “United
States Government, Internal
Revenue Service” or call
1–800–829–1040.
At all IRS offices you can also
get help with questions about
IRS notices or bills.
Volunteer Income Tax Assist-
ance (VITA) and Tax Coun-
seling for the Elderly (TCE).
Free help from volunteers is
available in most communities.
After completing IRS training,
these volunteers help prepare
basic tax returns for taxpayers
with special needs, including
low-income people, persons with
disabilities, the elderly, and non-
English-speaking people. At
some of these offices, you can
file your tax return electronically.
See IRS e-file in chapter 1 for
information on electronic filing.
Call the IRS for the location
of the volunteer assistance site
near you. Or, for the location of
an American Association of Re-
tired Persons (AARP) Tax-Aide
site in your community, call
1–877–227–7844 or visit their
Internet web site at
www.aarp.org/taxaide.
Page 269

Index
A
 Abortion, legal ......................... 143
Accelerated death benefits .. 35, 87
Accident and health insur-
ance .............................. 53, 143
 Accidents ................................. 166
 Accountable plans ................... 183
 Accounting methods .................. 11
 Accounting periods .................... 11
Accounting to employer ........... 184
 Accuracy-related penalties ........ 18
Activity not for profit ............ 68, 90
Additional child tax credit ........ 229
 Address label ............................. 15
 Adjusted basis ................... 95, 171
 Administrator ............................. 33
Adoption ............ 25, 143, 162, 213
 Adoption credit ........................ 251
 Advance commissions ............... 47
Advance earned income credit 247
 Advance rent ............................. 67
Alaska Permanent Fund dividend
income .................................. 90
Alaska Permanent Fund
dividends (See also In-
terest expenses: Limit
on investment interest) 155, 156
Aliens (See also Nonresident
aliens) ............................... 6, 211
 Alimony ...................................... 90
Alimony and separate mainte-
nance: 
 General rules ...................... 135
Instruments executed after
1984 .............................. 135
 Allocated tips ............................. 55
Alternative minimum tax .......... 202
 Amended returns ....................... 16
American citizens abroad ............ 5
 Annuities:
 Amount received .................. 76
 Purchased ............................ 81
 Appeal rights ........................... 267
 Appraisal fees .................. 162, 197
Armed forces: (See also Com-
bat zone)
 Dependency allotments ........ 27
 Disability pensions ......... 51, 52
 Moving expenses ............... 132
Travel and transporta-
tion ........................ 174, 179
 Uniforms ............................. 196
 Artistic works ........................... 102
 Artists, performing ........... 187, 195
 Assessments, improve-
ments ...................... 68, 95, 149
Assistance (See Tax help)               
Assistance from employer ....... 193
 ATIN .................................. 12, 213
 Attendance, temporary ............ 192
 Attorney fees ................... 197, 199
 Automatic extension .................. 10
Automatic investment service . 104
 Awards, prizes ..................... 47, 92
Away from home ..................... 172
B
 Baby sitting ................................ 47
 Back pay .................................... 47
Backup withholding ....... 42, 56, 64
 Bad debts ................................ 103
Bar exam review course ......... 192
 Bargain purchases .................... 96
 Barter income ............................ 86
 Basis .......................................... 94
 Bonds:
Amortization of premium 98, 198
 Basis of ................................ 98
Issued at discount ........ 61, 102
Original issue discount ......... 61
 Retirement of ................ 99, 102
 Sale of .......................... 61, 102
 Savings ................................. 58
Series EE and E .................. 58
Series HH and H .................. 58
 Series I ................................. 58
 Tax-exempt .................. 62, 102
 Bonuses ..................................... 47
Bribes and illegal payments .... 199
 Brokerage account .................... 11
Burial or funeral ex-
penses .................. 29, 143, 199
Business use of home ..... 109, 196
C
Campaign contributions received 90
 Campaign expenses ................ 199
Canceling a lease ...................... 67
Cancellation of debt .................. 86
Capital asset defined ............... 102
Capital gain distributions (See
also Interest expenses: Limit
on investment interest) ........ 155
Capital gain, lump-sum distribu-
tions ...................................... 79
 Capital gain:
 Distributions .......................... 65
Gains and losses ....... 102, 111
 Tax computation ................. 112
Capital loss carryover .............. 112
 Car accidents .......................... 166
 Car allowance .......................... 184
 Car expenses:
 Business use ...................... 178
 Car pools ............................ 180
 Charitable contribution ....... 160
 Medical expense ................ 144
 Moving expense ................. 132
Carryover, capital loss ............. 112
 Cash rebates. ............................ 90
 Casualties ................................ 166
Casualty insurance and other re-
imbursements ....................... 91
Certificates of deposit ................ 62
Change of address ........ 15, 16, 45
Change of name .................. 12, 46
 Charitable contributions ........... 158
 Check-writing fees ................... 199
Checks, year received ............... 11
 Child care:
 Credit .................................. 211
 Provider .............................. 215
Child support payments ............ 91
Child tax credit ........................ 229
 Child:
 Care provider ....................... 47
 Gifts to .................................. 56
 Investment income ............. 206
 Support ......................... 31, 136
Tax on investment income
of ................................... 204
 Christmas gifts ........................... 48
 Church employee .................... 243
Citizens outside the U.S. ............. 5
Claims for refund ......... 16, 34, 104
 Clergy .................................... 6, 50
Clerical help, deductibility of ... 197
Closing costs (settlement fees) 107
 Clothing, work .......................... 196
Collection of tax ....................... 267
 Combat zone:
Extension to file return ......... 10
Extension to pay tax ............ 10
 Commissions, advance ............. 47
Common law marriage .............. 19
Community property .... 20, 59, 142
 Commuting expenses ...... 180, 199
 Considered unmarried ............... 22
Constructive receipt of
income ............................ 11, 62
Contributions to retirement plan 48
 Contributions, charitable .......... 158
 Convention expenses .............. 177
 Cooperative
apartments ........... 71, 106, 148
 Copyrights ......................... 89, 102
 Cosmetic surgery .................... 143
 Cost basis .................................. 94
Cost of annuity .......................... 79
Cost-of-living allowances, govern-
ment ..................................... 48
 Coupon bonds ........................... 62
 Court awards ............................. 91
CPA exam review course ........ 192
Credit card insurance ................ 91
 Credits:
Additional child tax ............. 229
 Adoption ............................. 251
Child and dependent care .. 211
 Child tax ............................. 229
 Earned income ................... 237
 Education expenses ........... 233
 Electric vehicle ................... 252
For the disabled ................. 221
For the elderly .................... 221
 Foreign tax ......................... 251
Higher education expenses 233
 Minimum tax ....................... 252
 Mortgage interest ....... 151, 252
Railroad retirement tax over-
paid ............................... 252
Regulated investment com-
pany .............................. 253
Social security tax overpaid 252
 Custodial fees .......................... 197
 Custody:
 Exception .............................. 31
 General rule ......................... 29
D
Damages ................... 91, 146, 195
 Day-care center ....................... 215
 Death benefits:
 Life insurance ....................... 87
Public safety officers ............ 87
 Debts:
 Bad debts ........................... 103
Cancellation or forgiveness .. 86
Paid by another .............. 11, 86
 Deceased tax-
payer ............ 5, 24, 33, 59, 143
Decedent's medical expenses 142
 Deductible expenses ............... 192
Deductions in respect of
decedent ............................... 38
Deductions related to benefits .. 85
 Dependent care:
 Benefits .............................. 216
 Credit for ............................ 211
 Dependents:
Child tax credit ................... 229
 Exemption ............................ 24
 Filing requirements ................. 5
For education credits ......... 233
 Medical expenses .............. 142
Social security number ... 12, 31
 Standard deduction ............ 139
Support by divorced or sepa-
rated parents ................... 29
Tests to claim ....................... 24
Deposits, loss on ............. 103, 166
 Depreciation ...................... 67, 109
Vacant rental property .......... 67
 Depreciation:
 Car ...................................... 181
 Rental property ..................... 70
Desert Storm (See Combat zone)   
 Diaper service ......................... 143
 Directors' fees ........................... 91
 Disability:
 Benefits repaid ..................... 85
Income .............. 51, 52, 81, 223
Permanent and total ........... 221
 Disabled persons:
 Credit for ............................ 221
Expenses for ...... 145, 187, 198
 Financially ............................ 17
Disaster area losses ................ 171
 Disaster relief ............................ 90
 Disclosure statement ................. 18
Discount, bonds and notes issued
at .......................................... 61
 Distributions from:
 Corporations ......................... 64
Estates and trusts ................ 91
 Retirement bonds ................. 80
 S corporations ...................... 88
Distributions, exceptions to age
59 1/2 rule .......................... 122
 Distributions:
Early, tax on ......................... 80
 Dividends ................................... 64
 Divorced taxpayers:
 Alimony ............................... 135
Dependent, support test ....... 29
 Exemptions ........................... 24
 Filing status .......................... 19
Transfers of property .......... 101
Drugs and medicines .............. 143
 Due dates .............................. 9, 10
 Dues:
Chamber of Commerce ...... 195
Club .................... 159, 161, 199
Union .................... 93, 161, 196
E
 e-file ............................................. 8
Early distributions, tax on .......... 80
 Early distributions:
 Exceptions .......................... 124
 Earned income ........................ 139
Earned income credit ........ 22, 237
 Easements ................................. 95
 Education credits ..................... 233
Education IRA ............. 36, 37, 128
 Contribution limits ............... 128
 Distributions ........................ 128
Education savings bond
program ................................ 60
 Educational assistance ............ 193
 Educational expenses ............. 190
Electric vehicle credit .............. 252
 Electronic filing ............................ 8
Eligible educational institution . 233
 Emotional distress ..................... 91
 Employee expenses:
 Cellular telephone .............. 195
 Education ........................... 190
 Home computer .......... 195, 197
 Miscellaneous ..................... 195
Travel and transportation ... 172
 Employer plans:
Defined benefit plan ........... 119
Defined contribution plan ... 119
For which year(s) are you
covered? ....................... 119
 Nonvested employees ........ 119
 Employer-provided assistance 193
Employer-sponsored health in-
surance plan ....................... 143
 Employment:
 Abroad .................................. 51
 Agency fees ....................... 196
 Résumé expenses ............. 196
 Taxes .................................. 217
Energy conservation subsidies . 91
Entertainers and musicians ..... 196
 Entertainment expenses .......... 177
Estate tax .................... 38, 78, 198
Estates and trusts, income from 91
 Estimated tax:
 Credit for ........................ 45, 46
How to figure ........................ 43
 Payment-voucher ................. 45
 Payments ............................. 43
 Penalty ................................. 46
When to pay ......................... 43
Examination of return .............. 267
 Excess reimbursements .......... 185
Executors and administra-
tors ............................. 5, 33, 91
 Exempt-interest dividends ......... 57
 Exemptions:
 Deduction for ........................ 24
Final return for decedent ...... 36
 Phaseout of .......................... 31
Expenses for higher educa-
tion .............................. 127, 233
 Expenses, education ............... 190
 Extensions ................................. 10
 Eyeglasses .............................. 143
F
Fair market value ...... 94, 100, 162
Fair rental value ........................ 27
Page 270

Federal crime investigations or
prosecutions ....................... 173
Federal Employees Compen-
sation Act payments ............. 53
Federal income taxes .............. 150
Federal per diem ..................... 184
Fee-basis officials .... 187, 195, 198
 Fellowships and
scholarships ................... 29, 93
 Filing requirements ...................... 4
Filing status, general rules ........ 19
 Final return ................................ 33
 Financially disabled ................... 17
 Fines ................................ 181, 199
Fiscal year ..................... 11, 43, 46
Flexible spending arrangement 143
 Foreclosure .............................. 107
 Foreign:
 Conventions ....................... 177
 Employer .............................. 51
 Students ............................... 25
Tax credit or de-
duction ........... 148, 150, 251
Forms: (See also Returns and
Schedules) 
 56 ......................................... 33
1040 ........................... 7, 62, 66
1040A ......................... 7, 62, 66
 1040EZ ................................... 6
 1040X ................................... 16
 1040–ES ............................... 44
 1040–ES(NR) ....................... 43
 1040–V ............................. 8, 14
 1065 ..................................... 87
 1098 ............................. 75, 155
 1098–T ............................... 235
 1099 ..................................... 11
 1099–A ............................... 107
1099–B ........... 86, 99, 111, 113
 1099–C ............................... 107
1099–DIV ................. 45, 64, 66
 1099–G ................................. 88
1099–INT .................. 45, 56, 63
 1099–MISC .......................... 64
 1099–OID ............................. 61
1099–R ................... 45, 60, 123
1099–S ............... 106, 111, 149
 1116 ................................... 251
 1120S ................................... 88
 2106 ................................... 186
 2106–EZ ............................. 186
 2120 ..................................... 29
 2439 ............................. 65, 253
 2441 ................................... 217
 2688 ..................................... 10
 3115 ..................................... 59
 3903 ................................... 134
 4070 ..................................... 54
 4070A ................................... 54
 4137 ..................................... 55
 4506 ..................................... 15
 4562 ............................... 70, 75
 4684 ................................... 103
 4810 ..................................... 34
 4868 ..................................... 10
 4952 ................................... 156
 5329 ............................. 80, 124
 5495 ..................................... 35
 6251 ................................... 202
 8271 ..................................... 18
 8275 ..................................... 18
 8283 ................................... 165
 8332 ..................................... 31
 8379 ..................................... 14
 8396 ........................... 151, 252
 8453 ....................................... 9
 8582 ............................. 74, 111
 8606 ................................... 123
8615 ....................... 56, 64, 206
 8801 ................................... 252
 8812 ................................... 229
8814 ....................... 56, 64, 204
 8815 ..................................... 60
 8818 ..................................... 61
 8822 ............................... 16, 45
 8824 ................................... 100
 8834 ................................... 252
 8839 ................................... 251
 8855–V ................................... 9
 8863 ................................... 235
 9465 ..................................... 15
 SS–5 ............................... 12, 32
 W–10 .................................. 215
W–2 .......................... 11, 12, 45
 W–2G ................................... 45
 W–4 ...................................... 40
 W–4P .............................. 42, 76
 W–4S .................................... 42
 W–4V .................................... 42
 W–5 .................................... 247
W–7 ............................ 4, 12, 32
 W–7A .................................... 12
 W–9S .................................. 235
Foster care expenses ................ 27
Foster care payments ............... 27
 Foster child .............................. 237
Foster child, dependency ex-
emption for:
Member of household test ... 25
 Support test .......................... 27
Foster parents and providers .... 91
Free tax services ..................... 268
Free tour received ..................... 92
 Fringe benefits ..................... 41, 48
Funeral or burial ex-
penses .................. 29, 143, 199
G
Gains and losses:
 Basis ..................................... 94
Capital or ordinary .............. 102
Casualty and theft losses ... 166
 Deposits ............................. 103
Estates and trusts ................ 91
 Figuring ........................ 99, 102
 Gambling ...................... 92, 198
 Hobby ................................... 92
Passive activity losses ......... 21
 Personal items ..................... 93
 Related parties ................... 101
 Reporting ............................ 111
Rollover of gain .................. 104
Gambling winnings and
losses ..................... 42, 92, 198
Garnishments and attachments 11
Gifts: (See also Contributions,
charitable) 
 Basis ..................................... 97
 Business ............................. 178
Christmas, from employer .... 48
 Holding period .................... 104
 Not taxed .............................. 92
 Taxes on ............................ 150
To reduce the public debt .... 15
 Grants ........................................ 93
 Gross income .............................. 4
 Ground rent ............................. 152
Group life insurance .................. 49
Group medical insurance premi-
ums ..................................... 143
 Guaranteed payments. .............. 77
 Guide dogs .............................. 143
H
H.R. 10 (Keogh) plans .............. 76
Hazardous duty area (See Combat
zone)                                           
Head of household .................... 21
Health insurance (See Insurance
premiums)                                   
 Hearing aids ............................ 143
Help (See Tax help)                         
 Hobbies ............................. 92, 197
 Holding period ......................... 104
 Home:
 Abandoned ......................... 107
Business use of .................. 196
Changed to rental
property ..................... 68, 97
 Closing costs ...................... 107
Cost of keeping up ............... 22
 Damage to .......................... 166
Exclusion of gain ................ 108
 Foreclosure ........................ 107
Main home defined ...... 69, 106
 Mortgage interest ............... 151
 Renting ......................... 67, 109
 Repossession ..................... 107
 Sale of ................................ 106
 Security system .................. 199
 Settlement fees ............ 94, 107
Tax home defined .............. 173
 Vacation ............................... 69
 Hope credit .............................. 234
Hours of service limits ............. 178
 Household employees ............. 217
 Household services ................. 215
I
Identification number, qualifying
person ................................ 211
 Impairment-related
work expenses ... 145, 187, 198
Improvements .............. 68, 95, 107
Income in respect of
decedent: 
How to report ....................... 36
 Inherited IRAs ...................... 37
 Installment obligations .......... 37
Interest, savings certificates . 37
 Income taxes:
 Deductible amounts ... 147, 150
 Interest on .................... 14, 156
 Nondeductible amounts ..... 150
 Refund of ............................ 148
 Income-producing expenses ... 197
 Income:
Interest and dividend ............ 35
Partnership, final return ........ 35
 Indefinite assignment .............. 173
Individual retirement arrange-
ments (IRAs):
 Administrative fees ............. 198
 Contributions ...................... 118
 Deductions ......................... 118
 Education IRA .................... 127
 General rules ...................... 117
Married filing separately ....... 21
 Penalties ............................. 123
Rollovers and other
transfers ........................ 121
 Roth IRA ............................. 124
 Inheritances:
 Basis ..................................... 97
 Holding period .................... 104
 Not taxed .............................. 92
 Inherited IRAs ............................ 37
 Injured spouse ........................... 13
Injury and illness pay-
ments ........................ 48, 52, 81
 Innocent spouse ........................ 20
 Installment agreement ............... 14
 Installment sale ....................... 109
Insurance policies exchanged . 101
 Insurance premiums:
Alimony payments, part of . 135
 Group life .............................. 49
 Home .................................. 199
 Liability ............................... 195
 Life ...................................... 199
 Long-term care ................... 143
 Medical ............................... 143
 Mortgage ............................ 199
Paid in advance ................... 57
 Rental ................................... 68
 Self-employed .................... 144
 Insurance proceeds:
Accident and health ............. 53
 Dividends .............................. 66
Dividends, interest on .......... 57
 Endowment .......................... 87
From long-term care contract 53
 Installment payments ..... 61, 87
 Life .................................. 61, 87
 Medical ............................... 145
 Property ...................... 168, 169
 Veterans ............................... 51
 Interest expenses:
 Allocation ............................ 155
 Carry forward ..................... 155
 Investment .......................... 155
Limit on investment interest 155
Passive activity losses ....... 156
 Interest:
 Expense ............................. 151
Fees to collect .................... 197
 Frozen deposits .............. 58, 92
 Income .................................. 56
 Mortgage ............................ 151
 On refunds ........................... 16
On unpaid taxes ........... 14, 156
 Personal ............................. 156
 Usurious ............................... 58
Interlocutory decree of divorce 135
 Interview expenses .................... 92
Investment expenses, interest 155
Investment income, tax on
child's ................................. 204
 Investment property ......... 102, 155
 Involuntary conversions ............. 96
 Itemized deductions:
Changing your mind ........... 139
 Decedent's return ................. 36
 Limit .................................... 141
 Recoveries of ....................... 88
State benefit funds ............. 148
Who should itemize ............ 139
 ITIN .................................... 12, 211
J
Job search expenses .............. 196
 Joint accounts ..................... 56, 64
Joint return, revoked by personal
representative ....................... 35
 Jury duty .................................... 92
K
Keeping up a home ................... 22
Keogh (H.R. 10) plans .............. 76
 Kickbacks .................................. 92
L
 Laboratory fees ....................... 143
Late payment charges ............. 151
Leases canceled or transferred 67
Leasing a car ........................... 181
Legal expenses ......... 85, 197, 199
License and similar fees ......... 199
 Life insurance:
Paid before death ................. 87
 Premiums ..................... 49, 199
 Proceeds ........................ 61, 87
Lifetime learning credit ............ 234
Limit on credit .......................... 224
 Limits:
 Business gifts ..................... 178
 Capital loss ......................... 112
Casualty and theft loss ...... 169
 Charitable contributions ..... 163
Depreciation of car ............. 181
 Entertainment ..................... 177
 Itemized deductions ........... 141
 Meals .................................. 177
 Miscellaneous deductions .. 195
Postponement of gain from
securities sale ............... 104
Liquidating distributions (divi-
dends) .................................. 65
 Literary compositions .............. 102
Loan origination fees ............... 153
 Lobbying expenses ................. 199
 Lockout benefits ........................ 93
Long-term gains and
losses ......................... 104, 112
Losses on sales or trades ....... 156
Losses, deduction on final return 36
 Lost property ................... 166, 199
 Lotteries ..................................... 92
 Lump-sum distributions ....... 78, 79
 10-year option ...................... 79
Capital gain part ................... 79
M
 M&IE ........................................ 175
 Main home ......................... 69, 106
Mandatory retirement age ....... 223
Married taxpayers: (See also
Spouse) 
Child and dependent care
credit ............................. 215
 Estimated tax ....................... 43
 Filing status .......................... 19
Signing joint return ............... 20
 Surviving spouse .................. 35
 Maternity clothes ..................... 143
 Meal expenses ........................ 193
Meals and lodging:
 Business travel ................... 174
 Medical ............................... 144
Support for dependent ......... 27
Page 271

 Medical expenses:
 Checklist ............................. 143
Costs you can deduct ........ 142
 Decedent's return ................. 36
 Insurance .................... 143, 144
 Work-related ....................... 216
Medical savings account ..... 36, 37
 Medicare .................................. 143
Medicines and drugs ............... 143
 Mineral royalties ........................ 89
Minimum tax credit .................. 252
 Ministers ................................ 6, 50
 Miscellaneous deductions ....... 195
 Mobile home .............................. 69
Modified accelerated cost recov-
ery system (MACRS) ........... 71
Modified adjusted gross income
for education credits ........... 234
Money market certificates ......... 57
More information (See Tax help)     
Mortgage assistance payments 90
 Mortgage interest:
 Credit .......................... 151, 252
 Deduction ........................... 151
Recapture of credit ............. 110
 Mortgages:
 Insurance premiums ........... 199
 Interest on .......................... 151
 Prepayment penalty ........... 151
 Seller-financed ................... 109
 Moving expenses .................... 130
 Multiple support:
 Agreement ............................ 29
 Medical expenses .............. 143
 Municipal bonds ........................ 62
 Musical compositions .............. 102
Musicians and entertainers ..... 196
Mutual funds ................ 65, 98, 104
 Mutual funds:
 Allocated expenses ............ 197
 Nonpublicly offered ............ 197
N
 Name change ...................... 12, 46
Net operating loss ................... 171
 New job:
Employment agency fees ... 196
Job search expenses ......... 196
 Moving expenses ............... 130
 Travel expenses ................. 196
Nominees ...................... 57, 61, 64
 Nonaccountable plans ............. 185
Nonresident aliens ........... 6, 20, 22
 Nontaxable:
 Distributions .......................... 65
Exchanges ............ 96, 100, 104
 Not-for-profit activities ......... 68, 90
 Notes:
 Discounted ................... 61, 102
Received for services ........... 48
 Nursing home .......................... 144
Nutrition Program for the Elderly 90
O
Office rent, deductibility of ....... 197
Office, use of home as ............ 196
 Older taxpayers:
Credit for the elderly .......... 221
 Filing requirements ................. 5
Original issue discount ...... 61, 102
 Other basis ................................ 96
Overpayment of tax:
Credited to estimated tax 44, 46
 Refunded .............................. 13
P
Parent's responsibility for child's
tax ........................................... 5
Parking fees and tolls:
 Contributions ...................... 160
 Employee business
expenses ....................... 181
 Medical ............................... 144
Partners and partnerships . 87, 197
 Passive activity ........................ 156
Passive activity losses ........ 21, 74
 Patents ...................................... 89
 Patronage dividends .................. 66
Payment by credit card ....... 14, 45
Payment by direct debit ............ 45
Payment of tax .................. 14, 267
Peace Corps allowances ........... 51
 Penalties:
 Accuracy-related .................. 18
 Criminal ................................ 18
 Deductibility ................ 156, 199
 Estimated tax ....................... 46
Failure to file ........................ 17
Failure to furnish tax shelter
registration number ......... 18
Failure to pay ....................... 17
Failure to supply social security
number ............................ 18
 Form W–4 ............................ 41
 Fraud .................................... 18
 Frivolous return .................... 18
 Negligence ........................... 18
Substantial understatement of
income tax ....................... 18
Penalty taxes, pension .............. 80
 Pensions:
 Amount received .................. 76
 Unrecovered investment
in ............................. 36, 198
Per diem allowance ................. 184
 Performing artists ............ 187, 195
Permanent and total disability . 221
 Personal exemption ................... 24
 Personal interest ..................... 156
Personal property taxes .......... 150
 Personal representative ............ 33
 Points ....................................... 153
Political campaign expenses ... 199
Power of attorney ...................... 13
Premature distributions (early
withdrawals): 
Exceptions to age 59 1/2
rule ................................ 122
 Prepaid:
 Income .................................. 12
 Insurance ...................... 57, 143
 Interest ............................... 151
 Rent ...................................... 67
 Preparer's fee:
 Deductible amount ............. 197
 Rental expense .................... 68
Presidential Election Campaign
Fund ..................................... 12
Private delivery services ............. 9
Private schools, tuition to ........ 162
Prizes and awards ............... 47, 92
 Profit-sharing plans:
 Lump-sum distributions ........ 78
Prompt assessment, request .... 34
 Property:
 Basis of ................................ 94
Casualty and theft loss ...... 166
Change to rental ............ 68, 97
Gifts to charity .................... 162
 Inherited ......................... 92, 97
Received as a gift ................ 97
Received for services ..... 48, 96
 Rental ................................... 67
Transfer from a spouse ........ 97
Prorating standard meal allow-
ance .................................... 185
 Protective clothing ................... 196
 Psychiatric care ....................... 143
Public assistance benefits ......... 90
Publications (See Tax help)             
Puerto Rico, residents of ............. 5
 Punitive damages ...................... 91
Q
Qualified Domestic Relations Or-
der (QDRO) .......................... 79
R
 Raffles ....................................... 92
Railroad retirement benefits:
 Repayments ......................... 85
 Taxation of ........................... 82
 Withholding ........................... 42
Railroad retirement tax, credit for
overpayment of .................. 252
Real estate investment trust
(REIT) ................................. 104
Real estate taxes:
 Basis adjustment .................. 95
 Deductible amounts ........... 148
 Local benefits ............... 68, 149
 Refund of ............................ 149
 Service charges ................. 150
 Recapture, alimony ................. 137
 Recordkeeping:
 Contributions, charitable .... 163
 Employee business
expenses ....................... 181
 Gambling ............................ 198
 General requirements .. 15, 195
 Home .................................. 107
Savings bonds used for edu-
cation ............................... 61
 Recoveries of:
Amounts previously deducted 88
 Itemized deductions ............. 88
 Stolen property ................... 167
Refunds: (See also Tax
refunds) 
 Of interest ........................... 152
Of state income tax (recov-
eries) ............................... 88
Offset against debts ... 8, 13, 17
 Past due ............................... 16
 Taxability of .......................... 88
Regulated investment company 253
 Reimbursements ..................... 183
 Reimbursements:
Casualty and theft loss 168, 169
 Medical expenses .............. 145
 Moving expenses ............... 134
Related parties, transactions be-
tween .................................. 101
Release from personal liability,
request ................................. 35
Rental income and
expenses ........................ 67, 68
Repayment of social security
benefits ................................. 85
Repayment, amount previ-
ously included in income 89, 198
Repossession of home ............ 107
 Resident aliens ............................ 6
Retirement of bonds .......... 99, 102
 Retirement pay:
 Armed forces ........................ 51
Pensions and annuities ........ 76
Retirement plan contributions ... 48
 Retirement plans:
 457 plans .............................. 76
 For employees ..................... 76
Individual retirement arrange-
ments (IRAs) ................. 117
 Keogh ................................... 76
 Roth IRA ............................. 124
 Self-employed ...................... 76
Voluntary payments to ......... 79
Return of capital ........................ 65
 Returns:
 Aliens ...................................... 6
 Amended .............................. 16
 Child ............................... 5, 204
 Copies of .............................. 15
 Deceased taxpayer ................ 5
 Estimated tax ....................... 44
Extension of filing date ......... 10
 Filing status .......................... 19
 Final ...................................... 33
How to file ............................ 11
Joint .................... 20, 24, 33, 35
Puerto Rican residents ........... 5
 Separate ......................... 20, 24
Signatures ................ 13, 20, 33
When to file ............................ 9
Which form to use .................. 6
Who must file ......................... 4
 Rollovers:
 Education IRA .................... 128
Gain from sale of securities 104
Individual retirement arrange-
ments (IRAs) ................. 121
 Pensions ............................... 79
 Roth IRAs ........................... 125
Roth IRA .............. 36, 37, 124, 125
 Conversions ....................... 125
 Rollovers ............................ 125
Rounding off dollars .................. 12
 Royalties .................................... 89
S
 S corporations ................... 88, 197
Safe deposit box ..................... 198
Salaries and wages ................... 47
Salaries and wages, unpaid .... 103
Sales and exchanges:
 Bonds ........................... 61, 102
 General rules ........................ 99
 Home .................................. 106
 Savings:
 Bonds ............................. 58, 63
Bonds used for education .... 60
 Certificate ....................... 57, 62
Schedule K–1 .......... 56, 64, 87, 88
Schedules (Form 1040):
 C ........................................... 75
 D ......................................... 111
 E ........................................... 75
 R ......................................... 223
 SE ........................................... 6
Schedules (Form 1040A):
1 – Part I .............................. 62
 2 ......................................... 217
2 – Part II ............................. 66
 3 ......................................... 223
 Scholarships ........................ 29, 93
 Security deposit ......................... 67
 Self-employed persons:
 Filing requirements ................. 6
Health insurance premiums 144
 Self-employment tax:
 Deduction for ...................... 150
Who must pay .................... 201
 Seller-financed mortgage ........ 109
 Separated taxpayers:
Dependent, support test ....... 29
 Filing status .......................... 19
Separate maintenance de-
cree ............................... 135
 Separation agreement ........ 135
Series EE and E ........................ 58
Series HH and H ....................... 58
 Series I ...................................... 58
 Service charges ....................... 198
 Settlement fees ....................... 107
 Severance pay .......................... 48
Shareholder, S corporation ....... 88
 Short-term gains and
losses ......................... 104, 111
Sick pay ................. 42, 48, 52, 143
Signing your return ........ 13, 20, 34
 Simplified Method:
Who must use ...................... 77
Social security benefits:
 Medicare ............................. 143
 Repayments ................. 85, 198
 Taxation of ........................... 82
Social security num-
ber .................... 12, 31, 64, 211
Social security tax:
Credit for overpayment ...... 252
 Deductibility ........................ 150
Specialized small business in-
vestment company ............. 104
Spouse: (See also Married
taxpayers) 
 Deceased ......................... 5, 24
Disabled, qualifying for de-
pendent care credit ....... 213
 Exemption for ....................... 24
Medical expenses for ......... 142
 Standard deduction ............ 138
 Student ............................... 213
 Standard deduction:
Age 65 or older .................. 138
 Blindness ............................ 138
 Decedent's return ................. 36
 Dependents ........................ 139
Persons not eligible ............ 138
 Spouse ............................... 138
Standard meal allowance ........ 175
Standard mileage rate ............. 180
 State:
 Benefit funds ...................... 148
Benefit payments (See also
Welfare benefits) ............... 27
Income tax refunds (recov-
eries) ............................... 88
Obligations, interest on ........ 62
Officials ............... 187, 195, 198
Page 272

 Sterilization .............................. 143
Stock bonus plans, lump-sum dis-
tributions ............................... 78
 Stock:
 Appreciation rights ............... 48
 Basis ..................................... 98
 Dividends .............................. 65
 For services .......................... 48
 Holding period .................... 104
 Indirect ownership .............. 101
 Mutual fund .................. 98, 104
 Options ................................. 48
 Rights ........................... 65, 104
Rollover of gain from sale .. 104
Sale or exchange ............... 100
 Small business ................... 104
 Worthless ............................. 99
 Stockholders' meeting
expenses ............................ 200
 Strike benefits ............................ 93
Student loan interest ............... 193
 Students:
 Dependent ............................ 26
Fellowships, grants, and
scholarships .............. 29, 93
Living in your home ............ 160
 Loan canceled ...................... 86
 Theological ........................... 50
Withholding, exemption from 41
Support for dependent .............. 27
Support, decree of ................... 135
 Survivor annuities ...................... 78
 Survivors .................................. 132
T
Tax (See Taxes)                              
Tax counsel fees ..................... 197
Tax figured by IRS .................. 202
 Tax help ................................... 268
 Tax home ................................ 173
Tax on early distributions .......... 80
Tax preference items .............. 202
 Tax refunds:
 Claim for ....................... 16, 267
 Deceased taxpayer ........ 33, 34
General rules for .................. 13
Interest on ................ 16, 17, 58
Less than $1 ........................ 13
Offset against debts ......... 8, 13
 Past due ............................... 16
State income tax recoveries 88
 Tax-exempt:
Bonds and other obli-
gations ..................... 62, 102
 Income ................................ 200
 Interest ................................. 62
Taxes: (See also particular
type) 
 Alternative minimum ........... 202
 Credit for .............................. 45
 Deductible .......................... 147
 Estimated ....................... 43, 46
For not making minimum dis-
tributions .......................... 80
Foreign ............... 147, 148, 251
How to figure ...................... 201
 Income ................................ 147
 IRA penalties ...................... 123
 Minor children ..................... 204
 Not deductible .................... 150
On capital gains ................. 112
On child's investment
income ........................... 204
 Personal property ............... 150
 Railroad retirement ............. 252
 Real estate ......................... 148
 Self-employment ................ 201
 Social security .............. 48, 252
 Withholding ..................... 39, 45
 Taxpayer Advocate ......... 267, 268
 Taxpayer identification
number ............... 4, 12, 31, 211
 Taxpayer rights ........................ 267
 Teachers' educational
expenses ............................ 191
 TeleFile ........................................ 9
 Telephones .............................. 200
 Temporary assignment .... 173, 179
 Temporary attendance ............ 192
Ten-year tax option ................... 79
Tenants by the entirety ....... 56, 64
Tenants in common ............. 56, 64
The federal rate ....................... 184
 Theft losses ............................. 166
 Tip income ................................. 54
Tip Rate Determination and Edu-
cation Program ..................... 55
 Tools ................................ 180, 196
 Trade-in ................................... 100
Trades (See Nontaxable:
Exchanges)                                 
 Traditional IRAs ....................... 117
 Transfer taxes ......................... 150
 Transportation expenses ......... 192
 Transporting schoolchildren ...... 93
Travel and transportation:
 Contributions ...................... 160
 Educational ......................... 193
 Employees .......................... 172
Expenses paid for others ... 200
In the United States ........... 176
 Investment-related ...... 176, 177
 Local transportation ............ 178
 Medical ............................... 144
 Moving ................................ 133
 New employment ............... 196
Outside the United States .. 176
 Rental ................................... 68
Standard mileage rate .......... 68
 Travel advance ................... 185
 Treasury notes .................. 57, 101
Trusts and estates, income from 91
 TTY/TDD information .............. 268
Tuition, parochial school ......... 162
U
U.S. citizens abroad .................... 5
U.S. obligations, interest ..... 57, 58
Underpayment of estimated tax,
penalty for ............................ 46
 Unemployment
compensation ................. 42, 89
 Uniforms .......................... 160, 196
 Union:
 Assessments ................ 93, 196
 Benefits ................................ 93
Dues ..................... 93, 161, 196
Unpaid salaries and wages ..... 103
 Unstated interest ....................... 94
Use of home in business ........ 196
 Usurious interest ....................... 58
 Utility rebate .............................. 93
V
 Vandalism ................................ 166
 Veterans' benefits ................ 29, 51
 VISTA volunteers ...................... 52
 Volunteer work ........................ 215
W
Wages (See Salaries and wages)   
 Welfare benefits ........................ 90
 Wheelchair ............................... 143
When to file ................................. 9
Where to file:
Address to use ..................... 15
 Deceased taxpayer .............. 34
Who should itemize ................. 139
Widow(er) with dependent child 22
Winter energy payments ........... 90
 Withholding:
 Backup ................................. 42
 Credit for .............................. 45
 Federal payments ................ 42
 Fringe benefits ..................... 41
 Gambling winnings ............... 42
 General rules ........................ 39
Pensions and annuities .. 42, 76
Railroad retirement benefits . 42
Salaries and wages .............. 39
 Sick pay ................................ 42
 Tips ....................................... 41
 Unemployment compensation 42
 Work clothes ............................ 196
 Workers' compensation ............. 53
 Worthless securities .................. 99
 Wristwatch ............................... 200
/H18549
Page 273

Order Blank
for Forms and
Publications
The most frequently ordered forms and publications are listed on the order blank below .
We will mail you two copies of each form and one copy of each publication you order. T o
help reduce waste, please order only the items you need to prepare your return.
For faster ways of getting the items you need, such as by computer or
fax, see the front cover.
Circle the forms and
publications you need. The
instructions for any form
you order will be included.
Schedule R
(1040)
8582
24411040
Pub. 508
1040EZ
Schedule SE
(1040)
Pub. 590
8829
Pub. 521
Schedules A&B
(1040)
1040-ES
(2000)
3903
Pub. 11040A
Pub. 523
Pub. 910
Schedule C
(1040)
1040X
4562
Pub. 17
Pub. 525
Schedule D
(1040)
Schedule 1
(1040A)
2106
Pub. 929
Pub. 334
Pub. 527
4868
Schedule E
(1040)
Schedule 2
(1040A)
5329
Pub. 463
Pub. 529
Schedule 3
(1040A)
Schedule F
(1040)
Pub. 505
Schedule EIC
(1040A or 1040) Pub. 596
8822
Central United States Central Area Distribution Center
Eastern United States or a foreign country Eastern Area Distribution Center
THEN mail to . . .IF you live in the . . .
Western United States Western Area Distribution Center
Where To Mail Your Order Blank for Free Forms and Publications
AT this address . . .
Detach at this line
Name
Number and street
City
Schedule
C-EZ (1040)
2210
Order Blank
Fill in your name and
address.
How To Use the Order
Blank
Circle the items you need on the order blank
below . Use the blank spaces to order items
not listed. If you need more space, attach a
separate sheet of paper.
Print or type your name and address accu-
rately in the space provided below . An accu-
rate address is necessary to ensure delivery
of your order. Cut the order blank on the
dotted line. Enclose the order blank in your
own envelope and send it to the IRS address
shown on this page that applies to you. Y ou
should receive your order within 10 days
after we receive your request.
Some items may be picked up at many IRS offices, post offices, and libraries. You may also download all
these items from the Internet at www.irs.gov or place an electronic order for them.
8283
8606
Pub. 501
Pub. 502
Pub. 550
Pub. 575
Pub. 554
Pub. 936
2106-EZ
Schedule H
(1040) Pub. 926
1040-V
Schedule J
(1040)
8812
8863
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743-0001
P.O. Box 8903 Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
P.O. Box 85074 Richmond, VA 23261-5074
Pub. 970
Schedule D-1
(1040)
9465
Pub. 535
Pub. 972
Apt./Suite/Room
Foreign country
Daytime telephone number (optional)
State ZIP code
International postal code
()
Page 274