Contents
What's New .................. 1
Reminders ................... 1
Introduction .................. 2
Who Must File ................. 2
Who Should File ............... 5
Filing Status .................. 5
Dependents ................. 11
Social Security Numbers (SSNs) for 
Dependents .............. 22
Standard Deduction ............ 22
2023 Standard Deduction Tables .... 24
How To Get Tax Help ............ 26
Index ..................... 29
What's New
Who must file.  In some cases, the amount of 
income you can receive before you must file a 
tax return has increased. T able 1 shows the fil-
ing requirements for most taxpayers.
Standard deduction increased.  The stand-
ard deduction for taxpayers who don't itemize 
their deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) is 
higher for 2023 than it was for 2022. The 
amount depends on your filing status. Y ou can 
use the 2023 Standard Deduction T ables near 
the end of this publication to figure your stand-
ard deduction.
Reminders
Future developments. Information about any 
future developments affecting Pub. 501 (such 
as legislation enacted after we release it) will be 
posted at IRS.gov/Pub501.
Taxpayer identification number for aliens. If 
you are a nonresident or resident alien and you 
don't have and aren't eligible to get a social se-
curity number (SSN), you must apply for an indi-
vidual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). 
Y our spouse may also need an ITIN if your 
spouse doesn't have and isn't eligible to get an 
SSN. See Form W -7, Application for IRS Indi-
vidual T axpayer Identification Number. Also see 
Social Security Numbers (SSNs) for Depend-
ents, later.
Photographs of missing children.  The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC) . Photographs of missing 
children selected by the Center may appear in 
this publication on pages that would otherwise 
be blank. Y ou can help bring these children 
home by looking at the photographs and calling 
1-800-THE-LOST (1 -800-843-5678) if you rec-
ognize a child.
Department 
of the 
T reasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 501
Cat. No. 15000U
Dependents,
Standard
Deduction,
and Filing 
Information
For use in preparing
2023 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 30  6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jan 2, 2024

Introduction
This publication discusses some tax rules that 
affect every person who may have to file a fed-
eral income tax return. It answers some basic 
questions: who must file, who should file, what 
filing status to use, and the amount of the stand-
ard deduction.
Who Must File  explains who must file an in-
come tax return. If you have little or no gross in-
come, reading this section will help you decide 
if you have to file a return.
Who Should File  helps you decide if you 
should file a return, even if you aren't required to 
do so.
Filing Status helps you determine which fil-
ing status to use. Filing status is important in 
determining whether you must file a return and 
whether you may claim certain deductions and 
credits. It also helps determine your standard 
deduction and tax rate.
Dependents explains the difference be-
tween a qualifying child  and a qualifying rela-
tive. Other topics include the SSN requirement 
for dependents, the rules for multiple support 
agreements, and the rules for divorced or sepa-
rated parents.
Standard Deduction gives the rules and dol-
lar amounts for the standard deduction —a ben-
efit for taxpayers who don't itemize their deduc-
tions. This section also discusses the standard 
deduction for taxpayers who are blind or age 65 
or older, as well as special rules that limit the 
standard deduction available to dependents. In 
addition, this section helps you decide whether 
you would be better off taking the standard de-
duction or itemizing your deductions.
How T o Get T ax Help explains how to get tax 
help from the IRS.
This publication is for U.S. citizens and resi-
dent aliens only. If you are a resident alien for 
the entire year, you must follow the same tax 
rules that apply to U.S. citizens. The rules to de-
termine if you are a resident or nonresident 
alien are discussed in chapter 1 of Pub. 519.
Nonresident aliens. If you were a nonresident 
alien at any time during the year, the rules and 
tax forms that apply to you may be different from 
those that apply to U.S. citizens. See Pub. 519.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and sug-
gestions for future editions.
Y ou can send us comments through 
IRS.gov/FormComments. Or, you can write to 
the Internal Revenue Service, T ax Forms and 
Publications, 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, 
IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments and 
suggestions as we revise our tax forms, instruc-
tions, and publications. Don’t send tax ques-
tions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
Getting answers to your tax questions. 
If you have a tax question not answered by this 
publication or the How T o Get T ax Help section 
at the end of this publication, go to the IRS In-
teractive T ax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the 
search feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications. Go to  IRS.gov/Forms to download 
current and prior -year forms, instructions, and 
publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and 
publications. Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to or-
der current forms, instructions, and publica-
tions; call 800 -829-3676 to order prior -year 
forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon 
as possible. Don’t resubmit requests you’ve al-
ready sent us. Y ou can get forms and publica-
tions faster online.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
559 Survivors, Executors, and 
Administrators
Form (and Instructions)
1040-X Amended U.S. Individual Income 
T ax Return
2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration 
of Representative
8332 Release/Revocation of Release of 
Claim to Exemption for Child by 
Custodial Parent
8814 Parents' Election T o Report Child's 
Interest and Dividends
Who Must File
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, 
whether you must file a federal income tax re-
turn depends on your gross income, your filing 
status, your age, and whether you are a de-
pendent. For details, see T able 1 and T able 2. 
Y ou must also file if one of the situations descri-
bed in T able 3 applies. The filing requirements 
apply even if you owe no tax.
Y ou may have to pay a penalty if you are re-
quired to file a return but fail to do so. If you will-
fully fail to file a return, you may be subject to 
criminal prosecution.
Gross income.  Gross income is all income 
you receive in the form of money, goods, prop-
erty, and services that isn't exempt from tax. If 
   559
  1040-X
   2848
   8332
   8814
T able 1.2023 Filing Requirements Chart for Most Taxpayers
IF your filing status is...
AND at the end of 2023 you 
were...*
THEN file a return 
if your gross 
income was at 
least...**
single under 65 $13,850
65 or older $15,700
head of household under 65 $20,800
65 or older $22,650
married filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $27,700
65 or older (one spouse) $29,200
65 or older (both spouses) $30,700
married filing separately any age   $5
qualifying surviving spouse under 65 $27,700
65 or older $29,200
* If you were born before January 2, 1959, you're considered to be 65 or older at the 
end of 2023. (If your spouse died in 2023, see Death of spouse, later. If you're 
preparing a return for someone who died in 2023, see Death of taxpayer, later.)
** Gross income means all income you receive in the form of money, goods, 
property, and services that isn't exempt from tax, including any income from sources 
outside the United States or from the sale of your main home (even if you can exclude 
part or all of it). Don't include any social security benefits unless (a) you're married 
filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during 2023, or (b) 
one-half of your social security benefits plus your other gross income and any 
tax-exempt interest is more than $25,000 ($32,000 if married filing jointly). If (a) or (b) 
applies, see the Form 1040 and 1040-SR instructions to figure the taxable part of 
social security benefits you must include in gross income. Gross income includes 
gains, but not losses, reported on Form 8949 or Schedule D. Gross income from a 
business means, for example, the amount on Schedule C, line 7; or Schedule F , line 9. 
But in figuring gross income, don't reduce your income by any losses, including any 
loss on Schedule C, line 7; or Schedule F , line 9.
*** If you didn't live with your spouse at the end of 2023 (or on the date your spouse 
died) and your gross income was at least $5, you must file a return regardless of your 
age.
Page 2 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2 Publication 501 (2023)

you are married and live with your spouse in a 
community property state, half of any income 
defined by state law as community income may 
be considered yours. For a list of community 
property states, see Community property states 
under Married Filing Separately, later.
Self-employed persons.  If you are 
self-employed in a business that provides serv-
ices (where products aren't a factor), your gross 
income from that business is the gross receipts. 
If you are self -employed in a business involving 
manufacturing, merchandising, or mining, your 
gross income from that business is the total 
sales minus the cost of goods sold. In either 
case, you must add any income from invest-
ments and from incidental or outside operations 
or sources.
Filing status.  Y our filing status generally de-
pends on whether you are single or married. 
Whether you are single or married is deter-
mined at the end of your tax year, which is De-
cember 31 for most taxpayers. Filing status is 
discussed in detail later in this publication.
Age. Age is a factor in determining if you must 
file a return only if you are 65 or older at the end 
of your tax year. For 2023, you are 65 or older if 
you were born before January 2, 1959.
Filing Requirements for Most 
Taxpayers
Y ou must file a return if your gross income for 
the year was at least the amount shown on the 
appropriate line in T able 1. Dependents should 
see T able 2 instead.
Deceased Persons
Y ou must file an income tax return for a dece-
dent (a person who died) if both of the following 
are true.
1. Y our spouse died, or you are the executor, 
administrator, or legal representative.
2. The decedent met the filing requirements 
described in this publication at the time of 
the decedent’s death.
For more information, see Final Income T ax 
Return for Decedent—Form 1040 or 1040-SR in 
Pub. 559.
Death of spouse. If your spouse died in 2023, 
read this before using T able 1 or T able 2 to find 
whether you must file a 2023 return. Consider 
your spouse to be 65 or older at the end of 2023 
only if your spouse was 65 or older at the time 
of death. Even if your spouse was born before 
January 2, 1959, your spouse isn't considered 
65 or older at the end of 2023 unless your 
spouse was 65 or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before the person’s 65th birthday.
Example. Y our spouse was born on Febru-
ary 14, 1958, and died on February 13, 2023. 
Y our spouse is considered age 65 at the time of 
death. However, if your spouse died on Febru-
ary 12, 2023, your spouse isn't considered age 
65 at the time of death and is not 65 or older at 
the end of 2023.
Death of taxpayer.  If you are preparing a re-
turn for someone who died in 2023, read this 
before using T able 1 or T able 2. Consider the 
taxpayer to be 65 or older at the end of 2023 
only if the taxpayer was 65 or older at the time 
of death. Even if the taxpayer was born before 
January 2, 1959, the taxpayer isn't considered 
65 or older at the end of 2023 unless the tax-
payer was 65 or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before the person’s 65th birthday.
U.S. Citizens or Resident Aliens 
Living Abroad
T o determine whether you must file a return, in-
clude in your gross income any income you 
earned or received abroad, including any in-
come you can exclude under the foreign earned 
income exclusion. For more information on spe-
cial tax rules that may apply to you, see Pub. 
54.
Residents of Puerto Rico
If you are a U.S. citizen and also a bona fide 
resident of Puerto Rico, you must generally file 
a U.S. income tax return for any year in which 
you meet the income requirements. This is in 
addition to any legal requirement you may have 
to file an income tax return with Puerto Rico.
If you are a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico 
for the whole year, your U.S. gross income 
doesn't include income from sources within Pu-
erto Rico. It does, however, include any income 
you received for your services as an employee 
of the United States or any U.S. agency. If you 
receive income from Puerto Rican sources that 
isn't subject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your 
standard deduction, which reduces the amount 
of income you can have before you must file a 
U.S. income tax return.
For more information, see Pub. 570.
Individuals With Income From U.S. 
Territories
If you had income from Guam, the Common-
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri-
can Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, special 
rules may apply when determining whether you 
must file a U.S. federal income tax return. In ad-
dition, you may have to file a return with the indi-
vidual territory government. See Pub. 570 for 
more information.
Dependents
A person who is a dependent may still have to 
file a return. It depends on the person’s earned 
income, unearned income, and gross income. 
For details, see T able 2. A dependent must also 
file if one of the situations described in T able 3 
applies.
Responsibility of parent. If a dependent child 
must file an income tax return but can't file due 
to age or any other reason, a parent, guardian, 
or other legally responsible person must file it 
for the child. If the child can't sign the return, the 
parent or guardian must sign the child's name 
followed by the words “By (your signature), pa-
rent for minor child.”
Earned income. Earned income includes sal-
aries, wages, professional fees, and other 
amounts received as pay for work you actually 
perform. Earned income (only for purposes of 
filing requirements and the standard deduction) 
also includes any part of a taxable scholarship. 
See chapter 1 of Pub. 970 for more information 
on taxable and nontaxable scholarships.
Child's earnings.  Amounts a child earns 
by performing services are included in the 
child’s gross income and not the gross income 
of the parent. This is true even if under local law 
the child's parent has the right to the earnings 
and may actually have received them. But if the 
child doesn't pay the tax due on this income, the 
parent is liable for the tax.
Unearned income. Unearned income includes 
income such as interest, dividends, and capital 
gains. T rust distributions of interest, dividends, 
capital gains, and survivor annuities are also 
considered unearned income.
Election to report child's unearned income 
on parent's return.  Y ou may be able to in-
clude your child's interest and dividend income 
on your tax return. If you do this, your child won't 
have to file a return. T o make this election, all of 
the following conditions must be met.
• Y our child was under age 19 (or under age 
24 if a student) at the end of 2023. (A child 
born on January 1, 2005, is considered to 
be age 19 at the end of 2023; you can't 
make the election for this child unless the 
child was a student. Similarly, a child born 
on January 1, 2000, is considered to be 
age 24 at the end of 2023; you can't make 
the election for this child.)
• Y our child had gross income only from in-
terest and dividends (including capital gain 
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends).
• The interest and dividend income was less 
than $12,500.
• Y our child is required to file a return for 
2023 unless you make this election.
• Y our child doesn't file a joint return for 
2023.
• No estimated tax payment was made for 
2023 and no 2022 overpayment was ap-
plied to 2023 under your child's name and 
SSN.
• No federal income tax was withheld from 
your child's income under the backup with-
holding rules.
• Y ou are the parent whose return must be 
used when making the election to report 
your child's unearned income.
For more information, see Form 8814, Pa-
rents’ Election T o Report Child’s Interest and 
Dividends, and its instructions.
Other Situations
Y ou may have to file a tax return even if your 
gross income is less than the amount shown in 
T able 1 or T able 2 for your filing status. See T a-
ble 3  for those other situations when you must 
file.
Page 3 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 3

2023 Filing Requirements for Dependents 
See Dependents to find out if you are a dependent.
If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see if you must file a return.
In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. It also includes 
unemployment compensation, taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned income from a 
trust. Earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. Gross income 
is the total of your unearned and earned income.
CAUTION
!
If your gross income was $4,700 or more, you usually can't be claimed as a dependent unless you are a qualifying child. 
For details, see Dependents.
Single dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Y our unearned income was more than $1,250.
2. Y our earned income was more than $13,850.
3. Y our gross income was more than the larger of: 
a. $1,250, or
b. Y our earned income (up to $13,450) plus $400.
Yes. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Y our unearned income was more than $3,100 ($4,950 if 65 or older and blind).
2. Y our earned income was more than $15,700 ($17,550 if 65 or older and blind).
3. Y our gross income was more than the larger of:
a. $3,100 ($4,950 if 65 or older and blind), or 
b. Y our earned income (up to $13,450) plus $2,250 ($4,100 if 65 or older and blind).
Married dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Y our gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and itemizes deductions.
2. Y our unearned income was more than $1,250.
3. Y our earned income was more than $13,850.
4. Y our gross income was more than the larger of:
a. $1,250, or
b.  Y our earned income (up to $13,450) plus $400. 
Yes. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Y our gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and itemizes deductions.
2. Y our unearned income was more than $2,750 ($4,250 if 65 or older and blind).
3. Y our earned income was more than $15,350 ($16,850 if 65 or older and blind).
4. Y our gross income was more than the larger of:
a. $2,750 ($4,250 if 65 or older and blind), or 
b. Y our earned income (up to $13,450) plus $1,900 ($3,400 if 65 or older and blind).
T able 2.
Page 4 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4 Publication 501 (2023)

Who Should File
Even if you don't have to file, you should file a 
tax return if you can get money back. For exam-
ple, you should file if one of the following ap-
plies.
1. Y ou had income tax withheld from your 
pay.
2. Y ou made estimated tax payments for the 
year or had any of your overpayment for 
last year applied to this year's estimated 
tax.
3. Y ou qualify for the earned income credit. 
See Pub. 596 for more information.
4. Y ou qualify for the additional child tax 
credit. See the Instructions for Form 1040 
for more information.
5. Y ou qualify for the refundable American 
opportunity credit. See Form 8863.
6. Y ou qualify for the credit for federal tax on 
fuels. See Form 4136.
7. Y ou qualify for the premium tax credit. See 
Form 8962.
Form 1099-B received. Even if you aren't re-
quired to file a return, you should consider filing 
if all of the following apply.
• Y ou received a Form 1099-B, Proceeds 
From Broker and Barter Exchange T rans-
actions (or substitute statement).
• The amount in box 1d of Form 1099-B (or 
substitute statement), when added to your 
other gross income, means you have to file 
a tax return because of the filing require-
ment in T able 1 or T able 2 that applies to 
you.
• Box 1e of Form 1099-B (or substitute state-
ment) is blank.
In this case, filing a return may keep you from 
getting a notice from the IRS.
Filing Status
Y ou must determine your filing status before you 
can determine whether you must file a tax re-
turn, your standard deduction (discussed later), 
and your tax. Y ou also use your filing status to 
determine whether you are eligible to claim cer-
tain other deductions and credits.
There are five filing statuses.
• Single.
• Married filing jointly.
• Married filing separately.
• Head of household.
• Qualifying surviving spouse.
If more than one filing status applies to you, 
choose the one that will give you the lowest tax.
Marital Status
In general, your filing status depends on 
whether you are considered unmarried or mar-
ried.
Unmarried persons.  Y ou are considered un-
married for the whole year if, on the last day of 
your tax year, you are either:
• Unmarried, or
• Legally separated from your spouse under 
a divorce or separate maintenance decree.
State law governs whether you are married 
or legally separated under a divorce or separate 
maintenance decree.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced un-
der a final decree by the last day of the year, 
you are considered unmarried for the whole 
year.
Divorce and remarriage.  If you obtain a 
divorce for the sole purpose of filing tax returns 
as unmarried individuals, and at the time of di-
vorce you intend to and do, in fact, remarry 
each other in the next tax year, you and your 
spouse must file as married individuals in both 
years.
Annulled marriages. If you obtain a court 
decree of annulment, which holds that no valid 
marriage ever existed, you are considered un-
married even if you filed joint returns for earlier 
years. File amended returns (Form(s) 1040 -X) 
claiming single or head of household status for 
all tax years that are affected by the annulment 
T able 3.Other Situations When You Must File a 2023 Return
Y ou must file a return if any of the conditions below apply.
1. Y ou owe any special taxes reported on Schedule 2 (Form 1040), including any of the following. (See the instructions for 
Schedule 2 (Form 1040).)
a. Alternative minimum tax.
b. Additional tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA), or other tax-favored account.
c. Social security or Medicare tax on tips you didn't report to your employer or on wages you received from an employer 
who didn't withhold these taxes.
d. Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you reported to your employer or on 
group-term life insurance and additional taxes on health savings accounts.
e. Household employment taxes.
f. Recapture taxes.
2. Y ou (or your spouse if filing jointly) received Archer MSA, Medicare Advantage MSA, or health savings account distributions.
3. Y ou had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400.
4. Y ou had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer 
social security and Medicare taxes.
5. Advance payments of the premium tax credit were made for you, your spouse, or a dependent who enrolled in coverage 
through the Health Insurance Marketplace. Y ou or whoever enrolled you should have received Form(s) 1095-A showing the 
amount of the advance payments. 
6. Y ou are required to include amounts in income under section 965 or you have a net tax liability under section 965 that you 
are paying in installments under section 965(h) or deferred by making an election under section 965(i).
Page 5 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 5

and not closed by the statute of limitations for 
filing a tax return. Generally, for a credit or re-
fund, you must file Form(s) 1040 -X within 3 
years (including extensions) after the date you 
filed your original return or within 2 years after 
the date you paid the tax, whichever is later. If 
you filed your original tax return early (for exam-
ple, March 1), your return is considered filed on 
the due date (generally April 15). However, if 
you had an extension to file (for example, until 
October 15) but you filed earlier and we re-
ceived it on July 1, your return is considered 
filed on July 1.
Head of household or qualifying surviv-
ing spouse.  If you are considered unmarried, 
you may be able to file as head of household or 
as a qualifying surviving spouse. See Head of 
Household and Qualifying Surviving Spouse , 
later, to see if you qualify.
Married persons.  If you are considered mar-
ried, you and your spouse can file a joint return 
or separate returns.
Considered married.  Y ou are considered 
married for the whole year if, on the last day of 
your tax year, you and your spouse meet any 
one of the following tests.
1. Y ou are married and living together.
2. Y ou are living together in a common law 
marriage recognized in the state where 
you now live or in the state where the com-
mon law marriage began.
3. Y ou are married and living apart but not le-
gally separated under a decree of divorce 
or separate maintenance.
4. Y ou are separated under an interlocutory 
(not final) decree of divorce.
Spouse died during the year.  If your 
spouse died during the year, you are consid-
ered married for the whole year for filing status 
purposes.
If you didn't remarry before the end of the 
tax year, you can file a joint return for yourself 
and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 
years, you may be entitled to the special bene-
fits described later under Qualifying Surviving 
Spouse.
If you remarried before the end of the tax 
year, you can file a joint return with your new 
spouse. Y our deceased spouse's filing status is 
married filing separately for that year.
Married persons living apart.  If you live 
apart from your spouse and meet certain tests, 
you may be able to file as head of household 
even if you aren't divorced or legally separated. 
If you qualify to file as head of household in-
stead of as married filing separately, your stand-
ard deduction will be higher and your tax may 
be lower. See Head of Household, later.
Single
Y our filing status is single if you are considered 
unmarried and you don't qualify for another fil-
ing status. T o determine your marital status, see 
Marital Status, earlier.
Spouse died before January 1, 2023.  Y our 
filing status may be single if your spouse died 
before January 1, 2023, and you didn't remarry 
before the end of 2023. Y ou may, however, be 
able to use another filing status that will give 
you a lower tax. See Head of Household  and 
Qualifying Surviving Spouse , later, to see if you 
qualify.
On Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, show your filing 
status as single by checking the “Single” box on 
the Filing Status  line near the top of the form. 
Use the Single column of the T ax T able, or Sec-
tion A of the T ax Computation Worksheet, to fig-
ure your tax.
Married Filing Jointly
Y ou can choose married filing jointly as your fil-
ing status if you are considered married and 
both you and your spouse agree to file a joint re-
turn. On a joint return, you and your spouse re-
port your combined income and deduct your 
combined allowable expenses. Y ou can file a 
joint return even if one of you had no income or 
deductions.
If you and your spouse decide to file a joint 
return, your tax may be lower than your com-
bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your 
standard deduction (if you don't itemize deduc-
tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for 
tax benefits that don't apply to other filing sta-
tuses.
On Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, show your filing 
status as married filing jointly by checking the 
“Married filing jointly” box on the Filing Status 
line near the top of the form. Use the Married fil-
ing jointly column of the T ax T able, or Section B 
of the T ax Computation Worksheet, to figure 
your tax.
If you and your spouse each have in-
come, you may want to figure your tax 
both on a joint return and on separate 
returns (using the filing status of married filing 
separately). Y ou can choose the method that 
gives the two of you the lower combined tax un-
less you are required to file separately.
Spouse died.  If your spouse died during the 
year, you are considered married for the whole 
year and can choose married filing jointly as 
your filing status. See Spouse died during the 
year under Married persons, earlier.
If your spouse died in 2024 before filing a 
2023 return, you can choose married filing 
jointly as your filing status on your 2023 return.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced under a 
final decree by the last day of the year, you are 
considered unmarried for the whole year and 
you can't choose married filing jointly as your fil-
ing status.
Filing a Joint Return
Both you and your spouse must include all of 
your income and deductions on your joint re-
turn.
Accounting period. Both of you must use the 
same accounting period, but you can use differ-
ent accounting methods.
Joint responsibility. Both of you may be held 
responsible, jointly and individually, for the tax 
TIP
and any interest or penalty due on your joint re-
turn. This means that if one spouse doesn't pay 
the tax due, the other may have to. Or, if one 
spouse doesn't report the correct tax, both 
spouses may be responsible for any additional 
taxes assessed by the IRS. One spouse may be 
held responsible for all the tax due even if all the 
income was earned by the other spouse.
Y ou may want to file separately if:
• Y ou believe your spouse isn't reporting all 
of their income, or
• Y ou don't want to be responsible for any 
taxes due if your spouse doesn't have 
enough tax withheld or doesn't pay enough 
estimated tax.
Divorced taxpayer. Y ou may be held jointly 
and individually responsible for any tax, interest, 
and penalties due on a joint return filed before 
your divorce. This responsibility may apply even 
if your divorce decree states that your former 
spouse will be responsible for any amounts due 
on previously filed joint returns.
Relief from joint responsibility.  In some 
cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint re-
sponsibility for tax, interest, and penalties on a 
joint return for items of the other spouse that 
were incorrectly reported on the joint return. Y ou 
can ask for relief no matter how small the liabil-
ity.
There are three types of relief available.
1. Innocent spouse relief.
2. Separation of liability (available only to 
joint filers whose spouse has died, or who 
are divorced, who are legally separated, or 
who haven't lived together for the 12 
months ending on the date the election for 
this relief is filed).
3. Equitable relief.
Y ou must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-
cent Spouse Relief, to request relief from joint 
responsibility. Pub. 971 explains the kinds of re-
lief and who may qualify for them.
Signing a joint return.  For a return to be con-
sidered a joint return, both spouses must gener-
ally sign the return.
Spouse died before signing.  If your 
spouse died before signing the return, the exec-
utor or administrator must sign the return for 
your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has 
been appointed as executor or administrator, 
you can sign the return for your spouse and en-
ter “Filing as surviving spouse” in the area 
where you sign the return.
Spouse away from home.  If your spouse 
is away from home, you should prepare the re-
turn, sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign 
so it can be filed on time.
Injury or disease prevents signing.  If 
your spouse can't sign because of injury or dis-
ease and tells you to sign for them, you can sign 
your spouse's name in the proper space on the 
return followed by the words “By (your name), 
Spouse.” Be sure to sign in the space provided 
for your signature. Attach a dated statement, 
signed by you, to the return. The statement 
should include the form number of the return 
you are filing, the tax year, and the reason your 
Page 6 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6 Publication 501 (2023)

spouse can't sign, and it should state that your 
spouse has agreed to your signing for them.
Signing as guardian of spouse. If you are 
the guardian of your spouse who is mentally in-
competent, you can sign the return for your 
spouse as guardian.
Spouse in combat zone.  Y ou can sign a 
joint return for your spouse if your spouse can't 
sign because they are serving in a combat zone 
(such as the Persian Gulf area, Serbia, Monte-
negro, Albania, or Afghanistan), even if you 
don't have a power of attorney or other state-
ment. Attach a signed statement to your return 
explaining that your spouse is serving in a com-
bat zone. For more information on special tax 
rules for persons who are serving in a combat 
zone, or who are in missing status as a result of 
serving in a combat zone, see Pub. 3, Armed 
Forces' T ax Guide.
Power of attorney (POA).  In order for you 
to sign a return for your spouse in any of these 
cases, you must attach to the return a POA that 
authorizes you to sign for your spouse. Y ou can 
use a POA that states that you have been gran-
ted authority to sign the return, or you can use 
Form 2848. Part I of Form 2848 must state that 
you are granted authority to sign the return.
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. Gen-
erally, a married couple can't file a joint return if 
either one is a nonresident alien at any time dur-
ing the tax year. However, if one spouse was a 
nonresident alien or dual -status alien who was 
married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the 
end of the year, the spouses can choose to file 
a joint return. If you do file a joint return, you and 
your spouse are both treated as U.S. residents 
for the entire tax year. See chapter 1 of Pub. 
519. 
Married Filing Separately
Y ou can choose married filing separately as 
your filing status if you are married. This filing 
status may benefit you if you want to be respon-
sible only for your own tax or if it results in less 
tax than filing a joint return.
If you and your spouse don't agree to file a 
joint return, you must use this filing status un-
less you qualify for head of household status, 
discussed later.
Y ou may be able to choose head of house-
hold filing status if you are considered unmar-
ried because you live apart from your spouse 
and meet certain tests (explained later under 
Head of Household ). This can apply to you 
even if you aren't divorced or legally separated. 
If you qualify to file as head of household, in-
stead of as married filing separately, your tax 
may be lower, you may be able to claim certain 
tax benefits, and your standard deduction will 
be higher. The head of household filing status 
allows you to choose the standard deduction 
even if your spouse chooses to itemize deduc-
tions. See Head of Household , later, for more 
information.
Y ou will generally pay more combined 
tax on separate returns than you would 
on a joint return for the reasons listed 
under Special Rules, later. However, unless you 
TIP
are required to file separately, you should figure 
your tax both ways (on a joint return and on sep-
arate returns). This way, you can make sure you 
are using the filing status that results in the low-
est combined tax. When figuring the combined 
tax of a married couple, you may want to con-
sider state taxes as well as federal taxes.
How to file.  If you file a separate return, you 
generally report only your own income, credits, 
and deductions.
Select this filing status by checking the 
“Married filing separately” box on the Filing Sta-
tus line near the top of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. 
Enter your spouse's full name in the entry space 
at the bottom of the Filing Status  section and 
enter your spouse's SSN or ITIN in the space 
for spouse's SSN on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If 
your spouse doesn't have and isn't required to 
have an SSN or ITIN, enter “NRA” in the entry 
space below the filing status checkboxes. For 
electronic filing, enter the spouse's name or 
“NRA” if the spouse doesn't have an SSN or 
ITIN in the entry space below the filing status 
checkboxes. Use the Married filing separately 
column of the T ax T able, or Section C of the T ax 
Computation Worksheet, to figure your tax.
Special Rules
If you choose married filing separately as your 
filing status, the following special rules apply. 
Because of these special rules, you usually pay 
more tax on a separate return than if you use 
another filing status you qualify for.
1. Y our tax rate is generally higher than on a 
joint return.
2. Y our exemption amount for figuring the al-
ternative minimum tax is half that allowed 
on a joint return.
3. Y ou can't take the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses in most cases, 
and the amount you can exclude from in-
come under an employer's dependent 
care assistance program is limited to 
$2,500 (instead of $5,000 on a joint re-
turn). However, if you are legally separated 
or living apart from your spouse, you may 
be able to file a separate return and still 
take the credit. See What’s Y our Filing Sta-
tus? in Pub. 503, Child and Dependent 
Care Expenses, for more information.
4. Y ou can't take the earned income credit 
unless you have a qualifying child and 
meet certain other requirements.
5. Y ou can't take the exclusion or credit for 
adoption expenses in most cases.
6. Y ou can't take the education credits (the 
American opportunity credit and lifetime 
learning credit), or the deduction for stu-
dent loan interest.
7. Y ou can't exclude any interest income from 
qualified U.S. savings bonds you used for 
higher education expenses.
8. If you lived with your spouse at any time 
during the tax year:
a. Y ou can't claim the credit for the eld-
erly or the disabled, and
b. Y ou must include in income a greater 
percentage (up to 85%) of any social 
security or equivalent railroad retire-
ment benefits you received.
9. The following credits and deductions are 
reduced at income levels half those for a 
joint return.
a. The child tax credit and the credit for 
other dependents.
b. The retirement savings contributions 
credit.
10. Y our capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 
(instead of $3,000 on a joint return).
11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you 
can't claim the standard deduction. If you 
can claim the standard deduction, your ba-
sic standard deduction is half the amount 
allowed on a joint return.
There are special rules that allow a 
separated spouse to claim the earned 
income credit under certain circum-
stances. See the line 27 instructions in the In-
structions for Form 1040 and Schedule EIC 
(Form 1040) to see if you meet the qualifica-
tions to claim the earned income credit even 
though you are married and don’t file a joint re-
turn.
Adjusted gross income (AGI) limits.  If your 
AGI on a separate return is lower than it would 
have been on a joint return, you may be able to 
deduct a larger amount for certain deductions 
that are limited by AGI, such as medical expen-
ses.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). 
Y ou may not be able to deduct all or part of your 
contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your 
spouse was covered by an employee retirement 
plan at work during the year. Y our deduction is 
reduced or eliminated if your income is more 
than a certain amount. This amount is much 
lower for married individuals who file separately 
and lived together at any time during the year. 
For more information, see How Much Can Y ou 
Deduct? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A.
Rental activity losses.  If you actively partici-
pated in a passive rental real estate activity that 
produced a loss, you can generally deduct the 
loss from your nonpassive income up to 
$25,000. This is called a special allowance. 
However, married persons filing separate re-
turns who lived together at any time during the 
year can't claim this special allowance. Married 
persons filing separate returns who lived apart 
at all times during the year are each allowed a 
$12,500 maximum special allowance for losses 
from passive real estate activities. See Rental 
Activities in Pub. 925, Passive Activity and 
At-Risk Rules.
Community property states.  Community 
property states include Arizona, California, 
Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, T exas, 
Washington, and Wisconsin. If you live in a 
community property state and file separately, 
your income may be considered separate in-
come or community income for income tax pur-
poses. See Pub. 555.
TIP
Page 7 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 7

Joint Return After Separate 
Returns
Y ou can change your filing status from a sepa-
rate return to a joint return by filing an amended 
return using Form 1040-X.
Y ou can generally change to a joint return 
any time within 3 years from the due date of the 
separate return or returns. This doesn't include 
any extensions. A separate return includes a re-
turn filed by you or your spouse claiming mar-
ried filing separately, single, or head of house-
hold filing status.
Separate Returns After Joint 
Return
Once you file a joint return, you can't choose to 
file separate returns for that year after the due 
date of the return.
Exception. A personal representative for a de-
cedent can change from a joint return elected 
by the surviving spouse to a separate return for 
the decedent. The personal representative has 
1 year from the due date (including extensions) 
of the return to make the change. See Pub. 559 
for more information on filing income tax returns 
for a decedent.
Head of Household
Y ou may be able to file as head of household if 
you meet all the following requirements.
1. Y ou are unmarried or considered unmar-
ried on the last day of the year. See Marital 
Status, earlier, and Considered Unmar-
ried, later.
2. Y ou paid more than half the cost of keep-
ing up a home for the year.
3. A qualifying person lived with you in the 
home for more than half the year (except 
for temporary absences, such as school). 
However, if the qualifying person is your 
dependent parent, your dependent parent 
doesn't have to live with you. See Special 
rule for parent, later, under Qualifying Per-
son.
If you qualify to file as head of house-
hold, your tax rate will usually be lower 
than the rates for single or married fil-
ing separately. Y ou will also receive a higher 
standard deduction than if you file as single or 
married filing separately.
How to file.  Indicate your choice of this filing 
status by checking the “Head of household” box 
on the Filing Status  line near the top of Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR. If the child who qualifies you 
for this filing status isn't claimed as your de-
pendent in the Dependents section of Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR, enter the child's name in the 
entry space at the bottom of the Filing Status 
section. Use the Head of a household  column 
of the T ax T able, or Section D of the T ax Com-
putation Worksheet, to figure your tax.
TIP
Considered Unmarried
T o qualify for head of household status, you 
must be either unmarried or considered unmar-
ried on the last day of the year. Y ou are consid-
ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if 
you meet all the following tests.
1. Y ou file a separate return. A separate re-
turn includes a return claiming married fil-
ing separately, single, or head of house-
hold filing status.
2. Y ou paid more than half the cost of keep-
ing up your home for the tax year.
3. Y our spouse didn't live in your home during 
the last 6 months of the tax year. Y our 
spouse is considered to live in your home 
even if your spouse is temporarily absent 
due to special circumstances. See T empo-
rary absences, later.
4. Y our home was the main home of your 
child, stepchild, or foster child for more 
than half the year. (See Home of qualifying 
person, later, for rules applying to a child's 
birth, death, or temporary absence during 
the year.)
5. Y ou must be able to claim the child as a 
dependent. However, you meet this test if 
you can't claim the child as a dependent 
only because the noncustodial parent can 
claim the child using the rules described 
later in Children of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart) under 
Qualifying Child or in Support T est for Chil-
dren of Divorced or Separated Parents (or 
Parents Who Live Apart) under Qualifying 
Relative. The general rules for claiming a 
child as a dependent are explained later 
under Dependents.
Y ou may be considered unmarried for the 
purpose of using head of household status but 
not for other purposes, such as claiming the 
EIC. Different tests apply depending on the tax 
benefit you claim.
If you were considered married for part 
of the year and lived in a community 
property state (listed earlier under Mar-
ried Filing Separately ), special rules may apply 
in determining your income and expenses. See 
Pub. 555 for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse.  Y ou are consid-
ered unmarried for head of household purposes 
if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any 
time during the year and you don't choose to 
treat your nonresident spouse as a resident 
alien. However, your spouse isn't a qualifying 
person for head of household purposes. Y ou 
must have another qualifying person and meet 
the other tests to be eligible to file as head of 
household.
Choice to treat spouse as resident.  Y ou 
are considered married if you choose to treat 
your spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1 
of Pub. 519.
Keeping Up a Home
T o qualify for head of household status, you 
must pay more than half of the cost of keeping 
up a home for the year. Y ou can determine 
whether you paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up a home by using Worksheet 1.
Costs you include.  Include in the cost of 
keeping up a home expenses such as rent, 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, insurance 
on the home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in 
the home.
Costs you don't include.  Don't include the 
cost of clothing, education, medical treatment, 
CAUTION
!
Cost of Keeping Up a HomeWorksheet 1. Keep for Y our Records
   
Amount You
Paid
Total
Cost
Property taxes .............................. $ $ 
Mortgage interest expense ......................   
Rent .....................................   
Utility charges ..............................   
Repairs/maintenance .........................   
Property insurance ...........................   
Food eaten in the home ........................   
Other household expenses .....................   
Totals .................................... $ $ 
Minus total amount you paid ................... (  )
Amount others paid .......................... $ 
Note. TANF and other governmental payments. Under proposed T reasury regulations, if you received T emporary 
Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) payments or other similar payments and used the payment to support 
another person, those payments are considered support you provided for that person, rather than support provided 
by the government or other third party. If the total amount you paid is more than the amount others paid, you meet 
the requirement of paying more than half the cost of keeping up the home.
Page 8 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8 Publication 501 (2023)

vacations, life insurance, or transportation. Also 
don't include the value of your services or those 
of a member of your household.
Qualifying Person
See T able 4 to see who is a qualifying person. 
Any person not described in T able 4 isn't a qual-
ifying person.
Example 1 —child. Y our unmarried child 
lived with you all year and was 18 years old at 
the end of the year. Y our child didn't provide 
more than half of their own support and doesn't 
meet the tests to be a qualifying child of anyone 
else. As a result, this child is your qualifying 
child (see Qualifying Child, later) and, because 
this child is single, this is your qualifying person 
for head of household purposes.
Example 2 —child who isn't qualifying 
person. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 1, except your child was 25 years old at the 
end of the year and your child’s gross income 
was $5,000. Because your child doesn't meet 
the age test  (explained later under Qualifying 
Child), your child isn't your qualifying child. Be-
cause the child doesn't meet the gross income 
test (explained later under Qualifying Relative), 
the child isn't your qualifying relative. As a re-
sult, this child isn't your qualifying person for 
head of household purposes.
Example 3—your friend. Y our friend lived 
with you all year. Even though your friend may 
be your qualifying relative if the gross income 
and support tests (explained later) are met, your 
friend isn't your qualifying person for head of 
household purposes because your friend isn't 
related to you in one of the ways listed under 
Relatives who don't have to live with you , later. 
See T able 4.
Example 4 —friend's child.  The facts are 
the same as in Example 3, except your friend's 
10-year-old child also lived with you all year. 
Y our friend’s child isn't your qualifying child and, 
because the child is your friend's qualifying 
child, your friend’s child isn't your qualifying rel-
ative (see Not a Qualifying Child T est, later). As 
a result, your friend’s child isn't your qualifying 
person for head of household purposes.
Home of qualifying person.  Generally, the 
qualifying person must live with you for more 
than half of the year.
Special rule for parent.  If your qualifying 
person is your parent, you may be eligible to file 
as head of household even if your parent 
doesn't live with you. However, you must be 
able to claim your parent as a dependent. Also, 
you must pay more than half the cost of keeping 
up a home that was the main home for the en-
tire year for your parent.
If you pay more than half the cost of keeping 
your parent in a rest home or home for the eld-
erly, that counts as paying more than half the 
cost of keeping up your parent's main home.
Death or birth.  Y ou may be eligible to file 
as head of household even if the qualifying per-
son who qualifies you for this filing status is born 
or dies during the year. T o qualify you for head 
of household filing status, the qualifying person 
(as defined in T able 4) must be one of the fol-
lowing.
• Y our qualifying child or qualifying relative 
who lived with you for more than half the 
part of the year they were alive.
• Y our parent for whom you paid, for the en-
tire part of the year your parent was alive, 
more than half the cost of keeping up the 
home your parent lived in.
Example. Y ou are unmarried. Y our parent, 
who you claim as a dependent, lived in an 
apartment alone. Y our parent died on Septem-
ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of the apartment 
for the year until your parent’s death was 
$6,000. Y ou paid $4,000 and your sibling paid 
$2,000. Y our sibling made no other payments 
toward your parent’s support. Y our parent had 
no income. Because you paid more than half of 
the cost of keeping up your parent’s apartment 
from January 1 until your parent’s death, and 
you can claim your parent as a dependent, you 
can file as head of household.
Temporary absences. Y ou and your quali-
fying person are considered to live together 
even if one or both of you are temporarily ab-
sent from your home due to special circumstan-
ces such as illness, education, business, vaca-
tion, military service, or detention in a juvenile 
facility. It must be reasonable to assume the ab-
sent person will return to the home after the 
temporary absence. Y ou must continue to keep 
up the home during the absence.
Adopted child or foster child.  Y ou may 
be eligible to file as head of household if the 
person who qualifies you for this filing status 
was an adopted child or foster child and you 
kept up a home for this person in 2023, the per-
son was lawfully placed with you for legal adop-
tion by you in 2023, or the person was an eligi-
ble foster child placed with you during 2023. 
The person is considered to have lived with you 
for more than half of 2023 if your main home 
was this person's main home for more than half 
the time since the child was adopted or placed 
with you in 2023.
Kidnapped child.  Y ou may be eligible to 
file as head of household even if the child who 
is your qualifying person has been kidnapped. 
Y ou can claim head of household filing status if 
all the following statements are true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year before the kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year following the date of the child’s re-
turn.
4. Y ou would have qualified for head of 
household filing status if the child hadn't 
been kidnapped.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Qualifying Surviving Spouse
If your spouse died in 2023, you can use mar-
ried filing jointly as your filing status for 2023 if 
you otherwise qualify to use that status. The 
year of death is the last year for which you can 
file jointly with your deceased spouse. See Mar-
ried Filing Jointly, earlier.
Y ou may be eligible to use qualifying surviv-
ing spouse as your filing status for 2 years fol-
lowing the year your spouse died. For example, 
if your spouse died in 2022 and you haven't re-
married, you may be able to use this filing status 
for 2023 and 2024. The rules for using this filing 
status are explained in detail here.
This filing status entitles you to use joint re-
turn tax rates and the highest standard deduc-
tion amount (if you don't itemize deductions). It 
doesn't entitle you to file a joint return.
How to file.  Indicate your choice of this filing 
status by checking the “Qualifying surviving 
spouse” box on the Filing Status  line near the 
top of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If the child who 
qualifies you for this filing status isn’t claimed as 
your dependent in the Dependents section of 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, enter the child’s name 
in the entry space at the bottom of the Filing 
Status section. Use the Married filing jointly col-
umn of the T ax T able, or Section B of the T ax 
Computation Worksheet, to figure your tax.
Eligibility rules.  Y ou are eligible to file your 
2023 return as a qualifying surviving spouse if 
you meet all the following tests.
1. Y ou were entitled to file a joint return with 
your spouse for the year your spouse died. 
It doesn't matter whether you actually filed 
a joint return.
2. Y our spouse died in 2021 or 2022 and you 
didn't remarry before the end of 2023.
3. Y ou have a child or stepchild (not a foster 
child) whom you can claim as a dependent 
or could claim as a dependent except that, 
for 2023:
a. The child had gross income of $4,700 
or more,
b. The child filed a joint return, or
c. Y ou could be claimed as a dependent 
on someone else’s return.
If the child isn’t claimed as your de-
pendent in the Dependents section on 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, enter the child’s 
name in the entry space at the bottom of 
the Filing Status section. If you don’t enter 
the name, it will take us longer to process 
your return.
4. This child lived in your home all year, ex-
cept for temporary absences. See T empo-
rary absences, earlier, under Head of 
Household. There are also exceptions, de-
scribed later, for a child who was born or 
died during the year and for a kidnapped 
child.
Page 9 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 9

5. Y ou paid more than half the cost of keep-
ing up a home for the year. See Keeping 
Up a Home, earlier, under Head of House-
hold.
Example. Y our spouse died in 2021 and 
you haven’t remarried. During 2022 and 2023, 
you continued to keep up a home for you and 
your child who lives with you and whom you can 
claim as a dependent. For 2021, you were enti-
tled to file a joint return for you and your de-
ceased spouse. For 2022 and 2023, you can file 
as a qualifying surviving spouse. After 2023, 
you can file as head of household if you qualify.
Death or birth. Y ou may be eligible to file as a 
qualifying surviving spouse if the child who 
qualifies you for this filing status is born or dies 
during the year. Y ou must have provided more 
than half of the cost of keeping up a home that 
was the child's main home during the entire part 
of the year the child was alive.
Adopted child. Y ou may be eligible to file as a 
qualifying surviving spouse if the child who 
qualifies you for this filing status you adopted in 
2023 or was lawfully placed with you for legal 
adoption by you in 2023. The child is consid-
ered to have lived with you for all of 2023 if your 
main home was this child's main home for the 
entire time since this child was adopted or 
placed with you in 2023.
Kidnapped child. Y ou may be eligible to file as 
a qualifying surviving spouse even if the child 
who qualifies you for this filing status has been 
kidnapped. Y ou can claim qualifying surviving 
spouse filing status if all the following state-
ments are true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year before the kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year following the date of the child’s re-
turn.
4. Y ou would have qualified for qualifying sur-
viving spouse filing status if the child had 
not been kidnapped.
As mentioned earlier, the filing status 
qualifying surviving spouse is available 
for only 2 years following the year your 
spouse died.
CAUTION
!
Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
CAUTION
!
See the text of this publication for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing status.
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
qualifying child (such as a son, daughter, 
or grandchild who lived with you more than 
half the year and meets certain other tests)2
the child is single a qualifying person, whether or not 
the child meets the citizen or 
resident test.
the child is married and you can claim the 
child as a dependent
a qualifying person.
the child is married and you can't claim the 
child as a dependent
not a qualifying person.3
qualifying relative4 who is your father or 
mother
you can claim your parent as a dependent5 a qualifying person.6
you can't claim your parent as a dependent not a qualifying person.
qualifying relative4 other than your father or 
mother (such as a grandparent, brother, or 
sister who meets certain tests) 
your relative lived with you more than half 
the year, and your relative is related to you 
in one of the ways listed under Relatives 
who don't have to live with you, later, and 
you can claim your relative as a dependent5
a qualifying person.
your relative didn't live with you more than 
half the year
not a qualifying person.
your relative isn't related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who don't have 
to live with you, later, and is your qualifying 
relative only because your relative lived with 
you all year as a member of your household 
not a qualifying person.
you can't claim your relative as a dependent not a qualifying person.
1 A person can't qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2 The term “qualifying child” is defined under Dependents, later. Note: If you are a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child” for head of 
household filing status doesn't include a child who is your qualifying child only because of the rules described under Children of divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart) under Qualifying Child, later. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child is 
generally your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child isn't a qualifying child you can claim as a dependent.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you can't claim the person as a dependent is that you can be claimed as a dependent on 
another taxpayer's return.
4 The term “qualifying relative” is defined under Dependents, later.
5 If you can claim a person as a dependent only because of a multiple support agreement, that person isn't a qualifying person. See Multiple 
Support Agreement, later.
6 See Special rule for parent, earlier.
T able 4.
Page 10 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
10 Publication 501 (2023)

Dependents
The term “dependent” means:
• A qualifying child, or
• A qualifying relative.
The terms “qualifying child” and “qualifying rela-
tive” are defined later.
All the requirements for claiming a depend-
ent are summarized in T able 5.
Housekeepers, maids, or servants.  If these 
people work for you, you can't claim them as 
dependents.
Child tax credit. Y ou may be entitled to a child 
tax credit for each qualifying child who was un-
der age 17 at the end of the year if you claimed 
that child as a dependent. For more information, 
see the Instructions for Form 1040.
Credit for other dependents. Y ou may be en-
titled to a credit for other dependents for each 
qualifying child who does not qualify you for the 
child tax credit and for each qualifying relative. 
For more information, see the Instructions for 
Form 1040.
Exceptions
Even if you have a qualifying child or qualifying 
relative, you can claim that person as a depend-
ent only if these three tests are met.
1. Dependent taxpayer test.
2. Joint return test.
3. Citizen or resident test.
These three tests are explained in detail here.
Dependent Taxpayer Test
If you can be claimed as a dependent by an-
other taxpayer, you can't claim anyone else as a 
Overview of the Rules for Claiming a Dependent
CAUTION
!
This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this publication.
• Y ou can't claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer, 
unless that taxpayer files a return only to claim a refund of withheld income tax or estimated tax paid.
• Y ou can't claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is filed only to claim a refund of 
withheld income tax or estimated tax paid. 
• Y ou can't claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, a U.S. resident alien, a U.S. national, or a resident 
of Canada or Mexico.1
• Y ou can't claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother, 
sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsister, or a descendant 
of any of them.
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year and younger 
than you (or your spouse if filing jointly); (b) under age 24 at the end of the 
year, a student, and younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly); or 
(c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. 
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of the year.2
4. The child must not have provided more than half of the child’s own support 
for the year.
5. The child must not be filing a joint return for the year (unless that joint 
return is filed only to claim a refund of withheld income tax or estimated 
tax paid).
If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than one 
person, generally only one person can actually treat the child as a 
qualifying child. See Qualifying Child of More Than One Person, later, 
to find out which person is the person entitled to claim the child as a 
qualifying child. 
1. The person can't be your qualifying child or the qualifying 
child of any other taxpayer.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who don't have to live with you, or 
(b) must live with you all year as a member of your 
household2 (and your relationship must not violate local law).
3. The person's gross income for the year must be less than 
$4,700.3
4. Y ou must provide more than half of the person's total support 
for the year.4
1 There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2 There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children who were adopted or lawfully placed for 
adoption during the year, children who are eligible foster children placed during the year, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who 
live apart), and kidnapped children.
3 There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4 There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), and kidnapped 
children.
T able 5.
Page 11 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 11

dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child 
or qualifying relative, you can't claim that person 
as a dependent.
If you are filing a joint return and your 
spouse can be claimed as a dependent by an-
other taxpayer, you and your spouse can't claim 
any dependents on your joint return.
Exception. If you can be claimed as a depend-
ent by another taxpayer, you can claim some-
one else as a dependent if the person who can 
claim you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) 
as a dependent files a return only to claim a re-
fund of income tax withheld or estimated tax 
paid.
Joint Return Test
Y ou generally can't claim a married person as a 
dependent if that person files a joint return.
Exception. Y ou can claim a person as a de-
pendent who files a joint return if that person 
and that person’s spouse file the joint return 
only to claim a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid.
Example 1 —child files joint return.  Y ou 
supported your 18 -year-old child who lived with 
you all year while your child’s spouse was in the 
Armed Forces. Y our child’s spouse earned 
$35,000 for the year. The couple files a joint re-
turn. Y ou can't claim your child as a dependent.
Example 2 —child files joint return only 
as claim for refund of withheld tax.  Y our 
18-year-old child and your child’s 17 -year-old 
spouse had $800 of wages from part -time jobs 
and no other income. They lived with you all 
year. Neither is required to file a tax return. They 
don't have a child. T axes were taken out of their 
pay, so they file a joint return only to get a refund 
of the withheld taxes. The exception to the joint 
return test applies, so you aren't disqualified 
from claiming each of them as a dependent just 
because they file a joint return. Y ou can claim 
each of them as dependents if all the other tests 
to do so are met.
Example 3 —child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in Example 2, except no 
taxes were taken out of your child’s pay or your 
child’s spouse’s pay. However, they file a joint 
return to claim an American opportunity credit 
of $124 and get a refund of that amount. Be-
cause they filed a joint return claiming the 
American opportunity credit, they aren’t filing it 
only to get a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid. The exception to the joint re-
turn test doesn't apply, so you can't claim either 
of them as a dependent.
Citizen or Resident Test
Y ou generally can't claim a person as a depend-
ent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, a U.S. 
resident alien, a U.S. national, or a resident of 
Canada or Mexico. However, there is an excep-
tion for certain adopted children, as explained 
next.
Exception for adopted child. If you are a U.S. 
citizen or U.S. national who has legally adopted 
a child who isn't a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident 
alien, or U.S. national, this test is met if the child 
lived with you as a member of your household 
all year. This exception also applies if the child 
was lawfully placed with you for legal adoption 
and the child lived with you for the rest of the 
year after placement.
Child's place of residence.  Children are usu-
ally citizens or residents of the country of their 
parents.
If you were a U.S. citizen when your child 
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen and 
meet this test even if the other parent was a 
nonresident alien and the child was born in a 
foreign country.
Foreign students' place of residence.  For-
eign students brought to this country under a 
qualified international education exchange pro-
gram and placed in American homes for a tem-
porary period generally aren't U.S. residents 
and don't meet this test. Y ou can't claim them as 
dependents. However, if you provided a home 
for a foreign student, you may be able to take a 
charitable contribution deduction. See Expen-
ses Paid for Student Living With Y ou in Pub. 
526.
U.S. national. A U.S. national is an individual 
who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes alle-
giance to the United States. U.S. nationals in-
clude American Samoans and Northern Ma-
riana Islanders who chose to become U.S. 
nationals instead of U.S. citizens.
Qualifying Child
Five tests must be met for a child to be your 
qualifying child. The five tests are:
1. Relationship,
2. Age,
3. Residency,
4. Support, and
5. Joint return.
These tests are explained next.
If a child meets the five tests to be the 
qualifying child of more than one per-
son, there are rules you must use to 
determine which person can actually treat the 
child as a qualifying child. See Qualifying Child 
of More Than One Person, later.
Relationship Test
T o meet this test, a child must be:
• Y our son, daughter, stepchild, or foster 
child, or a descendant (for example, your 
grandchild) of any of them; or
• Y our brother, sister, half brother, half sister, 
stepbrother, or stepsister, or a descendant 
(for example, your niece or nephew) of any 
of them.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
CAUTION
!
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Foster child. A foster child is an individual who 
is placed with you by an authorized placement 
agency or by judgment, decree, or other order 
of any court of competent jurisdiction.
Age Test
T o meet this test, a child must be:
• Under age 19 at the end of the year and 
younger than you (or your spouse if filing 
jointly);
• A student under age 24 at the end of the 
year and younger than you (or your spouse 
if filing jointly); or
• Permanently and totally disabled at any 
time during the year, regardless of age.
Example. Y our child turned 19 on Decem-
ber 10. Unless this child was permanently and 
totally disabled or a student, this child doesn't 
meet the age test because, at the end of the 
year, this child wasn't under age 19.
Child must be younger than you or your 
spouse. T o be your qualifying child, a child 
who isn't permanently and totally disabled must 
be younger than you. However, if you are mar-
ried filing jointly, the child must be younger than 
you or your spouse but doesn't have to be 
younger than both of you.
Example 1—child not younger than you 
or your spouse. Y our 23-year-old sibling, who 
is a student and unmarried, lives with you and 
your spouse, who provide more than half of your 
sibling’s support. Y our sibling isn't disabled. 
Both you and your spouse are 21 years old, and 
you file a joint return. Y our sibling isn't your qual-
ifying child because your sibling isn't younger 
than you or your spouse.
Example 2 —child younger than your 
spouse but not younger than you.  The facts 
are the same as in  Example 1 , except your 
spouse is 25 years old. Because your sibling is 
younger than your spouse and you and your 
spouse are filing a joint return, your sibling is 
your qualifying child, even though your sibling 
isn't younger than you.
Student defined. T o qualify as a student, your 
child must be, during some part of each of any 5 
calendar months of the year:
1. A full-time student at a school that has a 
regular teaching staff and course of study, 
and a regularly enrolled student body at 
the school; or
2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
ing course given by a school described in 
(1), or by a state, county, or local govern-
ment agency.
The 5 calendar months don't have to be con-
secutive.
Full-time student.  A full -time student is a 
student who is enrolled for the number of hours 
or courses the school considers to be full -time 
attendance.
Page 12 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
12 Publication 501 (2023)

School defined.  A school can be an ele-
mentary school, a junior or senior high school, a 
college, a university, or a technical, trade, or 
mechanical school. However, an on -the-job 
training course, correspondence school, or 
school offering courses only through the Inter-
net doesn't count as a school.
Vocational high school students.  Stu-
dents who work on “co-op” jobs in private indus-
try as a part of a school's regular course of 
classroom and practical training are considered 
full-time students.
Permanently and totally disabled.  Y our child 
is permanently and totally disabled if both of the 
following apply.
• Y our child can't engage in any substantial 
gainful activity because of a physical or 
mental condition.
• A doctor determines the condition has las-
ted or can be expected to last continuously 
for at least a year or can lead to death.
Residency Test
T o meet this test, your child must have lived with 
you for more than half the year. There are ex-
ceptions for temporary absences, children who 
were born or died during the year, adopted or 
foster children, kidnapped children, and chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents.
Temporary absences.  Y our child is consid-
ered to have lived with you during periods of 
time when one of you, or both, is temporarily 
absent due to special circumstances, such as:
• Illness,
• Education,
• Business,
• Vacation,
• Military service, or
• Detention in a juvenile facility.
Death or birth of child.  A child who was born 
or died during the year is treated as having lived 
with you more than half the year if your home 
was the child's home more than half the time 
the child was alive during the year. The same is 
true if the child lived with you more than half the 
year except for any required hospital stay follow-
ing birth.
Child born alive. Y ou may be able to claim 
as a dependent a child born alive during the 
year, even if the child lived only for a moment. 
State or local law must treat the child as having 
been born alive. There must be proof of a live 
birth shown by an official document, such as a 
birth certificate. The child must be your qualify-
ing child or qualifying relative, and all the other 
tests to claim the child as a dependent must be 
met.
Stillborn child.  Y ou can't claim a stillborn 
child as a dependent.
Adopted child or foster child.  Y ou can treat 
your adopted child or foster child as meeting the 
residency test as follows if you adopted the 
child in 2023, the child was lawfully placed with 
you for legal adoption by you in 2023, or the 
child was an eligible foster child placed with you 
during 2023. This child is considered to have 
lived with you for more than half of 2023 if your 
main home was this child's main home for more 
than half the time since this child was adopted 
or placed with you in 2023.
Kidnapped child.  Y ou can treat your child as 
meeting the residency test even if the child has 
been kidnapped, but the following statements 
must be true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the 
child lived with you for more than half of 
the part of the year before the date of the 
kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year following the date of the child’s re-
turn.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Children of divorced or separated parents 
(or parents who live apart).  In most cases, 
because of the residency test, a child of di-
vorced or separated parents is the qualifying 
child of the custodial parent. However, the child 
will be treated as the qualifying child of the non-
custodial parent if all four of the following state-
ments are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance;
b. Are separated under a written separa-
tion agreement; or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 
6 months of the year, whether or not 
they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of the child’s 
support for the year from the parents.
3. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
a. The custodial parent signs a written 
declaration, discussed later, that they 
won't claim the child as a dependent 
for the year, and the noncustodial pa-
rent attaches this written declaration 
to their return. (If the decree or agree-
ment went into effect after 1984 and 
before 2009, see Post-1984 and 
pre-2009 divorce decree or separa-
tion agreement, later. If the decree or 
agreement went into effect after 2008, 
see Post-2008 divorce decree or sep-
aration agreement, later.)
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance or written separa-
tion agreement that applies to 2023 
states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, 
the decree or agreement wasn't 
changed after 1984 to say the non-
custodial parent can't claim the child 
as a dependent, and the noncustodial 
parent provides at least $600 for the 
child's support during the year.
If statements (1) through (4) are all true, only 
the noncustodial parent can:
• Claim the child as a dependent; and
• Claim the child as a qualifying child for the 
child tax credit, the credit for other depend-
ents, or the additional child tax credit.
However, this doesn’t allow the noncustodial 
parent to claim head of household filing status, 
the credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses, the exclusion for dependent care benefits, 
or the earned income credit. See Applying the 
tiebreaker rules to divorced or separated pa-
rents (or parents who live apart), later.
Example—earned income credit.  Even if 
statements (1) through (4) are all true and the 
custodial parent signs Form 8332 or a substan-
tially similar statement that the custodial parent 
won’t claim the child as a dependent for 2023, 
this doesn’t allow the noncustodial parent to 
claim the child as a qualifying child for the 
earned income credit. The custodial parent or 
another taxpayer, if eligible, can claim the child 
for the earned income credit.
Custodial parent and noncustodial pa-
rent. The custodial parent is the parent with 
whom the child lived for the greater number of 
nights during the year. The other parent is the 
noncustodial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during 
the year and the child lived with both parents 
before the separation, the custodial parent is 
the one with whom the child lived for the greater 
number of nights during the rest of the year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a 
night if the child sleeps:
• At that parent's home, whether or not the 
parent is present; or
• In the company of the parent, when the 
child doesn't sleep at a parent's home (for 
example, the parent and child are on vaca-
tion together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived 
with each parent for an equal number of nights 
during the year, the custodial parent is the pa-
rent with the higher AGI.
December 31. The night of December 31 is 
treated as part of the year in which the night be-
gins. For example, the night of December 31, 
2023, is treated as part of 2023.
Emancipated child. If a child is emancipa-
ted under state law, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent. See Examples 5 and 6.
Absences. If a child wasn't with either pa-
rent on a particular night (because, for example, 
the child was staying at a friend's house), the 
child is treated as living with the parent with 
whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night, except for the absence. But if it can't 
be determined with which parent the child nor-
mally would have lived or if the child would not 
have lived with either parent that night, the child 
is treated as not living with either parent that 
night.
Page 13 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 13

Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's 
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a 
greater number of days, but not nights, with the 
parent who works at night, that parent is treated 
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the 
child is treated as living at the primary resi-
dence registered with the school.
Example 1 —child lived with one parent 
for a greater number of nights. Y ou and your 
child’s other parent are divorced. In 2023, your 
child lived with you 210 nights and with the 
other parent 155 nights. Y ou are the custodial 
parent.
Example 2 —child is away at camp.  In 
2023, your child lives with each parent for alter-
nate weeks. In the summer, your child spends 6 
weeks at summer camp. During those 6 weeks, 
your child is treated as living with you for 3 
weeks and with your child’s other parent, your 
ex-spouse, for 3 weeks because this is how 
long the child would have lived with each parent 
if the child had not attended summer camp.
Example 3—child lived same number of 
nights with each parent.  Y our child lived with 
you 180 nights during the year and lived the 
same number of nights with the child’s other pa-
rent, your ex-spouse. Y our AGI is $40,000. Y our 
ex-spouse's AGI is $25,000. Y ou are treated as 
your child's custodial parent because you have 
the higher AGI.
Example 4 —child is at parent’s home 
but with other parent.  Y our child normally 
lives with you during the week and with the 
child’s other parent, your ex-spouse, every other 
weekend. Y ou become ill and are hospitalized. 
The other parent lives in your home with your 
child for 10 consecutive days while you are in 
the hospital. Y our child is treated as living with 
you during this 10 -day period because your 
child was living in your home.
Example 5 —child emancipated in May. 
Y our child turned 18 in May 2023 and became 
emancipated under the law of the state where 
your child lives. As a result, your child isn't con-
sidered in the custody of either parent for more 
than half of the year. The special rule for chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents doesn't 
apply.
Example 6 —child emancipated in Au-
gust. Y our child lives with you from January 1, 
2023, until May 31, 2023, and lives with the 
child’s other parent, your ex -spouse, from June 
1, 2023, through the end of the year. Y our child 
turns 18 and is emancipated under state law on 
August 1, 2023. Because your child is treated 
as not living with either parent beginning on Au-
gust 1, your child is treated as living with you 
the greater number of nights in 2023. Y ou are 
the custodial parent.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent 
must use either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment (containing the same information required 
by the form) to make the written declaration to 
release a claim to an exemption for a child to 
the noncustodial parent. Although the exemp-
tion amount is zero for tax year 2023, this re-
lease allows the noncustodial parent to claim 
the child tax credit, credit for other dependents, 
or additional child tax credit, if applicable, for 
the child. The noncustodial parent must attach 
a copy of the form or statement to their tax re-
turn.
The release can be for 1 year, for a number 
of specified years (for example, alternate 
years), or for all future years, as specified in the 
declaration.
Post-1984 and pre -2009 divorce decree 
or separation agreement.  If the divorce de-
cree or separation agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial 
parent may be able to attach certain pages from 
the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. 
The decree or agreement must state all three of 
the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the 
child as a dependent without regard to any 
condition, such as payment of support.
2. The custodial parent won't claim the child 
as a dependent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial pa-
rent, rather than the custodial parent, can 
claim the child as a dependent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of 
the following pages of the decree or agreement 
to their tax return.
• The cover page (write the other parent's 
SSN on this page).
• The pages that include all of the informa-
tion identified in items (1) through (3) 
above.
• The signature page with the other parent's 
signature and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation 
agreement. The noncustodial parent can't at-
tach pages from the decree or agreement in-
stead of Form 8332 if the decree or agreement 
went into effect after 2008. The custodial parent 
must sign either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment whose only purpose is to release the cus-
todial parent's claim to an exemption, and the 
noncustodial parent must attach a copy to their 
return. The form or statement must release the 
custodial parent's claim to the child without any 
conditions. For example, the release must not 
depend on the noncustodial parent paying sup-
port.
The noncustodial parent must attach 
the required information even if it was 
filed with a return in an earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
emption. The custodial parent can revoke a re-
lease of claim to an exemption. For the revoca-
tion to be effective for 2023, the custodial parent 
must have given (or made reasonable efforts to 
give) written notice of the revocation to the non-
custodial parent in 2022 or earlier. The custo-
dial parent can use Part III of Form 8332 for this 
purpose and must attach a copy of the revoca-
tion to their return for each tax year the custo-
dial parent claims the child as a dependent as a 
result of the revocation.
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-
port provided by your new spouse is treated as 
provided by you.
Parents who never married.  This rule for 
divorced or separated parents also applies to 
CAUTION
!
parents who never married and lived apart at all 
times during the last 6 months of the year.
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying 
Child)
T o meet this test, the child can't have provided 
more than half of the child’s own support for the 
year.
This test is different from the support test to 
be a qualifying relative, which is described later. 
However, to see what is or isn't support, see 
Support T est (T o Be a Qualifying Relative), later. 
If you aren't sure whether a child provided more 
than half of their own support, you may find 
Worksheet 2 helpful.
Example. Y ou provided $4,000 toward your 
16-year-old child's support for the year and the 
child provided $6,000. Y our child provided more 
than half their own support. This child isn't your 
qualifying child.
Foster care payments and expenses.  Pay-
ments you receive for the support of a foster 
child from a child placement agency are consid-
ered support provided by the agency. Similarly, 
payments you receive for the support of a foster 
child from a state or county are considered sup-
port provided by the state or county.
If you aren't in the trade or business of pro-
viding foster care and your unreimbursed 
out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a foster 
child were mainly to benefit an organization 
qualified to receive deductible charitable contri-
butions, the expenses are deductible as charita-
ble contributions but aren't considered support 
you provided. For more information about the 
deduction for charitable contributions, see Pub. 
526. If your unreimbursed expenses aren't de-
ductible as charitable contributions, they may 
qualify as support you provided.
If you are in the trade or business of provid-
ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses 
aren't considered support provided by you.
Example 1. A foster child lived with a mar-
ried couple, the Smiths, for the last 3 months of 
the year. The Smiths cared for the foster child 
because they wanted to adopt the child (al-
though the child had not been placed with them 
for adoption). They didn't care for the foster 
child as a trade or business or to benefit the 
agency that placed the foster child in their 
home. The Smiths' unreimbursed expenses 
aren't deductible as charitable contributions but 
are considered support they provided for the 
foster child.
Example 2.  Y ou provided $3,000 toward 
your 10 -year-old foster child's support for the 
year. The state government provided $4,000, 
which is considered support provided by the 
state, not by the child. See Support provided by 
the state (welfare, food benefits, housing, etc.) , 
later. Y our foster child didn't provide more than 
half of their own support for the year.
Scholarships. A scholarship received by a 
child who is a student isn't taken into account in 
determining whether the child provided more 
than half of their own support.
Page 14 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
14 Publication 501 (2023)

TANF and other governmental payments. 
Under proposed T reasury regulations, if you re-
ceived T emporary Assistance to Needy Fami-
lies (TANF) payments or other similar payments 
and used the payment to support another per-
son, those payments are considered support 
you provided for that person, rather than sup-
port provided by the government or other third 
party.
Joint Return Test (To Be a 
Qualifying Child)
T o meet this test, the child can't file a joint return 
for the year.
Exception. An exception to the joint return test 
applies if your child and the child’s spouse file a 
joint return only to claim a refund of income tax 
withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1 —child files joint return.  Y ou 
supported your 18 -year-old child who lived with 
you all year while the child’s spouse was in the 
Armed Forces. Y our child’s spouse earned 
$35,000 for the year. The couple files a joint re-
turn so this child isn't your qualifying child.
Example 2 —child files joint return only 
as claim for refund of withheld tax.  Y our 
18-year-old child and your child’s 17 -year-old 
spouse had $800 of wages from part -time jobs 
and no other income. They lived with you all 
year. Neither is required to file a tax return. They 
don't have a child. T axes were taken out of their 
pay, so they file a joint return only to get a refund 
of the withheld taxes. The exception to the joint 
return test applies, so this child may be your 
qualifying child if all the other tests are met.
Example 3 —child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in  Example 2 , except no 
taxes were taken out of either spouse's pay. 
However, they file a joint return to claim an 
American opportunity credit of $124 and get a 
refund of that amount. Because claiming the 
American opportunity credit is their reason for 
filing the return, they aren't filing it only to get a 
refund of income tax withheld or estimated tax 
paid. The exception to the joint return test 
doesn't apply, so this child isn't your qualifying 
child.
Qualifying Child of More Than One 
Person
If your qualifying child isn't a qualifying 
child of anyone else, this topic doesn't 
apply to you and you don't need to read 
about it. This is also true if your qualifying child 
isn't a qualifying child of anyone else except 
your spouse with whom you plan to file a joint 
return.
If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under 
the rules for children of divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart), 
described earlier, see Applying the tiebreaker 
rules to divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart), later.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Sometimes, a child meets the relationship, 
age, residency, support, and joint return tests to 
be a qualifying child of more than one person. 
Although the child is a qualifying child of each of 
these persons, generally only one person can 
actually treat the child as a qualifying child to 
take all of the following tax benefits (provided 
the person is eligible for each benefit).
1. The child tax credit, credit for other de-
pendents, or additional child tax credit.
2. Head of household filing status.
3. The credit for child and dependent care 
expenses.
4. The exclusion from income for dependent 
care benefits.
5. The earned income credit.
The other person can’t take any of these 
benefits based on this qualifying child. In other 
words, you and the other person can’t agree to 
divide these tax benefits between you.
Tiebreaker rules. T o determine which person 
can treat the child as a qualifying child to claim 
these five tax benefits, the following tiebreaker 
rules apply. For purposes of these tiebreaker 
rules, the term “parent” means a biological or 
adoptive parent of an individual. It does not in-
clude a stepparent or foster parent unless that 
person has adopted the individual.
• If only one of the persons is the child's pa-
rent, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the parent.
• If the parents file a joint return together and 
can claim the child as a qualifying child, 
the child is treated as the qualifying child of 
the parents.
• If the parents don't file a joint return to-
gether but both parents claim the child as a 
qualifying child, the IRS will treat the child 
as the qualifying child of the parent with 
whom the child lived for the longer period 
of time during the year. If the child lived 
with each parent for the same amount of 
time, the IRS will treat the child as the qual-
ifying child of the parent who had the 
higher AGI for the year.
• If no parent can claim the child as a qualify-
ing child, the child is treated as the qualify-
ing child of the person who had the highest 
AGI for the year.
• If a parent can claim the child as a qualify-
ing child but no parent does so claim the 
child, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the person who had the highest 
AGI for the year, but only if that person's 
AGI is higher than the highest AGI of any of 
the child's parents who can claim the child.
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and 
the other person may be able to choose which 
of you claims the child as a qualifying child.
Y ou may be able to qualify for the 
earned income credit under the rules 
for taxpayers without a qualifying child 
if you have a qualifying child for the earned in-
come credit who is claimed as a qualifying child 
by another taxpayer. For more information, see 
Pub. 596.
TIP
Example 1 —child lived with parent and 
grandparent. Y ou and your 3-year-old child J 
lived with your parent all year. Y ou are 25 years 
old and unmarried, and your AGI is $9,000. Y our 
parent's AGI is $15,000. Y our child’s other pa-
rent didn't live with you or your child. Y ou 
haven't signed Form 8832 (or a similar state-
ment).
J is a qualifying child of both you and your 
parent because J meets the relationship, age, 
residency, support, and joint return tests for 
both you and your parent. However, only one of 
you can claim J. J isn't a qualifying child of any-
one else, including J’s other parent. Y ou agree 
to let your parent claim J. This means your pa-
rent can claim J as a qualifying child for all of 
the five tax benefits listed earlier, if your parent 
qualifies for each of those benefits (and if you 
don't claim J as a qualifying child for any of 
those tax benefits).
Example 2—parent has higher AGI than 
grandparent. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 1, except your AGI is $18,000. Because 
your parent's AGI isn't higher than yours, your 
parent can't claim J. Only you can claim J.
Example 3 —two persons claim same 
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except you and your parent both claim J as a 
qualifying child. In this case, you, as the child's 
parent, will be the only one allowed to claim J 
as a qualifying child. The IRS will disallow your 
parent's claim to the five tax benefits listed ear-
lier based on J. However, your parent may qual-
ify for the earned income credit as a taxpayer 
without a qualifying child.
Example 4—qualifying children split be-
tween two persons.  The facts are the same 
as in Example 1, except you also have two other 
young children who are qualifying children of 
both you and your parent. Only one of you can 
claim each child. However, if your parent's AGI 
is higher than yours, you can allow your parent 
to claim one or more of the children. For exam-
ple, if you claim one child, your parent can claim 
the other two.
Example 5—taxpayer who is a qualifying 
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except you are only 18 years old and didn't pro-
vide more than half of your own support for the 
year. This means you are your parent's qualify-
ing child. If your parent can claim you as a de-
pendent, then you can't claim your child as a 
dependent because of the dependent taxpayer 
test, explained earlier, unless your parent files a 
return only to claim a refund of income tax with-
held or estimated tax paid.
Example 6 —separated parents.  Y ou, 
your spouse, and your 10-year-old child all lived 
in the United States for all of 2023. On August 
1, 2023, your spouse moved out of the house-
hold. In August and September, your child lived 
with you. For the rest of the year, your child lived 
with your spouse, the child's other parent. Y our 
child is a qualifying child of both you and your 
spouse because your child lived with each of 
you for more than half the year and because 
your child met the relationship, age, support, 
and joint return tests for both of you. At the end 
of the year, you and your spouse still weren't 
Page 15 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 15

Worksheet for Determining SupportWorksheet 2. Keep for Y our Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable 
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other 
accounts at the beginning of the year. Don't include funds provided by the state; include those 
amounts on line 23 instead .......................................................... 1.  
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support .......................... 2.  
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ............................... 3.  
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ........ 4.  
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ................................. 5.  
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
a. Enter the total rent paid ........................................................... 6a.  
b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, 
also include this amount in line 21 .................................................. 6b.  
7. Enter the total food expenses ........................................................ 7.  
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc., not included in line 6a or 6b) .......... 8.  
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ............................. 9.  
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Don't include expenses of maintaining the home, such as 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance ...................................... 10.  
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses .......................... 11.  
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ................................. 12.  
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............... 13.  
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses .............................................. 14.  
15. Enter the person's total education expenses ............................................ 15.  
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by 
insurance ........................................................................ 16.  
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses ................................... 17.  
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses ........................................... 18.  
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year ............. 19.  
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of the Person’s Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (0.50) ........................................................ 20.  
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b, if the person you supported owned 
the home. This is the amount the person provided for their own support ...................... 21.  
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
No. Y ou meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a 
qualifying child, stop here; don't complete lines 23–26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to 
determine if this person is your qualifying relative. 
 Yes. Y ou don't meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop 
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state, 
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Don't include any amounts included on 
line 1 ............................................................................ 23.  
24. Add lines 21 and 23 ................................................................ 24.  
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ......... 25.  
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
Yes. Y ou meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 No. Y ou don't meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. Y ou can't claim this person as a 
dependent unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart), or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement, Support T est 
for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart), or Kidnapped child under Qualifying Relative.
Page 16 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
16 Publication 501 (2023)

divorced, legally separated, or separated under 
a written separation agreement, so the rule for 
children of divorced or separated parents (or 
parents who live apart) doesn't apply.
Y ou and your spouse will file separate re-
turns. Y our spouse agrees to let you treat your 
child as a qualifying child. This means, if your 
spouse doesn't claim your child as a qualifying 
child, you can claim this child as a qualifying 
child for the child tax credit and the exclusion for 
dependent care benefits (assuming you other-
wise qualify for both tax benefits). However, you 
can't claim head of household filing status be-
cause you and your spouse didn't live apart for 
the last 6 months of the year. As a result, your 
filing status is married filing separately. Y ou 
can't claim the earned income credit because 
you don't meet the requirements for certain sep-
arated spouses to claim the earned income 
credit when they don’t file a joint return. Y ou and 
your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 
months of 2023 and while you did live apart at 
the end of 2023, you aren't legally separated 
under a written separation agreement or decree 
of separate maintenance. Therefore, you don't 
meet the requirements to take the earned in-
come credit as a separated spouse who is not 
filing a joint return. Y ou also can't take the credit 
for child and dependent care expenses be-
cause your fling status is married filing sepa-
rately and you and your spouse didn't live apart 
for the last 6 months of 2023.
Example 7 —separated parents claim 
same child.  The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 6 , except you and your spouse both 
claim your child as a qualifying child. In this 
case, only your spouse will be allowed to treat 
your child as a qualifying child. This is because, 
during 2023, the child lived with your spouse 
longer than with you. If you claimed the child tax 
credit for your child, the IRS will disallow your 
claim to the child tax credit. If you don't have an-
other qualifying child or dependent, the IRS will 
also disallow your claim to the exclusion for de-
pendent care benefits. In addition, because you 
and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 
months of the year, your spouse can't claim 
head of household filing status. As a result, your 
spouse’s filing status is married filing separately. 
Y our spouse can't claim the earned income 
credit because your spouse doesn't meet the 
requirements to claim the earned income credit 
for certain separated spouses. Y ou and your 
spouse didn’t live apart for the last 6 months of 
2023 and, while you did live apart at the end of 
2023, you aren't legally separated under a writ-
ten separation agreement or decree of separate 
maintenance. Therefore, your spouse doesn’t 
meet the requirements to take the earned in-
come credit as a separated spouse who isn’t fil-
ing a joint return. Y our spouse also can't take 
the credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses because your spouse’s filing status is mar-
ried filing separately and you and your spouse 
didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 2023.
Example 8 —unmarried parents.  Y ou, 
your 5 -year-old child, L, and L ’s other parent 
lived together in the United States all year. Y ou 
and L ’s other parent aren't married. L is a quali-
fying child of both you and L ’s other parent be-
cause L meets the relationship, age, residency, 
support, and joint return tests for both you and 
L ’s other parent. Y our AGI is $12,000 and L ’s 
other parent's AGI is $14,000. L ’s other parent 
agrees to let you claim the child as a qualifying 
child. This means you can claim L as a qualify-
ing child for the child tax credit, head of house-
hold filing status, the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses, the exclusion for 
dependent care benefits, and the earned in-
come credit, if you qualify for each of those tax 
benefits (and if L ’s other parent doesn't claim L 
as a qualifying child for any of those tax bene-
fits).
Example 9 —unmarried parents claim 
same child. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 8 , except you and L ’s other parent both 
claim L as a qualifying child. In this case, only 
L ’s other parent will be allowed to treat L as a 
qualifying child. This is because L ’s other pa-
rent’s AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI, 
$12,000. If you claimed the child tax credit for L, 
the IRS will disallow your claim to this credit. If 
you don't have another qualifying child or de-
pendent, the IRS will also disallow your claim to 
head of household filing status, the credit for 
child and dependent care expenses, and the 
exclusion for dependent care benefits. How-
ever, you may be able to claim the earned in-
come credit as a taxpayer without a qualifying 
child.
Example 10—child didn't live with a pa-
rent. Y ou and your sibling’s child, M, lived with 
your parent all year. Y ou are 25 years old, and 
your AGI is $9,300. Y our parent’s AGI is 
$15,000. M’s parents file jointly, have an AGI of 
less than $9,000, and don't live with you or M. M 
is a qualifying child of both you and your parent 
because M meets the relationship, age, resi-
dency, support, and joint return tests for both 
you and your parent. However, only your parent 
can treat M as a qualifying child. This is be-
cause your parent's AGI, $15,000, is more than 
your AGI, $9,300.
Applying the tiebreaker rules to divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live 
apart). If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under the rules 
described earlier for children of divorced or sep-
arated parents (or parents who live apart) , only 
the noncustodial parent can claim the child as a 
dependent and claim the child tax credit, addi-
tional child tax credit, or credit for other depend-
ents for the child. However, only the custodial 
parent can claim the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses or the exclusion for de-
pendent care benefits for the child. Also, gener-
ally, the noncustodial parent can't claim the 
child as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status or the earned income credit. In-
stead, generally, the custodial parent, if eligible, 
or other eligible person can claim the child as a 
qualifying child for those two benefits. If the 
child is the qualifying child of more than one 
person for these benefits, then the tiebreaker 
rules determine whether the custodial parent or 
another eligible person can treat the child as a 
qualifying child.
The noncustodial parent may be able 
to claim the self -only earned income 
credit if they meet other requirements. 
See Pub. 596 and Schedule EIC and its instruc-
tions for more information.
Example 1. Y ou and your 5-year-old child, 
E, lived all year with your parent in the United 
States. Y our parent paid the entire cost of keep-
ing up the home. Y our AGI is $10,000. Y our pa-
rent's AGI is $25,000. E’s other parent lived in 
the United States all year, but didn't live with 
you or E.
Under the rules explained earlier for children 
of divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), E is treated as the qualifying 
child of E’s other parent, who can claim the 
child tax credit for E. Because of this, you can't 
claim the child tax credit for E. However, those 
rules don't allow E’s other parent to claim E as a 
qualifying child for head of household filing sta-
tus, the credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses, the exclusion for dependent care bene-
fits, or the earned income credit.
Y ou and your parent didn't have any child-
care expenses or dependent care benefits, so 
neither of you can claim the credit for child and 
dependent care expenses or the exclusion for 
dependent care benefits. But E is a qualifying 
child of both you and your parent for head of 
household filing status and the earned income 
credit because E meets the relationship, age, 
residency, support, and joint return tests for 
both you and your parent. (The support test 
doesn't apply for the earned income credit.) 
However, you agree to let your parent claim E. 
This means your parent can claim E for head of 
household filing status and the earned income 
credit if your parent qualifies for each and if you 
don't claim E as a qualifying child for the earned 
income credit. (Y ou can't claim head of house-
hold filing status because your parent paid the 
entire cost of keeping up the home.) Y ou may 
be able to claim the earned income credit as a 
taxpayer without a qualifying child.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 , except your AGI is $25,000 and 
your parent's AGI is $21,000. Y our parent can't 
claim E as a qualifying child for any purpose be-
cause your parent’s AGI isn't higher than yours.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 , except you and your parent both 
claim E as a qualifying child for the earned in-
come credit. Y our parent also claims E as a 
qualifying child for head of household filing sta-
tus. Y ou, as the child's parent, will be the only 
one allowed to claim E as a qualifying child for 
the earned income credit. The IRS will disallow 
your parent's claim to head of household filing 
status unless your parent has another qualifying 
child or dependent. Y our parent can’t claim the 
earned income credit as a taxpayer without a 
qualifying child because your parent’s AGI is 
more than $17,640.
Qualifying Relative
Four tests must be met for a person to be your 
qualifying relative. The four tests are:
1. Not a qualifying child test,
TIP
Page 17 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 17

2. Member of household or relationship test,
3. Gross income test, and
4. Support test.
Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rela-
tive can be any age. There is no age test for a 
qualifying relative.
Kidnapped child. Y ou can treat a child as your 
qualifying relative even if the child has been kid-
napped, but the following statements must be 
true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the 
child met the tests to be your qualifying rel-
ative for the part of the year before the 
date of the kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
met the tests to be your qualifying relative 
for the part of the year following the date of 
the child’s return.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Not a Qualifying Child Test
A child isn't your qualifying relative if the child is 
your qualifying child or the qualifying child of 
any other taxpayer.
Example 1. Y our 22-year-old child, who is a 
student, lives with you and meets all the tests to 
be your qualifying child. This child isn't your 
qualifying relative.
Example 2. Y our 2-year-old child lives with 
your parents and meets all the tests to be their 
qualifying child. This child isn't your qualifying 
relative.
Example 3.  Y our 30-year-old child lives 
with you. This child isn’t a qualifying child be-
cause the age test isn’t met. This child may be 
your qualifying relative if the gross income test 
and the support test are met.
Example 4.  Y our 13-year-old grandchild 
only lived with you for 5 months during the year. 
Y our grandchild isn’t your qualifying child be-
cause the residency test isn’t met. Y our grand-
child may be your qualifying relative if the gross 
income test and the support test are met.
Child of person not required to file a return. 
A child isn't the qualifying child of any other tax-
payer and so may qualify as your qualifying rela-
tive if the child's parent (or other person for 
whom the child is defined as a qualifying child) 
isn't required to file an income tax return and ei-
ther:
• Doesn't file an income tax return, or
• Files a return only to get a refund of in-
come tax withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1 —return not required.  Y ou 
support an unrelated friend and your friend’s 
3-year-old child, who lived with you all year in 
your home. Y our friend has no gross income, 
isn't required to file a 2023 tax return, and 
doesn't file a 2023 tax return. Both your friend 
and your friend’s child are your qualifying rela-
tives if the support test is met.
Example 2—return filed to claim refund. 
The facts are the same as in Example 1, except 
your friend had wages of $1,500 during the year 
and had income tax withheld from your friend’s 
wages. Y our friend files a return only to get a re-
fund of the income tax withheld and doesn't 
claim the earned income credit or any other tax 
credits or deductions. Both your friend and your 
friend’s child are your qualifying relatives if the 
support test is met.
Example 3 —earned income credit 
claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 2 , except your friend had wages of $8,000 
during the year and claimed the earned income 
credit. Y our friend's child is the qualifying child 
of another taxpayer (your friend), so you can't 
claim your friend's child as your qualifying rela-
tive. Also, you can't claim your friend as your 
qualifying relative because of the gross income 
test explained later.
Child in Canada or Mexico.  Y ou may be able 
to claim your child as a dependent even if the 
child lives in Canada or Mexico. If the child 
doesn't live with you, the child doesn't meet the 
residency test to be your qualifying child. How-
ever, the child may still be your qualifying rela-
tive. If the persons the child does live with aren't 
U.S. citizens and have no U.S. gross income, 
those persons aren't “taxpayers,” so the child 
isn't the qualifying child of any other taxpayer. If 
the child isn't the qualifying child of any other 
taxpayer, the child is your qualifying relative as 
long as the gross income test and the support 
test are met.
Y ou can't claim as a dependent a child who 
lives in a foreign country other than Canada or 
Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S. 
resident alien, or U.S. national. There is an ex-
ception for certain adopted children who lived 
with you all year. See Citizen or Resident T est, 
earlier.
Example. Y ou provide all the support of 
your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in 
Mexico with your parent and have no income. 
Y ou are single and live in the United States. 
Y our parent isn't a U.S. citizen and has no U.S. 
income, so your parent isn't a “taxpayer.” Y our 
children aren't your qualifying children because 
they don't meet the residency test. But because 
they aren't the qualifying children of any other 
taxpayer, they may be your qualifying relatives 
and you may be permitted to claim them as de-
pendents. Y ou may also be able to claim your 
parent as a dependent if the gross income and 
support tests are met.
Member of Household or 
Relationship Test
T o meet this test, a person must either:
1. Live with you all year as a member of your 
household, or
2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed 
under Relatives who don't have to live with 
you below.
If at any time during the year the person was 
your spouse, that person can't be your qualify-
ing relative.
Relatives who don't have to live with you. A 
person related to you in any of the following 
ways doesn't have to live with you all year as a 
member of your household to meet this test.
• Y our child, stepchild, or foster child, or a 
descendant of any of them (for example, 
your grandchild). (A legally adopted child is 
considered your child.)
• Y our brother, sister, half brother, half sister, 
stepbrother, or stepsister.
• Y our father, mother, grandparent, or other 
direct ancestor, but not foster parent.
• Y our stepfather or stepmother.
• A son or daughter of your brother or sister.
• A son or daughter of your half brother or 
half sister.
• A brother or sister of your father or mother.
• Y our son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa-
ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, 
or sister-in-law.
Any of these relationships that were established 
by marriage aren't ended by death or divorce.
Example. In 2017, you and your spouse 
began supporting your spouse’s unmarried pa-
rent, G. Y our spouse died in 2022. Despite your 
spouse’s death, G continues to meet this test, 
even if G doesn't live with you. Y ou can claim G 
as a dependent if all other tests are met, includ-
ing the gross income and support tests.
Foster child. A foster child is an individual 
who is placed with you by an authorized place-
ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other 
order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
Joint return.  If you file a joint return, the per-
son can be related to either you or your spouse. 
Also, the person doesn't need to be related to 
the spouse who provides support.
For example, you provide more than half the 
support of your spouse’s stepparent. Y our spou-
se’s stepparent may be your qualifying relative 
even if the stepparent doesn't live with you. 
However, if you and your spouse file separate 
returns, your spouse's stepparent can be your 
qualifying relative only if the stepparent lives 
with you all year as a member of your house-
hold.
Temporary absences. A person is considered 
to live with you as a member of your household 
during periods of time when one of you, or both, 
is temporarily absent due to special circumstan-
ces, such as:
• Illness,
• Education,
• Business,
• Vacation,
• Military service, or
• Detention in a juvenile facility.
If the person is placed in a nursing home for 
an indefinite period of time to receive constant 
Page 18 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
18 Publication 501 (2023)

medical care, the absence may be considered 
temporary.
Death or birth.  A person who died during the 
year, but lived with you as a member of your 
household until death, will meet this test. The 
same is true for a child who was born during the 
year and lived with you as a member of your 
household for the rest of the year. The test is 
also met if a child lived with you as a member of 
your household except for any required hospital 
stay following birth. The test is also met for an 
adopted or foster child if you adopted the per-
son in 2023, the person was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption by you in 2023, or 
the person was an eligible foster child placed 
with you during 2023 and your main home was 
the person’s main home for the entire time since 
the person was adopted or placed with you in 
2023.
If your dependent died during the year and 
you otherwise qualify to claim that person as a 
dependent, you can still claim that person as a 
dependent.
Example. Y our parent, who met the tests to 
be your qualifying relative, died on January 15. 
Y ou can claim your parent as a dependent on 
your return.
Local law violated.  A person doesn't meet 
this test if at any time during the year the rela-
tionship between you and that person violates 
local law.
Example. Y our significant other, T , lived 
with you as a member of your household all 
year. However, your relationship with T violated 
the laws of the state where you live because T 
was married to someone else. Therefore, T 
doesn't meet this test and you can't claim T as a 
dependent.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Cousin. Y our cousin must live with you all year 
as a member of your household to meet this 
test.
Gross Income Test
T o meet this test, a person's gross income for 
the year must be less than $4,700.
Gross income defined. Gross income is all in-
come in the form of money, property, and serv-
ices that isn't exempt from tax.
In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
ing business, gross income is the total net sales 
minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-
neous income from the business.
Gross receipts from rental property are 
gross income. Don't deduct taxes, repairs, or 
other expenses to determine the gross income 
from rental property.
Gross income includes a partner's share of 
the gross (not net) partnership income.
Gross income also includes all taxable un-
employment compensation, taxable social se-
curity benefits, and certain amounts received as 
scholarship and fellowship grants. Scholarships 
received by degree candidates and used for tui-
tion, fees, supplies, books, and equipment re-
quired for particular courses aren’t generally in-
cluded in gross income. For more information 
about scholarships, see chapter 1 of Pub. 970.
Disabled dependent working at sheltered 
workshop. For purposes of the gross income 
test, the gross income of an individual who is 
permanently and totally disabled at any time 
during the year doesn't include income for serv-
ices the individual performs at a sheltered work-
shop. The availability of medical care at the 
workshop must be the main reason for the indi-
vidual's presence there. Also, the income must 
come solely from activities at the workshop that 
are incident to this medical care.
A “sheltered workshop” is a school that:
• Provides special instruction or training de-
signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-
vidual; and
• Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-
zations or by a state, a U.S. territory, a po-
litical subdivision of a state or territory, the 
United States, or the District of Columbia.
Permanently and totally disabled  has the 
same meaning here as under Qualifying Child, 
earlier.
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying 
Relative)
T o meet this test, you must generally provide 
more than half of a person's total support during 
the calendar year.
However, if two or more persons provide 
support, but no one person provides more than 
half of a person's total support, see Multiple 
Support Agreement, later.
How to determine if support test is met. 
Y ou figure whether you have provided more 
than half of a person's total support by compar-
ing the amount you contributed to that person's 
support with the entire amount of support that 
person received from all sources. This includes 
support the person provided from the person’s 
own funds.
Y ou may find Worksheet 2 helpful in figuring 
whether you provided more than half of a per-
son's support.
Person's own funds not used for support. A 
person's own funds aren't support unless they 
are actually spent for support.
Example. Y our parent received $2,400 in 
social security benefits and $300 in interest, 
paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation, 
and put $300 in a savings account.
Even though your parent received a total of 
$2,700 ($2,400 + $300), your parent spent only 
$2,400 ($2,000 + $400) for your parent’s own 
support. If you spent more than $2,400 for your 
parent’s support and no other support was re-
ceived, you have provided more than half of 
your parent’s support.
Child's wages used for own support.  Y ou 
can't include in your contribution to your child's 
support any support paid for by the child with 
the child's own wages, even if you paid the wa-
ges.
Year support is provided.  The year you pro-
vide the support is the year you pay for it, even if 
you do so with borrowed money that you repay 
in a later year.
If you use a fiscal year to report your income, 
you must provide more than half of the depend-
ent's support for the calendar year in which your 
fiscal year begins.
Armed Forces dependency allotments.  The 
part of the allotment contributed by the govern-
ment and the part taken out of your military pay 
are both considered provided by you in figuring 
whether you provide more than half of the sup-
port. If your allotment is used to support per-
sons other than those you name, you can claim 
them as dependents if they otherwise qualify.
Example. Y ou are in the Armed Forces. Y ou 
authorize an allotment for your surviving parent 
that your surviving parent uses to support them-
selves and their sibling. If the allotment provides 
more than half of each person's support, you 
can claim each of them as a dependent, if they 
otherwise qualify, even though you authorize the 
allotment only for your surviving parent.
Tax-exempt military quarters allowan-
ces. These allowances are treated the same 
way as dependency allotments in figuring sup-
port. The allotment of pay and the tax -exempt 
basic allowance for quarters are both consid-
ered as provided by you for support.
Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's to-
tal support, include tax -exempt income, sav-
ings, and borrowed amounts used to support 
that person. T ax-exempt income includes cer-
tain social security benefits, welfare benefits, 
nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed 
Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions, 
and tax-exempt interest.
Example 1.  Y ou provide $4,000 toward 
your parent's support during the year. Y our pa-
rent has earned income of $600, nontaxable so-
cial security benefits of $4,800, and tax -exempt 
interest of $200, all of which your parent uses 
for self-support. Y ou can't claim your parent as a 
dependent because the $4,000 you provide 
isn't more than half of the total support of 
$9,600 ($4,000 + $600 + $4,800 + $200).
Example 2. K, your sibling’s child, takes out 
a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay col-
lege tuition. K is personally responsible for the 
loan. Y ou provide $2,000 toward K’s total sup-
port. Y ou can't claim K as a dependent because 
you provide less than half of K’s support.
Social security benefits.  If spouses each 
receive benefits that are paid by one check 
made out to both of them, half of the total paid 
is considered to be for the support of each 
spouse, unless they can show otherwise.
If a child receives social security benefits 
and uses them toward their own support, the 
benefits are considered as provided by the 
child.
Page 19 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 19

Support provided by the state (welfare, 
food benefits, housing, etc.).  Benefits provi-
ded by the state to a needy person are gener-
ally considered support provided by the state. 
However, payments based on the needs of the 
recipient won't be considered as used entirely 
for that person's support if it is shown that part 
of the payments weren't used for that purpose.
TANF and other governmental pay-
ments. Under proposed T reasury regulations, 
if you received TANF payments or other similar 
payments and used the payments to support 
another person, those payments are considered 
support you provided for that person, rather 
than support provided by the government or 
other third party.
Foster care. Payments you receive for the sup-
port of a foster child from a child placement 
agency are considered support provided by the 
agency. See Foster care payments and expen-
ses, earlier.
Home for the aged.  If you make a lump -sum 
advance payment to a home for the aged to 
take care of your relative for life and the pay-
ment is based on that person's life expectancy, 
the amount of support you provide each year is 
the lump-sum payment divided by the relative's 
life expectancy. The amount of support you pro-
vide also includes any other amounts you provi-
ded during the year.
Total Support
T o figure if you provided more than half of a per-
son's support, you must first determine the total 
support provided for that person. T otal support 
includes amounts spent to provide food, lodg-
ing, clothing, education, medical and dental 
care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-
cessities.
Generally, the amount of an item of support 
is the amount of the expense incurred in provid-
ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support 
is the fair rental value of the lodging.
Expenses not directly related to any one 
member of a household, such as the cost of 
food for the household, must be divided among 
the members of the household.
Example 1.  G Brown, parent of M Miller, 
lives with F and M Miller and their two children. 
G gets social security benefits of $2,400, which 
G spends for clothing, transportation, and recre-
ation. G has no other income. F and M's total 
food expense for the household is $5,200. They 
pay G's medical and drug expenses of $1,200. 
The fair rental value of the lodging provided for 
G is $1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar 
rooming facilities. Figure G's total support as 
follows.
Fair rental value of lodging ............ $ 1,800 
Clothing, transportation, and 
recreation ....................... 2,400 
Medical expenses ................. 1,200 
Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) .......... 1,040 
Total support ............... $6,440 
The support F and M provide ($1,800 lodg-
ing + $1,200 medical expenses + $1,040 food = 
$4,040) is more than half of G's $6,440 total 
support.
Example 2. Y our parents, A and B, live with 
you, your spouse, and your two children in a 
house you own. The fair rental value of your pa-
rents' share of the lodging is $2,000 a year 
($1,000 each), which includes furnishings and 
utilities. A receives a nontaxable pension of 
$4,200, which A spends equally between A and 
B for items of support such as clothing, trans-
portation, and recreation. Y our total food ex-
pense for the household is $6,000. Y our heat 
and utility bills amount to $1,200. B has hospital 
and medical expenses of $600, which you pay 
during the year. Figure your parents' total sup-
port as follows.
Support provided A B
Fair rental value of lodging .... $1,000 $1,000 
Pension spent for their 
support ................. 2,100 2,100 
Share of food (1/6 of 
$6,000) ................. 1,000 1,000 
Medical expenses for B ...... 600 
Parents' total support .... $4,100 $4,700 
Y ou must apply the support test separately 
to each parent. Y ou provide $2,000 ($1,000 
lodging + $1,000 food) of A's total support of 
$4,100—less than half. Y ou provide $2,600 to B 
($1,000 lodging + $1,000 food + $600 medi-
cal)—more than half of B’s support of $4,700. 
Y ou meet the support test for B, but not for A. 
Heat and utility costs are included in the fair 
rental value of the lodging, so these aren't con-
sidered separately.
Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging, 
you are considered to provide support equal to 
the fair rental value of the room, apartment, 
house, or other shelter in which the person 
lives. Fair rental value includes a reasonable al-
lowance for the use of furniture and appliances, 
and for heat and other utilities that are provided.
Fair rental value defined. Fair rental value 
is the amount you could reasonably expect to 
receive from a stranger for the same kind of 
lodging. It is used instead of actual expenses 
such as taxes, interest, depreciation, paint, in-
surance, utilities, and the cost of furniture and 
appliances. In some cases, fair rental value may 
be equal to the rent paid.
If you provide the total lodging, the amount 
of support you provide is the fair rental value of 
the room the person uses, or a share of the fair 
rental value of the entire dwelling if the person 
has use of your entire home. If you don't provide 
the total lodging, the total fair rental value must 
be divided depending on how much of the total 
lodging you provide. If you provide only a part 
and the person supplies the rest, the fair rental 
value must be divided between both of you ac-
cording to the amount each provides.
Example. Y our parents live rent free in a 
house you own. It has a fair rental value of 
$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair 
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 
for the furniture. This doesn't include heat and 
utilities. The house is completely furnished with 
furniture belonging to your parents. Y ou pay 
$600 for their utility bills. Utilities aren't usually 
included in rent for houses in the area where 
your parents live. Therefore, you consider the 
total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 
($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished 
house + $1,800 allowance for the furnishings 
provided by your parents + $600 cost of utilities) 
of which you are considered to provide $4,200 
($3,600 + $600).
Person living in their own home.  The to-
tal fair rental value of a person's home that the 
person owns is considered support contributed 
by that person.
Living with someone rent free.  If you live 
with a person rent free in that person’s home, 
you must reduce the amount you provide for 
support of that person by the fair rental value of 
lodging the person provides you.
Property. Property provided as support is 
measured by its fair market value. Fair market 
value is the price that property would sell for on 
the open market. It is the price that would be 
agreed upon between a willing buyer and a will-
ing seller, with neither being required to act, and 
both having reasonable knowledge of the rele-
vant facts.
Capital expenses.  Capital items, such as 
furniture, appliances, and cars, bought for a per-
son during the year can be included in total sup-
port under certain circumstances.
The following examples show when a capital 
item is or isn't support.
Example 1.  Y ou buy a $200 power lawn 
mower for your 13 -year-old child. The child is 
given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. Be-
cause the lawn mower benefits all members of 
the household, don't include the cost of the 
lawn mower in the support of your child.
Example 2.  Y ou buy a $150 television set 
as a birthday present for your 12 -year-old child. 
The television set is placed in your child's bed-
room. Y ou can include the cost of the television 
set in the support of your child.
Example 3.  Y ou pay $5,000 for a car and 
register it in your name. Y ou and your 
17-year-old child use the car equally. Because 
you own the car and don't give it to your child 
but merely let your child use it, don't include the 
cost of the car in your child's total support. How-
ever, you can include in your child's support 
your out -of-pocket expenses of operating the 
car for your child’s benefit.
Example 4.  Y our 17-year-old child, using 
personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. Y ou pro-
vide the rest of your child's support —$4,000. 
Because the car is bought and owned by your 
child, the car's fair market value ($4,500) must 
be included in your child’s support. Y our child 
has provided more than half of their own total 
support of $8,500 ($4,500 + $4,000), so this 
child isn't your qualifying child. Y ou didn't pro-
vide more than half of this child’s total support, 
so this child isn't your qualifying relative. Y ou 
can't claim this child as a dependent.
Page 20 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
20 Publication 501 (2023)

Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur-
ance premiums you pay, including premiums for 
supplementary Medicare coverage, are inclu-
ded in the support you provide.
Medical insurance benefits.  Medical in-
surance benefits, including basic and supple-
mentary Medicare benefits, aren't part of sup-
port.
Tuition payments and allowances under the 
GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under the GI 
Bill for tuition payments and allowances while 
they attend school are included in total support.
Example. During the year, your child re-
ceives $2,200 from the government under the 
GI Bill. Y our child uses this amount for your 
child’s education. Y ou provide the rest of your 
child’s support —$2,000. Because GI benefits 
are included in total support, your child’s total 
support is $4,200 ($2,200 + $2,000). Y ou 
haven't provided more than half of your child’s 
support.
Childcare expenses.  If you pay someone to 
provide child or dependent care, you can in-
clude these payments in the amount you provi-
ded for the support of your child or disabled de-
pendent, even if you claim a credit for the 
payments. For information on the credit, see 
Pub. 503.
Other support items.  Other items may be 
considered as support depending on the facts 
in each case.
Don't Include in Total Support
The following items aren't included in total sup-
port.
1. Federal, state, and local income taxes 
paid by persons from their own income. 
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid 
by persons from their own income. 
3. Life insurance premiums. 
4. Funeral expenses. 
5. Scholarships received by your child if your 
child is a student. 
6. Survivors' and Dependents' Educational 
Assistance payments used for the support 
of the child who receives them.
Multiple Support Agreement
Sometimes no one provides more than half of 
the support of a person. Instead, two or more 
persons, each of whom would be able to claim 
the person as a dependent but for the support 
test, together provide more than half of the per-
son's support.
When this happens, you can agree that any 
one of you who individually provides more than 
10% of the person's support, but only one, can 
claim that person as a dependent. Each of the 
others must sign a statement agreeing not to 
claim the person as a dependent for that year. 
The person who claims the person as a de-
pendent must keep these signed statements for 
their own records. A multiple support 
declaration identifying each of the others who 
agreed not to claim the person as a dependent 
must be attached to the return of the person 
claiming the person as a dependent. Form 
2120, Multiple Support Declaration, can be 
used for this purpose.
Y ou can claim someone as a dependent un-
der a multiple support agreement for someone 
related to you or for someone who lived with 
you all year as a member of your household.
Example 1.  Y ou, and your siblings, S, B, 
and D, provide the entire support of your parent 
for the year. Y ou provide 45%, S provides 35%, 
and B and D each provide 10%. Either you or S 
can claim your parent as a dependent; the one 
who doesn’t must sign a statement agreeing not 
to claim your parent as a dependent. The one 
who claims your parent as a dependent must 
attach Form 2120, or a similar declaration, to 
their return and must keep the statement signed 
by the other for their records. Because neither B 
nor D provides more than 10% of the support, 
neither can claim your parent as a dependent 
and neither has to sign a statement.
Example 2. Y ou and your sibling each pro-
vide 20% of your parent's support for the year. 
The remaining 60% of your parent’s support is 
provided equally by two persons who are unre-
lated. Y our parent doesn't live with them. Be-
cause more than half of your parent’s support is 
provided by persons who can't claim your pa-
rent as a dependent, no one can claim your pa-
rent as a dependent.
Example 3. Y our parent lives with you and 
receives 25% of their support from social secur-
ity, 40% from you, 24% from a relative, and 11% 
from a friend. Either you or the relative can 
claim your parent as a dependent if the other 
signs a statement agreeing not to. The one who 
claims your parent as a dependent must attach 
Form 2120, or a similar declaration, to your pa-
rent’s return and must keep for your parent’s re-
cords the signed statement from the one agree-
ing not to claim your parent as a dependent.
Support Test for Children of 
Divorced or Separated Parents (or 
Parents Who Live Apart)
In most cases, a child of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart) will be a 
qualifying child of one of the parents. See Chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart)  under Qualifying Child, 
earlier. However, if the child doesn't meet the re-
quirements to be a qualifying child of either pa-
rent, the child may be a qualifying relative of 
one of the parents. In that case, the following 
rules must be used in applying the support test.
A child who doesn’t meet the requirements 
to be a qualifying child of either parent will be 
treated as the qualifying relative of the child’s 
noncustodial parent if all four of the following 
statements are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance;
b. Are separated under a written separa-
tion agreement; or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 
6 months of the year, whether or not 
they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of the child’s 
support for the year from the parents (and 
the rules on multiple support agreements, 
explained earlier, don't apply).
3. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
a. The custodial parent signs a written 
declaration, discussed later, that they 
won't claim the child as a dependent 
for the year, and the noncustodial pa-
rent attaches this written declaration 
to their return. (If the decree or agree-
ment went into effect after 1984 and 
before 2009, see Post-1984 and 
pre-2009 divorce decree or separa-
tion agreement, later. If the decree or 
agreement went into effect after 2008, 
see Post-2008 divorce decree or sep-
aration agreement, later.)
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance or written separa-
tion agreement that applies to 2023 
states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, 
the decree or agreement wasn't 
changed after 1984 to say the non-
custodial parent can't claim the child 
as a dependent, and the noncustodial 
parent provides at least $600 for the 
child's support during the year.
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent. 
The custodial parent is the parent with whom 
the child lived for the greater number of nights 
during the year. The other parent is the noncus-
todial parent. The term “parent” means a biolog-
ical or adoptive parent of an individual. It 
doesn’t include a stepparent or foster parent un-
less that person has adopted the individual.
If the parents divorced or separated during 
the year and the child lived with both parents 
before the separation, the custodial parent is 
the one with whom the child lived for the greater 
number of nights during the rest of the year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a 
night if the child sleeps:
• At that parent's home, whether or not the 
parent is present; or
• In the company of the parent, when the 
child doesn't sleep at a parent's home (for 
example, the parent and child are on vaca-
tion together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived 
with each parent for an equal number of nights 
during the year, the custodial parent is the pa-
rent with the higher AGI.
December 31. The night of December 31 is 
treated as part of the year in which it begins. For 
example, the night of December 31, 2023, is 
treated as part of 2023.
Page 21 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 21

Emancipated child. If a child is emancipa-
ted under state law, the child is not under the 
custody of either parent and time lived with a 
parent after emancipation does not count for 
purposes of determining who is the custodial 
parent.
Absences. If a child wasn't with either pa-
rent on a particular night (because, for example, 
the child was staying at a friend's house), the 
child is treated as living with the parent with 
whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night. But if it can't be determined with 
which parent the child normally would have 
lived or if the child wouldn't have lived with ei-
ther parent that night, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent that night.
Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's 
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a 
greater number of days, but not nights, with the 
parent who works at night, that parent is treated 
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the 
child is treated as living at the primary resi-
dence registered with the school.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent 
must use either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment (containing the same information required 
by the form) to make the written declaration to 
release a claim to an exemption for a child to 
the noncustodial parent. Although the exemp-
tion amount is zero for tax year 2023, this re-
lease allows the noncustodial parent to claim 
the child tax credit, credit for other dependents, 
or additional child tax credit, if applicable, 
based on the child being a qualifying child. The 
noncustodial parent must attach a copy of the 
form or statement to their tax return.
The release can be for 1 year, for a number 
of specified years (for example, alternate 
years), or for all future years, as specified in the 
declaration.
Post-1984 and pre -2009 divorce decree 
or separation agreement.  If the divorce de-
cree or separation agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial 
parent may be able to attach certain pages from 
the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. 
The decree or agreement must state all three of 
the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the 
child as a dependent without regard to any 
condition, such as payment of support.
2. The custodial parent won't claim the child 
as a dependent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial pa-
rent, rather than the custodial parent, can 
claim the child as a dependent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of 
the following pages of the decree or agreement 
to their tax return.
• The cover page (write the other parent's 
SSN on this page).
• The pages that include all of the informa-
tion identified in items (1) through (3) 
above.
• The signature page with the other parent's 
signature and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation 
agreement. The noncustodial parent can't 
attach pages from the decree or agreement to 
the tax return instead of Form 8332 if the decree 
or agreement went into effect after 2008. The 
custodial parent must sign either Form 8332 or 
a similar statement whose only purpose is to re-
lease the custodial parent's claim to an exemp-
tion, and the noncustodial parent must attach a 
copy to their return. The form or statement must 
release the custodial parent's claim to the child 
without any conditions. For example, the re-
lease must not depend on the noncustodial pa-
rent paying support.
The noncustodial parent must attach 
the required information even if it was 
filed with a return in an earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
emption. The custodial parent can revoke a re-
lease of claim to an exemption that they previ-
ously released to the noncustodial parent. For 
the revocation to be effective for 2023, the cus-
todial parent must have given (or made reason-
able efforts to give) written notice of the revoca-
tion to the noncustodial parent in 2022 or 
earlier. The custodial parent can use Part III of 
Form 8332 for this purpose and must attach a 
copy of the revocation to their return for each 
tax year the custodial parent claims the child as 
a dependent as a result of the revocation.
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the support 
provided by your new spouse is treated as pro-
vided by you.
Child support under pre -1985 agreement. 
All child support payments actually received 
from the noncustodial parent under a pre -1985 
agreement are considered used for the support 
of the child.
Example. Under a pre -1985 agreement, 
the noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for the 
child's support. This amount is considered sup-
port provided by the noncustodial parent even if 
the $1,200 was actually spent on things other 
than support.
Alimony. Payments to a spouse that are ali-
mony or separate maintenance payments, or 
similar payments from an estate or trust, aren't 
treated as a payment for the support of a de-
pendent.
Parents who never married. This special rule 
for divorced or separated parents also applies 
to parents who never married and lived apart at 
all times during the last 6 months of the year.
Multiple support agreement. If the support of 
the child is determined under a multiple support 
agreement, this special support test for di-
vorced or separated parents (or parents who 
live apart) doesn't apply.
Social Security Numbers 
(SSNs) for Dependents
Y ou must show the SSN of any dependent you 
list in the Dependents section of your Form 
1040 or 1040-SR.
CAUTION
!
If you don't show the dependent's SSN 
when required or if you show an incor-
rect SSN, certain tax benefits may be 
disallowed.
No SSN. If a person whom you expect to claim 
as a dependent on your return doesn't have an 
SSN, either you or that person should apply for 
an SSN as soon as possible by filing Form 
SS-5, Application for a Social Security Card, 
with the Social Security Administration (SSA). 
Y ou can get Form SS -5 online at SSA.gov/
forms/ss-5.pdf or at your local SSA office.
It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN 
once the SSA has all the information it needs. If 
you don't have a required SSN by the filing due 
date, you can file Form 4868, Application for 
Automatic Extension of Time T o File U.S. Indi-
vidual Income T ax Return, for an extension of 
time to file.
Born and died in 2023.  If your child was 
born and died in 2023, and you don't have an 
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the 
child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos-
pital records instead. The document must show 
the child was born alive. If you do this, enter 
“DIED” in column (2) of the Dependents section 
of your Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Alien or adoptee with no SSN.  If your de-
pendent doesn't have and can't get an SSN, 
you must show the ITIN or adoption taxpayer 
identification number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.
Taxpayer identification numbers for ali-
ens. If your dependent is a resident or nonresi-
dent alien who doesn't have and isn't eligible to 
get an SSN, your dependent must apply for an 
ITIN. For details on how to apply, see Form 
W-7, Application for IRS Individual T axpayer 
Identification Number.
Taxpayer identification numbers for 
adoptees. If you have a child who was placed 
with you by an authorized placement agency, 
you may be able to claim the child as a depend-
ent. However, if you can't get an SSN or an ITIN 
for the child, you must get an ATIN for the child 
from the IRS. See Form W -7A, Application for 
T axpayer Identification Number for Pending U.S. 
Adoptions, for details.
Standard Deduction
Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking a 
standard deduction or itemizing their deduc-
tions. If you have a choice, you can use the 
method that gives you the lower tax.
The standard deduction is a dollar amount 
that reduces your taxable income. It is a benefit 
that eliminates the need for many taxpayers to 
itemize actual deductions, such as medical ex-
penses, charitable contributions, and taxes, on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). The standard deduc-
tion is higher for taxpayers who:
• Are 65 or older, or
• Are blind.
Y ou benefit from the standard deduc-
tion if your standard deduction is more 
than the total of your allowable itemized 
deductions.
CAUTION
!
TIP
Page 22 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
22 Publication 501 (2023)

Persons not eligible for the standard de-
duction. Y our standard deduction is zero and 
you should itemize any deductions you have if:
1. Y our filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, and your spouse itemizes deduc-
tions on their return;
2. Y ou are filing a tax return for a short tax 
year because of a change in your annual 
accounting period; or
3. Y ou are a nonresident or dual-status alien 
during the year. Y ou are considered a 
dual-status alien if you were both a non-
resident and resident alien during the year.
If you are a nonresident alien who is married to 
a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of the 
year, you can choose to be treated as a U.S. 
resident (see Pub. 519). If you make this choice, 
you can take the standard deduction.
If you can be claimed as a dependent 
on another person's return (such as 
your parents' return), your standard de-
duction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-
tion for Dependents, later.
Standard Deduction Amount
The standard deduction amount depends on 
your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or 
blind, and whether another taxpayer can claim 
you as a dependent. Generally, the standard 
deduction amounts are adjusted each year for 
inflation. The standard deduction amounts for 
most people are shown in T able 6.
Decedent's final return. The standard deduc-
tion for a decedent's final tax return is the same 
as it would have been had the decedent contin-
ued to live. However, if the decedent wasn't 65 
or older at the time of death, the higher stand-
ard deduction for age can't be claimed.
Higher Standard Deduction for 
Age (65 or Older)
If you are age 65 or older on the last day of the 
year and don't itemize deductions, you are enti-
tled to a higher standard deduction. Y ou are 
considered 65 on the day before your 65th birth-
day. Therefore, you can take a higher standard 
deduction for 2023 if you were born before Jan-
uary 2, 1959.
Use T able 7 to figure the standard deduction 
amount.
Death of taxpayer.  If you are preparing a re-
turn for someone who died in 2023, consider 
the taxpayer to be 65 or older at the end of 2023 
only if the taxpayer was 65 or older at the time 
of death. Even if the taxpayer was born before 
January 2, 1959, the taxpayer isn't considered 
65 or older at the end of 2023 unless the tax-
payer was 65 or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before the person’s 65th birthday.
CAUTION
!
Higher Standard Deduction for 
Blindness
If you are blind on the last day of the year and 
you don't itemize deductions, you are entitled to 
a higher standard deduction.
Not totally blind. If you aren't totally blind, you 
must get a certified statement from an eye doc-
tor (ophthalmologist or optometrist) stating that:
1. Y ou can't see better than 20/200 in the 
better eye with glasses or contact lenses, 
or
2. Y our field of vision is 20 degrees or less.
If your eye condition isn't likely to improve 
beyond these limits, the statement should in-
clude this fact. Keep the statement in your re-
cords.
If your vision can be corrected beyond these 
limits only by contact lenses that you can wear 
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers, 
you can take the higher standard deduction for 
blindness if you otherwise qualify.
Spouse 65 or Older or Blind
Y ou can take the higher standard deduction if 
your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:
1. Y ou file a joint return, or
2. Y ou file a separate return and your spouse 
had no gross income and can't be claimed 
as a dependent by another taxpayer.
Death of spouse.  If your spouse died in 2023 
before reaching age 65, you can't take a higher 
standard deduction because of your spouse. 
Even if your spouse was born before January 2, 
1959, your spouse isn’t considered 65 or older 
at the end of 2023 unless your spouse was 65 
or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before the person’s 65th birthday.
Example. Y our spouse was born on Febru-
ary 14, 1958, and died on February 13, 2023. 
Y our spouse is considered age 65 at the time of 
death. However, if your spouse died on Febru-
ary 12, 2023, your spouse isn't considered age 
65 at the time of death and isn't 65 or older at 
the end of 2023.
Y ou can't claim the higher standard de-
duction for an individual other than 
yourself and your spouse.
Examples
The following examples illustrate how to deter-
mine your standard deduction using T able 6 and 
T able 7.
Example 1. Hunter, 46, and Avery, 33, are 
filing a joint return for 2023. Neither is blind, and 
neither can be claimed as a dependent. They 
decide not to itemize their deductions. They use 
T able 6. Their standard deduction is $27,700.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 , except that Hunter is blind at the 
end of 2023. Hunter and Avery use T able 7. 
Their standard deduction is $29,200.
CAUTION
!
Example 3. Dylan and Dru are filing a joint 
return for 2023. Both are over age 65. Neither is 
blind, and neither can be claimed as a depend-
ent. If they don't itemize deductions, they use 
T able 7. Their standard deduction is $30,700.
Standard Deduction for 
Dependents
The standard deduction for an individual who 
can be claimed as a dependent on another per-
son's tax return is generally limited to the 
greater of:
1. $1,250, or
2. The individual's earned income for the 
year plus $400 (but not more than the reg-
ular standard deduction amount, generally 
$13,850).
However, if the individual is 65 or older or blind, 
the standard deduction may be higher.
If you (or your spouse if filing jointly) can be 
claimed as a dependent on someone else's re-
turn, use T able 8 to determine your standard de-
duction.
Earned income defined.  Earned income 
is salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and 
other amounts received as pay for work you ac-
tually perform.
For purposes of the standard deduction, 
earned income also includes any part of a taxa-
ble scholarship or fellowship grant. See chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 970 for more information on what 
qualifies as a scholarship or fellowship grant.
Example 1.  Y ou are 16 years old and sin-
gle. Y our parents can claim you as a dependent 
on their 2023 tax return. Y ou have interest in-
come of $780 and wages of $150. Y ou have no 
itemized deductions and use T able 8 to find 
your standard deduction. Y ou enter $150 
(earned income) on line 1, $550 ($150 + $400) 
on line 3, $1,250 (the larger of $550 and 
$1,250) on line 5, and $13,850 on line 6. Y our 
standard deduction, on line 7a, is $1,250 (the 
smaller of $1,250 and $13,850).
Example 2.  Y ou are a 22-year-old college 
student and can be claimed as a dependent on 
your parents' 2023 tax return. Y ou are married 
filing a separate return. Y our spouse doesn't 
itemize deductions. Y ou have $1,500 in interest 
income and wages of $3,800 and no itemized 
deductions. Y ou find your standard deduction 
by using T able 8. Y ou enter earned income of 
$3,800 on line 1. Y ou add lines 1 and 2 and en-
ter $4,200 on line 3. On line 5, you enter 
$4,200, the larger of lines 3 and 4. Because you 
are married filing a separate return, you enter 
$13,850 on line 6. On line 7a, you enter $4,200 
as the standard deduction amount because it is 
smaller than $13,850, the amount on line 6.
Example 3.  Y ou are single and can be 
claimed as a dependent on your parents' 2023 
tax return. Y ou are 18 years old and blind, and 
have interest income of $1,300, wages of 
$2,900, and no itemized deductions. Y ou use 
T able 8 to find the standard deduction amount. 
Y ou enter wages of $2,900 on line 1 and add 
lines 1 and 2 and enter $3,300 on line 3. On 
line 5, you enter $3,300, the larger of lines 3 
Page 23 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 23

and 4. Because you are single, you enter 
$13,850 on line 6 and $3,300 on line 7a. This is 
the smaller of the amounts on lines 5 and 6. Be-
cause you checked one box in the top part of 
the worksheet, you enter $1,850 on line 7b, then 
add the amounts on lines 7a and 7b and enter 
the standard deduction amount of $5,150 on 
line 7c.
Example 4. Y ou are 18 years old and single 
and can be claimed as a dependent on your pa-
rents’ 2023 tax return. Y ou have wages of 
$7,000, interest income of $500, a business 
loss of $3,000, and no itemized deductions. Y ou 
use T able 8 to figure the standard deduction 
amount. Y ou enter $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000) on 
line 1, add lines 1 and 2, and enter $4,400 on 
line 3. On line 5, you enter $4,400, the larger of 
lines 3 and 4, and, because you are single, 
$13,850 on line 6. On line 7a, you enter $4,400 
as the standard deduction amount because it is 
smaller than $13,850, the amount on line 6.
Who Should Itemize
Y ou should itemize deductions if your total de-
ductions are more than the standard deduction 
amount. Also, you should itemize if you don't 
qualify for the standard deduction, as dis-
cussed, earlier, under Persons not eligible for 
the standard deduction.
Y ou should first figure your itemized deduc-
tions and compare that amount to your standard 
deduction to make sure you are using the 
method that gives you the greater benefit.
When to itemize.  Y ou may benefit from 
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form 
1040) if you:
1. Don't qualify for the standard deduction,
2. Had large uninsured medical and dental 
expenses during the year,
3. Paid interest and taxes on your home,
4. Had large uninsured casualty or theft los-
ses,
5. Made large contributions to qualified chari-
ties, or
6. Have total itemized deductions that are 
more than the standard deduction to which 
you are otherwise entitled.
If you decide to itemize your deductions, 
complete Schedule A and attach it to your Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR. Enter the amount from 
Schedule A, line 17, on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, 
line 12.
Electing to itemize for state tax or other 
purposes. Even if your itemized deductions 
are less than your standard deduction, you can 
elect to itemize deductions on your federal re-
turn rather than take the standard deduction. 
Y ou may want to do this if, for example, the tax 
benefit of itemizing your deductions on your 
state tax return is greater than the tax benefit 
you lose on your federal return by not taking the 
standard deduction. T o make this election, you 
must check the box on line 18 of Schedule A.
Changing your mind. If you don't itemize your 
deductions and later find that you should have 
itemized—or if you itemize your deductions and 
later find you shouldn't have —you can change 
your return by filing Form 1040-X.
Married persons who filed separate re-
turns. Y ou can change methods of taking de-
ductions only if you and your spouse both make 
the same changes. Both of you must file a con-
sent to assessment for any additional tax either 
one may owe as a result of the change.
Y ou and your spouse can use the method 
that gives you the lower total tax, even though 
one of you may pay more tax than you would 
have paid by using the other method. Y ou both 
must use the same method of claiming deduc-
tions. If one itemizes deductions, the other 
should itemize because the other spouse won't 
qualify for the standard deduction. See Persons 
not eligible for the standard deduction, earlier.
2023 Standard 
Deduction Tables
If you are married filing a separate re-
turn and your spouse itemizes deduc-
tions, or if you are a dual -status alien, 
you can't take the standard deduction even if 
you were born before January 2, 1959, or are 
blind.
CAUTION
!
Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*T able 6.
IF your filing status is... YOUR standard deduction is...
Single or Married filing separately $13,850
Married filing jointly or Qualifying surviving spouse   27,700
Head of household  20,800
* Don't use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1959, or are blind, or if someone else can claim you (or your spouse if filing jointly) as a dependent. 
Use T able 7 or T able 8 instead.
Page 24 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
24 Publication 501 (2023)

Standard Deduction Chart for People Born Before January 2, 1959, or Who Are Blind*T able 7.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You: Born before January 2, 1959  
  Blind 
Your spouse: Born before January 2, 1959 
  Blind 
Total number of boxes you checked 
IF your filing status is... AND the number in the box above is... THEN your standard deduction is...
Single
1 $15,700
2  17,550
Married filing jointly 
1 $29,200
2  30,700
3  32,200
4  33,700
Qualifying surviving spouse
1 $29,200
2  30,700
Married filing separately**
1  $15,350
2  16,850
3  18,350
4  19,850
Head of household
1 $22,650
2  24,500
* If someone else can claim you (or your spouse if filing jointly) as a dependent, use T able 8 instead. 
** Y ou can check the boxes for “Y our spouse” if your filing status is married filing separately and your spouse had no income, isn't filing a return, and can't be claimed as a 
dependent on another person's tax return.
Page 25 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 25

Standard Deduction Worksheet for Dependents
Use this worksheet only if someone else can claim you (or your spouse if 
filing jointly) as a dependent.
T able 8.
Keep for Y our Records
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You: Born before January 2, 1959 
 Blind 
Your spouse: Born before January 2, 1959 
 Blind 
Total number of boxes you checked 
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If none, enter -0-. 1.  
2. Additional amount. 2. $400
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.  
4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $1,250
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.  
6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status. 
• Single or Married filing separately—$13,850
• Married filing jointly—$27,700
• Head of household—$20,800
6.  
7. Standard deduction. 
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after January 1, 1959, and not blind, stop here. This is your 
standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to line 7b. 7a.  
b. If born before January 2, 1959, or blind, multiply $1,850 ($1,500 if married) by the number in the box above. 7b.  
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard deduction for 2023. 7c.  
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also includes any 
taxable scholarship or fellowship grant.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue; need 
help preparing your tax return; or want to down-
load free publications, forms, or instructions, go 
to IRS.gov to find resources that can help you 
right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After 
receiving all your wage and earnings state-
ments (Forms W-2, W-2G, 1099-R, 1099-MISC, 
1099-NEC, etc.); unemployment compensation 
statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 
1099-G); and interest, dividend, and retirement 
statements from banks and investment firms 
(Forms 1099), you have several options to 
choose from to prepare and file your tax return. 
Y ou can prepare the tax return yourself, see if 
you qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax 
professional to prepare your return.
Free options for tax preparation.  Y our op-
tions for preparing and filing your return online 
or in your local community, if you qualify, include 
the following.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare 
and file your federal individual income tax 
return for free using software or Free File 
Fillable Forms. However, state tax 
preparation may not be available through 
Free File. Go to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if 
you qualify for free online federal tax prep-
aration, e-filing, and direct deposit or pay-
ment options.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income T ax Assis-
tance (VITA) program offers free tax help to 
people with low-to-moderate incomes, per-
sons with disabilities, and limited-Eng-
lish-speaking taxpayers who need help 
preparing their own tax returns. Go to 
IRS.gov/VITA, download the free IRS2Go 
app, or call 800-906-9887 for information 
on free tax return preparation.
• TCE. The T ax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) program offers free tax help for all 
taxpayers, particularly those who are 60 
years of age and older. TCE volunteers 
specialize in answering questions about 
pensions and retirement-related issues 
unique to seniors. Go to IRS.gov/TCE or 
download the free IRS2Go app for informa-
tion on free tax return preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed 
Forces and qualified veterans may use Mil-
T ax, a free tax service offered by the De-
partment of Defense through Military One-
Source. For more information, go to 
MilitaryOneSource (MilitaryOneSource.mil/
MilT ax).
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable Forms, 
which can be completed online and then 
e-filed regardless of income.
Using online tools to help prepare your re-
turn. Go to IRS.gov/T ools for the following.
• The Earned Income T ax Credit Assistant 
(IRS.gov/EITCAssistant) determines if 
you’re eligible for the earned income credit 
(EIC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) 
helps you get an employer identification 
number (EIN) at no cost.
• The T ax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/
W4App) makes it easier for you to estimate 
the federal income tax you want your em-
ployer to withhold from your paycheck. 
This is tax withholding. See how your with-
holding affects your refund, take-home pay, 
or tax due.
• The First- Time Homebuyer Credit Account 
Look-up (IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool pro-
vides information on your repayments and 
account balance.
• The Sales T ax Deduction Calculator 
(IRS.gov/SalesT ax) figures the amount you 
can claim if you itemize deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax ques-
tions. On IRS.gov, you can get 
Page 26 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
26 Publication 501 (2023)

up-to-date information on current events and 
changes in tax law.
• IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to help you 
get answers to some of the most common 
tax questions.
• IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive T ax Assistant, 
a tool that will ask you questions and, 
based on your input, provide answers on a 
number of tax topics.
• IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instructions, 
and publications. Y ou will find details on 
the most recent tax changes and interac-
tive links to help you find answers to your 
questions.
• Y ou may also be able to access tax infor-
mation in your e-filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return? 
There are various types of tax return preparers, 
including enrolled agents, certified public ac-
countants (CPAs), accountants, and many oth-
ers who don’t have professional credentials. If 
you choose to have someone prepare your tax 
return, choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax 
preparer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall sub-
stantive accuracy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax iden-
tification number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs 
the return, you're ultimately responsible 
for providing all the information re-
quired for the preparer to accurately prepare 
your return and for the accuracy of every item 
reported on the return. Anyone paid to prepare 
tax returns for others should have a thorough 
understanding of tax matters. For more informa-
tion on how to choose a tax preparer, go to Tips 
for Choosing a T ax Preparer on IRS.gov.
Employers can register to use Business 
Services Online. The Social Security Adminis-
tration (SSA) offers online service at SSA.gov/
employer for fast, free, and secure W-2 filing op-
tions to CPAs, accountants, enrolled agents, 
and individuals who process Form W -2, Wage 
and T ax Statement, and Form W-2c, Corrected 
Wage and T ax Statement.
IRS social media.  Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia 
to see the various social media tools the IRS 
uses to share the latest information on tax 
changes, scam alerts, initiatives, products, and 
services. At the IRS, privacy and security are 
our highest priority. We use these tools to share 
public information with you. Don’t post your so-
cial security number (SSN) or other confidential 
information on social media sites. Always pro-
tect your identity when using any social net-
working site.
The following IRS Y ouT ube channels provide 
short, informative videos on various tax -related 
topics in English, Spanish, and ASL.
• Y outube.com/irsvideos.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSVideos.gov) contains video and audio pre-
CAUTION
!
sentations for individuals, small businesses, 
and tax professionals.
Online tax information in other languages. 
Y ou can find information on IRS.gov/
MyLanguage if English isn’t your native lan-
guage.
Free Over-the-Phone Interpreter (OPI) Serv-
ice. The IRS is committed to serving taxpayers 
with limited -English proficiency (LEP) by offer-
ing OPI services. The OPI Service is a federally 
funded program and is available at T axpayer 
Assistance Centers (TACs), most IRS offices, 
and every VITA/TCE tax return site. The OPI 
Service is accessible in more than 350 lan-
guages.
Accessibility Helpline available for taxpay-
ers with disabilities.  T axpayers who need in-
formation about accessibility services can call 
833-690-0598. The Accessibility Helpline can 
answer questions related to current and future 
accessibility products and services available in 
alternative media formats (for example, braille, 
large print, audio, etc.). The Accessibility Help-
line does not have access to your IRS account. 
For help with tax law, refunds, or account -rela-
ted issues, go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp.
Note. Form 9000, Alternative Media Prefer-
ence, or Form 9000(SP) allows you to elect to 
receive certain types of written correspondence 
in the following formats.
• Standard Print.
• Large Print.
• Braille.
• Audio (MP3).
• Plain T ext File (TXT).
• Braille Ready File (BRF).
Disasters. Go to IRS.gov/DisasterRelief to re-
view the available disaster tax relief.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Forms to view, download, or print all 
the forms, instructions, and publications you 
may need. Or, you can go to IRS.gov/
OrderForms to place an order.
Getting tax publications and instructions in 
eBook format.  Download and view most tax 
publications and instructions (including the In-
structions for Form 1040) on mobile devices as 
eBooks at IRS.gov/eBooks.
IRS eBooks have been tested using Apple's 
iBooks for iPad. Our eBooks haven’t been tes-
ted on other dedicated eBook readers, and 
eBook functionality may not operate as inten-
ded.
Access your online account (individual tax-
payers only).  Go to IRS.gov/Account to se-
curely access information about your federal tax 
account.
• View the amount you owe and a break-
down by tax year.
• See payment plan details or apply for a 
new payment plan.
• Make a payment or view 5 years of pay-
ment history and any pending or sched-
uled payments.
• Access your tax records, including key 
data from your most recent tax return, and 
transcripts.
• View digital copies of select notices from 
the IRS.
• Approve or reject authorization requests 
from tax professionals.
• View your address on file or manage your 
communication preferences.
Get a transcript of your return.  With an on-
line account, you can access a variety of infor-
mation to help you during the filing season. Y ou 
can get a transcript, review your most recently 
filed tax return, and get your adjusted gross in-
come. Create or access your online account at 
IRS.gov/Account.
Tax Pro Account.  This tool lets your tax pro-
fessional submit an authorization request to ac-
cess your individual taxpayer IRS online ac-
count. For more information, go to IRS.gov/
T axProAccount.
Using direct deposit.  The safest and easiest 
way to receive a tax refund is to e -file and 
choose direct deposit, which securely and elec-
tronically transfers your refund directly into your 
financial account. Direct deposit also avoids the 
possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
destroyed, or returned undeliverable to the IRS. 
Eight in 10 taxpayers use direct deposit to re-
ceive their refunds. If you don’t have a bank ac-
count, go to IRS.gov/DirectDeposit for more in-
formation on where to find a bank or credit 
union that can open an account online.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related 
identity theft issues. 
• T ax-related identity theft happens when 
someone steals your personal information 
to commit tax fraud. Y our taxes can be af-
fected if your SSN is used to file a fraudu-
lent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with tax-
payers by email, text messages (including 
shortened links), telephone calls, or social 
media channels to request or verify per-
sonal or financial information. This includes 
requests for personal identification num-
bers (PINs), passwords, or similar informa-
tion for credit cards, banks, or other finan-
cial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Iden-
tity Theft Central webpage, for information 
on identity theft and data security protec-
tion for taxpayers, tax professionals, and 
businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of 
tax-related identity theft, you can learn 
what steps you should take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP 
PINs are six-digit numbers assigned to tax-
payers to help prevent the misuse of their 
SSNs on fraudulent federal income tax re-
turns. When you have an IP PIN, it pre-
vents someone else from filing a tax return 
with your SSN. T o learn more, go to 
IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Ways to check on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your 
mobile device to check your refund status.
Page 27 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 27

• Call the automated refund hotline at 
800-829-1954.
The IRS can’t issue refunds before 
mid-February for returns that claimed 
the EIC or the additional child tax credit 
(ACTC). This applies to the entire refund, not 
just the portion associated with these credits.
Making a tax payment.  Payments of U.S. tax 
must be remitted to the IRS in U.S. dollars. 
Digital assets are not accepted. Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for information on how to make a pay-
ment using any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill 
or estimated tax payment directly from your 
checking or savings account at no cost to 
you.
• Debit Card, Credit Card, or Digital Wallet: 
Choose an approved payment processor 
to pay online or by phone.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Schedule a 
payment when filing your federal taxes us-
ing tax return preparation software or 
through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal T ax Payment System: 
Best option for businesses. Enrollment is 
required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment 
to the address listed on the notice or in-
structions.
• Cash: Y ou may be able to pay your taxes 
with cash at a participating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: Y ou may be able to do 
same-day wire from your financial institu-
tion. Contact your financial institution for 
availability, cost, and time frames.
Note. The IRS uses the latest encryption 
technology to ensure that the electronic pay-
ments you make online, by phone, or from a 
mobile device using the IRS2Go app are safe 
and secure. Paying electronically is quick, easy, 
and faster than mailing in a check or money or-
der.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for more information about your op-
tions.
• Apply for an online payment agreement 
(IRS.gov/OPA) to meet your tax obligation 
in monthly installments if you can’t pay 
your taxes in full today. Once you complete 
the online process, you will receive imme-
diate notification of whether your agree-
ment has been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier 
to see if you can settle your tax debt for 
less than the full amount you owe. For 
more information on the Offer in Compro-
mise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  Go to IRS.gov/
Form1040X for information and updates.
Checking the status of your amended re-
turn. Go to IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status 
of Form 1040-X amended returns.
CAUTION
!
It can take up to 3 weeks from the date 
you filed your amended return for it to 
show up in our system, and processing 
it can take up to 16 weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter 
you’ve received. Go to IRS.gov/Notices to find 
additional information about responding to an 
IRS notice or letter.
Responding to an IRS notice or letter.  Y ou 
can now upload responses to all notices and 
letters using the Document Upload T ool. For no-
tices that require additional action, taxpayers 
will be redirected appropriately on IRS.gov to 
take further action. T o learn more about the tool, 
go to IRS.gov/Upload.
Note. Y ou can use Schedule LEP (Form 
1040), Request for Change in Language Prefer-
ence, to state a preference to receive notices, 
letters, or other written communications from 
the IRS in an alternative language. Y ou may not 
immediately receive written communications in 
the requested language. The IRS’s commitment 
to LEP taxpayers is part of a multi -year timeline 
that began providing translations in 2023. Y ou 
will continue to receive communications, includ-
ing notices and letters, in English until they are 
translated to your preferred language.
Contacting your local TAC.  Keep in mind, 
many questions can be answered on IRS.gov 
without visiting a TAC. Go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp 
for the topics people ask about most. If you still 
need help, TACs provide tax help when a tax is-
sue can’t be handled online or by phone. All 
TACs now provide service by appointment, so 
you’ll know in advance that you can get the 
service you need without long wait times. Be-
fore you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to find 
the nearest TAC and to check hours, available 
services, and appointment options. Or, on the 
IRS2Go app, under the Stay Connected tab, 
choose the Contact Us option and click on “Lo-
cal Offices.”
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) Is Here To 
Help You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organization within the 
IRS that helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer 
rights. TAS strives to ensure that every taxpayer 
is treated fairly and that you know and under-
stand your rights under the T axpayer Bill of 
Rights.
How Can You Learn About Your 
Taxpayer Rights?
The T axpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic 
rights that all taxpayers have when dealing with 
the IRS. Go to T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to 
CAUTION
!
help you understand what these rights mean to 
you and how they apply. These are your rights. 
Know them. Use them.
What Can TAS Do for You?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you 
can’t resolve with the IRS. And their service is 
free. If you qualify for their assistance, you will 
be assigned to one advocate who will work with 
you throughout the process and will do every-
thing possible to resolve your issue. TAS can 
help you if:
• Y our problem is causing financial difficulty 
for you, your family, or your business;
• Y ou face (or your business is facing) an im-
mediate threat of adverse action; or
• Y ou’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn’t responded by the date promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico . T o find your advo-
cate’s number:
• Go to T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-
Us;
• Download Pub. 1546, The T axpayer Advo-
cate Service Is Y our Voice at the IRS, avail-
able at IRS.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p1546.pdf;
• Call the IRS toll free at 800-TAX-FORM 
(800-829-3676) to order a copy of Pub. 
1546;
• Check your local directory; or
• Call TAS toll free at 877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help 
Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale problems that 
affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of 
these broad issues, report it to TAS at IRS.gov/
SAMS. Be sure to not include any personal tax-
payer information.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics 
(LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the IRS and TAS. 
LITCs represent individuals whose income is 
below a certain level and who need to resolve 
tax problems with the IRS. LITCs can represent 
taxpayers in audits, appeals, and tax collection 
disputes before the IRS and in court. In addi-
tion, LITCs can provide information about tax-
payer rights and responsibilities in different lan-
guages for individuals who speak English as a 
second language. Services are offered for free 
or a small fee. For more information or to find an 
LITC near you, go to the LITC page at 
T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/LITC or see IRS 
Pub. 4134, Low Income T axpayer Clinic List, at 
IRS.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p4134.pdf.
Page 28 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28 Publication 501 (2023)

T o help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
A
Abroad, citizens living, filing 
requirements 3
Absence, temporary 9, 13, 18
Accounting periods, joint 
returns 6
Adopted child 12, 19
T axpayer identification 
number 22
Advance payment of premium tax 
credit 5
Age:
Filing status determination 3
Gross income and filing 
requirements (T able 1)2
Standard deduction for age 65 or 
older 23
T est12
Aliens:
Dual-status (See Dual-status 
taxpayers)
Nonresident (See Nonresident 
aliens)
Alimony 22
Alternative minimum tax (AMT), 
effect on filing requirements 
(Table 3) 5
Amended returns 8, 24
(See also Form 1040-X)
Change from itemized to 
standard deduction (or vice 
versa) 24
American citizens abroad 3
Annulled marriages, filing 
status 5
Armed forces:
Combat zone, signing return for 
spouse 7
Dependency allotments 19
GI Bill benefits 21
Military quarters allotments 19
Assistance (See T ax help)
ATINs (Adoption taxpayer 
identification numbers) 22
B
Birth of child 9
Blind persons, standard 
deduction 23
C
Canada, resident of 12, 18
Capital expenses 20
Child born alive 13
Child care expenses 21
Child custody 13
Child support under pre-1985 
agreement 22
Child tax credit 11
Child, qualifying 12
Children:
Adopted child (See Adoption)
Adoption (See Adopted child)
Birth of child 9, 10
Claiming parent, when child is 
head of household 9
Custody of 13
Death of child 9, 10
Dividends of 3
Filing requirements as 
dependents (T able 2)4
Investment income of child under 
age 18 3, 4
Kidnapped 13, 18
Social security number 22
Stillborn 13
Church employees, filing 
requirements (Table 3) 5
Citizen or resident test 12
Citizens outside U.S., filing 
requirements 3
Common law marriage 6
Community property states 7
Cousin 19
Credit, premium tax 5
Custody of child 13
D
Death:
Of child 13
Of dependent 9, 19
Of spouse 3, 6, 19, 23
Of taxpayer 3, 23
Decedents 6, 23
(See also Death of spouse)
Filing requirements 3
Deductions:
Standard deduction 22
Dependent taxpayer test 11
Dependents 11
Birth of 19
Born and died within year 22
Child's earnings 3
Death of 19
Earned income 3
Filing requirements 3, 4
Married, filing joint return 12, 15
Not allowed to claim 
dependents 11
Qualifying child 12
Qualifying relative 17
Social security number 22
Standard deduction for 23
Unearned income 3
Disabled:
Child 13
Dependent 19
Divorced parents 13
Divorced taxpayers:
Child custody 13
Filing status 5, 6
Joint returns, responsibility for 6
Domestic help 11
Dual-status taxpayers:
Joint returns not available 7
E
Earned income:
Defined for purposes of standard 
deduction 23
Dependent filing requirements 
(T able 2)4
Earned income credit:
T wo persons with same 
qualifying child 15
Elderly persons:
Home for the aged 20
Standard deduction for age 65 or 
older 23
Equitable relief, Innocent 
spouse 6
F
Fair rental value 20
Figures (See T ables and figures)
Filing requirements 2-5
Filing status 5-10
Annulled marriages 5
Change to:
Joint return after separate 
returns 8
Separate returns after joint 
return 8, 9
Determination of 3, 5
Head of household 6, 8
Marital status, determination 
of 5
Married filing jointly (See Joint 
returns)
Married filing separately 
(See Married filing 
separately)
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
Food benefits 20
Foreign employment, filing 
requirements 3
Foreign students 12
Form 1040 or 1040-SR:
Social security numbers 22
Use of 7
Form 1040-X:
Change of filing status 8
Itemized deductions, change to 
standard deduction 24
Standard deduction, change to 
itemized deductions 24
Form 1095-A 5
Form 1099-B 5
Form 8814, parents' election to 
report child's interest and 
dividends 3
Form 8857, innocent spouse 
relief 6
Form SS-5, social security 
number request 22
Form W-7, individual taxpayer 
identification number 
request 22
Form W-7A, adoption taxpayer 
identification number 
request 22
Foster care payments and 
expenses 14, 20
Foster child 12, 14, 18, 20
Funeral expenses 21
G
GI Bill benefits 21
Gross income:
Defined 2
Filing requirements 
(T able 1)2
Dependent filing requirements 
(T able 2)4
T est19
Group-term life insurance 5
H
Head of household 8, 9
Filing requirements (T able 1)2
Health insurance premiums 21
Home:
Aged, home for 20
Cost of keeping up 8
Household workers 11
I
Income:
Gross 19
T ax exempt19
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs):
Filing requirements (T able 3)5
Married filing separately 7
Individual taxpayer identification 
numbers (ITINs) 1, 22
Innocent spouse relief 6
Insurance premiums:
Life 21
Medical 21
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Itemized deductions:
Changing from standard to 
itemized deduction (or vice 
versa) 24
Choosing to itemize 24
Married filing separately 24
When to itemize 24
ITINs (Individual taxpayer 
identification numbers) 22
J
Joint return test 12, 15
Joint returns 6, 7
Dependents on 18
K
Kidnapped children 10
Qualifying child 13
Qualifying relative 18
L
Life insurance premiums 21
Local income taxes, itemized 
deductions 24
Local law violated 19
Lodging 20
Losses, rental real estate 7
M
Marital status, determination 
of 5
Married dependents, filing joint 
return 12, 15
Married filing jointly (See Joint 
returns)
Married filing separately 7
Changing method from or to 
itemized deductions 24
Itemized deductions 24
Married taxpayers 6
(See also Joint returns)
Age 65 or older spouse, standard 
deduction 23
Blind spouse, standard 
deduction 23
Dual-status alien spouse 7
Filing status 6
Medical insurance premiums 21
Page 29 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2023) 29

Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs, effect on filing 
requirements (Table 3) 5
Medicare taxes, not support 21
Member of household or 
relationship test 18
Mexico, resident of 12, 18
Military (See Armed forces)
Missing children, photographs of 
in IRS publications 1
Multiple support agreement 21
N
National of the United States 12
Nonresident aliens 2
Dependents 22
Joint return 7
Spouse 8
T axpayer identification 
number 22
P
Parent, claiming head of 
household for 9
Parents who never married 14
Parents, divorced or 
separated 13
Penalty, failure to file 2
Photographs of missing children 
in IRS publications 1
Premium tax credit 5
Publications (See T ax help)
Puerto Rico, residents of 3
Q
Qualifying:
Child 12
Relative 17
Surviving spouse 9
R
Recapture taxes 5
Relationship test 12, 18
Relative, qualifying 17
Remarriage after divorce 5
Rental losses 7
Residency test 13
S
Scholarships 3, 14, 19, 21, 23
Self-employed persons:
Filing requirements (T able 3)5
Gross income 3
Separate returns (See Married 
filing separately)
Separated parents 13
Separated taxpayers:
Filing status 6
Living apart but not legally 
separated 6
Signatures, joint returns 6
Single taxpayers:
Filing status 5, 6
Gross income filing requirements 
(T able 1)2
Social security and Medicare 
taxes:
Reporting of (T able 3)5
Support, not included in 21
Social security benefits 19
Social security numbers (SSNs) 
for dependents 22
Spouse:
Deceased 6
Dual-status alien spouse 7
Innocent spouse relief 6
Nonresident alien 8
Signing joint returns 6
Surviving (See Surviving 
spouse)
SSNs (See Social security numbers 
(SSNs) for dependents)
Standard deduction 1, 22-24
Married filing jointly 6
State or local income taxes 24
Stillborn child 13
Students:
Defined 12
Foreign 12
Support test:
Qualifying child 14
Qualifying relative 19
Surviving spouse:
Death of spouse (See Death of 
spouse)
Gross income filing requirements 
(T able 1)2
Qualifying Surviving Spouse 9
Single filing status 6
T
Tables and figures 8, 16
(See also Worksheets)
Filing requirements:
Dependents (T able 2)4
Gross income levels 
(T able 1)2
Other situations requiring 
filing (T able 3)5
Standard deduction tables 26
Tax help 26
Tax returns:
Amended (See Form 1040-X)
Filing of (See Filing 
requirements)
Joint returns (See Joint returns)
Who must file 1-3, 5
Tax-exempt income 19
Taxes, not support 21
Temporary absences 13, 18
Tiebreaker rules 15
Tips, reporting of (Table 3) 5
Total support 20
Tuition, benefits under GI Bill 21
U
U.S. citizen or resident 12
U.S. citizens filing abroad, filing 
requirements:
Filing requirements 3
U.S. national 12
U.S. territories, income from 3
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
W
Welfare benefits 20
What's New 1
Worksheets:
Head of household status and 
cost of keeping up home 8
Support test 16
Page 30 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 6:05 - 3-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
30 Publication 501 (2023)