Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P535.SGM (15-Feb-2007) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535 ContentsCat. No. 15065Z
Introduction ..................... 1
Department
What’s New for 2006............... 2of the
BusinessTreasury What’s New for 2007............... 2
Internal Reminders ...................... 2Revenue Expenses
Service 1. Deducting Business
Expenses ................... 2
2. Employees’ Pay ............... 6For use in preparing
3. Rent Expense ................. 8
4. Interest ..................... 102006 Returns
5. Taxes ...................... 15
6. Insurance ................... 17
7. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize ................... 20
8. Amortization ................. 25
9. Depletion .................... 25
10. Business Bad Debts ............ 37
11. Other Expenses ............... 39
12. How To Get Tax Help ........... 45
Index .......................... 47
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific
expenses and list other publications and forms
you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR–6406
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including the
area code, in your correspondence.
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
asterisk must be included in the address.)
Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
ally to each email, we do appreciate your
feedback and will consider your comments as
we revise our tax products.
Tax questions. If you have a tax question,
visit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-4933. WeGet forms and other information cannot answer tax questions at either of the
addresses listed above.faster and easier by:
Ordering forms and publications. Visit
Internet • www.irs.gov www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to

Page 2 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
one of the three addresses shown under How To you were age 50 or older). For SIMPLE plans, Qualified environmental cleanup (remedia-
Get Tax Help in the back of this publication. the amount increased to $10,000 ($12,500 if you tion) costs. The deduction for qualified envi-
were age 50 or older). ronmental cleanup (remediation) costs include
costs you pay or incur before 2006. See chapterCompensation limit. The maximum compen- 7.sation used for figuring contributions and bene-What’s New for 2006 fits for a retirement plan has increased from Marginal production of oil and gas. The
$210,000 to $220,000 for 2006. suspension of the taxable income limit on per-The following items highlight some changes in
centage depletion from the marginal productionthe tax law for 2006. More information on these Standard mileage rate. The standard mile- of oil and natural gas has been extended to taxand other changes can be found in Publication age rate for the cost of operating your car, van, years beginning before 2006. For more informa-553, Highlights of 2006 Tax Changes. pickup, or panel truck in 2006 is 44.5 cents a tion on marginal production, see section 613A(c)We removed two chapters that covered the mile for all business miles. of the Internal Revenue Code.following topics that were in the 2005 revision.
• Retirement plans. The information is Photographs of missing children. The Inter-
available in Publication 560, Retirement nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
Plans for Small Business (SEP, Simple, What’s New for 2007 National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
and Qualified Plans). dren. Photographs of missing children selected
The following items highlight some changes in by the Center may appear in this publication on• Electric and clean-fuel vehicles. The the tax law for 2007. pages that would otherwise be blank. You canclean-fuel vehicle and refueling property help bring these children home by looking at thededuction expired for vehicles placed in Domestic production activities deduction. photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOSTservice after December 31, 2005. For in- The deduction rate for 2007 will be increased to (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.formation on the recapture of this deduc- 6%. See Form 8903, Domestic Production Activ-
tion, see Regulations section 1-179A-1. ities Deduction, for more information.
For information on the electric vehicle
Meal expense deduction subject to “hours ofcredit, see Form 8834, Qualified Electric
service” limits. For 2007, this deduction isVehicle Credit. You may be able to claim a
unchanged at 75% of the reimbursed mealscredit if you placed an energy efficient ve-
your employees consumed while they were sub-hicle or alternative fuel vehicle refueling 1.ject to the Department of Transportation’sproperty in service in 2006. See Form
“hours of service” limits. See chapter 11.8910, Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit,
and Form 8911, Alternative Fuel Vehicle
Elective deferrals. For 2007, the maximumRefueling Property Credit, for more infor- Deductingamount of elective deferrals under a salary re-mation.
duction agreement that can be contributed to a
qualified plan increases to $15,500 ($20,500 ifCapital gains treatment for certain Businessyou are age 50 or older). However, for SIMPLEself-created musical. Capital gains treatment plans, the amount is $10,500 ($13,000 if you arefor certain self-created musical works has been age 50 or older). Expensesmade permanent.
Compensation limit. The maximum compen-Partial expensing for advanced mine safety sation used for figuring contributions and bene-equipment.  For costs paid or incurred for any fits for a retirement plan will increase from Introductionqualified advanced mine safety equipment prop- $220,000 to $225,000 for 2007.erty after December 20, 2006, an election can This chapter covers the general rules for deduct-
be made to treat 50% of the cost as a currently ing business expenses. Business expenses areStandard mileage rate. The standard mile-
deductible expense if the property is placed in the costs of carrying on a trade or business andage rate for the cost of operating your car, van,
service during the tax year. See chapter 7 for they are usually deductible if the business ispickup, or panel truck in 2007 is 48.5 cents a
more information. mile for all business miles. operated to make a profit.
Tax rates and maximum net earnings. The Topicsmaximum net self-employment earnings subject
This chapter discusses:to the social security portion (12.4%) of the Remindersself-employment tax increased to $94,200 for
• What you can deduct2006. There is no maximum limit on earnings
subject to the Medicare portion (2.9%). See • How much you can deductIRS e-file (Electronic Filing)Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self Employment
• When you can deductTax.
• Not-for-profit activitiesMeal expense deduction subject to “hours of
service” limits. For 2006, this deduction is
75% of the reimbursed meals your employees Useful ItemsYou can file your tax returns electronically usingconsumed while they were subject to the De- You may want to see:an IRS e-file option. The benefits of IRS e-filepartment of Transportation’s “hours of service” include faster refunds, increased accuracy, andlimits. See chapter 11. Publicationacknowledgment of IRS receipt of your return.
You can use one of the following IRS e-fileIncreased section 179 deduction dollar limit. ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Businessoptions.The maximum section 179 deduction you can
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carelect for property you purchased and placed in • Use an authorized IRS e-file provider. Expensesservice in 2006 has increased from $105,000 to
• Use a personal computer.$108,000. For more information, see Publication ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
946, How To Depreciate Property. • Visit a Volunteer Income Tax Assistance ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions(VITA) or Tax Counseling for the ElderlyElective deferrals. For 2006, the maximum ❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for(TCE) site.amount of elective deferrals under a salary re- Individuals, Estates, and Trustsduction agreement that could be contributed to a For details on these fast filing methods, see your
qualified plan increased to $15,000 ($20,000 if income tax package. ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods
Page 2 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 3 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 542 Corporations This rule does not apply to personal property Treat as repairs amounts paid to replace parts of
you acquire for resale if your average annual a machine that only keep it in a normal operating❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts gross receipts (or those of your predecessor) for condition.
❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home the preceding 3 tax years are not more than $10 Restoration plan. Capitalize the cost of re-(Including Use by Daycare million. conditioning, improving, or altering your prop-Providers) For more information, see the following erty as part of a general restoration plan to makesources.❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules it suitable for your business. This applies even if
• Cost of goods sold—chapter 6 of Publica- some of the work would by itself be classified as❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest tion 334. repairs.Deduction
• Inventories—Publication 538.❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property Capital versus Deductible• Uniform capitalization rules—Publication ExpensesForm (and Instructions) 538 and section 263A of the Internal Rev-
enue Code and the related regulations. To help you distinguish between capital and❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
deductible expenses, different examples are
❏ 5213 Election To Postpone given below.Capital ExpensesDetermination as To Whether the
Motor vehicles. You usually capitalize thePresumption Applies That an You must capitalize, rather than deduct, some cost of a motor vehicle you use in your business.Activity Is Engaged in for Profit costs. These costs are a part of your investment You can recover its cost through annual deduc-in your business and are called “capital ex- tions for depreciation.See chapter 12 for information about getting penses.” Capital expenses are considered as- There are dollar limits on the depreciationpublications and forms. sets in your business. There are, in general, you can claim each year on passenger automo-three types of costs you capitalize. biles used in your business. See Publication
463.• Business start-up costs (See Tip below).
Generally, repairs you make to your busi-What Can I Deduct? • Business assets. ness vehicle are currently deductible. However,
amounts you pay to recondition and overhaul a• Improvements.To be deductible, a business expense must be
business vehicle are capital expenses and areboth ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex-
recovered through depreciation.pense is one that is common and accepted in You can elect to deduct or amortize
your industry. A necessary expense is one that certain business start-up costs. See Roads and driveways.  The cost of building ais helpful and appropriate for your trade or busi- chapters 7and 8. private road on your business property and the
TIP
ness. An expense does not have to be indispen- cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-sable to be considered necessary. crete one are capital expenses you may be ableCost recovery. Although you generally can-It is important to distinguish business ex- to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a privatenot take a current deduction for a capital ex-penses from: road on your business property is a deductiblepense, you may be able to recover the amount
expense.• The expenses used to figure cost of goods you spend through depreciation, amortization,
sold, or depletion. These recovery methods allow you Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rulesto deduct part of your cost each year. In this apply, amounts spent for tools used in your• Capital expenses, and way, you are able to recover your capital ex- business are deductible expenses if the tools• Personal expenses. pense. See Amortization (chapter 8) and Deple- have a life expectancy of less than 1 year or theirtion (chapter 9) in this publication. You may also cost is minor.be allowed a section 179 deduction. For infor-
Cost of Goods Sold Machinery parts. Unless the uniform capitali-mation on the section 179 deduction and depre-
zation rules apply, the cost of replacingciation, see Publication 946.If your business manufactures products or short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in goodpurchases them for resale, you generally must working condition, but not add to its life, is avalue inventory at the beginning and end of each Business Assets deductible expense.tax year to determine your cost of goods sold.
Some of your business expenses may be in- Heating equipment. The cost of changingThere are many different kinds of business as-
cluded in figuring cost of goods sold. Cost of from one heating system to another is a capitalsets; for example, land, buildings, machinery,
goods sold is deducted from your gross receipts expense.furniture, trucks, patents, and franchise rights.
to figure your gross profit for the year. If you You must fully capitalize the cost of these as-
include an expense in the cost of goods sold, sets, including freight and installation charges. Personal versus Businessyou cannot deduct it again as a business ex- Certain property you produce for use in your Expensespense. trade or business must be capitalized under the
The following are types of expenses that go uniform capitalization rules. See Regulations Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, orinto figuring cost of goods sold. section 1.263A-2 for information on these rules. family expenses. However, if you have an ex-
pense for something that is used partly for busi-• The cost of products or raw materials, in-
ness and partly for personal purposes, dividecluding freight. Improvements the total cost between the business and per-• Storage. sonal parts. You can deduct the business part.The costs of making improvements to a busi- For example, if you borrow money and use• Direct labor (including contributions to ness asset are capital expenses if the improve- 70% of it for business and the other 30% for apension or annuity plans) for workers who ments add to the value of the asset, appreciably family vacation, you generally can deduct 70%produce the products. lengthen the time you can use it, or adapt it to a of the interest as a business expense. The re-different use. Improvements are generally major• Factory overhead. maining 30% is personal interest and generallyexpenditures. Some examples are: new electric is not deductible. See chapter 4 for informationwiring, a new roof, a new floor, new plumbing,Under the uniform capitalization rules, you on deducting interest and the allocation rules.bricking up windows to strengthen a wall, andmust capitalize the direct costs and part of the
lighting improvements.indirect costs for certain production or resale Business use of your home. If you use part
activities. Indirect costs include rent, interest, However, you can currently deduct repairs of your home for business, you may b e able to
taxes, storage, purchasing, processing, repack- that keep your property in a normal efficient deduct expenses for the business us e of your
aging, handling, and administrative costs. operating condition as a business expense. home. These expenses may include mortgage
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Page 4 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
interest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre- have a “net operating loss.” You can use a net
operating loss to lower your taxes in other years.ciation. How Much Can I
See Publication 536 for more information.To qualify to claim expenses for the business See Publication 542 for information aboutDeduct?use of your home, you must meet both of the net operating losses of corporations.following tests. You can deduct the cost of a business expense
if it meets the criteria of ordinary and necessary1. The business part of your home must be
and it is not a capital expense.used exclusively and regularly for your
When Can Itrade or business. Recovery of amount deducted (tax benefit
rule). If you recover part of an expense in the2. The business part of your home must be: Deduct an Expense?same tax year in which you would have claimed
a. Your principal place of business, or a deduction, reduce your current year expense When you can deduct an expense depends onby the amount of the recovery. If you have a your accounting method. An accounting methodb. A place where you meet or deal with recovery in a later year, include the recovered is a set of rules used to determine when and howpatients, clients, or customers in the amount in income in that year. However, if part income and expenses are reported. The twonormal course of your trade or busi- of the deduction for the expense did not reduce basic methods are the cash method and theness, or your tax, you do not have to include that part of accrual method. Whichever method you choosethe recovered amount in income.c. A separate structure (not attached to must clearly reflect income.For more information on recoveries and theyour home) used in connection with For more information on accounting meth-tax benefit rule, see Publication 525.your trade or business. ods, see Publication 538.
Payments in kind. If you provide services to Cash method. Under the cash method of ac-You generally do not have to meet the exclu- pay a business expense, the amount you can counting, you generally deduct business ex-sive use test for the part of your home that you deduct is limited to your out-of-pocket costs. penses in the tax year you pay them.regularly use either for the storage of inventory You cannot deduct the cost of your own labor.
or product samples, or as a daycare facility. Similarly, if you pay a business expense in Accrual method. Under an accrual method ofgoods or other property, you can deduct onlyYour home office qualifies as your principal accounting, you generally deduct business ex-what the property costs you. If these costs areplace of business if you meet the following re- penses when both of the following apply.included in the cost of goods sold, do not deductquirements.
them as a business expense. 1. The all-events test has been met. The test• You use the office exclusively and regu- is met when:Limits on losses. If your deductions for anlarly for administrative or management ac-
investment or business activity are more thantivities of your trade or business. a. All events have occurred that fix the factthe income it brings in, you have a loss. There of liability, and• You have no other fixed location where may be limits on how much of the loss you can
b. The liability can be determined with rea-you conduct substantial administrative or deduct.
sonable accuracy.management activities of your trade or Not-for-profit limits. If you carry on yourbusiness. business activity without the intention of making 2. Economic performance has occurred.a profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offsetIf you have more than one business location, other income. See Not-for-Profit Activities, later. Economic performance. You generallydetermine your principal place of business
cannot deduct or capitalize a business expenseAt-risk limits. Generally, a deductible lossbased on the following factors.
until economic performance occurs. If your ex-from a trade or business or other in-• The relative importance of the activities pense is for property or services provided to you,come-producing activity is limited to the invest-performed at each location. or for your use of property, economic perform-ment you have “at risk” in the activity. You are at
ance occurs as the property or services arerisk in any activity for the following.• If the relative importance factor does not
provided, or the property is used. If your ex-determine your principal place of busi- 1. The money and adjusted basis of property pense is for property or services you provide toness, consider the time spent at each lo- you contribute to the activity. others, economic performance occurs as youcation. provide the property or services.2. Amounts you borrow for use in the activity
For more information, see Publication 587. if: Example. Your tax year is the calendar
year. In December 2006, the Field Plumbinga. You are personally liable for repayment,
Business use of your car. If you use your car Company did some repair work at your place ofor
exclusively in your business, you can deduct car business and sent you a bill for $600. You paid it
b. You pledge property (other than prop- by check in January 2007. If you use the accrualexpenses. If you use your car for both business erty used in the activity) as security for method of accounting, deduct the $600 on yourand personal purposes, you must divide your the loan. tax return for 2006 because all events haveexpenses based on actual mileage.
occurred to “fix” the fact of liability (in this caseYou can deduct actual car expenses, which For more information, see Publication 925. the work was completed), the liability can beinclude depreciation (or lease payments), gas determined, and economic performance oc-Passive activities. Generally, you are in aand oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups, insurance, and curred in that year.passive activity if you have a trade or businessregistration fees. Or, instead of figuring the busi- If you use the cash method of accounting,activity in which you do not materially partici-ness part of these actual expenses, you may be deduct the expense on your 2007 return.pate, or a rental activity. In general, deductionsable to use the standard mileage rate to figure for losses from passive activities only offset in-your deduction. For 2006, the standard mileage Prepayment. You generally cannot deductcome from passive activities. You cannot use expenses in advance, even if you pay them inrate is 44.5 cents a mile for all business miles. any excess deductions to offset other income. In advance. This rule applies to both the cash andIf you are self-employed, you can also de- addition, passive activity credits can only offset accrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest,duct the business part of interest on your car the tax on net passive income. Any excess loss prepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex-loan, state and local personal property tax on the or credits are carried over to later years. Sus- pense paid far enough in advance to, in effect,pended passive losses are fully deductible in thecar, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not you create an asset with a useful life extending sub-year you completely dispose of the activity. Forclaim the standard mileage rate. stantially beyond the end of the current tax year.more information, see Publication 925.For more information on car expenses and
the rules for using the standard mileage rate, Net operating loss. If your deductions are Example. In 2006, you sign a 10-year lease
see Publication 463. more than your income for the year, you may and immediately pay your rent for the first 3
Page 4 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 5 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
years. Even though you paid the rent for 2006, Presumption of profit. An activity is pre- lines of Schedule A (Form 1040). You can de-
sumed carried on for profit if it produced a profit duct a casualty loss on property you own for2007, and 2008, you can only deduct the rent for
in at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including the personal use only to the extent it is more than2006 on your 2006 tax return. You can deduct
current year. Activities that consist primarily of $100 and exceeds 10% of your adjusted grossthe rent for 2007 and 2008 on your tax returns
breeding, training, showing, or racing horses are income. See Publication 547 for more informa-for those years.
presumed carried on for profit if they produced a tion on casualty losses. For the limits that apply
profit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax years, includ- to mortgage interest, see Publication 936.Contested liability. Under the cash method,
ing the current year. The activity must be sub-you can deduct a contested liability only in the Category 2. Deductions that do not result instantially the same for each year within thisyear you pay the liability. Under the accrual an adjustment to the basis of property are al-period. You have a profit when the gross incomemethod, you can deduct contested liabilities lowed next, but only to the extent your grossfrom an activity exceeds the deductions.such as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses- income from the activity is more than your de-If a taxpayer dies before the end of thesion income, war profits, and excess profits ductions under the first category. Most business5-year (or 7-year) period, the “test” period endstaxes) either in the tax year you pay the liability deductions, such as those for advertising, insur-on the date of the taxpayer’s death.(or transfer money or other property to satisfy ance premiums, interest, utilities, and wages,If your business or investment activitythe obligation) or in the tax year you settle the belong in this category.passes this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, the IRScontest. However, to take the deduction in the will presume it is carried on for profit. This Category 3. Business deductions that de-year of payment or transfer, you must meet means the limits discussed here will not apply. crease the basis of property are allowed last, butcertain conditions. See Contested Liability in You can take all your business deductions from only to the extent the gross income from thePublication 538 for more information. the activity, even for the years that you have a activity exceeds the deductions you take under
loss. You can rely on this presumption unless the first two categories. Deductions for deprecia-Related person. Under an accrual method of the IRS later shows it to be invalid. tion, amortization, and the part of a casualty lossaccounting, you generally deduct expenses an individual could not deduct in category (1)when you incur them, even if you have not yet Using the presumption later. If you are start- belong in this category. Where more than onepaid them. However, if you and the person you ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) years asset is involved, allocate depreciation andshowing a profit, you can elect to have the pre-owe are related and that person uses the cash these other deductions proportionally.sumption made after you have the 5 (or 7) yearsmethod of accounting, you must pay the ex-
Individuals must claim the amounts inof experience allowed by the test.pense before you can deduct it. Your deduction
categories (2) and (3) as miscellane-You can elect to do this by filing Form 5213.is allowed when the amount is includible in in-
ous deductions on Schedule A (FormFiling this form postpones any determinationcome by the related cash method payee. See
TIP
1040). They are subject to thethat your activity is not carried on for profit until 5Related Persons in Publication 538.
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Publi-(or 7) years have passed since you started the
cation 529 for information on this limit.activity.
The benefit gained by making this election is
that the IRS will not immediately question Example. Ida is engaged in a not-for-profitNot-for-Profit Activities whether your activity is engaged in for profit. activity. The income and expenses of the activity
Accordingly, it will not restrict your deductions. are as follows.If you do not carry on your business or invest- Rather, you will gain time to earn a profit in thement activity to make a profit, you cannot use a required number of years. If you show 3 (or 2) Gross income ................. $3,200loss from the activity to offset other income. years of profit at the end of this period, yourActivities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport Subtract:deductions are not limited under these rules. Ifor recreation, are often not entered into for profit. Real estate taxes ........ $700you do not have 3 (or 2) years of profit, the limit Home mortgage interest .... 9 0 0The limit on not-for-profit losses applies to can be applied retroactively to any year with a Insurance ............. 4 0 0individuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and S loss in the 5-year (or 7-year) period. Utilities ............... 7 0 0corporations. It does not apply to corporations Filing Form 5213 automatically extends the Maintenance ........... 2 0 0other than S corporations. period of limitations on any year in the 5-year (or Depreciation on an automobile 600In determining whether you are carrying on 7-year) period to 2 years after the due date of Depreciation on a machine . . 200 3,700an activity for profit, several factors are taken the return for the last year of the period. The
into account. No one factor alone is decisive. period is extended only for deductions of the Loss ....................... $(500)
Among the factors to consider are whether: activity and any related deductions that might be
affected. Ida must limit her deductions to $3,200, the• You carry on the activity in a businesslike
gross income she earned from the activity. Themanner, You must file Form 5213 within 3 years limit is reached in category (3), as follows.after the due date of your return (deter-• The time and effort you put into the activity mined without extensions) for the year
TIP
indicate you intend to make it profitable, Limit on deduction ............. $3,200in which you first carried on the activity, or, if
• You depend on the income for your liveli- Category 1: Taxes andearlier, within 60 days after receiving written
hood, interest ............... $1,600notice from the Internal Revenue Service pro-
Category 2: Insurance,posing to disallow deductions attributable to the• Your losses are due to circumstances be- utilities, and maintenance . . . 1,300 2,900activity.yond your control (or are normal in the
Available for Category 3 ........ $ 300start-up phase of your type of business),
Limit on Deductions• You change your methods of operation in The $800 of depreciation is allocated be-an attempt to improve profitability, tween the automobile and machine as follows.If your activity is not carried on for profit, take
deductions in the following order and only to the• You (or your advisors) have the knowl-
$600 depreciation for theextent stated in the three categories. If you areedge needed to carry on the activity as a x $300 = $225$800 automobilean individual, these deductions may be takensuccessful business,
only if you itemize. These deductions may be• You were successful in making a profit in taken on Schedule A (Form 1040). $200 depreciation for thesimilar activities in the past, x  $300 = $75$800 machineCategory 1. Deductions you can take for per-• The activity makes a profit in some years, sonal as well as for business activities are al- The basis of each asset is reduced accord-and lowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusiness ingly.
• You can expect to make a future profit deductions, such as those for home mortgage The $1,600 for category (1) is deductible in
from the appreciation of the assets used in interest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong in full on the appropriate lines for taxes and interest
the activity. this category. Deduct them on the appropriate on Schedule A (Form 1040). Ida deducts the
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 5

Page 6 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
remaining $1,600 ($1,300 for category (2) and Reduce your deduction for employee wages • The complexities of your business.
$300 for category (3)) as other miscellaneous by the amount of any employment credits you • The amount of time required.deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) subject claim. For more information about these credits,
• The cost of living in the locality.to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. see Publication 954, Tax Incentives for Dis-
tressed Communities, or Publication 4492, In- • The ability and achievements of the indi-Partnerships and S corporations. If a part- formation for Taxpayers Affected by Hurricanes vidual employee performing the service.nership or S corporation carries on a Katrina, Rita, and Wilma.
• The pay compared with the gross and netnot-for-profit activity, these limits apply at the
partnership or S corporation level. They are re- income of the business, as well as withTopicsflected in the individual shareholder’s or part- distributions to shareholders if the busi-This chapter discusses:ner’s distributive shares. ness is a corporation.
• Tests for deducting pay • Your policy regarding pay for all your em-More than one activity. If you have several ployees.undertakings, each may be a separate activity or • Kinds of pay
several undertakings may be combined. The • The history of pay for each employee.
following are the most significant facts and cir- Useful Itemscumstances in making this determination.
You may want to see: Test 2—For Services• The degree of organizational and eco- Performednomic interrelationship of various under- Publication
takings. You must be able to prove the payment was❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guide made for services actually performed.• The business purpose that is (or might be)
served by carrying on the various under- ❏ 15-A Employer’s Supplemental Tax
Employee-shareholder salaries. If a corpo-takings separately or together in a busi- Guide
ness or investment setting. ration pays an employee who is also a share-❏ 15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe holder a salary that is unreasonably high• The similarity of the undertakings. Benefits (Rev. December 2006) considering the services actually performed, the
excessive part of the salary may be treated as aThe IRS will generally accept your characteri- See chapter 12 for information about getting constructive distribution to the em-zation if it is supported by facts and circum- publications and forms. ployee-shareholder. For more information onstances. corporate distributions to shareholders, see
If you are carrying on two or more dif- Publication 542, Corporations.
ferent activities, keep the deductions
Tests forand income from each one separate.
TIP
Figure separately whether each is a
Deducting Paynot-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on Kinds of Paydeductions and losses separately for each activ-
To be deductible, your employees’ pay must beity that is not for profit. Some of the ways you may provide pay to youran ordinary and necessary expense and you
employees in addition to regular wages or sala-must pay or incur it. These and other require-
ries are discussed next. For specialized andments that apply to all business expenses are
detailed information on employees’ pay and theexplained in chapter 1.
employment tax treatment of employees’ pay,In addition, the pay must meet both of the see Pub. 15, Pub. 15-A, and Pub. 15-B.following tests.
• Test 1. It must be reasonable.2. Awards
• Test 2. It must be for services performed. You can generally deduct amounts you pay to
The form or method of figuring the pay does not your employees as awards, whether paid in
affect its deductibility. For example, bonuses cash or property. If you give property to anEmployees’ Pay and commissions based on sales or earnings, employee as an employee achievement award,
and paid under an agreement made before the your deduction may be limited.
services were performed, are both deductible.
Achievement awards. An achievementIntroduction
award is an item of tangible personal propertyTest 1—ReasonablenessYou can generally deduct the pay you give your that meets all the following requirements.employees for the services they perform. The Determine the reasonableness of pay by the • It is given to an employee for length ofpay may be in cash, property, or services. It may facts and circumstances. Generally, reasonable service or safety achievement.include wages, or salaries, or other compensa- pay is the amount that like enterprises pay fortion such as: vacation allowances, bonuses, the same, or similar, services. • It is awarded as part of a meaningful pres-commissions, and fringe benefits. For informa- entation.You must be able to prove that the pay istion about deducting employment taxes, see reasonable. Base this determination on the cir- • It is awarded under conditions and circum-chapter 5. cumstances that exist when you contract for the stances that do not create a significantYou can claim the following employ- services, not those that exist when the reasona- likelihood of disguised pay.ment credits if you hire individuals who bleness is questioned. If the pay is excessive,
meet certain requirements. the excess is disallowed.
TIP
Length-of-service award. An award will
qualify as a length-of-service award only if either• Empowerment zone and renewal commu- Factors to consider. To determine if pay is of the following applies.nity employment credit. reasonable, consider the following items and
• The employee receives the award after his• Indian employment credit. any other pertinent facts.
or her first 5 years of employment.• Welfare-to-work credit. • The duties performed by the employee.
• The employee did not receive another• Work opportunity credit. • The volume of business handled. length-of-service award (other than one of
very small value) during the same year or• Credits for employers affected by Hurri- • The character and amount of responsibil-
in any of the prior 4 years.cane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma. ity.
Page 6 Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay

Page 7 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Safety achievement award. An award for This includes meals you furnish at a sup-Education Expenses
safety achievement will qualify as an achieve- port camp that is near and integral to an
If you pay or reimburse education expenses forment award unless one of the following applies. oil or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.
an employee, you can deduct the payments if
1. It is given to a manager, administrator, they are part of a qualified educational assis- Employee benefit programs. Employee ben-clerical employee, or other professional tance program. Deduct them on the “Employee efit programs include the following.employee. benefit programs” or other appropriate line of
• Accident and health plans.your tax return. For information on educational2. During the tax year, more than 10% of assistance programs, see Educational Assis-your employees, excluding those listed in • Adoption assistance.tance in section 2 of Publication 15-B.(1), have already received a safety • Cafeteria plans.achievement award (other than one of very
Fringe Benefits • Dependent care assistance.small value).
• Educational assistance.A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the perform-Deduction limit. Your deduction for the ance of services. You can generally deduct the • Life insurance coverage.cost of employee achievement awards given to cost of fringe benefits.any one employee during the tax year is limited • Welfare benefit funds.You may be able to exclude all or part of theto the following. value of some fringe benefits from your employ-
You can generally deduct amounts you spend• $400 for awards that are not qualified plan ees’ pay. You also may not owe employment
on employee benefit programs on the applicableawards. taxes on the value of the fringe benefits. See
line of your tax return. For example, if you pro-Table 2-1 in Publication 15-B for details.• $1,600 for all awards, whether or not qual- vide dependent care by operating a dependentYour deduction for the cost of fringe benefitsified plan awards. care facility for your employees, deduct yourfor activities generally considered entertain-
costs in whatever categories they fall (utilities,ment, amusement, or recreation, or for a facilityA qualified plan award is an achievement salaries, etc.).used in connection with such an activity (foraward given as part of an established written
example, a company aircraft) for certain officers, Life insurance coverage. You cannot de-plan or program that does not favor highly com- directors, and more-than-10% shareholders is duct the cost of life insurance coverage for you,pensated employees as to eligibility or benefits. limited. an employee, or any person with a financialA highly compensated employee for 2006 is See Pub. 15-B for an extensive discussion of interest in your business, if you are directly oran employee who meets either of the following fringe benefits. indirectly the beneficiary of the policy. See Reg-tests.
ulations section 1.264-1 for more information.Meals and lodging. You can usually deduct1. The employee was a 5% owner at any Welfare benefit funds. A welfare benefitthe cost of furnishing meals and lodging to yourtime during the year or the preceding year. fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangementemployees. Deduct the cost in whatever cate-
2. The employee received more than having the effect of a plan) that provides welfaregory the expense falls. For example, if you oper-
$100,000 in pay for the preceding year. ate a restaurant, deduct the cost of the meals benefits to your employees, independent con-
you furnish to employees as part of the cost of tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefitsYou can choose to ignore test (2) if the em- goods sold. If you operate a nursing home, are any benefits other than deferred compensa-ployee was not also in the top 20% of employees motel, or rental property, deduct the cost of tion or transfers of restricted property.ranked by pay for the preceding year. furnishing lodging to an employee as expenses Your deduction for contributions to a welfareAn award is not a qualified plan award if the for utilities, linen service, salaries, depreciation, benefit fund is limited to the fund’s qualified costaverage cost of all the employee achievement etc. for the tax year. If your contributions to the fundawards given during the tax year (that would be
are more than its qualified cost, carry the excessDeduction limit on meals. You can gener-qualified plan awards except for this limit) is
over to the next tax year.ally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishingmore than $400. To figure this average cost,
meals to your employees. However, you can Generally, the fund’s “qualified cost” is theignore awards of nominal value.
deduct the full cost of the following meals. total of the following amounts, reduced by theDeduct achievement awards as a nonwage
after-tax income of the fund.business expense on your return or business • Meals whose value you include in an em-
ployee’s wages.schedule. • The cost you would have been able to
deduct using the cash method of account-• Meals that qualify as a de minimus fringeYou may not owe employment taxes
ing if you had paid for the benefits directly.benefit as discussed in section 2 of Publi-on the value of some achievement
cation 15-B. This generally includes mealsawards you provide to an employee.
TIP
• The contributions added to a reserve ac-
you furnish to employees at your place ofSee Publication 15-B. count that are needed to fund claims in-business if more than half of these em- curred but not paid as of the end of theployees are provided the meals for your year. These claims can be for supplemen-Bonuses convenience. tal unemployment benefits, severance
You can generally deduct a bonus paid to an • Meals you furnish to your employees at pay, or disability, medical, or life insurance
employee if you intended the bonus as addi- the work site when you operate a restau- benefits.
tional pay for services, not as a gift, and the rant or catering service.
services were performed. However, the total bo- For more information, see sections 419(c) and• Meals you furnish to your employees asnuses, salaries, and other pay must be reasona- 419A of the Internal Revenue Code and thepart of the expense of providing recrea-ble for the services performed. If the bonus is related regulations.tional or social activities, such as a com-paid in property, see Property, later. pany picnic.
Loans or Advances• Meals you are required by federal law toGifts of nominal value. If, to promote em-
furnish to crew members of certain com- You generally can deduct as wages an advanceployee goodwill, you distribute food, or mer-
mercial vessels (or would be required to you make to an employee for services per-chandise of nominal value to your employees at
furnish if the vessels were operated atholidays, you can deduct the cost of these items formed if you do not expect the employee to
sea). This does not include meals you fur-as a nonwage business expense. Your deduc- repay the advance. However, if the employeenish on vessels primarily providing luxurytion for de minimus gifts of food or drink are not performs no services, treat the amount you ad-water transportation.subject to the 50% deduction limit that generally vanced as a loan. If the employee does not
applies to meals. For more information on this repay the loan, treat it as income to the em-• Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platform
deduction limit, see Meals and lodging, later. ployee.or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska.
Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay Page 7

Page 8 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Below-market interest rate loans. On cer- Vacation pay. Vacation pay is an employee and lineal descendants (children, grand-
tain loans you make to an employee or share- benefit. It includes amounts paid for unused children, etc.).
holder, you are treated as having received vacation leave. You can deduct vacation pay 2. An individual and a corporation if the indi-interest income and as having paid compensa- only in the tax year in which the employee actu- vidual owns, directly or indirectly, moretion or dividends equal to that interest. See Be- ally receives it. This rule applies regardless of than 50% in value of the outstanding stocklow-Market Loans in chapter 4. whether you use the cash or accrual method of of the corporation.accounting.
3. Two corporations that are members of the
Property
same controlled group as defined in sec-
tion 267(f) of the Internal Revenue Code.If you transfer property (including your com-
pany’s stock) to an employee as payment for 4. A grantor and a fiduciary of any trust.services, you can generally deduct it as wages.
5. Fiduciaries of two separate trusts if theThe amount you can deduct is the property’s fair
same person is a grantor of both trusts.market value on the date of the transfer less any 3.
amount the employee paid for the property. 6. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of the sameYou can claim the deduction only for the tax trust.year in which your employee includes the prop-
7. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of two sepa-Rent Expenseerty’s value in income. Your employee is
rate trusts if the same person is a grantordeemed to have included the value in income if
of both trusts.you report it on Form W-2 in a timely manner.
 You treat the deductible amount as received 8. A fiduciary of a trust and a corporation ifIntroductionin exchange for the property, and you must rec- the trust or a grantor of the trust owns,This chapter discusses the tax treatment of rentognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer, directly or indirectly, more than 50% inor lease payments you make for property youunless it is the company’s stock transferred as value of the outstanding stock of the cor-use in your business but do not own. It alsopayment for services. Your gain or loss is the poration.discusses how to treat other kinds of paymentsdifference between the fair market value of the
9. A person and a tax-exempt educational oryou make that are related to your use of thisproperty and its adjusted basis on the date of
charitable organization that is controlled di-property. These include payments you make fortransfer.
rectly or indirectly by that person or bytaxes on the property, improvements to theThese rules also apply to property trans-
members of the family of that person.property, and getting a lease. There is a discus-ferred to an independent contractor for services,
sion about capitalizing (including in the cost ofgenerally reported on Form 1099-MISC. 10. A corporation and a partnership if theproperty) certain rent expenses at the end of the same persons own more than 50% inchapter.Restricted property. If the property you value of the outstanding stock of the cor-transfer for services is subject to restrictions that poration and more than 50% of the capitalaffect its value, you generally cannot deduct it Topics or profits interest in the partnership.and do not report gain or loss until it is substan- This chapter discusses:
11. Two S corporations or an S corporationtially vested in the recipient. However, if the
and a regular corporation if the same per-recipient pays for the property, you must report • The definition of rent
sons own more than 50% in value of theany gain at the time of the transfer up to the • Taxes on leased property outstanding stock of each corporation.amount paid.
“Substantially vested” means the property is • The cost of getting a lease 12. An executor of an estate and a beneficiary
not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. This of the estate unless the sale or exchange• Improvements by the lesseemeans that the recipient is not likely to have to is in satisfaction of a pecuniary bequest.
give up his or her rights in the property in the • Capitalizing rent expenses
To determine whether an individual directlyfuture.
or indirectly owns any of the outstanding stock of
See chapter 12 for information about getting a corporation, see Related Persons in Publica-Reimbursements publications and forms. tion 542, Corporations. For rules that apply to
for Business Expenses transactions between partners and partner-
ships, see Publication 541, Partnerships.You can generally deduct the amount you pay or
reimburse employees for business expenses in- Rent on your home. If you rent your home
Rentcurred for your business. However, your deduc- and use part of it as your place of business, you
tion may be limited. may be able to deduct the rent you pay for thatRent is any amount you pay for the use ofIf you make the payment under an accounta- part. You must meet the requirements for busi-property you do not own. In general, you canble plan, deduct it in the category of the expense ness use of your home. For more information,deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is forpaid. For example, if you pay an employee for see Business use of your home in chapter 1.property you use in your trade or business. If youtravel expenses incurred on your behalf, deduct have or will receive equity in or title to the prop- Rent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid inthis payment as a travel expense. If you make erty, the rent is not deductible. your trade or business is deductible in the yearthe payment under a nonaccountable plan, de- paid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, youduct it as wages and include it in the employee’s Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental can deduct only the amount that applies to yourW-2. deduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, the use of the rented property during the tax year.See Reimbursement of Travel, Meals, and issue of reasonableness arises only if you and You can deduct the rest of your payment onlyEntertainment in chapter 11 for more informa- the lessor are related. Rent paid to a related over the period to which it applies.tion about deducting reimbursements and an person (defined below) is reasonable if it is the
explanation of accountable and nonaccountable same amount you would pay to a stranger for Example 1. You are a calendar year tax-plans. use of the same property. Rent is not unreason- payer and you leased a building for 5 years
able just because it is figured as a percentage of beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 per year.
Sick and Vacation Pay gross sales. You paid the first year’s rent ($12,000) on June
30. You can deduct only $6,000 (6/12 × $12,000)Related persons. For this purpose, the fol-
Sick pay. You can deduct amounts you pay to for the rent that applies to the first year.lowing are considered related persons.
your employees for sickness and injury, includ-
ing lump-sum amounts, as wages. However, 1. An individual and his or her brothers and Example 2. You are a calendar year tax-
your deduction is limited to amounts not com- sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, payer. Last January you leased proper ty for 3
pensated by insurance or other means. ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), years for $6,000 a year. You paid the full
Page 8 Chapter 3 Rent Expense

Page 9 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$18,000 (3 × $6,000) during the first year of the the IRS will consider the lessor in a leveraged rent and stated or imputed interest into ac count
lease. Each year you can deduct only $6,000, under a constant rental accrual method in whichlease transaction to be the owner of the property
the part of the lease that applies to that year. the rent is treated as accruing ratably over theand the transaction to be a valid lease if all the
entire lease term. For details, see section 467 offactors in the revenue procedure are met, in-Canceling a lease. You generally can deduct the Internal Revenue Code.cluding the following.as rent an amount you pay to cancel a business
• The lessor must maintain a minimum un-lease.
conditional “at risk” equity investment inLease or purchase. There may be instances the property (at least 20% of the cost ofin which you must determine whether your pay- Taxes onthe property) during the entire lease term.ments are for rent or for the purchase of the
Leased Property• The lessee may not have a contractualproperty. You must first determine whether your
right to buy the property from the lessor atagreement is a lease or a conditional sales con-
If you lease business property, you can deductless than fair market value when the righttract. Payments made under a conditional sales
as additional rent any taxes you have to pay tois exercised.contract are not deductible as rent expense.
or for the lessor. When you can deduct these• The lessee may not invest in the property,Conditional sales contract. Whether an taxes as additional rent depends on your ac-agreement is a conditional sales contract de- except as provided by Revenue Procedure counting method.pends on the intent of the parties. Determine 2001-28.
intent based on the provisions of the agreement Cash method. If you use the cash method of• The lessee may not lend any money to theand the facts and circumstances that exist when accounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi-lessor to buy the property or guarantee theyou make the agreement. No single test, or tional rent only for the tax year in which you payloan used by the lessor to buy the prop-special combination of tests, always applies. them.erty.However, in general, an agreement may be con-
sidered a conditional sales contract rather than • The lessor must show that it expects to Accrual method. If you use an accrual
a lease if any of the following is true. receive a profit apart from the tax deduc- method of accounting, you can deduct taxes as
tions, allowances, credits, and other tax additional rent for the tax year in which you can• The agreement applies part of each pay- attributes. determine all the following.ment toward an equity interest you will re-
ceive. • That you have a liability for taxes on theThe IRS may charge you a user fee for issuing leased property.• You get title to the property after you make a tax ruling. For more information, see Revenue
a stated amount of required payments. • How much the liability is.Procedure 2007-1, on page 1 of Internal Reve-
nue Bulletin No. 2007-1. Internal Revenue Bulle-• The amount you must pay to use the prop- • That economic performance occurred.tin 2007-1 is available at www.irs.gov/pub/erty for a short time is a large part of the irs-irbs/irb07-01.pdf.amount you would pay to get title to the The liability and amount of taxes are deter-
property. mined by state or local law and the lease agree-Leveraged leases of limited-use property.
ment. Economic performance occurs as you useThe IRS will not issue advance rulings on lever-• You pay much more than the current fair the property.aged leases of so-called limited-use property.rental value of the property. Limited-use property is property not expected to
• You have an option to buy the property at Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calendarbe either useful to or usable by a lessor at the
a nominal price compared to the value of year taxpayer that uses an accrual method ofend of the lease term except for continued leas-
the property when you may exercise the accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi-ing or transfer to a lessee. See Revenue Proce-
option. Determine this value when you ness. Under state law, owners of real propertydure 2001-28 for examples of limited-use
make the agreement. become liable (incur a lien on the property) forproperty and property that is not limited-use
real estate taxes for the year on January 1 ofproperty.• You have an option to buy the property at that year. However, they do not have to paya nominal price compared to the total Leases over $250,000. Special rules are pro- these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18amount you have to pay under the agree- vided for certain leases of tangible property. The months later) when tax bills are issued. Underment. rules apply if the lease calls for total payments of the terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable for
• The agreement designates part of the pay- more than $250,000 and any of the following the real estate taxes in the later year when the
ments as interest, or that part is easy to apply. tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before the
recognize as interest. tax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable for• Rents increase during the lease. the taxes for that year.
Leveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans- • Rents decrease during the lease. Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes as
actions may not be considered leases. Lever- rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when Oak’s• Rents are deferred (rent is payable afteraged leases generally involve three parties: a liability under the lease becomes fixed.the end of the calendar year following thelessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor. calendar year in which the use occurs and Example 2. The facts are the same as inUsually the lease term covers a large part of the the rent is allocated). Example 1 except that, according to the terms ofuseful life of the leased property, and the
the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real estatelessee’s payments to the lessor are enough to • Rents are prepaid (rent is payable before
taxes when the owner of the property becomescover the lessor’s payments to the lender. the end of the calendar year preceding the
liable for them. As a result, Oak will deduct theIf you plan to take part in what appears to be calendar year in which the use occurs and
real estate taxes as rent on its tax return for thea leveraged lease, you may want to get an the rent is allocated).
earlier year. This is the year in which Oak’sadvance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001-28 on These rules do not apply if your lease specifies liability under the lease becomes fixed.page 1156 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 equal amounts of rent for each month in thecontains the guidelines the IRS will use to deter- lease term and all rent payments are due in themine if a leveraged lease is a lease for federal calendar year to which the rent relates (or in theincome tax purposes. Revenue Procedure preceding or following calendar year).2001-29 on page 1160 of the same Internal Cost of
Generally, if the special rules apply, you mustRevenue Bulletin provides the information re-
use an accrual method of accounting (and timequired to be furnished in a request for an ad- Getting a Lease
value of money principles) for your rental ex-vance ruling on a leveraged lease transaction.
penses, regardless of your overall method ofInternal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 is available at You may either enter into a new lease with the
accounting. In addition, in certain cases in whichwww.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-19.pdf lessor of the property or get an existing lease
the IRS has determined that a lease was de-In general, Revenue Procedure 2001-28 from another lessee. Very often when you get an
signed to achieve tax avoidance, you must takeprovides that, for advance ruling purposes only, existing lease from another lessee, you must
Chapter 3 Rent Expense Page 9

Page 10 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
pay the previous lessee money to get the lease, Commissions, bonuses, and fees. Commis- 1. Produce real property or tangible personal
besides having to pay the rent on the lease. sions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts you property. For this purpose, tangible per-
pay to get a lease on property you use in your sonal property includes a film, sound re-If you get an existing lease on property or
business are capital costs. You must amortize cording, video tape, book, or similarequipment for your business, you generally
these costs over the term of the lease. property.must amortize any amount you pay to get that
lease over the remaining term of the lease. For 2. Acquire property for resale.Loss on merchandise and fixtures. If youexample, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease and
sell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that you However, these rules do not apply to the follow-there are 10 years remaining on the lease with
bought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost of ing property.no option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 each
getting the lease. You must capitalize the lossyear. 1. Personal property you acquire for resale ifand amortize it over the remaining term of theThe cost of getting an existing lease of tangi- your average annual gross receipts arelease.ble property is not subject to the amortization $10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.rules for section 197 intangibles discussed in
chapter 8. 2. Property you produce if you meet either of
the following conditions.
ImprovementsOption to renew. The term of the lease for
a. Your indirect costs of producing theamortization includes all renewal options plus
by Lessee property are $200,000 or less.any other period for which you and the lessor
reasonably expect the lease to be renewed. b. You use the cash method of accountingIf you add buildings or make other permanentHowever, this applies only if less than 75% of and do not account for inventories.improvements to leased property, depreciatethe cost of getting the lease is for the term
the cost of the improvements using the modifiedremaining on the purchase date (not including
accelerated cost recovery system (MACRS).any period for which you may choose to renew, Example 1. You rent construction equip-Depreciate the property over its appropriate re-extend, or continue the lease). Allocate the ment to build a storage facility. If you are subjectcovery period. You cannot amortize the costlease cost to the original term and any option to the uniform capitalization rules, you must cap-over the remaining term of the lease.term based on the facts and circumstances. In italize as part of the cost of the building the rentIf you do not keep the improvements whensome cases, it may be appropriate to make the you paid for the equipment. You recover youryou end the lease, figure your gain or loss basedallocation using a present value computation. cost by claiming a deduction for depreciation onon your adjusted basis in the improvements atFor more information, see Regulations section the building.that time.1.178-1(b)(5).
For more information, see the discussion of Example 2. You rent space in a facility toMACRS in Publication 946, How To DepreciateExample 1. You paid $10,000 to get a lease conduct your business of manufacturing tools. IfProperty.with 20 years remaining on it and two options to you are subject to the uniform capitalizationrenew for 5 years each. Of this cost, you paid rules, you must include the rent you paid toAssignment of a lease. If a long-term lessee$7,000 for the original lease and $3,000 for the occupy the facility in the cost of the tools youwho makes permanent improvements to landrenewal options. Because $7,000 is less than produce.later assigns all lease rights to you for money75% of the total $10,000 cost of the lease (or
and you pay the rent required by the lease, the$7,500), you must amortize the $10,000 over 30
amount you pay for the assignment is a capital More information. For more information onyears. That is the remaining life of your present
investment. If the rental value of the leased land these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules inlease plus the periods for renewal.
increased since the lease began, part of your Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-
capital investment is for that increase in the nal Revenue Code section 263A.Example 2. The facts are the same as in
rental value. The rest is for your investment inExample 1, except that you paid $8,000 for the
the permanent improvements.original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op-
The part that is for the increased rental valuetions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 over
of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and youthe 20-year remaining life of the original lease.
amortize it over the remaining term of the lease.The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease was
You can depreciate the part that is for yournot less than 75% of the total cost of the lease
investment in the improvements over the recov-(or $7,500). 4.ery period of the property as discussed earlier,
Cost of a modification agreement. You may without regard to the lease term.
have to pay an additional “rent” amount over part
of the lease period to change certain provisions
Interestin your lease. You must capitalize these pay-
ments and amortize them over the remaining
Capitalizing
period of the lease. You cannot deduct the pay-
ments as additional rent, even if they are de-
Rent Expenses Introductionscribed as rent in the agreement.
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must This chapter discusses the tax treatment of busi-
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirect ness interest expense. Business interest ex-
and sign a 20-year lease to rent part of a building costs for certain production or resale activities. pense is an amount charged for the use of
starting on January 1. However, before you oc- Include these costs in the basis of property you money you borrowed for business activities.
cupy it, you decide that you really need less produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim-
space. The lessor agrees to reduce your rent ing them as a current deduction. You recover the Topicsfrom $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to release costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost This chapter discusses:the excess space from the original lease. In of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwise
exchange, you agree to pay an additional rent dispose of the property. • Allocation of interestamount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install- Indirect costs include amounts incurred for
ments of $50 each. • Interest you can deductrenting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.
You must capitalize the $3,000 and amortize • Interest you cannot deductit over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor- Uniform capitalization rules. You may be
tization deduction each year will be $150 subject to the uniform capitalization rules if you • Capitalization of interest
($3,000 ÷ 20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 × do any of the following, unless the property is • When to deduct interest$50) that you will pay during each of the first 5 produced for your use other than in a business
• Below-market loansyears as rent. or an activity carried on for profit.
Page 10 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 11 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You secure a loan with property funds. The following table shows the transac-Useful Items
used in your business. You use the loan pro- tions in her account during the tax year.You may want to see: ceeds to buy an automobile for personal use.
Date TransactionYou must allocate interest expense on the loanPublication to personal use (purchase of the automobile) January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan Aeven though the loan is secured by business❏ 537 Installment Sales and
property. $1,000 unborrowed funds❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods depositedIf the property that secures the loan is❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses your home, you generally do not allo- January 13 $500 proceeds of Loan B
cate the loan proceeds or the related deposited❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest
TIP
interest. The interest is usually deductible asDeduction February 18 $800 used for personalqualified home mortgage interest, regardless of purposeshow the loan proceeds are used. For more infor-Form (and Instructions)
February 27 $700 used for passivemation, see Publication 936.
activity❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized
Allocation period. The period for which aDeductions June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan Cloan is allocated to a particular use begins on the deposited❏ Sch E (Form 1040) Supplemental date the proceeds are used and ends on theIncome and Loss November 20 $800 used for anearlier of the following dates.
investment❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1065) Partner’s Share of • The date the loan is repaid.
Income, Deductions, Credits, etc. December 18 $600 used for personal
• The date the loan is reallocated to another purposes❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1120S) Shareholder’s use.
Share of Income, Deductions, Edith treats the $800 used for personal pur-
poses as made from the $500 proceeds of LoanCredits, etc.
Proceeds not disbursed to borrower. Even A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. She❏ 1098 Mortgage Interest Statement if the lender disburses the loan proceeds to a treats the $700 used for a passive activity as
third party, the allocation of the loan is still based made from the remaining $200 proceeds of❏ 3115 Application for Change in
on your use of the funds. This applies whether Loan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. SheAccounting Method you pay for property, services, or anything else treats the $800 used for an investment as made❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense by incurring a loan, or you take property subject entirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treatsDeduction to a debt. the $600 used for personal purposes as made
from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan C❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations Proceeds deposited in borrower’s account.
and $400 of unborrowed funds.Treat loan proceeds deposited in an account as
For the periods during which loan proceedsSee chapter 12 for information about getting property held for investment. It does not matter
are held in the account, Edith treats them aspublications and forms. whether the account pays interest. Any interest
property held for investment.you pay on the loan is investment interest ex-
pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan, Payments from checking accounts. Gen-you must reallocate the loan based on the use of erally, you treat a payment from a checking orthe funds. similar account as made at the time the check isAllocation of Interest
written if you mail or deliver it to the payee withinExample. Connie, a calendar-year tax-The rules for deducting interest vary, depending a reasonable period after you write it. You canpayer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and im- treat checks written on the same day as writtenon whether the loan proceeds are used for busi- mediately uses the proceeds to open a checking in any order.ness, personal, or investment activities. If you account. No other amounts are deposited in theuse the proceeds of a loan for more than one Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re-account during the year and no part of the loantype of expense, you must make an allocation to ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-principal is repaid during the year. On April 1,determine the interest for each use of the loan’s ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treatConnie uses $20,000 from the checking accountproceeds. any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)for a passive activity expenditure. On Septem-
made from any account you own, or from cash,Allocate your interest expense to the follow- ber 1, Connie uses an additional $40,000 from
as made from those proceeds. This applies toing categories. the account for personal purposes.
any payment made within 30 days before orUnder the interest allocation rules, the entire• Nonpassive trade or business activity in- after the proceeds are received in cash or de-$100,000 loan is treated as property held forterest posited in your account.investment for the period from January 4
If the loan proceeds are deposited in an• Passive trade or business activity interest through March 31. From April 1 through August
account, you can apply this rule even if the rules31, Connie must treat $20,000 of the loan as• Investment interest stated earlier under Order of funds spent wouldused in the passive activity and $80,000 of the
otherwise require you to treat the proceeds as• Portfolio interest loan as property held for investment. From Sep-
used for other purposes. If you apply this rule totember 1 through December 31, she must treat• Personal interest any payments, disregard those payments (and$40,000 of the loan as used for personal pur-
the proceeds from which they are made) whenIn general, you allocate interest on a loan the poses, $20,000 as used in the passive activity,
applying the rules stated under Order of fundssame way you allocate the loan proceeds. You and $40,000 as property held for investment.
spent.allocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse- Order of funds spent. Generally, you treat If you received the loan proceeds in cash,ments to specific uses. loan proceeds deposited in an account as used you can treat the payment as made on the date(spent) before either of the following amounts. you received the cash instead of the date youThe easiest way to trace disburse-
actually made the payment.• Any unborrowed amounts held in thements to specific uses is to keep the
same account.proceeds of a particular loan separate
TIP
Example. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 onfrom any other funds. • Any amounts deposited after these loan August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash.proceeds. Frank deposits $1,500 in an account on August
Secured loan. The allocation of loan pro- 18 and on August 28 writes a check on the
ceeds and the related interest is not generally Example. On January 9, Edith opened a account for a passive activity expense. Also,
affected by the use of property that secures the checking account, depositing $500 of the pro- Frank deposits his paycheck, deposits other
loan. ceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowed loan proceeds, and pays his bills during the
Chapter 4 Interest Page 11

Page 12 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
same period. Regardless of these other transac- fixed or variable rates as different loans. to add it to the cost basis of the pr operty as
tions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the deposit he Treat these loans as repaid in the order explained later under Capitalization of Interest.
made on August 18 as being paid on August 4 shown on the loan agreement. Statement. If you paid $600 or more offrom the loan proceeds. In addition, Frank can mortgage interest (including certain points) dur-treat the passive activity expense he paid on Loan refinancing. Allocate the replacement ing the year on any one mortgage, you generallyAugust 28 as made from the $1,000 loan pro- loan to the same uses to which the repaid loan will receive a Form 1098 or a similar statement.ceeds treated as deposited in the account. was allocated. Make the allocation only to the You will receive the statement if you pay interest
Optional method for determining date of extent you use the proceeds of the new loan to to a person (including a financial institution or a
reallocation. You can use the following repay any part of the original loan. cooperative housing corporation) in the course
method to determine the date loan proceeds are of that person’s trade or business. A govern-
Debt-financed distribution. A debt-financedreallocated to another use. You can treat all mental unit is a person for purposes of furnishing
distribution occurs when a partnership or S cor-payments from loan proceeds in the account the statement.
poration borrows funds and allocates thoseduring any month as taking place on the later of If you receive a refund of interest you over-funds to distributions made to partners or share-the following dates. paid in an earlier year, this amount will be re-holders. The manner in which you report the ported in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannot• The first day of that month. interest expense associated with the distributed deduct this amount. For information on how todebt proceeds depends on your use of those• The date the loan proceeds are deposited report this refund, see Refunds of interest laterproceeds.in the account. in this chapter.
How to report. If the proceeds were used inHowever, you can use this optional method only Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.
if you treat all payments from the account during a nonpassive trade or business activity, report Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgage
the same calendar month in the same way. the interest on Schedule E (Form 1040), line 28; cannot be deducted as interest. These ex-
enter “interest expense” and the name of the penses, which include mortgage commissions,Interest on a segregated account. If you partnership or S corporation in column (a) and abstract fees, and recording fees, are capitalhave an account that contains only loan pro- the amount in column (h). If the proceeds were expenses. If the property mortgaged is businessceeds and interest earned on the account, you used in a passive activity, follow the instructions or income-producing property, you can amortizecan treat any payment from that account as for Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita- the costs over the life of the mortgage.being made first from the interest. When the tions, to determine the amount of interest ex-interest earned is used up, any remaining pay- Prepayment penalty. If you pay off yourpense that can be reported on Schedule Ements are from loan proceeds. mortgage early and pay the lender a penalty for(Form 1040), line 28; enter “interest expense”
doing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter-and the name of the partnership in column (a)Example. You borrowed $20,000 and used est.and the amount in column (f). If the proceedsthe proceeds of this loan to open a new savings
were used in an investment activity, enter theaccount. When the account had earned interest Interest on employment tax deficiency. In-interest on Form 4952. If the proceeds are usedof $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur- terest charged on employment taxes assessedfor personal purposes, the interest is generallyposes. You can treat the withdrawal as coming on your business is deductible.not deductible.first from the interest earned on the account,
$867, and then from the loan proceeds, $19,133 Original issue discount (OID). OID is a form
($20,000 − $867). All the interest charged on the of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen-
loan from the time it was deposited in the ac- erally has OID when its proceeds are less than
Interest Youcount until the time of the withdrawal is invest- its principal amount. The OID is the difference
ment interest expense. The interest charged on between the stated redemption price at maturityCan Deductthe part of the proceeds used for personal pur- and the issue price of the loan.
poses ($19,133) from the time you withdrew it  A loan’s stated redemption price at maturityYou can generally deduct as a business ex-until you either repay it or reallocate it to another is the sum of all amounts (principal and interest)pense all interest you pay or accrue during theuse is personal interest expense. The interest payable on it other than qualified stated interest.tax year on debts related to your trade or busi-charged on the loan proceeds you left in the Qualified stated interest is stated interest that isness. Interest relates to your trade or business ifaccount ($867) continues to be investment inter- unconditionally payable in cash or propertyyou use the proceeds of the loan for a trade orest expense until you either repay it or reallocate (other than another loan of the issuer) at leastbusiness expense. It does not matter what typeit to another use. annually over the term of the loan at a singleof property secures the loan. You can deduct fixed rate.Loan repayment. When you repay any part of interest on a debt only if you meet all the follow-
You generally deduct OID over the term ofa loan allocated to more than one use, treat it as ing requirements.
the loan. Figure the amount to deduct each yearbeing repaid in the following order.
• You are legally liable for that debt. using the constant-yield method, unless the OID
1. Personal use. on the loan is de minimis.• Both you and the lender intend that the
debt be repaid.2. Investments and passive activities (other De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it
than those included in (3)). is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the• You and the lender have a true
stated redemption price of the loan at maturitydebtor-creditor relationship.3. Passive activities in connection with a
multiplied by the number of full years from therental real estate activity in which you ac-
date of original issue to maturity (the term of thetively participate. Partial liability. If you are liable for part of a loan).
business debt, you can deduct only your share4. Former passive activities. If the OID is de minimis, you can choose oneof the total interest paid or accrued. of the following ways to figure the amount you5. Trade or business use and expenses for
can deduct each year.certain low-income housing projects. Example. You and your brother borrow
• On a constant-yield basis over the term ofmoney. You are liable for 50% of the note. You
Line of credit (continuous borrowings). the loan.use your half of the loan in your business, and
The following rules apply if you have a line of you make one-half of the loan payments. You • On a straight-line basis over the term ofcredit or similar arrangement. can deduct your half of the total interest pay- the loan.ments as a business deduction.1. Treat all borrowed funds on which interest • In proportion to stated interest payments.accrues at the same fixed or variable rate Mortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paid • In its entirety at maturity of the loan.as a single loan. or accrued on real estate you own legally or
equitably is deductible. However, rather than You make this choice by deducting the OID in a2. Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowed
deducting the interest currently, you may have manner consistent with the method chosen onfunds on which interest accrues at different
Page 12 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 13 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your timely filed tax return for the tax year in by a borrower to obtain a loan or a mortgage. accrued on the property), you cann ot deduct the
which the loan is issued. These charges are also called loan origination interest. Add this interest to the basis of the
fees, maximum loan charges, discount points, or property.
Example. On January 1, 2006, you took out premium charges. If any of these charges
a $100,000 discounted loan and received (points) are solely for the use of money, they are Commitment fees or standby charges.
$98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature on interest. Fees you incur to have business funds available
January 1, 2016 (a 10-year term), and the on a standby basis, but not for the actual use ofBecause points are prepaid interest, you
$100,000 principal is payable on that date. Inter- the funds, are not deductible as interest pay-generally cannot deduct the full amount in the
est of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of each ments. You may be able to deduct them asyear paid. However, you can choose to fully
year, beginning January 1, 2007. The $1,500 deduct points in the year paid if you meet certain business expenses.
OID on the loan is de minimis because it is less tests. For exceptions to the general rule, see If the funds are for inventory or certain prop-than $2,500 ($100,000 × .0025 × 10). You Publication 936. erty used in your business, the fees are indirectchoose to deduct the OID on a straight-line basis costs and you generally must capitalize themThe points reduce the issue price of the loanover the term of the loan. Beginning in 2006, you and result in original issue discount, deductible under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-can deduct $150 each year for 10 years. as explained in the preceding discussion. talization of Interest, later.
Constant-yield method. If the OID is not de
Partial payments on a nontax debt. If youminimis, you must use the constant-yield Interest on income tax. Interest charged on
make partial payments on a debt (other than amethod to figure how much you can deduct each income tax assessed on your individual income
debt owed the IRS), the payments are applied,year. You figure your deduction for the first year tax return is not a business deduction even
in general, first to interest and any remainder tousing the following steps. though the tax due is related to income from
principal. You can deduct only the interest. This your trade or business. Treat this interest as a1. Determine the issue price of the loan. Gen- rule does not apply when it can be inferred that business deduction only in figuring a net operat-erally, this equals the proceeds of the loan. the borrower and lender understood that a differ- ing loss deduction.If you paid points on the loan (as dis- ent allocation of the payments would be made.
cussed later), the issue price generally is Penalties. Penalties on underpaid deficien-
the difference between the proceeds and cies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter-Installment purchase. If you make an install-
the points. est. You cannot deduct them. Generally, youment purchase of business property, the con-
cannot deduct any fines or penalties.tract between you and the seller generally2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to
provides for the payment of interest. If no inter-maturity. Interest on loans with respect to life insur-est or a low rate of interest is charged under the
3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay- ance policies. You generally cannot deductcontract, a portion of the stated principal amount
ments from the result in (2). This is the interest on a debt incurred with respect to anypayable under the contract may be recharacter-
OID you can deduct in the first year. life insurance, annuity, or endowment contractized as interest (unstated interest). The amount
that covers any individual unless that individualrecharacterized as interest reduces your basisTo figure your deduction in any subsequent
is a key person.in the property and increases your interest ex-year, follow the above steps, except determine
pense. For more information on installment If the policy or contract covers a key person,the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get the
sales and unstated interest, see Publication you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 ofadjusted issue price, add to the issue price any
537. debt for that person. However, the deduction forOID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2)
any month cannot be more than the interestand (3) above.
figured using Moody’s Composite Yield on Sea-The yield to maturity is generally shown in
soned Corporate Bonds (formerly known asthe literature you receive from your lender. If you
Moody’s Corporate Bond Yield Aver-Interest Youdo not have this information, consult your lender
age-Monthly Average Corporates) (Moody’sor tax advisor. In general, the yield to maturity is
Cannot Deduct rate) for that month.the discount rate that, when used in computing
the present value of all principal and interest Who is a key person? A key person is anCertain interest payments cannot be deducted.payments, produces an amount equal to the officer or 20% owner. However, the number ofIn addition, certain other expenses that mayprincipal amount of the loan. individuals you can treat as key persons is lim-seem to be interest are not, and you cannot ited to the greater of the following.deduct them as interest.Example. The facts are the same as in the
• Five individuals.previous example, except that you deduct the You cannot currently deduct interest that
OID on a constant yield basis over the term of must be capitalized, and you generally cannot • The lesser of 5% of the total officers andthe loan. The yield to maturity on your loan is deduct personal interest. employees of the company or 20 individu-10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2006, als.you can deduct $93 [($98,500 × .102467) − Interest paid with funds borrowed from origi-
$10,000]. For 2007, you can deduct $103 nal lender. If you use the cash method of Exceptions for pre-June 1997 contracts.[($98,593 × .102467) − $10,000]. accounting, you cannot deduct interest you pay You can generally deduct the interest if the con-with funds borrowed from the original lender tract was issued before June 9, 1997, and theLoan or mortgage ends. If your loan or through a second loan, an advance, or any othermortgage ends, you may be able to deduct any covered individual is someone other than anarrangement similar to a loan. You can deductremaining OID in the tax year in which the loan employee, officer, or someone financially inter-the interest expense once you start making pay-or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may end ested in your business. If the contract was pur-ments on the new loan.due to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure, chased before June 21, 1986, you can generally
When you make a payment on the new loan,or similar event. deduct the interest no matter who is covered byyou first apply the payment to interest and then the contract.If you refinance with the original lender, to the principal. All amounts you apply to the
you generally cannot deduct the re- Interest allocated to unborrowed policyinterest on the first loan are deductible, along
maining OID in the year in which the cash value. Corporations and partnershipsCAUTION
!
with any interest you pay on the second loan,
refinancing occurs, but you may be able to de- generally cannot deduct any interest expensesubject to any limits that apply.
duct it over the term of the new mortgage or allocable to unborrowed cash values of life in-
loan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed from surance, annuity, or endowment contracts. ThisCapitalized interest. You cannot currently
original lender under Interest You Cannot De- rule applies to contracts issued after June 8,deduct interest you are required to capitalize
duct, later. 1997, that cover someone other than an officer,under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-
director, employee, or 20% owner. For moretalization of Interest, later. In addition, if you buy
information, see section 264(f) of the InternalPoints. The term “points” is used to describe property and pay interest owed by the seller (for
certain of the charges paid, or treated as paid, example, by assuming the debt and any interest Revenue Code.
Chapter 4 Interest Page 13

Page 14 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
information, see sections 1.263A-8 through interest. See Treatment of gift and demand
1.263A-15 of the regulations and Notice 88-99. loans later in this discussion.Capitalization
Notice 88-99 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1988-2. A below-market loan is a loan on which no
of Interest interest is charged or on which interest is
charged at a rate below the applicable federal
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you gen- rate. A gift or demand loan that is a be-
erally must capitalize interest on debt equal to When To low-market loan generally is considered an
your expenditures to produce real property or arm’s-length transaction in which you, the bor-
Deduct Interestcertain tangible personal property. The property rower, are considered as having received both
must be produced by you for use in your trade or the following.
If the uniform capitalization rules, discussedbusiness or for sale to customers. You cannot • A loan in exchange for a note that requiresunder Capitalization of Interest,  earlier, do notcapitalize interest related to property that you the payment of interest at the applicableapply to you, deduct interest as follows.acquire in any other manner. federal rate.Interest you paid or incurred during the pro- Cash method. Under the cash method, youduction period must be capitalized if the property • An additional payment in an amount equalcan generally deduct only the interest you actu-produced is designated property. Designated to the forgone interest.ally paid during the tax year. You cannot deductproperty is any of the following. The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi-a promissory note you gave as payment be-
• Real property. dend, contribution to capital, payment of com-cause it is a promise to pay and not an actual
pensation, or other payment, depending on thepayment.• Tangible personal property with a class life substance of the transaction.of 20 years or more. Prepaid interest. You generally cannot de-
For any period, forgone interest  is:duct any interest paid before the year it is due.• Tangible personal property with an esti- Interest paid in advance can be deducted only inmated production period of more than 2 1. The interest that would be payable for thatthe tax year in which it is due.years. period if interest accrued on the loan at the
Discounted loan. If interest or a discount is applicable federal rate and was payable• Tangible personal property with an esti- subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a annually on December 31,mated production period of more than 1 payment of interest and you cannot deduct it minusyear if the estimated cost of production is when you get the loan. For more information,more than $1 million. 2. Any interest actually payable on the loansee Original issue discount (OID) under Interest for the period.You Can Deduct, earlier.
Property you produce. You produce property
Refunds of interest. If you pay interest and Applicable federal rates are publishedif you construct, build, install, manufacture, de-
then receive a refund in the same tax year of any by the IRS each month in the Internalvelop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treat
part of the interest, reduce your interest deduc- Revenue Bulletin. Internal Revenueproperty produced for you under a contract as
TIP
tion by the refund. If you receive the refund in a Bulletins are available on the IRS web site atproduced by you up to the amount you pay or
later tax year, include the refund in your income www.irs.gov. You can also contact an IRS officeincur for the property.
to the extent the deduction for the interest re- to get these rates.
Carrying charges. Carrying charges include duced your tax.
taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or Loans subject to the rules. The rules for be-Accrual method. Under an accrual method,to carry, transport, or install personal property. low-market loans apply to the following.you can deduct only interest that has accruedYou can choose to capitalize carrying charges
during the tax year.not subject to the uniform capitalization rules if 1. Gift loans (below-market loans where the
they are otherwise deductible. For more infor- Prepaid interest. See Prepaid interest, forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).
mation, see chapter 7. above. 2. Compensation-related loans (be-
Capitalized interest. Treat capitalized inter- Discounted loan. See Discounted loan, low-market loans between an employer
est as a cost of the property produced. You above. and an employee or between an indepen-
recover your interest when you sell or use the dent contractor and a person for whom theTax deficiency. If you contest a federal in-property. If the property is inventory, recover contractor provides services).come tax deficiency, interest does not accruecapitalized interest through cost of goods sold. If until the tax year the final determination of liabil- 3. Corporation-shareholder loans.the property is used in your trade or business, ity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency,recover capitalized interest through an adjust- 4. Tax avoidance loans (below-market loansthen the interest accrues in the year the tax wasment to basis, depreciation, amortization, or where the avoidance of federal tax is oneasserted and agreed to by you.other method. of the main purposes of the interest ar-However, if you contest but pay the pro- rangement).Partnerships and S corporations. The inter- posed tax deficiency and interest, and you do
est capitalization rules are applied first at the not designate the payment as a cash bond, then 5. Loans to qualified continuing care facilities
partnership or S corporation level. The rules are the interest is deductible in the year paid. under a continuing care contract (made af-
then applied at the partners’ or shareholders’ ter October 11, 1985).Related person. If you use an accruallevel to the extent the partnership or S corpora- method, you cannot deduct interest owed to a Except as noted in (5) above, these rulestion has insufficient debt to support the produc- related person who uses the cash method until apply to demand loans (loans payable in full attion or construction costs. payment is made and the interest is includible in any time upon the lender’s demand) outstandingIf you are a partner or a shareholder, you the gross income of that person. The relation- after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans thatmay have to capitalize interest you incur during ship is determined as of the end of the tax year are not demand loans) made after that date.the tax year for the production costs of the part- for which the interest would otherwise be de-nership or S corporation. You may also have to ductible. See Related Persons in Publication Treatment of gift and demand loans. If youcapitalize interest incurred by the partnership or 538. receive a below-market gift loan or demandS corporation for your own production costs. To loan, you are treated as receiving an additionalproperly capitalize interest under these rules, payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to theyou must be given the required information in an forgone interest on the loan. You are thenattachment to the Schedule K-1 you receive treated as transferring this amount back to theBelow-Market Loansfrom the partnership or S corporation. lender as interest. These transfers are consid-
Additional information. The procedures for If you receive a below-market gift or demand ered to occur annually, generally on December
applying the uniform capitalization rules are be- loan and use the proceeds in your trade or 31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade or
yond the scope of this publication. For more business, you may be able to deduct the forgone business, you can deduct the forgone  interest
Page 14 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 15 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
each year as a business interest expense. The borrower will be determined by all the facts Internal Revenue Code and section 1.78 72-5T
lender must report it as interest income. of the regulations.and circumstances. Consider all the follow-
ing factors.Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of
$100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi- a. Whether items of income and deduction
viduals, forgone interest treated as transferred generated by the loan offset each other.back to the lender is limited to the borrower’s net
b. The amount of the items.investment income for the year. This limit ap-
plies if the outstanding loans between the lender c. The cost of complying with the be- 5.and borrower total $100,000 or less. If the bor- low-market loan provisions if they wererower’s net investment income is $1,000 or less, to apply.it is treated as zero. This limit does not apply to a
d. Any reasons, other than taxes, forloan if the avoidance of any federal tax is one of Taxesstructuring the transaction as a be-the main purposes of the interest arrangement.
low-market loan.
Treatment of term loans. If you receive a
below-market term loan other than a gift or de- IntroductionException for certain loans to a qualifiedmand loan, you are treated as receiving an addi-
You can deduct various federal, state, local, andcontinuing care facility. The below-markettional cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on the
foreign taxes directly attributable to your trade orinterest rules do not apply to a loan made by adate the loan is made. This payment is equal to
business as business expenses.lender to a qualified continuing care facilitythe loan amount minus the present value, at the
under a continuing care contract if the lender (orapplicable federal rate, of all payments due You cannot deduct federal income
lender’s spouse) is age 65 or older by the end ofunder the loan. The same amount is treated as taxes, estate and gift taxes, or state
original issue discount on the loan. See Original the calendar year. For 2006, this exception ap- inheritance, legacy, and successionCAUTION
!
issue discount (OID)  under Interest You Can plies only to the part of the total outstanding taxes.
Deduct, earlier. loans from the lender (or lender’s spouse) that
does not exceed $163,300. TopicsExceptions for loans of $10,000 or less. The A qualified continuing care facility is one or This chapter discusses:rules for below-market loans do not apply to any more facilities that are designed to provide serv-day on which the total outstanding loans be- ices under continuing care contracts and where • When to deduct taxestween the borrower and lender is $10,000 or substantially all the residents have entered intoless. This exception applies only to the follow- continuing care contracts. In addition, substan- • Real estate taxesing. tially all the facilities used to provide services • Income taxesrequired under the continuing care contract1. Gift loans between individuals if the loan is
• Employment taxesmust be owned or operated by the loan bor-not directly used to buy or carry in-
rower.come-producing assets. • Other taxesA continuing care contract is a written con-2. Compensation-related loans or corpora- tract between an individual and a qualified con-tion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of Useful Itemstinuing care facility that meets all the followingany federal tax is not a principal purpose of conditions. You may want to see:the interest arrangement.
1. The individual and/or the individual’s PublicationThis exception does not apply to a term loan spouse must be entitled to use the facilitydescribed in (2) above that was previously sub- for the rest of their life or lives. ❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guideject to the below-market loan rules. Those rules
will continue to apply even if the outstanding 2. The residential use must begin in a sepa- ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business
balance is reduced to $10,000 or less. rate, independent living unit provided by ❏ 510 Excise Taxes for 2007the continuing care facility and continueExceptions for loans without significant tax until the individual (or individual’s spouse) ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodseffect. The following loans are specifically ex- is incapable of living independently. The ❏ 551 Basis of Assetsempted from the rules for below-market loans facility must provide various “personalbecause their interest arrangements do not care” services to the resident such as Form (and Instructions)have a significant effect on the federal tax liabil- maintenance of the residential unit, meals,ity of the borrower or the lender. and daily aid and supervision relating to ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
routine medical needs.1. Loans made available by lenders to the ❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employmentgeneral public on the same terms and con- 3. The facility must be obligated to provide Taxditions that are consistent with the lender’s long-term nursing care if the resident is no
❏ 3115 Application for Change incustomary business practices. longer capable of living independently.
Accounting Method2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or 4. The contract must require the facility to
municipal government that are made avail- provide the “personal services” and See chapter 12 for information about gettingable under a program of general applica- “long-term nursing care” without substan- publications and forms.tion to the public. tial additional cost to the individual.
3. Certain employee-relocation loans.
Sale or exchange of property. Different rules4. Certain loans to or from a foreign person, generally apply to a loan connected with the sale When Tounless the interest income would be effec- or exchange of property. If the loan does nottively connected with the conduct of a U.S. Deduct Taxesprovide adequate stated interest, part of thetrade or business and not exempt from principal payment may be considered interest.U.S. tax under an income tax treaty. Generally, you can only deduct taxes in the yearHowever, there are exceptions that may require
you pay them. This applies whether you use the5. Any other loan if the taxpayer can show you to apply the below-market interest rate rules
cash method or an accrual method of account-that the interest arrangement has no signif- to these loans. See Unstated Interest and Origi-
ing.icant effect on the federal tax liability of the nal Issue Discount (OID) in Publication 537.
lender or the borrower. Whether an inter- Under an accrual method, you can deduct a
More information. For more information onest arrangement has a significant effect on tax before you pay it if you meet the exception
below-market loans, see section 7872 of thethe federal tax liability of the lender or the for recurring items discussed under Economic
Chapter 5 Taxes Page 15

Page 16 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Performance in Publication 538. You can also Taxes for local benefits. Generally, you can- Electing to ratably accrue. If you use an ac-
elect to ratably accrue real estate taxes as dis- not deduct taxes charged for local benefits and crual method, you can elect to accrue real estate
cussed later under Real Estate Taxes. improvements that tend to increase the value of tax related to a definite period ratably over that
your property. These include assessments for period.
Limit on accrual of taxes. A taxing jurisdic- streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines,
tion can require the use of a date for accruing Example. John Smith is a calendar yearand public parking facilities. You should in-
taxes that is earlier than the date it originally taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His realcrease the basis of your property by the amount
required. However, if you use an accrual estate taxes for the real property tax year, July 1,of the assessment.
method, and can deduct the tax before you pay 2006, to June 30, 2007, are $1,200. July 1 is theYou can deduct taxes for these local benefits
it, use the original accrual date for the year of assessment and lien date.only if the taxes are for maintenance, repairs, or
change and all future years to determine when If John elects to ratably accrue the taxes,interest charges related to those benefits. If part
you can deduct the tax. $600 will accrue in 2006 ($1,200 × 6/12, Julyof the tax is for maintenance, repairs, or interest,
1–December 31) and the balance will accrue inyou must be able to show how much of the tax is
Example. Your state imposes a tax on per- 2007.for these expenses to claim a deduction for that
sonal property used in a trade or business con- part of the tax. Separate elections. You can elect to rata-ducted in the state. This tax is assessed and
bly accrue the taxes for each separate trade orbecomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). In Example. Waterfront City, to improve down- business and for nonbusiness activities if you2006, the state changed the assessment and town commercial business, converted a down- account for them separately. Once you elect tolien dates from July 1, 2007, to December 31, town business area street into an enclosed ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must use2006, for property tax year 2007. Use the origi- pedestrian mall. The city assessed the full cost that method unless you get permission from thenal accrual date (July 1, 2007) to determine of construction, financed with 10-year bonds, IRS to change. See Form 3115, later.when you can deduct the tax. You must also use against the affected properties. The city is pay-
the July 1 accrual date for all future years to Making the election. If you elect to ratablying the principal and interest with the annual
determine when you can deduct the tax. accrue the taxes for the first year in which youpayments made by the property owners.
incur real estate taxes, attach a statement toThe assessments for construction costs areUniform capitalization rules. Uniform capi- your income tax return for that year. The state-not deductible as taxes or as business ex-talization rules apply to certain taxpayers who ment should show all the following items.penses, but are depreciable capital expenses.produce real property or tangible personal prop- The part of the payments used to pay the inter- • The trades or businesses to which theerty for use in a trade or business or for sale to est charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes. election applies and the accountingcustomers. They also apply to certain taxpayers
method or methods used.who acquire property for resale. Under these Charges for services. Water bills, sewerage,
rules, you either include certain costs in inven- and other service charges assessed against • The period to which the taxes relate.tory or capitalize certain expenses related to the your business property are not real estate taxes,
• The computation of the real estate tax de-property, such as taxes. For more information, but are deductible as business expenses.
duction for that first year.see chapter 1. Purchase or sale of real estate. If real estate
is sold, the real estate taxes must be allocatedCarrying charges. Carrying charges include Generally, you must file your return by the due
between the buyer and the seller.taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or date (including extensions). However, if you
The buyer and seller must allocate the realto carry, transport, or install personal property. timely filed your return for the year without elect-
estate taxes according to the number of days inYou can elect to capitalize carrying charges not ing to ratably accrue, you can still make the
the real property tax year (the period to whichsubject to the uniform capitalization rules if they election by filing an amended return within 6
the tax imposed relates) that each owned theare otherwise deductible. For more information, months after the due date of the return (exclud-
property. Treat the seller as paying the taxes upsee chapter 7. ing extensions). Attach the statement to the
to but not including the date of sale. Treat the amended return and write “Filed pursuant toRefunds of taxes. If you receive a refund for buyer as paying the taxes beginning with the section 301.9100-2” on the statement. File theany taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in- date of sale. You can usually find this informa- amended return at the same address where youclude the refund in income to the extent the tion on the settlement statement you received at filed the original return.deduction reduced your federal income tax in closing.
Form 3115. If you elect to ratably accrue forthe earlier year. For more information, see Re- If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes until
a year after the first year in which you incur realcovery of amount deducted (tax benefit rule) in they are paid because you use the cash method
estate taxes or if you want to revoke your elec-chapter 1. and the buyer of your property is personally
tion to ratably accrue real estate taxes, file Formliable for the tax, you are considered to haveYou must include in income any inter- 3115. For more information, including applicablepaid your part of the tax at the time of the sale.est you receive on tax refunds. time frames for filing, see the instructions forThis permits you to deduct the part of the tax up
TIP
Form 3115.to (but not including) the date of sale even
though you did not pay it. You must also include
the amount of that tax in the selling price of the
property.
Income TaxesIf you (the seller) use an accrual method and
Real Estate Taxes have not elected to ratably accrue real estate
This section discusses federal, state, local, andtaxes, you are considered to have accrued your
foreign income taxes.Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local, part of the tax on the date you sell the property.
or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the Federal income taxes. You cannot deductgeneral public welfare. The taxing authority Example. Al Green, a calendar year accrual federal income taxes.must base the taxes on the assessed value of method taxpayer, owns real estate in Elm
the real estate and charge them uniformly County. He has not elected to ratably accrue State and local income taxes. A corporation
against all property under its jurisdiction. De- property taxes. November 30 of each year is the or partnership can deduct state and local in-
ductible real estate taxes generally do not in- assessment and lien date for the current real come taxes imposed on the corporati on or part-
clude taxes charged for local benefits and property tax year, which is the calendar year. He nership as business expenses. An individual
improvements that increase the value of the sold the property on June 30, 2006. Under his can deduct state and local income taxes  only as
property. See Taxes for local benefits, later. accounting method he would not be able to an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form
If you use an accrual method, you generally claim a deduction for the taxes because the sale 1040).
cannot accrue real estate taxes until you pay occurred before November 30. He is treated as However, an individual can deduct a s tate
them to the government authority. However, you having accrued his part of the tax, 180/365  (Janu- tax on gross income (as distinguished from net
can elect to ratably accrue the taxes during the ary 1–June 29), on June 30 and he can deduct it income) directly attributable to  a trade or busi-
year. See Electing to ratably accrue, later. for 2006. ness as a business expense.
Page 16 Chapter 5 Taxes

Page 17 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Accrual of contested income taxes. If you unemployment compensation fund or to a state
use an accrual method, can deduct taxes before disability benefit fund. Deduct these payments
you pay them, and contest a state or local in- as taxes.
6.come tax liability, a special rule applies. Under
this special rule, you must accrue and deduct
any contested amount in the tax year in which
the liability is finally determined.
Other TaxesIf additional state or local income taxes for a Insurance
prior year are assessed in a later year, you can The following are other taxes you can deduct ifdeduct the taxes in the year in which they were you incur them in the ordinary course of youroriginally imposed (the prior year) if the tax liabil- trade or business. Introductionity is not contested. You cannot deduct them in
the year in which the liability is finally deter- You generally can deduct the ordinary and nec-
mined. Excise taxes. You can deduct as a business essary cost of insurance as a business expense
expense all excise taxes that are ordinary and if it is for your trade, business, or profession.The filing of an income tax return is not necessary expenses of carrying on your trade or However, you may have to capitalize certainconsidered a contest and, in the ab- business. However, see Fuel taxes, later. insurance costs under the uniform capitalizationsence of an overt act of protest, you
TIP
rules. For more information, see Capitalizedcan deduct the tax in the prior year. Also, you
Premiums, later.can deduct any additional taxes in the prior year Franchise taxes. You can deduct corporate
if you do not show some affirmative evidence of franchise taxes as a business expense.
Topicsdenial of the liability.
This chapter discusses:However, if you consistently deduct addi- Fuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel,tional assessments in the year they are paid or and other motor fuels that you use in your busi- • Deductible premiumsfinally determined (including those for which ness are usually included as part of the cost ofthere was no contest), you must continue to do • Nondeductible premiumsthe fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa-so. You cannot take a deduction in the earlier rate item. • Capitalized premiumsyear unless you receive permission to change
You may be entitled to a credit or refund foryour method of accounting. For more informa- • When to deduct premiumsfederal excise tax you paid on fuels used fortion on accounting methods, see When Can I
certain purposes. For more information, seeDeduct an Expense? in chapter 1.
Publication 510. Useful Items
Foreign income taxes. Generally, you can You may want to see:take either a deduction or a credit for income Occupational taxes. You can deduct as ataxes imposed on you by a foreign country or a Publicationbusiness expense an occupational tax chargedU.S. possession. However, an individual cannot at a flat rate by a locality for the privilege oftake a deduction or credit for foreign income ❏ 15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringeworking or conducting a business in the locality.taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S. Benefits
tax under the foreign earned income exclusion
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomeor the foreign housing exclusion. For information Personal property tax. You can deduct any
on these exclusions, see Publication 54, Tax tax imposed by a state or local government on ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods
Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens personal property used in your trade or busi- ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and TheftsAbroad. For information on the foreign tax credit, ness.
see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi-
Form (and Instructions)viduals.
Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Returnservice or on the purchase or use of property as
part of the cost of the service or property. If the
See chapter 12 for information about gettingservice or the cost or use of the property is aEmployment Taxes publications and forms.deductible business expense, you can deduct
the tax as part of that service or cost. If theIf you have employees, you must withhold vari- property is merchandise bought for resale, theous taxes from your employees’ pay. Most em- sales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. Ifployers must withhold their employees’ share of the property is depreciable, add the sales tax to Deductible Premiumssocial security and Medicare taxes along with the basis for depreciation. For more informationstate and federal income taxes. You may also on basis, see Publication 551. You generally can deduct premiums you pay forneed to pay certain employment taxes from your the following kinds of insurance related to yourown funds. These include your share of social Do not deduct state and local sales trade or business. security and Medicare taxes as an employer, taxes imposed on the buyer that you
along with unemployment taxes. must collect and pay over to the stateCAUTION
!
1. Insurance that covers fire, storm, theft, ac-You should treat the taxes you withhold from or local government. Also, do not include these cident, or similar losses.your employees’ pay as wages on your tax re- taxes in gross receipts or sales.
2. Credit insurance that covers losses fromturn. You can deduct the employment taxes you
business bad debts.must pay from your own funds as taxes.
Self-employment tax. You can deduct 3. Group hospitalization and medical insur-one-half of your self-employment tax as a busi-Example. You pay your employee $18,000 ance for employees, including long-termness expense in figuring your adjusted grossa year. However, after you withhold various care insurance.income. This deduction only affects your incometaxes, your employee receives $14,500. You
tax. It does not affect your net earnings fromalso pay an additional $1,500 in employment a. If a partnership pays accident and
self-employment or your self-employment tax.taxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as health insurance premiums for its part-
wages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay from ners, it generally can deduct them asTo deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, line
your own funds as taxes. guaranteed payments to partners.27, the amount shown on the Deduction for
For more information on employment taxes, one-half of self-employment tax line of Schedule b. If an S corporation pays accident andsee Publication 15 (Circular E). SE (Form 1040). health insurance premiums for its 2%
For more information on self-employmentUnemployment fund taxes. As an employer, shareholder-employees, it generally can
tax, see Publication 334.you may have to make payments to a state deduct them, but must also include
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 17

Page 18 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
them in the shareholder’s wages sub- • A shareholder owning more than 2% of The services must be required by a chronically ill
individual and prescribed by a licensed healththe outstanding stock of an S corporationject to federal income tax withholding.
care practitioner.with wages from the corporation reportedSee Publication 15-B.
on Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill4. Liability insurance. individual is a person who has been certified asThe insurance plan must be established one of the following.5. Malpractice insurance that covers your under your business. Partners andpersonal liability for professional negli- • An individual who has been unable, due tomore-than-2% S corporation shareholders cangence resulting in injury or damage to pa- loss of functional capacity for at least 90claim the self-employed health insurance de-tients or clients. days, to perform at least two activities ofduction only if the policy is in the name of the
daily living without substantial assistancepartnership or S corporation. For sole proprie-6. Workers’ compensation insurance set by
from another individual. Activities of dailytors, the policy does not have to be in the namestate law that covers any claims for bodily
living are eating, toileting, transferringof the business if it is in the name of the soleinjuries or job-related diseases suffered by
(general mobility), bathing, dressing, andproprietor.employees in your business, regardless of continence.You may be allowed this deduction whetherfault.
you paid the premiums yourself or your partner- • An individual who requires substantial su-a. If a partnership pays workers’ compen- ship or S corporation paid them and you in- pervision to be protected from threats to
sation premiums for its partners, it gen- cluded the premium amount in your gross health and safety due to severe cognitive
erally can deduct them as guaranteed income. Take the deduction on Form 1040, line impairment.
payments to partners. 29. The certification must have been made by a
b. If an S corporation pays workers’ com- licensed health care practitioner within the previ-Qualified long-term care insurance. Youpensation premiums for its 2% share- ous 12 months.can include premiums paid on a qualifiedholder-employees, it generally can long-term care insurance contract for you, your Benefits received. For information on ex-deduct them, but must also include spouse, or your dependents when figuring your cluding benefits you receive from a long-termthem in the shareholder’s wages. deduction. But, for each person covered, you care contract from gross income, see Publica-
can include only the smaller of the following tion 525.7. Contributions to a state unemployment in- amounts.surance fund are deductible as taxes if Other coverage. You cannot take the deduc-
they are considered taxes under state law. tion for any month you were eligible to partici-1. The amount paid for that person.
pate in any employer (including your spouse’s)8. Overhead insurance that pays for business 2. The amount shown below. Use the per- subsidized health plan at any time during thatoverhead expenses you have during long son’s age at the end of the year. month. This rule is applied separately to plansperiods of disability caused by your injury that provide long-term care insurance and plansa. Age 40 or younger–$280or sickness. that do not provide long-term care insurance.
b. Age 41 to 50–$530 However, any medical insurance payments not9. Car and other vehicle insurance that cov-
deductible on Form 1040, line 29, can be in-ers vehicles used in your business for lia- c. Age 51 to 60–$1,060 cluded as medical expenses on Schedule Ability, damages, and other losses. If you
d. Age 61 to 70–$2,830 (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions, if you item-operate a vehicle partly for personal use,
ize deductions.deduct only the part of the insurance pre- e. Age 71 or older–$3,530
mium that applies to the business use of Effect on itemized deductions. Subtract the
the vehicle. If you use the standard mile- health insurance deduction from your medicalQualified long-term care insurance con-age rate to figure your car expenses, you insurance when figuring medical expenses ontract. A qualified long-term care insurancecannot deduct any car insurance premi- Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-contract is an insurance contract that only pro-ums. tions.vides coverage of qualified long-term care serv-
ices. The contract must meet all the following10. Life insurance covering your officers and Effect on self-employment tax. Do not sub-
requirements.employees if you are not directly or indi- tract the health insurance deduction when figur-
ing net earnings for your self-employment tax.rectly a beneficiary under the contract. • It must be guaranteed renewable.
11. Business interruption insurance that pays How to figure the deduction. Generally, you• It must provide that refunds, other than can use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-for lost profits if your business is shut down refunds on the death of the insured or tions to figure your deduction. However, if any ofdue to a fire or other cause. complete surrender or cancellation of the the following apply, you must use Worksheetcontract, and dividends under the contract 6-A in this chapter.may be used only to reduce future premi-Self-Employed Health ums or increase future benefits. • You had more than one source of incomeInsurance Deduction subject to self-employment tax.• It must not provide for a cash surrender
value or other money that can be paid,You may be able to deduct premiums paid for • You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-
assigned, pledged, or borrowed.medical and dental insurance and qualified come, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned
Income Exclusion.long-term care insurance for you, your spouse, • It generally must not pay or reimburse ex-and your dependents if you are one of the follow- penses incurred for services or items that • You are using amounts paid for qualifieding. would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex- long-term care insurance to figure the de-
cept where Medicare is a secondary payer duction.• A self-employed individual with a net profit
or the contract makes per diem or otherreported on Schedule C (Form 1040), If you are claiming the health coverage taxperiodic payments without regard to ex-Profit or Loss From Business, Schedule credit, complete Form 8885, Health Coveragepenses.C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Busi- Tax Credit, before you figure this deduction.
ness, or Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or
Qualified long-term care services. Quali- Health coverage tax credit. You may beLoss From Farming. fied long-term care services are: able to take this credit only if you were an eligible
• A partner with net earnings from trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, al-• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-self-employment reported on Schedule ternative TAA recipient, or Pension Benefitpeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-K-1 (Form 1065), Partner1s Share of In- Guaranty Corporation pension recipient. Usehabilitative services, andcome, Deductions, Credits, etc., box 14, Form 8885 to figure the amount, if any, of this
code A. • Maintenance or personal care services. credit.
Page 18 Chapter 6 Insurance

Page 19 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
year and each plan is established under a differ-Worksheet 6-A. Self-Employed
ent business, you must use separate work-Health Insurance Deduction
sheets (Worksheet 6-A) to figure each plan’s netWorksheet Keep for Your Records
earnings limit. Include the premium you paid
under each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa-1. Enter total payments made during the year for health insurance rate worksheet and your net profit (or wages)coverage established under your business for you, your spouse, and from that business on line 4 (or line 11). For ayour dependents. Do not include payments for any month you were plan that provides long-term care insurance, theeligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your or your total of the amounts entered for each person onspouse’s employer or: line 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than the• Any amounts you included on Form 8885, line 4, appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that person.• Any qualified health insurance premiums you paid to “U.S.
Treasury-HCTC,” or
• Any health coverage tax credit advance payments shown in box 1
of Form 1099-H.
Also, do not include payments for qualified long-term care
Nondeductibleinsurance. ........................................ 1.
2. For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract, Premiums
enter for each person covered the smaller of the following amounts.
a) Total payments made for that person during the year. You cannot deduct premiums on the following
b) The amount shown below. Use the person’s age at the end of the kinds of insurance.
year.
1. Self-insurance reserve funds.  You cannot$280—if that person is age 40 or younger
deduct amounts credited to a reserve set$530—if age 41 to 50
up for self-insurance. This applies even if$1,060—if age 51 to 60
you cannot get business insurance cover-$2,830—if age 61 to 70
age for certain business risks. However,$3,530—if age 71 or older
your actual losses may be deductible. SeeDo not include payments for any month you were eligible to
Publication 547.participate in a long-term care insurance plan subsidized by your
or your spouse’s employer. If more than one person is covered, 2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre-figure separately the amount to enter for each person. Then enter miums for a policy that pays for lost earn-the total of those amounts ........................... 2. ings due to sickness or disability. However,3. Add the total of lines 1 and 2 ............................ 3. see the discussion on overhead insurance,4. Enter your net profit* and any other earned income** from the trade or item (8), under Deductible Premiums, ear-business under which the insurance plan is established. If the lier.business is an S corporation, skip to line 11 .................. 4.
3. Certain life insurance and annuities.5. Enter the total of all net profits* from: Schedule C (Form 1040), line
31; Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), line 3; Schedule F (Form 1040), line
a. For contracts issued before June 9,36; or Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), box 14, code A; plus any other
1997, you cannot deduct the premiumsincome allocable to the profitable businesses. See the instructions for
on a life insurance policy covering you,Schedule SE (Form 1040). Do not include any net losses shown on
an employee, or any person with a fi-these schedules. .................................... 5.
nancial interest in your business if you6. Divide line 4 by line 5 ................................. 6.
are directly or indirectly a beneficiary of7. Multiply Form 1040, line 27, by the percentage on line 6 .......... 7.
the policy. You are included among8. Subtract line 7 from line 4 .............................. 8.
possible beneficiaries of the policy if the9. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 28, attributable to the
policy owner is obligated to repay asame trade or business in which the insurance plan is established . . . 9.
loan from you using the proceeds of the10. Subtract line 9 from line 8 .............................. 10.
policy. A person has a financial interest11. Enter your wages from an S corporation in which you are a
in your business if the person is anmore-than-2% shareholder and in which the insurance plan is
owner or part owner of the business orestablished ........................................ 11.
has lent money to the business.12. Enter the amount from Form 2555, line 45, attributable to the amount
entered on line 4 or 11 above, or the amount from Form 2555-EZ, line b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997,18, attributable to the amount entered on line 11 above .......... 12. you generally cannot deduct the premi-13. Subtract line 12 from line 10 or 11, whichever applies ........... 13. ums on any life insurance policy, en-14. Compare the amounts on lines 3 and 13 above. Enter the smaller of dowment contract, or annuity contract ifthe two amounts here and on Form 1040, line 29. Do not include this you are directly or indirectly a benefi-amount when figuring a medical expense deduction on ciary. The disallowance applies withoutSchedule A (Form 1040). .............................. 14. regard to whom the policy covers.
* If you used either optional method to figure your net earnings from self-employment from any business, c. Partners. If, as a partner in a partner-
do not enter your net profit from the business. Instead, enter the amount attributable to that business ship, you take out an insurance policyfrom Schedule SE (Form 1040), line 4b. on your own life and name your part-* *Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you ners as beneficiaries to induce them tocreated. It does not include capital gain income.
retain their investments in the partner-
ship, you are considered a beneficiary.
You cannot deduct the insurance premi-
When figuring the amount to enter on line 1
• Any health coverage tax credit advance ums.
of Worksheet 6-A, do not include the following. payments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H,
Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Ad- 4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out• Any amounts you included on Form 8885, vance Payments. a policy on your life or on the life of an-line 4. other person with a financial interest in
More than one health plan and business.• Any qualified health insurance premiums your business to get or protect a business
If you have more than one health plan during theyou paid to “U.S. Treasury-HCTC.” loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as
a business expense. Nor can you deduct
the premiums as interest on business
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 19

Page 20 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loans or as an expense of financing loans. in which you actually pay them (unless the ex- You may be subject to the alternative
In the event of death, the proceeds of the minimum tax (AMT) if you deduct re-ception for recurring items applies). For more
policy are not taxed as income even if they search and experimental, intangibleinformation about the accrual method of ac- CAUTION
!
are used to liquidate the debt. drilling, exploration, development, circulation,counting, see chapter 1. For information about
the exception for recurring items, see Publica- and business organizational costs.
tion 538. For more information on the alternative mini-
mum tax, see the instructions for one of the
following forms.Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses inCapitalized Premiums • Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—In-advance, even if you pay them in advance. This
dividuals.rule applies to any expense paid far enough inUnder the uniform capitalization rules, you must
• Form 4626, Alternative Minimum Tax—advance to, in effect, create an asset with acapitalize the direct costs and part of the indirect
Corporations.costs for certain production or resale activities. useful life extending substantially beyond the
Include these costs in the basis of property you end of the current tax year.
produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim- TopicsExpenses such as insurance are generallying them as a current deduction. You recover the allocable to a period of time. You can deduct This chapter discusses:costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost insurance expenses for the year to which theyof goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwise • Carrying chargesare allocable.dispose of the property. • Research and experimental costs
Indirect costs include premiums for insur- Example. In 2006, you signed a 3-year in- • Intangible drilling costsance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip- surance contract. Even though you paid the pre- • Exploration costsment, materials, property produced, or property miums for 2006, 2007, and 2008 when you • Development costsacquired for resale. signed the contract, you can only deduct the • Circulation costs
premium for 2006 on your 2006 tax return. YouUniform capitalization rules. You may be • Environmental cleanup costscan deduct in 2007 and 2008 the premium allo-subject to the uniform capitalization rules if you • Business start-up and organizational costscable to those years.do any of the following, unless the property is • Reforestation costsproduced for your use other than in a business • Retired asset removal costsor an activity carried on for profit. Dividends received. If you receive dividends • Barrier removal costsfrom business insurance and you deducted the1. Produce real property or tangible personal • Film and television production costspremiums in prior years, at least part of theproperty. For this purpose, tangible per-
dividends generally are income. For more infor-sonal property includes a film, sound re-
mation, see Recovery of amount deducted (tax Useful Itemscording, video tape, book, or similar
benefit rule) in chapter 1 under How Much Can I You may want to see:property.
Deduct?
2. Acquire property for resale. Publication
However, these rules do not apply to the follow- ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofing property. Assets
1. Personal property you acquire for resale if
Form (and Instructions)your average annual gross receipts are
$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years. 7. ❏ 3468 Investment Credit
2. Property you produce if you meet either of
❏ 8826 Disabled Access Creditthe following conditions.
See chapter 12 for information about gettinga. Your indirect costs of producing the Costs You publications and forms.property are $200,000 or less.
b. You use the cash method of accounting Can Deductand do not account for inventories.
Carrying Chargesor CapitalizeMore information. For more information on
these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in Carrying charges include the taxes and interest
Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter- you pay to carry or develop real property or to
nal Revenue Code section 263A. carry, transport, or install personal property.Introduction
Certain carrying charges must be capitalized
This chapter discusses costs you can elect to under the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor-
deduct or capitalize. mation on capitalization of interest, see chapter
When To Deduct You generally deduct a cost as a current 4.) You can elect to capitalize carrying charges
business expense by subtracting it from your not subject to the uniform capitalization rules,
Premiums income in either the year you incur it or the year but only if they are otherwise deductible.
you pay it. You can elect to capitalize carrying chargesYou can usually deduct insurance premiums in If you capitalize a cost, you may be able to separately for each project you have and forthe tax year to which they apply. recover it over a period of years through periodic each type of carrying charge. For unimproved
Cash method. If you use the cash method of deductions for amortization, depletion, or depre- and unproductive real property, your election is
accounting, you generally deduct insurance pre- ciation. When you capitalize a cost, you add it to good for only 1 year. You must decide whether
miums in the tax year you actually paid them, the basis of property to which it relates. to capitalize carrying charges each year the
even if you incurred them in an earlier year. property remains unimproved and unproductive.A partnership, corporation, estate, or trustHowever, see Prepayment, later. For other real property, your election to capital-makes the election to deduct or capitalize the
ize carrying charges remains in effect until con-costs discussed in this chapter except for explo-Accrual method. If you use an accrual
struction or development is completed. Forration costs for mineral deposits. Each individualmethod of accounting, you cannot deduct insur-
personal property, your election is effective untilpartner, shareholder, or beneficiary electsance premiums before the tax year in which you
the date you install or first use it, whichever iswhether to deduct or capitalize explorationincur a liability for them. In addition, you cannot
later.costs.deduct insurance premiums before the tax year
Page 20 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 21 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IF you . . . THEN . . .How to make the election. To make the elec-
tion to capitalize a carrying charge, write a state- Elect to deduct research and Deduct all research and experimental costs in thement saying which charges you elect to experimental costs as a current first year you pay or incur the costs and all latercapitalize. Attach it to your original tax return for business expense years.the year the election is to be effective. However,
if you timely filed your return for the year without Do not deduct research and If you meet the requirements, amortize them over at
experimental costs as a current least 60 months, starting with the month you firstmaking the election, you can still make the elec-
business expense receive an economic benefit from the research. Seetion by filing an amended return within 6 months
Research and Experimental Costs in chapter 8.of the due date of the return (excluding exten-
sions). Attach the statement to the amended
return and write “Filed pursuant to section
• Management studies. • Amounts properly allocable to the cost of301.9100-2” on the statement. File the amended
depreciable property, orreturn at the same address you filed the original • Quality control testing.
return. • Research in connection with literary, his- • Amounts paid only out of production or
torical, or similar projects. proceeds from production if these
• The acquisition of another’s patent, model, amounts are depletable income to the re-
production, or process. cipient.
Research and
When and how to elect. You make the elec- How to make the election.  You elect to de-Experimental Costs tion to deduct research and experimental costs duct IDCs as a current business expense by
by deducting them on your tax return for the year taking the deduction on your income tax returnThe costs of research and experimentation are in which you first pay or incur research and for the first tax year you have eligible costs. Nogenerally capital expenses. However, you can experimental costs. If you do not make the elec- formal statement is required. If you file Scheduleelect to deduct these costs as a current business tion to deduct research and experimental costs C (Form 1040), enter these costs under “Otherexpense. Your election to deduct these costs is in the first year in which you pay or incur the expenses.”binding for the year it is made and for all later costs, you can deduct the costs in a later year For oil and gas wells, your election is bindingyears unless you get IRS approval to make a only with approval from the IRS. for the year it is made and for all later years. Forchange.
geothermal wells, your election can be revokedIf you meet certain requirements, you may Research credit. If you pay or incur quali-
by the filing of an amended return on which youelect to defer and amortize research and experi- fied research expenses, you may be able to take
do not take the deduction. You can file themental costs. For information on electing to de- the research credit. For more information about
amended return for the year up to the normalfer and amortize these costs, see Research and the research credit, see the instructions to Form
time of expiration for filing a claim for credit orExperimental Costs in chapter 8. 6765, Credit for Increasing Research Activities.
refund, generally, within 3 years after the date
you filed the original return or within 2 years afterResearch and experimental costs defined.
the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.Research and experimental costs are reasona-
ble costs you incur in your trade or business for Intangible Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells.activities intended to provide information that
If you capitalize the drilling and developmentwould eliminate uncertainty about the develop- Drilling Costs costs of geothermal wells that you place in serv-ment or improvement of a product. Uncertainty
ice during the tax year, you may be able to claimexists if the information available to you does not The costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermal a business energy credit. See the instructionsestablish how to develop or improve a product or wells are ordinarily capital expenditures. You for Form 3468 for more information.the appropriate design of a product. Whether can usually recover them through depreciation
costs qualify as research and experimental or depletion. However, you can elect to deduct Nonproductive well. If you capitalize yourcosts depends on the nature of the activity to intangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a current busi- IDCs, you have another option if the well iswhich the costs relate rather than on the nature ness expense. These are certain drilling and nonproductive. You can deduct the IDCs of theof the product or improvement being developed development costs for wells in the United States nonproductive well as an ordinary loss. Youor the level of technological advancement. in which you hold an operating or working inter- must indicate and clearly state your election onThe costs of obtaining a patent, including est. You can deduct only costs for drilling or your tax return for the year the well is completed.attorneys’ fees paid or incurred in making and preparing a well for the production of oil, gas, or Once made, the election for oil and gas wells isperfecting a patent application, are research and geothermal steam or hot water. binding for all later years. You can revoke yourexperimental costs. However, costs paid or in- You can elect to deduct only the costs of election for a geothermal well by filing ancurred to obtain another’s patent are not re- items with no salvage value. These include amended return that does not claim the loss.search and experimental costs. wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies re-
lated to drilling wells and preparing them for Costs incurred outside the United States.Product. The term “product” includes any production. Your cost for any drilling or develop- You cannot deduct as a current business ex-of the following items. ment work done by contractors under any form pense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil,• Formula. of contract is also an IDC. However, see gas, or geothermal well located outside the• Invention. Amounts paid to contractor that must be capital- United States. However, you can elect to include• Patent. ized, later. the costs in the adjusted basis of the well to• Pilot model. You can also elect to deduct the cost of figure depletion or depreciation. If you do not
drilling exploratory bore holes to determine the• Process. make this election, you can deduct the costs
location and delineation of offshore hydrocarbon• Technique. over the 10-year period beginning with the tax
deposits if the shaft is capable of conducting• Property similar to the items listed above. year in which you paid or incurred them. These
hydrocarbons to the surface on completion. It rules do not apply to a nonproductive well.It also includes products used by you in your does not matter whether there is any intent to
trade or business or held for sale, lease, or produce hydrocarbons.
license. If you do not elect to deduct your IDCs as a
current business expense, you can elect to de-Costs not included. Research and experi- Exploration Costsduct them over the 60-month period beginningmental costs do not include expenses for any
with the month they were paid or incurred.of the following activities. The costs of determining the existence, location,
• Advertising or promotions. extent, or quality of any mineral deposit areAmounts paid to contractor that must be
• Consumer surveys. ordinarily capital expenditures if the costs leadcapitalized.  Amounts paid to a contractor
to the development of a mine. You recover these• Efficiency surveys. must be capitalized if they are either:
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 21

Page 22 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
costs through depletion as the mineral is re- until the depletion you would have deducted the due date of the return (excluding e xten-
moved from the ground. However, you can elect equals the exploration costs you deducted. sions). Clearly indicate the election on your
to deduct domestic exploration costs paid or amended return and write “Filed pursuant to
incurred before the beginning of the develop- You also must recapture deducted explora- section 301.9100-2.” File the amended return at
ment stage of the mine (except those for oil, gas, tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty from the same address you filed the original return.
and geothermal wells). mine property before it reaches the producing
stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction for Foreign development costs. The rules dis-
How to make the election. You elect to de- the tax year you receive the bonus or royalty and cussed earlier for foreign exploration costs apply
duct exploration costs by taking the deduction any later tax years, until the depletion you would to foreign development costs.
on your income tax return, or on an amended have deducted equals the exploration costs you
income tax return, for the first tax year for which deducted. Reduced corporate deductions for develop-
you wish to deduct the costs paid or incurred Generally, if you dispose of the mine before ment costs. The rules discussed earlier for
during the tax year. Your return must adequately you have fully recaptured the exploration costs reduced corporate deductions for exploration
describe and identify each property or mine, and you deducted, recapture the balance by treating costs also apply to corporate deductions for de-
clearly state how much is being deducted for all or part of your gain as ordinary income. velopment costs.
each one. The election applies to the tax year Under these circumstances, you generallyyou make this election and all later tax years. treat as ordinary income all of your gain if it is
less than your adjusted exploration costs withPartnerships. Each partner, not the part-
respect to the mine. If your gain is more thannership, elects whether to capitalize or to deduct Circulation Costs
your adjusted exploration costs, treat as ordi-that partner’s share of exploration costs.
nary income only a part of your gain, up to the A publisher can deduct as a current business
Reduced corporate deductions for explora- amount of your adjusted exploration costs. expense the costs of establishing, maintaining,
tion costs. A corporation (other than an S or increasing the circulation of a newspaper,
corporation) can deduct only 70% of its domes- Foreign exploration costs. If you pay or incur magazine, or other periodical. For example, a
tic exploration costs. It must capitalize the re- exploration costs for a mine or other natural publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extra
maining 30% of costs and amortize them over deposit located outside the United States, you employees for a limited time to get new sub-
the 60-month period starting with the month the cannot deduct all the costs in the current year. scriptions through telephone calls. Circulation
exploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpo- You can elect to include the costs (other than for costs are deductible even if they normally would
ration may also elect to capitalize and amortize an oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the adjusted be capitalized.
mining exploration costs over a 10-year period. basis of the mineral property to figure cost de- This rule does not apply to the followingFor more information on this method of amorti- pletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chapter costs that must be capitalized.zation, see Internal Revenue Code section 9.) If you do not make this election, you must
• The purchase of land or depreciable prop-59(e). deduct the costs over the 10-year period begin-
erty.ning with the tax year in which you pay or incurThe 30% the corporation capitalizes cannot
them. These rules also apply to foreign develop-be added to its basis in the property to figure • The acquisition of circulation through thement costs.cost depletion. However, the amount amortized purchase of any part of the business of
is treated as additional depreciation and is sub- another publisher of a newspaper, maga-
ject to recapture as ordinary income on a dispo- zine, or other periodical, including the
sition of the property. See Section 1250 purchase of another publisher’s list of sub-
Property under Depreciation Recapture in chap- Development Costs scribers.
ter 3 of Publication 544.
These rules also apply to the deduction of You can deduct costs paid or incurred during the Other treatment of circulation costs. If youdevelopment costs by corporations. See Devel- tax year for developing a mine or any other do not want to deduct circulation costs as aopment Costs, later. natural deposit (other than an oil or gas well) current business expense, you can elect one oflocated in the United States. These costs must the following ways to recover these costs.Recapture of exploration expenses. When be paid or incurred after the discovery of ores or
your mine reaches the producing stage, you minerals in commercially marketable quantities. • Capitalize all circulation costs that are
must recapture any exploration costs you Development costs include those incurred for properly chargeable to a capital account.
elected to deduct. Use either of the following you by a contractor. Also, development costs • Amortize circulation costs over the 3-yearmethods. include depreciation on improvements used in period beginning with the tax year theythe development of ores or minerals. They do were paid or incurred.not include costs for the acquisition or improve-
Method 1—Include the deducted costs in ment of depreciable property.
gross income for the tax year the mine How to make the election. You elect to capi-Instead of deducting development costs inreaches the producing stage. Your election talize circulation costs by attaching a statementthe year paid or incurred, you can elect to treatmust be clearly indicated on the return. In- to your return for the first tax year the electionthem as deferred expenses and deduct themcrease your adjusted basis in the mine by applies. Your election is binding for the year it isratably as the units of produced ores or mineralsthe amount included in income. Generally, made and for all later years, unless you get IRSbenefited by the expenses are sold. This elec-you must elect this recapture method by the approval to revoke it.tion applies each tax year to expenses paid ordue date (including extensions) of your re- incurred in that year. Once made, the election isturn. However, if you timely filed your return binding for the year and cannot be revoked forfor the year without making the election, any reason.you can still make the election by filing an Environmental Cleanupamended return within 6 months of the due How to make the election. The election todate of the return (excluding extensions). Costsdeduct development costs ratably as the ores orMake the election on your amended return minerals are sold must be made for each mineand write “Filed pursuant to section Environmental cleanup (remediation) costs areor other natural deposit by a clear indication on301.9100-2” on the form where you are in- generally capital expenditures. However, youyour return or by a statement filed with the IRScluding the income. File the amended re- can elect to deduct these costs as a currentoffice where you file your return. Generally, youturn at the same address you filed the business expense if certain requirements (dis-must make the election by the due date of theoriginal return. cussed later) are met. This special tax treatmentreturn (including extensions). However, if you
is generally available for qualified environmentalMethod 2—Do not claim any depletion de- timely filed your return for the year without mak-
cleanup costs you pay or incur before January 1,duction for the tax year the mine reaches ing the election, you can still make the election
2008.the producing stage and any later tax years by filing an amended return within 6 months of
Page 22 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 23 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified environmental cleanup costs. “Section 198 Election” on the line next to the
Qualified environmental cleanup costs are gen- amount for environmental cleanup costs. Reforestation Costserally costs you pay or incur to abate or control More than one environmental cleanuphazardous substances at a qualified contami- Reforestation costs are generally capital expen-cost. If, for any tax year, you pay or incur morenated site. ditures. However, you can elect to deduct up tothan one environmental cleanup cost, you can
$10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately; $0Hazardous substance. Hazardous sub- elect to deduct one or more of such expendi- for a trust) of qualifying reforestation costs paidstances are defined in section 101(14) of the tures for that year. You can elect to deduct one or incurred after October 22, 2004, for eachComprehensive Environmental Response, expenditure and elect to capitalize another ex- qualified timber property. This limit is increasedCompensation, and Liability Act of 1980 and penditure (whether or not they are of the same for small timber producers with qualified timbercertain substances are designated as hazard- type or paid or incurred with respect to the same property located in certain areas affected byous in section 102 of the Act. For costs paid or qualified contaminated site). An election to de- Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. For moreincurred after December 31, 2005 (after August duct an expenditure for one year has no effect information, see Publication 4492. The remain-28, 2005, if for a Gulf Opportunity (GO) Zone on other years. You must make a separate elec- ing costs can be amortized over an 84-monthsite), petroleum products are treated as hazard- tion for each year in which you intend to deduct period. For information about amortizing refor-ous substances. Substances are not hazardous qualified environmental cleanup costs. estation costs, see chapter 8.if a removal or remedial action is prohibited
 Qualifying reforestation costs are the directunder sections 104 and 104(a)(3) of the Act. For
costs of planting or seeding for forestation ormore information on the GO Zone, see Publica- Recapture. This deduction may have to be
reforestation. Qualified timber property is prop-tion 4492, Information for Taxpayers Affected by recaptured as ordinary income under section
erty that contains trees in significant commercialHurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. 1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of the
quantities. See chapter 8 for more informationproperty that would have received an addition toQualified contaminated site. A qualified on qualifying reforestation costs and qualifiedbasis if you had not elected to deduct the expen-contaminated site is any area that meets both of timber property.diture. For more information on recapturing thethe following requirements. If you elect to deduct qualified reforestationdeduction, see Depreciation and amortization costs, create and maintain separate timber ac-1. You hold it for use in a trade or business, under Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Pub- counts for each qualified timber property andfor the production of income, or as inven- lication 544. include all reforestation costs and the datestory.
each was applied. Do not include this qualified
2. There has been a release, threat of re- More information. For more information timber property in any account (for example,
lease, or disposal of any hazardous sub- about the environmental cleanup cost deduc- depletion block) for which depletion is allowed.
stance at or on the site. tion, see Internal Revenue Code section 198.
You must get a statement from the designated How to make the election. You elect to de-state environmental agency that the site meets duct qualifying reforestation costs by claimingrequirement (2). the deduction on your timely filed income tax
Business Start-Up and return (including extensions) for the tax year theA site is not eligible if it is on, or proposed for,
expenses were paid or incurred. If Form T (Tim-the national priorities list under section
Organizational Costs ber), Forest Activities Schedule, is required,105(a)(8)(B) of the Comprehensive Environ-
complete Part IV of Form T. If Form T is notmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Business start-up and organizational costs are required, attach a statement containing the fol-Act of 1980. To find out if a site is on the national
generally capital expenditures. However, you lowing information for each qualified timberpriorities list, contact the U.S. Environmental
can elect to deduct up to $5,000 of business property for which an election is being made.Protection Agency.
start-up and $5,000 of organizational costs paid • The unique stand identification numbers.Expenditures for depreciable property. or incurred after October 22, 2004. The $5,000You cannot deduct the cost of acquiring depre- • The total number of acres reforested dur-deduction is reduced by the amount your totalciable property used in connection with the ing the tax year.start-up or organizational costs exceed $50,000.abatement or control of hazardous substances Any remaining costs must be amortized. For • The nature of the reforestation treatments.at a qualified contaminated site. However, the
information about amortizing start-up and orga-part of the depreciation for such property that is • The total amounts of qualified reforesta-nizational costs, see chapter 8.otherwise allocated to the qualified contami- tion expenditures eligible to be amortizednated site shall be treated as a qualified environ- Start-up costs include any amounts paid or or deducted.mental cleanup cost. incurred in connection with creating an active
trade or business or investigating the creation or  However, if you timely filed your return for the
acquisition of an active trade or business. Orga- year without making the election, you can stillWhen and how to elect. You elect to deduct
nizational costs include the costs of creating a make the election by filing an amended returnenvironmental cleanup costs by taking the de-
corporation. For more information on start-up within 6 months of the due date of the returnduction on the income tax return (filed by the due
and organizational costs, see chapter 8. (excluding extensions). Clearly indicate thedate including extensions) for the tax year in
election on your amended return and write “Filedwhich the costs are paid or incurred. The costs
pursuant to section 301.9100-2.” File theare deducted differently depending on the type How to make the election.  You elect to de- amended return at the same address you filedof business entity involved. duct the start-up or organizational costs by the original return. The election applies whenclaiming the deduction on the income tax returnIndividuals. Deduct the environmental computing taxable income for the current tax(filed by the due date including extensions) forcleanup costs on the “Other Expenses” line of year and all subsequent years.Schedule C, E, or F (Form 1040). If the schedule the tax year in which the active trade or business If you elected to deduct qualified timber costsrequires you to separately identify each expense begins. However, if you timely filed your return on a federal income tax return filed before Juneincluded in “Other Expenses” write “Section 198 for the year without making the election, you can 15, 2006, but did not include the above informa-Election” on the line next to the environmental still make the election by filing an amended tion, complete Part IV of Form T or the requiredcleanup costs. return within 6 months of the due date of the statement and attach it to the first federal income
return (excluding extensions). Clearly indicateAll other entities. All other taxpayers (in- tax return you file after June 14, 2006. If you
the election on your amended return and writecluding S corporations, partnerships, and trusts) have not elected to deduct qualified timber costs
“Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2.” File thededuct the environmental cleanup costs on the in a prior year you may be able to do so by filing
amended return at the same address you filed“Other Deductions” line of the appropriate fed- Form 3115, Application for Change in Account-
the original return. The election applies wheneral income tax return. On a schedule attached ing Method. For more information, see Notice
computing taxable income for the current taxto the return that separately identifies each ex- 2006-47 on page 892 of Internal Revenue Bulle-
year and all subsequent years.pense included in “Other Deductions” write tin 2006-20. Internal Revenue Bulletin 2006-20
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 23

Page 24 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-20. limit (as determined by the partner). If the part- Other barrier removals. To be deductible,
pdf. expenses of removing any barrier not coverednership cannot show this, it is presumed that the
For additional information on reforestation by the above standards must meet all three ofpartner was able to deduct the distributive share
costs, see chapter 8. the following tests. of the partnership’s costs in full.
1. The removed barrier must be a substantialRecapture. This deduction may have to be Example. John Duke’s distributive share of
barrier to access or use of a facility orrecaptured as ordinary income under section ABC partnership’s deductible expenses for the
1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of the public transportation vehicle by personsremoval of architectural barriers was $14,000.
property that would have received an addition to who have a disability or are elderly.John had $12,000 of similar expenses in his solebasis if you had not elected to deduct the expen- proprietorship. He elected to deduct $7,000 of 2. The removed barrier must have been aditure. For more information on recapturing the them. John allocated the remaining $8,000 of barrier for at least one major group of per-deduction, see Depreciation and amortization the $15,000 limit to his share of ABC’s ex- sons who have a disability or are elderlyunder Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Pub- penses. John can add the excess $5,000 of his (such as people who are blind, deaf, orlication 544. own expenses to the basis of the property used wheelchair users).
in his business. Also, if ABC can show that John 3. The barrier must be removed without cre-could not deduct $6,000 ($14,000 – $8,000) of ating any new barrier that significantly im-his share of the partnership’s expenses becauseRetired Asset Removal pairs access to or use of the facility orof how John applied the limit, ABC can add vehicle by a major group of persons who$6,000 to the basis of its property.Costs have a disability or are elderly.
If you retire and remove a depreciable asset in Qualification standards. You can deduct
How to make the election. If you elect toconnection with the installation or production of your costs as a current expense only if the bar-
deduct your costs for removing barriers to thea replacement asset, you can deduct the costs rier removal meets the guidelines and require-
of removing the retired asset. However, if you disabled or the elderly, claim the deduction onments issued by the Architectural andreplace a component (part) of a depreciable your income tax return (partnership return forTransportation Barriers Compliance Boardasset, capitalize the removal costs if the re- partnerships) for the tax year the expenses wereunder the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)placement is an improvement and deduct the paid or incurred. Identify the deduction as aof 1990. You can view the Americans with Disa-costs if the replacement is a repair. separate item. The election applies to all thebilities Act at www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/pubs/ada.
qualifying costs you have during the year, up totxt.
the $15,000 limit. If you make this election, you The following is a list of some architectural must maintain adequate records to support yourbarrier removal costs that can be deducted.Barrier Removal Costs deduction.
• Ground and floor surfaces. For your election to be valid, you generallyThe cost of an improvement to a business asset must file your return by its due date, including• Walks.is normally a capital expense. However, you can extensions. However, if you timely filed yourelect to deduct the costs of making a facility or • Parking lots. return for the year without making the election,public transportation vehicle more accessible to you can still make the election by filing an• Ramps.and usable by those who are disabled or elderly. amended return within 6 months of the due dateYou must own or lease the facility or vehicle for • Entrances. of the return (excluding extensions). Clearly indi-use in connection with your trade or business. cate the election on your amended return and• Doors and doorways.A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc- write “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2.” Filetures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, or • Stairs. the amended return at the same address yousimilar real or personal property. A public trans-
• Floors. filed the original return. Your election is irrevoca-portation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus or
ble after the due date, including extensions, ofrailroad car, that provides transportation service • Toilet rooms. your return.to the public (including service for your custom-
• Water fountains.ers, even if you are not in the business of provid-
Disabled access credit. If you make youring transportation services). • Telephones.
business accessible to persons with disabilitiesYou cannot deduct any costs that you paid or • Elevators. and your business is an eligible small business,incurred to completely renovate or build a facility
or public transportation vehicle or to replace you may be able to claim the disabled access• Controls.
depreciable property in the normal course of credit. If you choose to claim the credit, you must• Signage.business. reduce the amount you deduct or capitalize by
the amount of the credit.• Alarms.
Deduction limit. The most you can deduct as For more information about the disabled ac-• Protruding objects.a cost of removing barriers to the disabled and cess credit, see Form 8826.the elderly for any tax year is $15,000. However, • Symbols of accessibility.
you can add any costs over this limit to the basis
You can find the ADA guidelines and require-of the property and depreciate these excess
ments for architectural barrier removal at www.costs.
Film and Televisionusdoj.gov/crt/ada/reg3a.html.
Partners and partnerships. The $15,000 The following is a list of some deductible Production Costslimit applies to a partnership and also to each transportation barrier removal costs.partner in the partnership. A partner can allocate
Film and television production costs are gener-• Rail facilities.the $15,000 limit in any manner among the part-
ally capital expenses. However, you can elect toner’s individually incurred costs and the part- • Buses. deduct costs paid or incurred for certain produc-ner’s distributive share of partnership costs. If
tions that begin after October 22, 2004. For• Rapid and light rail vehicles.the partner cannot deduct the entire share of
more information, see section 181 of the Internalpartnership costs, the partnership can add any You can find the guidelines and requirements for Revenue Code. For guidance on electing to de-costs not deducted to the basis of the improved transportation barrier removal at www.fta.dot. duct these costs, see Notice 2006-47 on pageproperty. gov/14534_5608_ENG_HTML.htm 892 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2006-20. Inter-A partnership must be able to show that any
nal Revenue Bulletin 2006-20 is available at Also, you can access the ADA website atamount added to basis was not deducted by the
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-20.pdf.www.ada.gov for additional information.partner and that it was over a partner’s $15,000
Page 24 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 25 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To report amortization from previous years, • An analysis or survey of potential markets,
products, labor supply, transportation facil-in addition to amortization that begins in the
ities, etc.current year, list on Form 4562 each item sepa-8. rately. For example, in 2005 you began to amor- • Advertisements for the opening of the
tize a lease. In 2006, you began to amortize a business.
second lease. Report amortization from the new
• Salaries and wages for employees wholease on line 42 of your 2006 Form 4562. ReportAmortization are being trained and their instructors.amortization from the 2005 lease on line 43 of
your 2006 Form 4562. • Travel and other necessary costs for se-
curing prospective distributors, suppliers,If you do not have any new amortizable ex-Introduction or customers.penses for the current year, you are not required
Amortization is a method of recovering (deduct- to complete Form 4562 (unless you are claiming • Salaries and fees for executives and con-ing) certain capital costs over a fixed period of depreciation). Report the current year’s deduc- sultants, or for similar professional serv-time. It is similar to the straight line method of tion for amortization that began in a prior year ices.depreciation. directly on the “Other deduction” or “Other ex-The various amortizable costs covered in pense line ”of your return. Nonqualifying costs. Start-up costs do notthis chapter are included in the list below. How-
include deductible interest, taxes, or researchever, this chapter does not discuss amortization
and experimental costs. See Research and Ex-of bond premium. For information on that topic,
perimental Costs, later.see chapter 3 of Publication 550.
Starting a Business
Purchasing an active trade or business.Topics Amortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac-When you start a business, treat all eligible costsThis chapter discusses: tive trade or business include only investigativeyou incur before you begin operating the busi-
costs incurred in the course of a general searchness as capital expenditures which are part of• Deducting amortization for or preliminary investigation of the business.your basis in the business. Generally, you re- These are costs that help you decide whether to• Amortizing costs of starting a business cover costs for particular assets through depre- purchase a business.ciation deductions. Generally, you cannot• Amortizing costs of getting a lease
recover other costs until you sell the business or Example. On June 1st, you hired an ac-• Amortizing costs of section 197 intangibles otherwise go out of business. counting firm and a law firm to assist you in the• Amortizing reforestation costs However, you can elect to amortize certain potential purchase of XYZ, Inc. They researched
costs for setting up and organizing your busi- XYZ’s industry and analyzed the financial pro-• Amortizing costs of geological and geo-
ness. For costs paid or incurred before October jections of XYZ, Inc. In September, the law firmphysical costs
23, 2004, you can elect an amortization period of prepared and submitted a letter of intent to XYZ,• Amortizing costs of pollution control facili- 60 months or more. For costs paid or incurred Inc. The letter stated that a binding commitmentties after October 22, 2004, you can elect to deduct a would result only after a purchase agreement
was signed. The law firm and accounting firmlimited amount of start-up and organizational• Amortizing costs of research and experi-
continued to provide services including a reviewcosts (see chapter 7). The costs that are notmentation
of XYZ’s books and records and the preparationdeducted currently can be amortized ratably• Amortizing costs of certain tax preferences of a purchase agreement. On October 22nd, youover a 180-month period. The amortization pe-
signed a purchase agreement with XYZ, Inc.riod starts with the month you begin operating
All amounts paid or incurred to investigateUseful Items your active trade or business. See Code section
the business before October 22nd are amortiz-You may want to see: 195(b) for limitations.
able investigative costs. Amounts paid on orThe cost must qualify as one of the following. after that date relate to the attempt to purchasePublication
• A business start-up cost. the business and therefore must be capitalized.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of • An organizational cost for a corporation. Disposition of business. If you completelyAssets dispose of your business before the end of the• An organizational cost for a partnership.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses amortization period, you can deduct any remain-
ing deferred start-up costs. However, you can❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property deduct these deferred start-up costs only to theBusiness Start-Up Costs
extent they qualify as a loss from a business.Form (and Instructions) Start-up costs are amounts paid or incurred for:
(a) creating an active trade or business; or❏ 3468 Investment Credit Organizational Costs
(b)investigating the creation or acquisition of an❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization active trade or business. Start-up costs include Amounts paid to organize a corporation are the
direct costs of creating the corporation.❏ 4626 Alternative Minimum Tax — amounts paid or incurred in connection with an
Corporations existing activity engaged in for profit; and for the Qualifying costs. To qualify as an organiza-production of income in anticipation of the activ-❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax— tional cost it must be:ity becoming an active trade or business.Individuals • For the creation of the corporation,
Qualifying costs. A start-up cost is amortiz-See chapter 12 for information about getting • Chargeable to a capital account,
able if it meets both the following tests.publications and forms. • Amortized over the life of the corporation if
• It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or the corporation had a fixed life, and.
incurred it to operate an existing active
• Incurred before the end of the first tax yeartrade or business (in the same field as the in which the corporation is in business.How To Deduct one you entered into).
• It is a cost you pay or incur before the day A corporation using the cash method of ac-Amortization
your active trade or business begins. counting can amortize organizational costs in-
To deduct amortization that begins during the curred within the first tax year, even if it does not
Start-up costs include amounts paid for thecurrent tax year, complete Part VI of Form 4562 pay them in that year.
following:and attach it to your income tax return. Examples of organizational costs include:
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 25

Page 26 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The cost of temporary directors. registration, and legal fees and printing Start-up costs election statement. If you
costs. These “syndication fees” are capital elect to amortize your start-up costs, attach a• The cost of organizational meetings. expenses that cannot be depreciated or separate statement that contains the following
• State incorporation fees. amortized. information.
• The cost of legal services. • A description of the business to which the
Liquidation of partnership. If a partnership is start-up costs relate.
liquidated before the end of the amortizationNonqualifying costs. The following items are • A description of each start-up cost in-period, the unamortized amount of qualifyingcapital expenses that cannot be amortized: curred.organizational costs can be deducted in the
• Costs for issuing and selling stock or se- partnership’s final tax year. However, these • The month your active business began (or
curities, such as commissions, profes- costs can be deducted only to the extent they was acquired).
sional fees, and printing costs. qualify as a loss from a business. • The number of months in your amortiza-
• Costs associated with the transfer of as- tion period which is generally 180 months.
How To Amortizesets to the corporation.
Filing the statement early. You can electDeduct start-up and organizational costs in to amortize your start-up costs by filing the state-Costs of Organizing equal amounts over the applicable amortization ment with a return for any tax year before theperiod (discussed earlier). You can choose ana Partnership year your active business begins. If you file theamortization period for start-up costs that is dif- statement early, the election becomes effectiveThe costs to organize a partnership are the ferent from the period you choose for organiza- in the month of the tax year your active businessdirect costs of creating the partnership. tional costs, as long as both are not less than the begins.applicable amortization period. Once you
Qualifying costs. You can amortize an orga- choose an amortization period, you cannot Revised statement. You can file a revised
nizational cost only if it meets all the following change it. statement to include any start-up costs not in-
tests. cluded in your original statement. However, youTo figure your deduction, divide your total
cannot include on the revised statement anystart-up or organizational costs by the months in• It is for the creation of the partnership and
cost you previously treated on your return as athe amortization period. The result is the amountnot for starting or operating the partner-
cost other than a start-up cost. You can file theyou can deduct for each month.ship trade or business.
revised statement with a return filed after the• It is chargeable to a capital account. return on which you elected to amortize yourCash method partnership. A partnership us-
start-up costs.• It could be amortized over the life of the ing the cash method of accounting can deduct
partnership if the partnership had a fixed an organizational cost only if it has been paid by
life. Organizational costs election statement. Ifthe end of the tax year. However, any cost the
partnership could have deducted as an organi- you elect to amortize your corporation’s or part-• It is incurred by the due date of the part- zational cost in an earlier tax year (if it had been nership’s organizational costs, attach a sepa-nership return (excluding extensions) for paid that year) can be deducted in the tax year of rate statement that contains the followingthe first tax year in which the partnership
payment. information.is in business. However, if the partnership
uses the cash method of accounting and • A description of each cost.
pays the cost after the end of its first tax How To Make the Election • The amount of each cost.year, see Cash method partnership under
How To Amortize, later. • The date each cost was incurred.To elect to amortize start-up or organizational
costs, you must complete and attach Form 4562• It is for a type of item normally expected to • The month your corporation or partnership
and an accompanying statement (explainedbenefit the partnership throughout its en- began active business (or acquired the
later) to your return for the first tax year you aretire life. business).
in business. If you have both start-up and orga-
• The number of months in your amortiza-nizational costs, attach a separate statement toOrganizational costs include the following
tion period which is generally 180 months.your return for each type of cost.fees.
Generally, you must file the return by the due• Legal fees for services incident to the or- Partnerships. The statement prepared fordate (including any extensions). However, if youganization of the partnership, such as ne- a cash basis partnership must also indicate thetimely filed your return for the year without mak-gotiation and preparation of the amount paid before the end of the year for eaching the election, you can still make the electionpartnership agreement. cost.by filing an amended return within 6 months of
• Accounting fees for services incident to You do not need to separately list any part-the due date of the return (excluding exten-
the organization of the partnership. nership organizational cost that is less than $10.sions). For more information, see the instruc-
Instead, you can list the total amount of thesetions for Part VI of Form 4562.• Filing fees. costs with the dates the first and last costs wereOnce you make the election to amortize
incurred.start-up or organizational costs, you cannot re-Nonqualifying costs. The following costs After a partnership makes the election tovoke it.cannot be amortized. amortize organizational costs, it can later file anIf your business is organized as a corpora-
amended return to include additional organiza-• The cost of acquiring assets for the part- tion or partnership, only the corporation or part-
nership or transferring assets to the part- tional costs not included in the partnership’snership can elect to amortize its start-up or
nership. original return and statement.organizational costs. A shareholder or partner
cannot make this election. You, as a share-• The cost of admitting or removing part-
holder or partner, cannot amortize any costs youners, other than at the time the partnership
incur in setting up your corporation or partner-is first organized.
ship. Only the corporation or partnership can Getting a Lease• The cost of making a contract concerning amortize these costs.
the operation of the partnership trade or If you get a lease for business property, youHowever, you, as an individual, can elect tobusiness including a contract between a recover the cost by amortizing it over the term ofamortize costs you incur to investigate an inter-partner and the partnership. the lease. The term of the lease for amortizationest in an existing partnership. These costs qual-
purposes generally includes all renewal optionsify as business start-up costs if you acquire the• The costs for issuing and marketing inter-
partnership interest. (and any other period for which you and theests in the partnership such as brokerage,
Page 26 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 27 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
lessor reasonably expect the lease to be re- going concern value, or any other section 197 accounting or inventory control system s. It also
newed). However, renewal periods are not in- intangible. includes the cost of customer lists, subscription
cluded if 75% or more of the cost of getting the lists, insurance expirations, patient or client files,
lease is for the term of the lease remaining on and lists of newspaper, magazine, radio, and
Section 197
the acquisition date (not including any period for television advertisers.Intangibles Definedwhich you may choose to renew, extend, or
Patents, copyrights, etc. This includes pack-continue the lease). The following assets are section 197 intangibles age design, and any interest in a film, soundand must be amortized over 180 months:How to amortize. Enter your deduction in Part recording, videotape, book, or other similar
VI of Form 4562 if you are deducting amortiza- • Goodwill; property, except as discussed later under As-
tion that begins during the current year, or on the sets That Are Not Section 197 Intangibles.• Going concern value;appropriate line of your tax return if you are not
otherwise required to file Form 4562. Customer-based intangible. This is the com-• Workforce in place;
For more information on the costs of getting position of market, market share, and any other• Business books and records, operatinga lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease in value resulting from the future provision ofsystems, or any other information base,chapter 4. goods or services because of relationships withincluding lists or other information con- customers in the ordinary course of business.cerning current or prospective customers; For example, you must amortize the part of the
purchase price of a business that is for the• A patent, copyright, formula, process, de-
existence of the following intangibles.sign, pattern, know-how, format, or similarSection 197 Intangibles
item • A customer base.Generally, you may amortize the capitalized • A customer-based intangible; • A circulation base.costs of “section 197 intangibles”(defined later)
• A supplier-based intangible;ratably over a 15-year period. You must amor- • An undeveloped market or market growth.tize these costs if you hold the section 197 • A license, permit, or other right granted by • Insurance in force.intangibles in connection with your trade or busi- a governmental unit or agency (includingness or in an activity engaged in for the produc- • A mortgage servicing contract.issuances and renewals);tion of income.
• An investment management contract.• A covenant not to compete entered into inYou may not be able to amortize sec- connection with the acquisition of an inter- • Any other relationship with customers in-tion 197 intangibles acquired in a trans- est in a trade or business; and volving the future provision of goods oraction that did not result in a significantCAUTION
!
services.• Any franchise, trademark, or trade name.change in ownership or use. See Anti-Churning
Rules, later.
Accounts receivable or other similar rights toYour amortization deduction each year is the You cannot amortize any of the in- income for goods or services provided to cus-applicable part of the intangible’s adjusted basis tangibles listed in items (1) through (8) tomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi-(for purposes of determining gain), figured by that you created rather than acquiredCAUTION
!
ness are not section 197 intangibles.amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 months). unless you created them in acquiring assets that
The 15-year period begins with the later of: make up a trade or business or a substantial part Supplier-based intangible. This is the valueof a trade or business.• The month the intangible is acquired, or resulting from the future acquisition of goods or
services used or sold by the business becauseGoodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi-• The month the trade or business or activity of business relationships with suppliers.ness based on expected continued customerengaged in for the production of income For example, you must amortize the part ofpatronage due to its name, reputation, or anybegins. the purchase price of a business that is for theother factor.You cannot deduct amortization for the month existence of the following intangibles.
Going concern value. This is the additionalyou dispose of the intangible. • A favorable relationship with distributorsvalue of a trade or business that attaches toIf you pay or incur an amount that increases (such as favorable shelf or display spaceproperty because the property is an integral partthe basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi- at a retail outlet).of an ongoing business activity. It includes valueble after the 15-year period begins, amortize it based on the ability of a business to continue to • A favorable credit rating.over the remainder of the 15-year period begin- function and generate income even thoughning with the month the basis increase occurs. • A favorable supply contract.there is a change in ownership (but does notYou are not allowed any other depreciation include any other section 197 intangible). It alsoor amortization deduction for an amortizable includes value based on the immediate use or Government-granted license, permit, etc.section 197 intangible. availability of an acquired trade or business, This is any right granted by a governmental unit
such as the use of earnings during any period in or an agency or instrumentality of a governmen-Tax-exempt use property subject to a lease.
which the business would not otherwise be tal unit. For example, you must amortize theThe amortization period for any section 197 in-
available or operational. capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuingtangible leased under a lease agreement en-
or renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal-tered into after March 12, 2004, to a tax-exempt Workforce in place, etc. This includes the lion or license, or a television or radio broadcast-organization, governmental unit, or foreign per- composition of a workforce (for example, its ex- ing license.son or entity (other than a partnership), shall not perience, education, or training). It also includes
be less than 125 percent of the lease term. the terms and conditions of employment, Covenant not to compete. Section 197 in-whether contractual or otherwise, and any other tangibles include a covenant not to compete (orCost attributable to other property. The value placed on employees or any of their attrib- similar arrangement) entered into in connectionrules for section 197 intangibles do not apply to utes. with the acquisition of an interest in a trade orany amount that is included in determining the For example, you must amortize the part of business, or a substantial portion of a trade orcost of property that is not a section 197 intangi- the purchase price of a business that is for the business. An interest in a trade or businessble. For example, if the cost of computer existence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, you includes an interest in a partnership or a corpo-software is not separately stated from the cost of must amortize the cost of acquiring an existing ration engaged in a trade or business.hardware or other tangible property and you employment contract or relationship with em-consistently treat it as part of the cost of the An arrangement that requires the formerployees or consultants.hardware or other tangible property, these rules owner to perform services (or to provide prop-
do not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac- Business books and records, etc. This in- erty or the use of property) is not similar to a
quiring real property held for the production of cludes the intangible value of technical manuals, covenant not to compete to the  extent the
rental income is considered the cost of goodwill, training manuals or programs, data files, and amount paid under the arrangement  represents
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 27

Page 28 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
reasonable compensation for those services or Intangible property that is not amortizable production within 3 years of the first capitalized
under the rules for section 197 intangibles canfor that property or its use. transaction. You may amortize these costs rata-
be depreciated if it meets certain requirements. bly over a 15-year period beginning on the first
You generally must use the straight line method day of the second half of the tax year in whichFranchise, trademark, or trade name. A
over its useful life. For certain intangibles, the you properly write off the costs for financial ac-franchise, trademark, or trade name is a section
depreciation period is specified in the law and counting purposes. If, during the 15-year period,197 intangible. You must amortize its purchase
regulations. For example, the depreciation pe- you dispose of the creative property rights, youor renewal costs, other than certain contingent
riod for computer software that is not a section must continue to amortize the costs over thepayments that you can deduct currently. For
197 intangible is generally 36 months.information on currently deductible contingent remainder of the 15-year period.
For more information on depreciating intan-payments, see chapter 11. Creative property costs include costs paid orgible property, see Intangible Property  under incurred to acquire and develop screenplays,Professional sports franchise. A What Method Can You Use To Depreciate Your scripts, story outlines, motion picture productionfranchise engaged in professional sports and Property? in chapter 1 of Publication 946. rights to books and plays, and other similarany intangible assets acquired in connection
properties for purposes of potential future filmwith acquiring the franchise (including player Computer software. Section 197 intangibles development, production, and exploitation.contracts) is a section 197 intangible amortiz- do not include the following types of computer Amortize these costs using the rules of Rev-able over a 15-year period. software.
enue Procedure 2004-36. For more information,
see Revenue Procedure 2004-36 in Internal1. Software that meets all the following re-Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, a
Revenue Bulletin 2004-24, which is available atquirements.section 197 intangible. Section 197 in-
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-24.pdf.tangibles include any right under a license, con- a. It is, or has been, readily available fortract, or other arrangement providing for the use A change in the treatment of creativepurchase by the general public.of any section 197 intangible. It also includes property costs is a change in method of
any term interest in any section 197 intangible, b. It is subject to a nonexclusive license. accounting.CAUTION
!
whether the interest is outright or in trust. c. It has not been substantially modified.
This requirement is considered met if Anti-Churning RulesAssets That Are Not the cost of all modifications is not more
Section 197 Intangibles than the greater of 25% of the price of Anti-churning rules prevent you from amortizing
the publicly available unmodified most section 197 intangibles if the transaction inThe following assets are not section 197 in- software or $2,000. which you acquired them did not result in atangibles. significant change in ownership or use. These2. Software that is not acquired in connection rules apply to goodwill and going concern value,1. Any interest in a corporation, partnership, with the acquisition of a trade or business and to any other section 197 intangible that istrust, or estate. or a substantial part of a trade or business. not otherwise depreciable or amortizable.
2. Any interest under an existing futures con- Under the anti-churning rules, you cannotComputer software defined. Computertract, foreign currency contract, notional use 15-year amortization for the intangible if anysoftware includes all programs designed toprincipal contract, interest rate swap, or of the following conditions apply.cause a computer to perform a desired function.similar financial contract.
It also includes any database or similar item that 1. You or a related person (defined later) held3. Any interest in land. is in the public domain and is incidental to the or used the intangible at any time from Julyoperation of qualifying software.4. Most computer software. (See Computer 25, 1991, through August 10, 1993.
software, later.)
2. You acquired the intangible from a personRights of fixed duration or amount. Section
5. Any of the following assets not acquired in who held it at any time during the period in197 intangibles do not include any right under a
connection with the acquisition of a trade (1) and, as part of the transaction, the usercontract or from a governmental agency if the
or business or a substantial part of a trade did not change.right is acquired in the ordinary course of a trade
or business. or business (or in an activity engaged in for the 3. You granted the right to use the intangibleproduction of income) but not as part of aa. An interest in a film, sound recording, to a person (or a person related to thatpurchase of a trade or business and either:video tape, book, or similar property. person) who held or used it at any time
• Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or during the period in (1). This applies only ifb. A right to receive tangible property or the transaction in which you granted theservices under a contract or from a gov- • Is of a fixed amount that, except for the right and the transaction in which you ac-rules for section 197 intangibles, would beernmental agency. quired the intangible are part of a series ofrecovered under a method similar to thec. An interest in a patent or copyright. related transactions. See Related person,unit-of-production method of cost recov- later, for information about the kinds ofd. Certain rights that have a fixed duration ery. persons that are related.or amount. (See Rights of fixed duration However, this does not apply to the followingor amount, later.) intangibles.
Exceptions. The anti-churning rules do not
• Goodwill.6. An interest under either of the following. apply in the following situations.
• Going concern value. • You acquired the intangible from a dece-a. An existing lease or sublease of tangi-
dent and its basis was stepped up to itsble property. • A covenant not to compete.
fair market value.b. A debt that was in existence when the • A franchise, trademark, or trade name.
• The intangible was amortizable as a sec-interest was acquired.
• A customer-related information base, cus- tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans-
tomer-based intangible, or similar item. feror you acquired it from. This exception7. A right to service residential mortgages un-
does not apply if the transaction in whichless the right is acquired in connection with
you acquired the intangible and the trans-the acquisition of a trade or business or a Safe Harbor for Creative action in which the seller or transferor ac-substantial part of a trade or business.
Property Costs quired it are part of a series of related8. Certain transaction costs incurred by par- transactions.ties to a corporate organization or reorgan- If you are engaged in the trade or business of
• The gain-recognition exception, discussedization in which any part of a gain or loss is film production, you may be able to amortize the
later, applies.not recognized. creative property costs for properties not set for
Page 28 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 29 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Related person. For purposes of the • In the case of a series of related transac- Incorrect Amount of
tions (or a series of transactions that com-anti-churning rules, the following are related per- Amortization Deductedprise a qualified stock purchase undersons.
section 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue If you later discover that you deducted an incor-• An individual and his or her brothers, sis- Code), immediately before the earliest rect amount for amortization for a section 197ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, transaction or immediately after the last intangible in any year, you may be able to makeancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), transaction. a correction for that year by filing an amendedand lineal descendants (children, grand- return. See Amended Return, next. If you are notchildren, etc.). Ownership of stock. In determining allowed to make the correction on an amendedwhether an individual directly or indirectly owns• A corporation and an individual who owns, return, you can change your accounting methodany of the outstanding stock of a corporation, thedirectly or indirectly, more than 20% of the to claim the correct amortization. See Changingfollowing rules apply.value of the corporation’s outstanding Your Accounting Method, later.
stock. Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by
or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust• Two corporations that are members of the Amended Returnis considered owned proportionately by or for itssame controlled group as defined in sec- shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.tion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue If you deducted an incorrect correct amount for
Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownCode, except that “more than 20%” is sub- amortization, you can file an amended return to
the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for hisstituted for “at least 80%” in that definition correct the following.
or her family. Family includes only brothers andand the determination is made without re- • A mathematical error made in any year.sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse,gard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) of
ancestors, and lineal descendants. • A posting error made in any year.section 1563. (For an exception, see sec-
tion 1.197-2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.) Rule 3. An individual owning (other than by • An amortization deduction for a section
applying Rule 2) any stock in a corporation is 197 intangible for which you have not• A trust fiduciary and a corporation if more
considered to own the stock directly or indirectly adopted a method of accounting.than 20% of the value of the corporation’s owned by or for his or her partner.outstanding stock is owned, directly or in-
directly, by or for the trust or grantor of the Rule 4. For purposes of applying Rule 1, 2, When to file. If an amended return is allowed,
trust. or 3, treat stock constructively owned by a per- you must file it by the later of the following dates.
son under Rule 1 as actually owned by that• The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduci- • 3 years from the date you filed your origi-person. Do not treat stock constructively ownedary and beneficiary, of any trust. nal return for the year in which you did notby an individual under Rule 2 or 3 as owned by deduct the correct amount. (A return filed• The fiduciaries of two different trusts, and the individual for reapplying Rule 2 or 3 to make early is considered filed on the due date.)another person the constructive owner of thethe fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif-
stock.ferent trusts, if the same person is the • 2 years from the time you paid your tax for
grantor of both trusts. that year.Gain-recognition exception. This exception
to the anti-churning rules applies if the person• The executor and beneficiary of an estate.
you acquired the intangible from (the transferor) Changing Your• A tax-exempt educational or charitable or- meets both of the following requirements. Accounting Methodganization and a person who directly or
• That person would not be related to youindirectly controls the organization (or Generally, you must get IRS approval to change(as described under Related person, ear-whose family members control it). your method of accounting. File Form 3115,lier) if the 20% test for ownership of stock Application for Change in Accounting Method, to• A corporation and a partnership if the and partnership interests were replaced by request a change to a permissible method ofsame persons own more than 20% of the a 50% test. accounting for amortization.value of the outstanding stock of the cor-
• That person chose to recognize gain on The following are examples of a change inporation and more than 20% of the capital
the disposition of the intangible and pay method of accounting for amortization.or profits interest in the partnership. income tax on the gain at the highest tax • A change in the amortization method, pe-• Two S corporations, and an S corporation rate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for riod of recovery, or convention of an amor-and a regular corporation, if the same per- information on making this choice. tizable asset.sons own more than 20% of the value of
the outstanding stock of each corporation. If this exception applies, the anti-churning • A change in the accounting for amortiz-
rules apply only to the amount of your adjusted able assets from a single asset account to• Two partnerships if the same persons basis in the intangible that is more than the gain a multiple asset account (pooling), or viceown, directly or indirectly, more than 20% recognized by the transferor. versa.of the capital or profits interests in both
Notification. If the person you acquired the • A change in the accounting for amortiz-partnerships.
intangible from chooses to recognize gain under able assets from one type of multiple as-• A partnership and a person who owns, the rules for this exception, that person must set account to a different type of multipledirectly or indirectly, more than 20% of the notify you in writing by the due date of the return asset account.capital or profits interests in the partner- on which the choice is made.
ship. Changes in amortization that are not a changeAnti-abuse rule. You cannot amortize any in method of accounting include the following.• Two persons who are engaged in trades section 197 intangible acquired in a transactionor businesses under common control (as • A change in computing amortization in thefor which the principal purpose was either of the
described in section 41(f)(1) of the Internal tax year in which your use of the assetfollowing.
Revenue Code). changes.• To avoid the requirement that the intangi-
• An adjustment in the useful life of an am-ble be acquired after August 10, 1993.When to determine relationship. Persons
ortizable asset.are treated as related if the relationship existed • To avoid any of the anti-churning rules.
at the following time. • Generally, the making of a late amortiza-
tion election or the revocation of a timely• In the case of a single transaction, imme- More information. For more information valid amortization election.diately before or immediately after the about the anti-churning rules, including addi-
transaction in which the intangible was ac- tional rules for partnerships, see Regulations • Any change in the placed-in-service date
quired. section 1.197-2(h). of an amortizable asset.
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 29

Page 30 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See section 1.446-1(e)(2)(ii)(d) of the Regula- distributions, like-kind exchanges, and involun- cost-sharing program, unless you  include the
tions for more information and examples. reimbursement in your income.tary conversions.
In a like-kind exchange or involuntary con-Automatic approval. In some instances, you Qualified timber property. Qualified timberversion of a section 197 intangible, you mustmay be able to get automatic approval from the property is property that contains trees in signifi-continue to amortize the part of your adjustedIRS to change your method of accounting for cant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlotbasis in the acquired intangible that is not moreamortization. For a list of automatic accounting or other site that you own or lease. The propertythan your adjusted basis in the exchanged ormethod changes, see the Instructions for Form qualifies only if it meets all of the following re-converted intangible over the remaining amorti-3115. Also see the Instructions for Form 3115 quirements.zation period of the exchanged or convertedfor more information on getting approval, auto- intangible. Amortize over a new 15-year period • It is located in the United States.matic approval procedures, and a list of excep- the part of your adjusted basis in the acquired • It is held for the growing and cutting oftions to the automatic approval process. intangible that is more than your adjusted basis timber you will either use in, or sell for useFor additional guidance, see Revenue Pro- in the exchanged or converted intangible. in, the commercial production of timbercedure 2006-12 on page 310 of Internal Reve-
products.nue Bulletin 2006-3, available at www.irs.gov/ Example. You own a section 197 intangiblepub/irsnce-irbs/irb06-03.pdf. you have amortized for 4 full years. It has a • It consists of at least one acre planted with
remaining unamortized basis of $30,000. You tree seedlings in the manner normally
Disposition of exchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like-kind used in forestation or reforestation.
section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro-Section 197 Intangibles
visions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor- Qualified timber property does not include
A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia- tize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of the property on which you have planted shelter belts
ble property used in your trade or business. If acquired intangible over the 11 years remaining or ornamental trees, such as Christmas trees.
you held the intangible for more than 1 year, any in the original 15-year amortization period for the
Amortization period. The 84-month amorti-gain on its disposition, up to the amount of allow- transferred asset. You amortize the other
zation period starts on the first day of the firstable amortization, is ordinary income (section $10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 15-year
month of the second half of the tax year you1245 gain). If multiple section 197 intangibles period.
incur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax-are disposed of in a single transaction or a
payer), regardless of the month you actuallyseries of related transactions, treat all of the
incur the costs. You can claim amortization de-section 197 intangibles as if they were a single
ductions for no more than 6 months of the firstasset for purposes of determining the amount of Reforestation Costs and last (eighth) tax years of the period.gain that is ordinary income. Any remaining
gain, or any loss, is a section 1231 gain or loss. If You can elect to deduct a limited amount of Life tenant and remainderman. If one per-you held the intangible 1 year or less, any gain reforestation costs paid or incurred during the son holds the property for life with the remainderor loss on its disposition is an ordinary gain or tax year. See Reforestation Costs in chapter 7. going to another person, the life tenant is entitledloss. For more information on ordinary or capital You can elect to amortize the qualifying costs to the full amortization for qualifying reforesta-gain or loss on business property, see chapter 3 that are not deducted currently over an tion costs incurred by the life tenant. Any re-in Publication 544. 84-month period. There is no limit on the amount mainder interest in the property is ignored for
of your amortization deduction for reforestation amortization purposes.Nondeductible loss. You cannot deduct any
costs paid or incurred during the tax year.loss on the disposition or worthlessness of a
Recapture. If you dispose of qualified timberThe election to amortize reforestation costssection 197 intangible that you acquired in the
property within 10 years after the tax year youincurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es-same transaction (or series of related transac-
incur qualifying reforestation expenses, reporttate must be made by the partnership, corpora-tions) as other section 197 intangibles you still
any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza-tion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, orhave. Instead, increase the adjusted basis of
tion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544beneficiary cannot make that election.each remaining amortizable section 197 intangi-
for more information.A partner’s or shareholder’s share of amor-ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductible
tizable costs is figured under the general rulesloss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non- Investment credit. Amortizable reforestationdeductible loss on the disposition of the intangi- for allocating items of income, loss, deduction, costs qualify for the investment credit, whetherble by the following fraction. etc., of a partnership or S corporation. The am- or not they are amortized. See the instructionsortizable costs of an estate are divided between for Form 3468 for information on the investment• The numerator is the adjusted basis of the estate and the income beneficiary based on credit.each remaining intangible on the date of the income of the estate allocable to each.the disposition.
How to make the election. To elect to amor-A trust cannot elect to amortize refor-• The denominator is the total adjusted ba- tize qualifying reforestation costs, complete Partestation costs and cannot deduct itsses of all remaining amortizable section VI of Form 4562 and attach a statement thatshare of any amortizable reforestationCAUTION
!
197 intangibles on the date of the disposi- contains the following information.costs of a partnership, S corporation, or estate.tion.
• A description of the costs and the dates
Qualifying costs. Reforestation costs are the you incurred them.
Covenant not to compete. A covenant not to direct costs of planting or seeding for forestation • A description of the type of timber beingcompete, or similar arrangement, is not consid- or reforestation. Qualifying costs include only grown and the purpose for which it isered disposed of or worthless before you dis- those costs you must capitalize and include in grown.pose of your entire interest in the trade or the adjusted basis of the property. They include
business for which you entered into the cove- costs for the following items. Attach a separate statement for each property
nant. for which you amortize reforestation costs.• Site preparation.
Nonrecognition transfers. If you acquire a Generally, you must make the election on a• Seeds or seedlings.section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans- timely filed return (including extensions) for the
• Labor.fer, you are treated as the transferor with respect tax year in which you incurred the costs. How-
to the part of your adjusted basis in the intangi- ever, if you timely filed your return for the year• Tools.ble that is not more than the transferor’s ad- without making the election, you can still make
• Depreciation on equipment used in plant-justed basis. You amortize this part of the the election by filing an amended return within 6
ing and seeding.adjusted basis over the intangible’s remaining months of the due date of the return (excluding
amortization period in the hands of the trans- extensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state-
Qualifying costs do not include costs for whichferor. Nonrecognition transfers include transfers ment to the amended return and write “Filed
the government reimburses you under ato a corporation, partnership contributions and pursuant to section 301.9100-2” on Form 4562.
Page 30 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 31 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
File the amended return at the same address The facility must not significantly increase Costs you can amortize. You can amortize
the output or capacity, extend the useful life, or costs chargeable to a capital account if you meetyou filed the original return.
reduce the total operating costs of the plant or both the following requirements.
other property. Also, it must not significantlyRevoking the election. You must get IRS ap- • You paid or incurred the costs in yourchange the nature of the manufacturing or pro-proval to revoke your election to amortize quali- trade or business.duction process or facility.fying reforestation costs. Your application to
• You are not deducting the costs currently.The federal certifying authority will not certifyrevoke the election must include your name,
your property to the extent it appears you willaddress, the years for which your election was in
recover (over the property’s useful life) all or parteffect, and your reason for revoking it. You, or How to make the election. To elect to amor-of its cost from the profit based on its operationyour duly authorized representative, must sign tize research and experimental costs, complete(such as through sales of recovered wastes).the application and file it at least 90 days before Part VI of Form 4562 and attach it to your in-The federal certifying authority will describe thethe due date (without extensions) for filing your come tax return. Generally, you must file thenature of the potential cost recovery. You mustincome tax return for the first tax year for which return by the due date (including extensions).then reduce the amortizable basis of the facilityyour election is to end. However, if you timely filed your return for theby this potential recovery. year without making the election, you can still
make the election by filing an amended returnNew identifiable treatment facility. A new
within 6 months of the due date of the returnidentifiable treatment facility is tangible depre-Send the application to:
(excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to theciable property that is identifiable as a treatmentInternal Revenue Service
amended return and write “Filed pursuant tofacility. It does not include a building and itsAssociate Chief Counsel
section 301.9100-2” on Form 4562. File thestructural components unless the building is ex-Passthroughs and Special Industries
amended return at the same address you filedclusively a treatment facility.CC:PSI the original return.1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300 Atmospheric pollution control facilities . Your election is binding for the year it isWashington, DC 20224 Certain atmospheric pollution control facilities made and for all later years unless you obtain
can be amortized over 84 months. To qualify, approval from the IRS to change to a different
the following must apply. method.
• The facility must be acquired and placedGeological and in service after April 11, 2005. If acquired,
the original use must begin with you afterGeophysical Costs April 11, 2005. Optional Write-off
You can amortize the cost of geological and • The facility must be used in connection of Certain Taxgeophysical expenses paid or incurred in con- with an electric generation plant or other
nection with oil and gas exploration or develop- property placed in operation after Decem- Preferencesment within the U.S. These costs can be ber 31, 1975, that is primarily coal fired.
amortized ratably over a 24-month period (a You can elect to amortize certain tax preference• If you construct, reconstruct, or erect the5-year period for major integrated oil companies items over an optional period beginning in thefacility, only the basis attributable to thefor costs paid or incurred after May 12, 2006) tax year in which you incurred the costs. If youconstruction, reconstruction, or erectionbeginning on the mid-point of the tax year in make this election there is no AMT adjustment.completed after April 11, 2005, qualifies.which the expenses were paid or incurred. The applicable costs and the optional recovery
If you retire or abandon the property during periods are as follows:Basis reduction for corporations. A corpo-the 24-month amortization period, no amortiza-
• Circulation costs — 3 years,ration must reduce the amortizable basis of ation deduction is allowed in the year of retire-
pollution control facility by 20% before figuringment or abandonment. • Intangible drilling and development coststhe amortization deduction. — 60 months,
• Mining exploration and development costsMore information. For more information on
— 10 years, andthe amortization of pollution control facilities,Pollution see Code sections 169 and 291(c) and the re- • Research and experimental costs — 10lated regulations. years.Control Facilities
You can elect to amortize the cost of a certified How to make the election. To elect to amor-pollution control facility over 60 months. How- tize qualifying costs over the optional recoveryResearch andever, see Atmospheric pollution control facilities period, complete Part VI of Form 4562 and at-for an exception. The cost of a pollution control tach a statement containing the following infor-Experimental Costsfacility that is not eligible for amortization can be mation to your return for the tax year in which thedepreciated under the regular rules for deprecia- election begins:You can elect to amortize your research andtion. Also, you can claim a special depreciation experimental costs, deduct them as current • Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-allowance on a certified pollution control facility business expenses, or write them off over a cation number; andthat is qualified property even if you elect to 10-year period. If you elect to amortize theseamortize its cost. You must reduce its cost (am- • The type of cost and the specific amountcosts, deduct them in equal amounts over 60ortizable basis) by the amount of any special of the cost for which you are making themonths or more. The amortization period beginsallowance you claim. See chapter 3 of Publica- election.the month you first receive an economic benefittion 946. from the costs. For a definition of “research and
A certified pollution control facility is a new Generally, the election must be made on aexperimental costs” and information on deduct-
identifiable treatment facility used in connection timely filed return (including extensions) for theing them as current business expenses, see
with a plant or other property in operation before tax year in which you incurred the costs. How-chapter 7.
1976, to reduce or control water or atmospheric ever, if you timely filed your return for the year
pollution or contamination. The facility must do Optional write-off method. Rather than without making the election, you can still make
so by removing, changing, disposing, storing, or amortize these costs or deduct them as a cur- the election by filing an amended return within 6
preventing the creation or emission of pollu- rent expense, you have the option of deducting months of the due date of the return (excluding
tants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. The facility (writing off) research and experimental costs extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the amended
must be certified by state and federal certifying ratably over a 10-year period beginning with the return and write “Filed pursuant to section
authorities. tax year in which you incurred the costs. 301.9100-2” on Form 4562. File the amended
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 31

Page 32 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
return at the same address you filed the original in itself, an economic interest. A production pay- Total recoverable units. The total recover-
able units is the sum of the following.return. ment carved out of, or retained on the sale of,
mineral property is not an economic interest. • The number of units of mineral remainingRevoking the election. You must get IRS at the end of the year (including units re-Individuals, corporations, estates, andconsent to revoke your election. Your request to covered but not sold).trusts who claim depletion deductionsrevoke the election must be submitted to the IRS
• The number of units of mineral sold duringmay be liable for alternative minimumin the form of a letter ruling before the end of the CAUTION
!
the tax year (determined under yourtax.tax year in which the optional recovery period
method of accounting, as explained next).ends. The request must contain all of the infor-
mation necessary to demonstrate the rare and
You must estimate or determine recoverableunusual circumstances that would justify grant-
units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousandsing revocation. If the request for revocation is Mineral Property of cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod-approved, any unamortized costs are deductible
ucts using the current industry method and thein the year the revocation is effective. Mineral property includes oil and gas wells, most accurate and reliable information you canmines, and other natural deposits (including ge- obtain.othermal deposits). For this purpose, the term
Number of units sold. You determine the“property” means each separate interest you
number of units sold during the tax year basedown in each mineral deposit in each separate
on your method of accounting. Use the followingtract or parcel of land. You can treat two or more
table to make this determination.separate interests as one property or as sepa-
9. rate properties. See section 614 of the Internal IF you THEN the units soldRevenue Code and the related regulations for use ... during the year are ...rules on how to treat separate mineral interests.
The cash The units sold for whichThere are two ways of figuring depletion onDepletion method of you receive paymentmineral property.
accounting during the tax year
• Cost depletion. (regardless of the year of
sale).• Percentage depletion.Introduction
An accrual The units sold based onGenerally, you must use the method that givesDepletion is the using up of natural resources by method of your inventories andyou the larger deduction. However, unless youmining, quarrying, drilling, or felling. The deple- accounting method of accounting forare an independent producer or royalty owner,tion deduction allows an owner or operator to inventory.you generally cannot use percentage depletionaccount for the reduction of a product’s
for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells,reserves. The number of units sold during the tax yearlater.There are two ways of figuring depletion: does not include any for which depletion deduc-cost depletion and percentage depletion. For tions were allowed or allowable in earlier years.mineral property, you generally must use the Cost Depletion
Figuring the cost depletion deduction.method that gives you the larger deduction. For
Once you have figured your property’s basis forTo figure cost depletion you must first determinestanding timber, you must use cost depletion.
depletion, the total recoverable units, and thethe following.
number of units sold during the tax year, you canTopics • The property’s basis for depletion. figure your cost depletion deduction by takingThis chapter discusses: the following steps.• The total recoverable units of mineral in
the property’s natural deposit.• Who can claim depletion Step Action Result
• The number of units of mineral sold during• Mineral property  1 Divide your property’s Rate perthe tax year.
• Timber basis for depletion by unit.
total recoverable units.
Basis for depletion. To figure the property’s
 2 Multiply the rate per Costbasis for depletion, subtract all the following
unit by units sold depletionfrom the property’s adjusted basis.
during the tax year. deduction.
Who Can 1. Amounts recoverable through:
Claim Depletion? a. Depreciation deductions, Note. You must keep accounts for the de-
pletion of each property and adjust these ac-b. Deferred expenses (including deferredIf you have an economic interest in mineral prop- counts each year for units sold and depletionexploration and development costs),erty or standing timber, you can take a deduction claimed.andfor depletion. More than one person can have an
Elective safe harbor for owners of oil and gaseconomic interest in the same mineral deposit or c. Deductions other than depletion.
property. Owners of oil and gas property maytimber.
use an elective safe harbor in determining the2. The residual value of land and improve-You have an economic interest if both the property’s recoverable reserves for purposes ofments at the end of operations.following apply. computing cost depletion. If this election is
3. The cost or value of land acquired for pur-• You have acquired by investment any in- made, special rules apply. See Revenue Proce-
poses other than mineral production.terest in mineral deposits or standing tim- dure 2004-19 on page 563 of Internal Revenue
ber. Bulletin 2004-10, available at www.irs.gov/pub/
Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of your irs-irbs/irb04-10.pdf.• You have a legal right to income from the property is your original cost or other basis, plus To make the election, attach a statement toextraction of the mineral or cutting of the certain additions and improvements, and minus your timely filed (including extensions) originaltimber to which you must look for a return certain deductions such as depletion allowed or return for the first tax year for which the safeof your capital investment. allowable and casualty losses. Your adjusted harbor is elected. The statement must indicate
A contractual relationship that allows you an basis can never be less than zero. See Publica- that you are electing the safe harbor provided by
economic or monetary advantage from products tion 551, Basis of Assets, for more information Revenue Procedure 2004-19. The election, if
of the mineral deposit or standing timber is not, on adjusted basis. made, is effective for the tax year in which it is
Page 32 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 33 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
made and all subsequent years. It cannot be • Do not deduct any net operating loss de- partnership and a trust are related persons if one
duction from the gross income from the person holds a significant ownership interest inrevoked for the tax year in which it is elected, but
property. each of them.may be revoked in a later year. Once revoked, it
cannot be re-elected for the next 5 years. For purposes of the related person rules,• Corporations do not deduct charitable con-
significant ownership interest means direct ortributions from the gross income from the
indirect ownership of 5% or more in any one ofPercentage Depletion property.
the following.
• If, during the year, you dispose of an itemTo figure percentage depletion, you multiply a • The value of the outstanding stock of aof section 1245 property that was used incertain percentage, specified for each mineral, corporation.connection with mineral property, reduceby your gross income from the property during
any allowable deduction for mining ex- • The interest in the profits or capital of athe tax year.
penses by the part of any gain you must partnership.The rates to be used and other conditions report as ordinary income that is allocableand qualifications for oil and gas wells are dis- • The beneficial interests in an estate orto the mineral property. See sectioncussed later under Independent Producers and trust.1.613-5(b)(1) of the regulations for infor-Royalty Owners and under Natural Gas Wells. mation on how to figure the ordinary gainRates and other rules for percentage depletion Any interest owned by or for a corporation,allocable to the property.of other specific minerals are found later in partnership, trust, or estate is considered to be
Mines and Geothermal Deposits. owned directly both by itself and proportionately
Oil and Gas Wells by its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.
Gross income. When figuring your percent-
You cannot claim percentage depletion for an oilage depletion, subtract from your gross income Retailers who cannot claim percentage de-
or gas well unless at least one of the followingfrom the property the following amounts. pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple-
applies. tion if both the following apply.• Any rents or royalties you paid or incurred
• You are either an independent producer orfor the property. 1. You sell oil or natural gas or theira royalty owner. by-products directly or through a related• The part of any bonus you paid for a lease
• The well produces natural gas that is ei- person in any of the following situations.on the property allocable to the product
ther sold under a fixed contract or pro-sold (or that otherwise gives rise to gross a. Through a retail outlet operated by youduced from geopressured brine.income) for the tax year. or a related person.
A bonus payment includes amounts you paid as If you are an independent producer or royalty b. To any person who is required under ana lessee to satisfy a production payment re- owner, see Independent Producers and Royalty agreement with you or a related persontained by the lessor. Owners, next. to use a trademark, trade name, or
For information on the depletion deduction service mark or name owned by you orUse the following fraction to figure the part of
for wells that produce natural gas that is either a related person in marketing or distrib-the bonus you must subtract.
sold under a fixed contract or produced from uting oil, natural gas, or their
geopressured brine, see Natural Gas Wells,No. of units sold in the tax year by-products.Bonus later.Recoverable units from the × Payments c. To any person given authority under anproperty agreement with you or a related person
For oil and gas wells and geothermal depos- to occupy any retail outlet owned,Independent Producers and
its, gross income from the property is defined leased, or controlled by you or a relatedRoyalty Owners
person.later under Oil and Gas Wells. For property other
than a geothermal deposit or an oil and gas well, If you are an independent producer or royalty
2. The combined gross receipts from salesowner, you figure percentage depletion using agross income from the property is defined later
(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, orrate of 15% of the gross income from the prop-under Mines and Geothermal Deposits.
their by-products by all retail outlets takenerty based on your average daily production of
into account in (1) are more than $5 milliondomestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up toTaxable income limit. The percentage deple-
your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How- for the tax year.tion deduction generally cannot be more than
ever, certain refiners, as explained next, and50% (100% for oil and gas property) of your For the purpose of determining if this rulecertain retailers and transferees of proven oiltaxable income from the property figured without applies, do not count the following.and gas properties, as explained later, cannotthe depletion deduction and the domestic pro-
claim percentage depletion. For information on • Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities)duction activities deduction.
figuring the deduction, see Figuring percentage of oil or natural gas to commercial or in-Taxable income from the property means depletion, later. dustrial users.gross income from the property minus all allowa-
ble deductions (excluding any deduction for de- • Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart-Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-pletion or qualified domestic production ment of Defense.pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple-activities) attributable to mining processes, in- tion if you or a related person refine crude oil and • Sales of oil or natural gas or theircluding mining transportation. These deductible you and the related person refined more than by-products outside the United States ifitems include the following. 75,000 barrels on any day during the tax year none of your domestic production or that
based on average (rather than actual) daily re-• Operating expenses. of a related person is exported during the
finery runs for the tax year. The average daily tax year or the prior tax year.• Certain selling expenses. refinery run is computed by dividing total refinery
runs for the tax year by the total number of days• Administrative and financial overhead. Related person. To determine if you and
in the tax year. another person are related persons, see Re-• Depreciation. lated person under Refiners who cannot claimRelated person. You and another person• Intangible drilling and development costs. percentage depletion, earlier.are related persons if either of you holds a signif-
icant ownership interest in the other person or if• Exploration and development expendi- Sales through a related person. You are
a third person holds a significant ownership in-tures. considered to be selling through a related per-
terest in both of you. son if any sale by the related person produces
The following rules apply when figuring your gross income from which you may benefit be-For example, a corporation, partnership, es-
taxable income from the property for purposes cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter-tate, or trust and anyone who holds a significant
of the taxable income limit. est in the person.ownership interest in it are related persons. A
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 33

Page 34 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You are not considered to be selling through Example. John Oak owns oil property in but manufacture or convert it into a refined prod-
which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits interest. uct before sale or transport it before sale, thea related person who is a retailer if all the follow-
During the year, the property produced 10,000 gross income from the property is the represen-ing apply.
barrels of oil, which John sold for $200,000. tative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil or• You do not have a significant ownership John had expenses of $90,000 attributable to gas, before conversion or transportation.interest in the retailer. the property. The property generated a net profit If you sold gas after you removed it from the
of $110,000 ($200,000 − $90,000). Paul re- premises for a price that is lower than the RMFP,• You sell your production to persons who
ceived income of $22,000 ($110,000 × .20) for determine gross income from the property forare not related to either you or the retailer.
his net profits interest. percentage depletion purposes without regard• The retailer does not buy oil or natural gas Paul determined his percentage participation to the RMFP.from your customers or persons related to to be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income he Gross income from the property does notyour customers. received) by $200,000 (the gross revenue from include lease bonuses, advance royalties, or
the property). Paul determined his share of the other amounts payable without regard to pro-• There are no arrangements for the retailer
oil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 bar- duction from the property.to acquire oil or natural gas you produced
rels × 11%).for resale or made available for purchase
Average daily production exceeds deplet-by the retailer. Depletable oil or natural gas quantity. Gen- able quantities. If your average daily produc-
• Neither you nor the retailer knows of or erally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar- tion for the year is more than your depletable oil
controls the final disposition of the oil or rels. Your depletable natural gas quantity is or natural gas quantity, figure your allowance for
natural gas you sold or the original source 6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number of depletion for each domestic oil or natural gas
of the petroleum products the retailer ac- barrels of your depletable oil quantity that you property as follows.
quired for resale. choose to apply. If you claim depletion on both
1. Figure your average daily production of oiloil and natural gas, you must reduce your de-
or natural gas for the year.pletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num-Transferees who cannot claim percentage
ber of barrels you use to figure your depletable 2. Figure your depletable oil or natural gasdepletion. You cannot claim percentage de-
natural gas quantity. quantity for the year.pletion if you received your interest in a proven
oil or gas property by transfer after 1974 and 3. Figure depletion for all oil or natural gasExample. You have both oil and natural gasbefore October 12, 1990. For a definition of the produced from the property using a per-production. To figure your depletable naturalterm “transfer,” see section 1.613A-7(n) of the centage depletion rate of 15%.gas quantity, you choose to apply 360 barrels ofregulations. For a definition of the term “interest your 1000-barrel depletable oil quantity. Your 4. Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac-in proven oil or gas property,” see section depletable natural gas quantity is 2.16 million tion, the numerator of which is the result1.613A-7(p) of the regulations. cubic feet of gas (360 × 6000). You must reduce figured in (2) and the denominator of which
your depletable oil quantity to 640 barrels (1000 is the result figured in (1). This is yourFiguring percentage depletion. Generally, − 360). depletion allowance for that property foras an independent producer or royalty owner,  If you have production from marginal wells, the year.you figure your percentage depletion by comput- see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue
ing your average daily production of domestic oil Code to figure your depletable oil or natural gas Taxable income limit. If you are an indepen-or gas and comparing it to your depletable oil or quantity. dent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas,gas quantity. If your average daily production
Business entities and family members. your deduction for percentage depletion is lim-does not exceed your depletable oil or gas quan-
You must allocate the depletable oil or gas ited to the smaller of the following.tity, you figure your percentage depletion by quantity among the following related persons inmultiplying the gross income from the oil or gas • 100% of your taxable income from theproportion to each entity’s or family member’sproperty (defined later) by 15%. If your average property figured without the deduction forproduction of domestic oil or gas for the year.daily production of domestic oil or gas exceeds depletion and the deduction for domestic
your depletable oil or gas quantity, you must • Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% or production activities under section 199 of
make an allocation as explained later under Av- more of the beneficial interest is owned by the Internal Revenue Code. For a defini-
erage daily production exceeds depletable the same or related persons (considering tion of taxable income from the property,
quantities. only persons that own at least 5% of the see Taxable income limit, earlier, under
beneficial interest).In addition, there is a limit on the percentage Mineral Property.
depletion deduction. See Taxable income limit, • You and your spouse and minor children. • 65% of your taxable income from alllater. sources, figured without the depletion al-A related person is anyone mentioned in the
lowance, the deduction for domestic pro-related persons discussion under Nondeduct-Average daily production. Figure your aver- duction activities, any net operating lossible loss in chapter 2 of Publication 544, exceptage daily production by dividing your total do- carryback, and any capital loss carryback.that for purposes of this allocation, item (1) inmestic production of oil or gas for the tax year by that discussion includes only an individual, his or You can carry over to the following year anythe number of days in your tax year. her spouse, and minor children. amount you cannot deduct because of thePartial interest. If you have a partial inter- 65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de-Controlled group of corporations. Mem-est in the production from a property, figure your pletion allowance (before applying any limits) forbers of the same controlled group of corpora-share of the production by multiplying total pro- the following year.tions are treated as one taxpayer when figuringduction from the property by your percentage of the depletable oil or natural gas quantity. Theyinterest in the revenues from the property. share the depletable quantity. Under this rule, a Note. Depletion on the marginal productionYou have a partial interest in the production controlled group of corporations is defined in of oil or natural gas is not limited to your taxablefrom a property if you have a net profits interest section 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, income from the property figured without thein the property. To figure the share of production except that the stock ownership requirement in depletion deduction. For information on margi-for your net profits interest, you must first deter- that definition is “more than 50%” rather than “at nal production, see section 613A(c)(6) of themine your percentage participation (as mea- least 80%.” Internal Revenue Code.sured by the net profits) in the gross revenue
from the property. To figure this percentage, you Gross income from the property. For pur-
divide the income you receive for your net profits poses of percentage depletion, gross income Partnerships and S Corporations
interest by the gross revenue from the property. from the property (in the case of oil and gas
Then multiply the total production from the prop- wells) is the amount you receive from the sale of Generally, each partner or shareholder, and not
erty by your percentage participation to figure the oil or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well. the partnership or S corporation, figures the de-
your share of the production. If you do not sell the oil or gas on the property, pletion allowance separately. (However, see
Page 34 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 35 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Electing large partnerships must figure deple- Disqualified persons. An electing large Borax, granite, limestone, marble,tion allowance,  later.) Each partner or share- partnership does not figure the depletion allow- mollusk shells, potash, slate,holder must decide whether to use cost or ance of its partners that are disqualified per- soapstone, and carbon dioxidepercentage depletion. If a partner or shareholder sons. Disqualified persons must figure it produced from a well ........ 1 4 %
uses percentage depletion, he or she must ap- themselves, as explained earlier.
Coal, lignite, and sodium chloride 10%ply the 65%-of-taxable-income limit using his or All the following are disqualified persons.
her taxable income from all sources. Clay and shale used or sold for• Refiners who cannot claim percentage de- use in making sewer pipe or bricksPartner’s or shareholder’s adjusted basis. pletion (discussed under Independent Pro- or used or sold for use as sinteredThe partnership or S corporation must allocate ducers and Royalty Owners, earlier). or burned lightweight aggregates 7 1/2%to each partner or shareholder his or her share • Retailers who cannot claim percentage Clay used or sold for use inof the adjusted basis of each oil or gas property depletion (discussed under Independent making drainage and roofing tile,held by the partnership or S corporation. The Producers and Royalty Owners, earlier). flower pots, and kindred products,partnership or S corporation makes the alloca-
and gravel, sand, and stone (othertion as of the date it acquires the oil or gas • Any partner whose average daily produc-
than stone used or sold for use byproperty. tion of domestic crude oil and natural gas a mine owner or operator asEach partner’s share of the adjusted basis of is more than 500 barrels during the tax dimension or ornamental stone) 5%the oil or gas property generally is figured ac- year in which the partnership tax year
cording to that partner’s interest in partnership ends. Average daily production is dis- You can find a complete list of minerals and
capital. However, in some cases, it is figured cussed earlier. their percentage depletion rates in section
according to the partner’s interest in partnership 613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.income. Natural Gas Wells Corporate deduction for iron ore and coal.The partnership or S corporation adjusts the
The percentage depletion deduction of a corpo-partner’s or shareholder’s share of the adjusted You can use percentage depletion for a well that ration for iron ore and coal (including lignite) isbasis of the oil and gas property for any capital produces natural gas either sold under a fixed reduced by 20% of:expenditures made for the property and for any contract or produced from geopressured brine.change in partnership or S corporation interests. • The percentage depletion deduction for
Natural gas sold under a fixed contract. the tax year (figured without regard to thisEach partner or shareholder must sep- Natural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifies reduction), minusarately keep records of his or her share for a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This isof the adjusted basis in each oil andRECORDS
• The adjusted basis of the property at thedomestic natural gas sold by the producer undergas property of the partnership or S corporation. close of the tax year (figured without thea contract that does not provide for a price in-The partner or shareholder must reduce his or depletion deduction for the tax year).crease to reflect any increase in the seller’s taxher adjusted basis by the depletion allowed or liability because of the repeal of percentage de-allowable on the property each year. The part- pletion for gas. The contract must have been in Gross income from the property. For prop-ner or shareholder must use that reduced ad- effect from February 1, 1975, until the date of erty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil orjusted basis to figure cost depletion or his or her sale of the gas. Price increases after February 1, gas well, gross income from the property meansgain or loss if the partnership or S corporation 1975, are presumed to take the increase in tax the gross income from mining. Mining includesdisposes of the property. liability into account unless demonstrated other- all the following.
wise by clear and convincing evidence.Reporting the deduction. Information that • Extracting ores or minerals from theyou, as a partner or shareholder, use to figure ground.Natural gas from geopressured brine. Qual-your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper-
ified natural gas from geopressured brine is eli-ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora- • Applying certain treatment processes.gible for a percentage depletion rate of 10%.tion on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or on • Transporting ores or minerals (generally,This is natural gas that is both the following.Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). Deduct oil and gas not more than 50 miles) from the point ofdepletion for your partnership or S corporation • Produced from a well you began to drill extraction to the plants or mills in whichinterest on Schedule E (Form 1040). The deple- after September 1978 and before 1984. the treatment processes are applied.tion deducted on Schedule E is included in figur-
• Determined in accordance with sectioning income or loss from rental real estate or Excise tax. Gross income from mining in-503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978royalty properties. The instructions for Schedule cludes the separately stated excise tax receivedto be produced from geopressured brine.E explain where to report this income or loss and by a mine operator from the sale of coal towhether you need to file either of the following
compensate the operator for the excise tax theforms. Mines and mine operator must pay to finance black lung
• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. benefits.Geothermal Deposits
• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita- Extraction. Extracting ores or mineralsCertain mines, wells, and other natural deposits,tions. from the ground includes extraction by mineincluding geothermal deposits, qualify for per-
owners or operators of ores or minerals from thecentage depletion.
waste or residue of prior mining. This does notElecting large partnerships must figure de-
apply to extraction from waste or residue of priorpletion allowance. An electing large partner- Mines and other natural deposits. For a nat-
mining by the purchaser of the waste or residueship, rather than each partner, generally must ural deposit, the percentage of your gross in-
or the purchaser of the rights to extract ores orfigure the depletion allowance. The partnership come from the property that you can deduct as
minerals from the waste or residue.figures the depletion allowance without taking depletion depends on the type of deposit.
into account the 65-percent-of-taxable-income The following is a list of the percentage de- Treatment processes. The processes in-limit and the depletable oil or natural gas quan- pletion rates for the more common minerals. cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineraltity. Also, the adjusted basis of a partner’s inter- mined. To qualify as mining, the treatmentDEPOSITS RATEest in the partnership is not affected by the processes must be applied by the mine owner ordepletion allowance. operator. For a listing of treatment processesSulphur, uranium, and, if fromAn electing large partnership is one that considered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) ofdeposits in the United States,meets both the following requirements. the Internal Revenue Code and the related regu-asbestos, lead ore, zinc ore, nickel
lations.• The partnership had 100 or more partners ore, and mica ............. 2 2 %
in the preceding year. Transportation of more than 50 miles. IfGold, silver, copper, iron ore, and
the IRS finds that the ore or mineral must be• The partnership chooses to be an electing certain oil shale, if from deposits in
the United States ........... 1 5 % transported more than 50 miles to plants or millslarge partnership.
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 35

Page 36 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to be treated because of physical and other lessor, your income from bonuses and ad- determine that you have more or less units o f
vanced royalties received is subject to an allow- timber, you must adjust the original estimate.requirements, the additional authorized trans-
ance for depletion. The term “timber property” means your eco-portation is considered mining and included in
nomic interest in standing timber in each tract orthe computation of gross income from mining. Figuring cost depletion. To figure cost de- block representing a separate timber account.pletion on a bonus, multiply your adjusted basisIf you wish to include transportation of
in the property by a fraction, the numerator of Depletion unit. You figure your depletionmore than 50 miles in the computation
which is the bonus and the denominator of which unit each year by taking the following steps.of gross income from mining, file an
is the total bonus and royalties expected to beapplication in duplicate with the IRS. Include on 1. Determine your cost or adjusted basis ofreceived. To figure cost depletion on advancedthe application the facts concerning the physical the timber on hand at the beginning of theroyalties, use the computation explained earlierand other requirements which prevented the year. Adjusted basis is defined under Costunder Cost Depletion, treating the number ofconstruction and operation of the plant within 50 Depletion in the discussion on Mineralunits for which the advanced royalty is receivedmiles of the point of extraction. Send this appli- Property.as the number of units sold.cation to:
2. Add to the amount determined in (1) theInternal Revenue Service Figuring percentage depletion. In the
cost of any timber units acquired duringAssociate Chief Counsel case of mines, wells, and other natural deposits
the year and any additions to capital.Passthroughs and Special Industries other than gas, oil, or geothermal property, you
may use the percentage rates discussed earlierCC:PSI:FO 3. Figure the number of timber units to take
under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Any bo-1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300 into account by adding the number of tim-
nus or advanced royalty payments are generallyWashington, DC 20224 ber units acquired during the year to the
part of the gross income from the property to number of timber units on hand in the ac-
which the rates are applied in making the calcu- count at the beginning of the year and thenDisposal of coal or iron ore. You cannot take lation. However, in the case of independent pro- adding (or subtracting) any correction toa depletion deduction for coal (including lignite) ducers and royalty owners of oil and gas the estimate of the number of timber unitsor iron ore mined in the United States if both the property, bonuses and advance royalty pay- remaining in the account.following apply. ments are not a part of gross income.
4. Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3).• You disposed of it after holding it for more Terminating the lease. If you receive a bo- This is your depletion unit.than 1 year. nus on a lease that expires, terminates, or is
abandoned before you derive any income from• You disposed of it under a contract under Example. You bought a timber tract forthe extraction of mineral, include in income forwhich you retain an economic interest in $160,000 and the land was worth as much asthe year of expiration, termination, or abandon-the coal or iron ore. the timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000.ment, the depletion deduction you took. AlsoTreat any gain on the disposition as a capital Based on an estimated one million board feetincrease your adjusted basis in the property togain. (1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure yourrestore the depletion deduction you previously depletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷subtracted.Disposal to related person. This rule does 1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your deple-For advanced royalties, include in income fornot apply if you dispose of the coal or iron ore to tion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF ×the year of lease termination, the depletionone of the following persons. $80).claimed on minerals for which the advanced• A related person (as listed in chapter 2 of royalties were paid if the minerals were not pro- When to claim depletion. Claim your deple-Publication 544). duced before termination. Increase your ad- tion allowance as a deduction in the year of sale
justed basis in the property by the amount you or other disposition of the products cut from the• A person owned or controlled by the same
include in income. timber, unless you choose to treat the cutting ofinterests that own or control you.
timber as a sale or exchange (explained below).
Delay rentals. These are payments for defer- Include allowable depletion for timber productsGeothermal deposits. Geothermal deposits ring development of the property. Since delay not sold during the tax year the timber is cut as alocated in the United States or its possessions rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in- cost item in the closing inventory of timber prod-qualify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. A come that is not subject to depletion. These ucts for the year. The inventory is your basis forgeothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir of rentals can be avoided by either abandoning the determining gain or loss in the tax year you sellnatural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liquid lease, beginning development operations, or the timber products.or vapor. For percentage depletion purposes, a obtaining production.
geothermal deposit is not considered a gas well. Example. Assume the same facts as in the
Figure gross income from the property for a previous example except that you sold only half
geothermal steam well in the same way as for oil of the timber products in the cutting year. You
and gas wells. See Gross income from the prop- would deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletionTimber
erty, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells. Percent- that year. You would add the remaining $20,000
age depletion on a geothermal deposit cannot You can figure timber depletion only by the cost depletion to your closing inventory of timber
be more than 50% of your taxable income from method. Percentage depletion does not apply to products.
timber. Base your depletion on your cost or otherthe property. Electing to treat the cutting of timber as abasis in the timber. Your cost does not include sale or exchange. You can elect, under cer-the cost of land or any amounts recoverableLessor’s Gross Income tain circumstances, to treat the cutting of timberthrough depreciation. held for more than 1 year as a sale or exchange.Depletion takes place when you cut standingA lessor’s gross income from the property that You must make the election on your income taxtimber. You can figure your depletion deductionqualifies for percentage depletion usually is the return for the tax year to which it applies. If youwhen the quantity of cut timber is first accuratelytotal of the royalties received from the lease. make this election, subtract the adjusted basismeasured in the process of exploitation.However, for oil, gas, or geothermal property, for depletion from the fair market value of the
gross income does not include lease bonuses, timber on the first day of the tax year in whichFiguring cost depletion. To figure your costadvanced royalties, or other amounts payable you cut it to figure the gain or loss on the cutting.depletion allowance, you multiply the number ofwithout regard to production from the property. You generally report the gain as long-term capi-timber units cut by your depletion unit. tal gain. The fair market value then becomes
Bonuses and advanced royalties. Bonuses Timber units. When you acquire timber your basis for figuring your ordinary gain or loss
and advanced royalties are payments a lessee property, you must make an estimate of the on the sale or other disposition of the products
makes before production to a lessor for the grant quantity of marketable timber that exists on the cut from the timber. For more information, see
of rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or oil to property. You measure the timber using board Timber in chapter 2 of Publication 544, Sales
be extracted from leased property. If you are the feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you later and Other Dispositions of Assets.
Page 36 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 37 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You may revoke an election to treat the cut- decedent’s estate treats any loss from the debts
ting of timber as a sale or exchange without as a business bad debt if the debts were closelyDefinition of a
IRS’s consent. The prior election (and revoca- related to the decedent’s trade or business
tion) is disregarded for purposes of making a when they became worthless. Otherwise, a loss
Business Bad Debt
subsequent election. See Form T (Timber), For- from these debts becomes a nonbusiness bad
est Activities Schedule, for more information. debt for the decedent’s estate.A business bad debt is a loss from the worth-
lessness of a debt that was either: Liquidation. If you liquidate your business
and some of your accounts receivable becomeForm T. Complete and attach Form T (Timber)
• Created or acquired in your trade or busi-
worthless, they become business bad debts.to your income tax return if you claim a deduc- ness, or
tion for timber depletion, choose to treat the • Closely related to your trade or businesscutting of timber as a sale or exchange, or make Types of Business Badwhen it became partly or totally worthless.an outright sale of timber. Debts
A debt is closely related to your trade or busi-
The following are situations that may result in aness if your primary motive for incurring the debt
business bad debt.is business related. Bad debts of a corporation
are always business bad debts. Loans to clients and suppliers. If you loan
money to a client, supplier, employee, or distrib-Credit sales. Business bad debts are mainly utor for a business reason and subsequently,10. the result of credit sales to customers. Goods after making attempts to collect, the loan receiv-that have been sold, but not yet paid for, and
able becomes worthless, you have a businessservices that have been performed, but not yet bad debt.paid for are recorded in your books as either
accounts receivable or notes receivable. After aBusiness Debts of political parties. If a political partyreasonable period of time, if you have tried to (or other organization that accepts contributionscollect the amount due, but are unable to do so, or spends money to influence elections) owesBad Debts the uncollectible part becomes a business bad you money and the debt becomes worthless,debt. you can claim a bad debt deduction only if you Accounts or notes receivable valued at fair use an accrual method of accounting and meetmarket value (FMV) when received are deducti- all the following tests.Introduction ble only at that value, even though the FMV may
be less than the face value. If you purchased anIf someone owes you money that you are not 1. The debt arose from the sale of goods or
account receivable for less than its face value,going to be able to collect, you have a bad debt. services in the ordinary course of your
and the receivable subsequently becomesThere are two kinds of bad debts—business trade or business.
worthless, the most you are allowed to deduct isand nonbusiness. This chapter discusses only 2. More than 30% of your receivables ac-the amount you paid to acquire it.business bad debts. crued in the year of the sale were fromGenerally, a business bad debt is one that You can claim a bad debt deduction sales to political parties.comes from operating your trade or business. only if the amount owed to you was
3. You made substantial and continuing ef-You can deduct business bad debts on your previously included in gross income.CAUTION
!
forts to collect on the debt.business income tax return. This applies to amounts owed to you from all
sources of taxable income, including sales,All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad
services, rents, and interest. Loan or capital contribution. You cannotdebts and are deductible only as short-term cap-
claim a bad debt deduction for a loan you madeital losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more Accrual method. If you use the accrual to a corporation if, based on the facts and cir-information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub- method of accounting, generally, you report in- cumstances, the loan is actually a contribution tolication 550. come as you earn it. You can only claim a bad capital.
debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable ifTopics you have previously included the entire uncol- Debts of an insolvent partner. If your busi-
This chapter discusses: lectible amount in income. ness partnership breaks up and one of your
If you qualify, you can use the nonac- former partners becomes insolvent, you may
• Definition of business bad debt crual-experience method of accounting dis- have to pay more than your pro rata share. If you
cussed later. Under this method, you do not pay any part of the insolvent partner’s share of• When a debt becomes worthless
have to accrue income that, based on your ex- the debts, you can claim a bad debt deduction
• How to treat business bad debts perience, you do not expect to collect. for the amount you paid that is attributable to the
insolvent partner’s share.• Recovery of a business bad debt Cash method. If you use the cash method
of accounting, generally, you report income Business loan guarantee. If you guarantee awhen you receive payment. You cannot claim aUseful Items debt that subsequently becomes worthless, thebad debt deduction for amounts owed to you debt can qualify as a business bad debt if all theYou may want to see: because you never included those amounts in following requirements are met.income. For example, a cash basis architectPublication • You made the guarantee in the course ofcannot claim a bad debt deduction if a client fails
your trade or business.to pay the bill because the architect’s fee was❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income never included in income. • You have a legal duty to pay the debt.❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Debts from a former business. If you sell • You made the guarantee before the debtIndividuals, Estates, and Trusts
your business but retain its receivables, these became worthless. You meet this require-❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of debts are business debts because they arose ment if you reasonably expected youAssets out of your trade or business. If any of these would not have to pay the debt without full
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses receivables subsequently become worthless, reimbursement from the issuer.
the loss is still a business bad debt.❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal • You receive reasonable consideration for
Rights, and Claims for Refund Debt acquired from a decedent. The char- making the guarantee. You meet this re-
acter of a loss from debts of a business acquired quirement if you made the guarantee in
See chapter 12 for information about getting from a decedent is determined in the same way accord with normal business practice or
publications and forms. as debts sold by a business. The executor of the for a good faith business purpose.
Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts Page 37

Page 38 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Jane Zayne owns the Zayne • The nonaccrual-experience method. You may have longer to file the claim if you were
Dress Company. She guaranteed payment of a unable to manage your financial affairs due to aGenerally, you must use the specific charge-off$20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out- physical or mental impairment. Such an impair-method. However, you may use the nonac-let that is not a “related person.” Elegant Fash- ment requires proof of existence. See Code sec-crual-experience method if you meet the re-ions is one of Zayne’s largest clients. Elegant tion 6511(h).quirements discussed later underFashions later defaulted on the loan. As a result, Nonaccrual-Experience Method. For details and more information about filing aMs. Zayne paid the remaining balance of the
claim, see Publication 556. Use one of the fol-loan in full to the bank.
lowing forms to file a claim.Specific Charge-Off MethodShe can claim a business bad debt deduc-
tion only for the amount she paid, since her If you use the specific charge-off method, you Table 11-1. Forms Used To File aguarantee was made in the course of her trade can deduct specific business bad debts that Claimor business for a good faith business purpose. become either partly or totally worthless duringShe was motivated by the desire to retain one of the tax year. IF you filed asher better clients and keep a sales outlet. a... THEN file...
Deductible in the year paid. If you make a Partly worthless debts. You can deduct spe- Sole proprietor orpayment on a loan you guaranteed, you can cific bad debts that become partly uncollectible  Form 1040Xfarmerdeduct it in the year paid, unless you have rights during the tax year. Your tax deduction is limited
against the borrower. to the amount you charge off on your books Corporation  Form 1120X
during the year. You do not have to charge offRights against a borrower. When you S corporation  Form 1120Sand deduct your partly worthless debts annually.make payment on a loan you guaranteed, you (check box F(5))You can delay the charge off until a later year.may have the right to take the place of the
However, you cannot deduct any part of a debt Partnership  Form 1065lender. The debt is then owed to you. If you have
after the year it becomes totally worthless. (check box G(5))this right, or some other right to demand pay-
ment from the borrower, you cannot claim a bad Significantly modified debt.  An exception
debt deduction until these rights become partly to the charge-off rule exists for debt which has
or totally worthless. been significantly modified and on which the Nonaccrual-Experience
holder recognized gain. For more information, MethodJoint debtor.  If two or more debtors jointly see Regulations section 1.166-(3)(a)(3).owe you money, your inability to collect from one If you use an accrual method of accounting andDeduction disallowed. Generally, you candoes not enable you to deduct a proportionate qualify under the rules explained in this section,claim a partial bad debt deduction only in theamount as a bad debt. you can use the nonaccrual-experience methodyear you make the charge-off on your books. If,
for bad debts. Under this method, you do notSale of mortgaged property. If mortgaged or under audit, the IRS does not allow your deduc-
accrue service related income you expect to bepledged property is sold for less than the debt, tion and the debt becomes partly worthless in a
uncollectible.the unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is a later tax year, you can deduct the amount you
Generally, you can use the nonac-bad debt. charge off in that year plus the disallowed
crual-experience method for accounts receiva-amount charged-off in the earlier year. The
charge off in the earlier year, unless reversed on ble for services you performed only if:
your books, fulfills the charge-off requirement for • The services are provided in the fields ofthe later year.When Debt Becomes accounting, actuarial science, architecture,
consulting, engineering, health, law, or theWorthless Totally worthless debts. If a debt becomes performing arts, ortotally worthless in the current tax year, you can
You do not have to wait until a debt is due to • You meet the $5 million gross receipts testdeduct the entire amount, less any amount de-
determine whether it is worthless. A debt be- ducted in an earlier tax year when the debt was for all prior years.
comes worthless when there is no longer any only partly worthless.
chance the amount owed will be paid. You do not have to make an actual Service related income. You can use theIt is not necessary to go to court if you can charge-off on your books to claim a bad debt nonaccrual-experience method only forshow that a judgment from the court would be deduction for a totally worthless debt. However, amounts earned by performing services. Youuncollectible. You must only show that you have you may want to do so. If you do not and the IRS cannot use this method for amounts owed to youtaken reasonable steps to collect the debt. later rules the debt is only partly worthless, you from activities such as lending money, sellingBankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi- will not be allowed a deduction for the debt in goods, or acquiring receivables or other rights todence of the worthlessness of at least a part of that tax year. A deduction of a partly worthless receive payment.an unsecured and unpreferred debt. bad debt is limited to the amount actually
charged off. Gross receipts test.  You meet the gross re-Property received for debt. If you receive
property in partial settlement of a debt, reduce ceipts test if your average annual gross receiptsFiling a claim for refund. If you did not deductthe debt by the FMV of the property received. for the 3 prior tax years does not exceeda bad debt on your original return for the year itYou can deduct the remaining debt as a bad $5,000,000.became worthless, you can file a claim for adebt if and when it becomes worthless. credit or refund. If the bad debt was totally worth-If you later sell the property, any gain on the Interest or penalty charged. Generally, youless, you must file the claim by the later of thesale is due to the appreciation of the property. It cannot use the nonaccrual-experience methodfollowing dates.is not a recovery of a bad debt. For information for amounts due on which you charge interest or
on the sale of an asset, see Publication 544. • 7 years from the date your original return a late payment penalty. However, do not treat a
was due (not including extensions). discount offered for early payment as the charg-
ing of interest or a penalty if both the following• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.
apply.
How To Claim a If the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt, • You otherwise accrue the full amount dueyou must file the claim by the later of the follow- as gross income at the time you provideBusiness Bad Debt ing dates. the services.
• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-There are two methods to claim a business bad • You treat the discount allowed for earlynal return.debt. payment as an adjustment to gross in-
• 2 years from the date you paid the tax. come in the year of payment.• The specific charge-off method.
Page 38 Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts

Page 39 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Methods available. You can use any of the Table 11–1.  Reporting Reimbursements
following nonaccrual-experience methods.
IF the type of reimbursement (or other• 6-year moving average method. expense allowance) arrangement is under THEN the employer reports on Form W-2
• Actual experience method. An accountable plan with:
• Modified Black Motor method. Actual expense reimbursement: No amount.
• Modified 6-year moving average method. Adequate accounting made and excess
returned• Alternative nonaccrual-experience
method. Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as wages in box 1.
Adequate accounting and return of excessApply the nonaccrual-experience method sepa- both required but excess not returnedrately to each account receivable.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the No amount.Generally, you cannot change from one federal rate:method to another without IRS approval. You Adequate accounting made and excessmay be able to obtain automatic consent to returnedchange your method of accounting. See Regula-
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the The excess amount as wages in box 1. Thetions section 1.448-2 for more information on
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported onlyobtaining consent to change to a nonac-
Adequate accounting and return of excess in box 12—it is not reported in box 1.crual-experience method (other than one of the
both required but excess not returnedsafe harbor methods) or to change from one
method to another. Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the The excess amount as wages in box 1. The
For more information about the nonac- federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only
crual-experience method, including the $5 mil- Adequate accounting made up to the federal in box 12—it is not reported in box 1.
lion gross receipts test, see Code section rate only and excess not returned
448(d)(5) and Regulations section 1.448-2.
A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount as wages in box 1.
excess, or both, not required by plan
Recovery of a Bad No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.
Debt
see Car and truck expenses, under Miscellane- ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofIf you claim a deduction for a bad debt on your
Assetsous Expenses.income tax return and later recover (collect) all
or part of it, you may have to include all or part of ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Educationthe recovery in gross income. The amount you
❏ 1542 Per Diem Ratesinclude is limited to the amount you actually
deducted. However, you can exclude the Introduction See chapter 12 for information about gettingamount deducted that did not reduce your tax.
publications and forms.This chapter covers business expenses thatReport the recovery as “Other income” on the
appropriate business form or schedule. may not have been explained to you, as a busi-
See  Recoveries in Publication 525 for more ness owner, in previous chapters of this publica-
information. tion.
Reimbursement ofNet operating loss (NOL) carryover. If a
Topicsbad debt deduction increases an NOL carryover Travel, Meals, andthat has not expired before the beginning of the This chapter discusses:
tax year in which the recovery takes place, you Entertainmenttreat the deduction as having reduced your tax. • Travel, meals, and entertainment
A bad debt deduction that contributes to a net The following discussion explains how to handle• Bribes and kickbacksoperating loss helps lower taxes in the year to any reimbursements or allowances you maywhich you carry the net operating loss. See • Charitable contributions provide for travel, meals, and entertainment ex-Publication 536 for more information about net penses when incurred by your employees. If you• Education expensesoperating losses. are self-employed and report your income and• Lobbying expenses expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040),
see Publication 463.• Penalties and fines
To be deductible for tax purposes, expenses• Repayments (claim of right)
incurred for travel, meals, and entertainment
• Other miscellaneous expenses must be ordinary and necessary expenses in-
curred while carrying on your trade or business.11. Generally, you also must show that entertain-Useful Items ment expenses (including meals) are directlyYou may want to see: related to, or associated with, the conduct of
your trade or business. For more information onOther Expenses Publication travel, meals, and entertainment, including de-
ductibility, see Publication 463.❏ 15-B Employer1s Tax Guide to Fringe
BenefitsWhat’s New Reimbursements
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Standard mileage rate. The standard mile- A “reimbursement or allowance arrangement”Expenses
age rate for the cost of operating your car, van, provides for payment of advances, reimburse-❏ 526 Charitable Contributionspickup, or panel truck in 2006 is 44.5 cents a ments, and charges for travel, meals, and enter-
mile for all business miles. For more information, ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions tainment expenses incurred by your employees
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 39

Page 40 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
during the ordinary course of business. Upon each expense at or near the time the expense 1. For per diem amounts:
satisfying your established substantiation re- was incurred.
a. The regular federal per diem rate.quirements, you can deduct the allowable
Excess reimbursement or allowance. Anamount on your tax return. Because of differ- b. The standard meal allowance.excess reimbursement or allowance is anyences between accounting methods and tax
c. The high-low rate.amount you pay to an employee that is morelaw, these amounts may not be the same. For
than the business-related expenses for whichexample, you may deduct 100% of the cost of
2. For car expenses:the employee adequately accounted. The em-meals on your business books and records.
ployee must return any excess reimbursementHowever, for tax purposes, only 50% of these a. The standard mileage rate.or other expense allowance to you within a rea-costs are allowed by law as a tax deduction.
sonable period of time. b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).A reimbursement or allowance arrangement
(including per diem allowances, discussed later) Reasonable period of time. A reasonabledepends on whether you have: (1) an accounta- period of time depends on the facts and circum- Car allowance. Your employee is consideredble plan or (2) a nonaccountable plan. If you stances. Generally, actions that take place to have accounted to you for car expenses thatreimburse these expenses under an accounta- within the times specified in the following list will do not exceed the standard mileage rate. Forble plan, then you can deduct the amount allow- be treated as taking place within a reasonable 2006, the standard mileage rate for each busi-able to the extent of the tax law as travel, meal, period of time.and entertainment expenses on your tax return. ness mile is 44.5 cents per mile for all business
miles. If you reimburse these expenses under a 1. You give an advance within 30 days of the
nonaccountable plan, then you must report the You can choose to reimburse your employ-time the employee has incurred the ex-
reimbursements as wages on Form W-2, Wage ees using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) al-pense.
and Tax Statement, and deduct them as wages lowance. This is an allowance that includes a2. Your employees adequately account foron the appropriate line of your tax return. If you combination of payments covering fixed and va-their expenses within 60 days after the ex-make a single payment to your employees and it riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate topenses were paid or incurred.includes both wages and an expense reim- cover your employees’ variable operating costs
bursement, you must specify the amount attribu- (such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover3. Your employees return any excess reim-
table to reimbursement and report it accordingly. your employees’ fixed costs (such as deprecia-bursement within 120 days after the ex-
See Table 11–1,  Reporting Reimbursements. tion, insurance, etc.). For information on using apenses were paid or incurred.
FAVR allowance, see Revenue Procedure4. You give a periodic statement (at least 2006-41 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2006-43.quarterly) to your employees that asksAccountable Plans You can read Revenue Procedure 2006-41 atthem to either return or adequately ac- many public libraries or online at www.irs.gov.An accountable plan, requires your employees count for outstanding advances and they
to meet all of the following requirements. They comply within 120 days of the date of the Per diem allowance. If your employee actu-must: statement. ally substantiates to you the other elements (dis-
cussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursed1. Have paid or incurred deductible expenses
How to deduct. You can claim a deduction for using the per diem allowance, how you reportwhile performing services as your employ-
travel, meals, and entertainment expenses if and deduct the allowance depends on whetherees,
you reimburse your employees for these ex- the allowance is for lodging and meal expenses2. Adequately account to you for these ex- penses under an accountable plan. Generally, or for meal expenses only and whether the al-penses within a reasonable period of time, the amount you can deduct for meals and enter- lowance is more than the federal rate.and tainment, is subject to a 50% limit, discussed
Regular federal per diem rate. The regularlater. If you are a sole proprietor, or are filing as a3. Return any excess reimbursement or al- federal per diem rate is the highest amount thesingle member Limited Liability Company, de-lowance within a reasonable period of federal government will pay to its employeesduct the reimbursement on line 24b, Schedule Ctime. while away from home on travel. It has two(Form 1040) or line 2, Schedule C-EZ (Form
An arrangement under which you advance components:1040).
money to employees is treated as meeting (3) If you are filing an income tax return for a 1. Lodging expense, andabove only if the following requirements are also corporation, the reimbursement should be in-
met. 2. Meal and incidental expense (M & IE).cluded with the amount claimed on the Other
deductions line of Form 1120, U.S. Corporation• The advance is reasonably calculated not The rates are different for different locations.Income Tax Return, or Form 1120-A, U.S. Cor-to exceed the amount of anticipated ex- Publication 1542 lists the rates in the continentalporation Short-Form Income Tax Return.  If youpenses. United States.are filing any other business income tax return,
• You make the advance within a reasona- Standard meal allowance. The federal ratesuch as a partnership or S corporation return,
ble period of time. for meal and incidental expenses (M & IE) is thededuct the reimbursement on the appropriate
standard meal allowance. You may pay only anline of the return as provided in the instructions
If any expenses reimbursed under this ar- for that return. M & IE allowance to employees who travel away
rangement are not substantiated, or an excess from home if:
reimbursement is not returned within a reasona-
• You pay the employee for actual expensesble period of time by an employee, you are not Per Diem and Car Allowances for lodging based on receipts submitted toallowed to deduct these expenses as reim-
you,bursed under an accountable plan. Instead, You may reimburse your employees under an
treat the reimbursed expenses as paid under a accountable plan based on travel days, miles, or • You provide for the lodging,
nonaccountable plan, discussed later. some other fixed allowance. In these cases,
• You pay for the actual expense of theyour employee is considered to have accounted
lodging directly to the provider,Adequate accounting. Your employees must to you for the amount of the expense that does
adequately account to you for their travel, not exceed the rates established by the federal • You do not have reasonable belief thatmeals, and entertainment expenses. They must government. Your employee must actually sub- lodging expenses were incurred by thegive you documentary evidence of their travel, stantiate to you the other elements of the ex- employee, ormileage, and other employee business ex- pense, such as time, place, and business
• The allowance is computed on a basispenses. This evidence should include items purpose.
similar to that used in computing the em-such as receipts, along with either a statement
ployee’s wages (that is, number of hoursof expenses, an account book, a day-planner, or Federal rate. The federal rate can be figured
worked or miles traveled).similar record in which the employee entered using any one of the following methods.
Page 40 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 41 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internet access.  Per diem rates are avail- Related expenses. Taxes and tips relating spouse, ancestors, and lineal descend-
to a meal or entertainment activity you reim- ants.able on the Internet. You can access per diem
burse to your employee under an accountablerates at www.gsa.gov 2. Received more than $100,000 in pay forplan are included in the amount subject to the the preceding year. You may choose toHigh-low method. This is a simplified 50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex- include only employees who were also inmethod of computing the federal per diem rate penses, such as cover charges for admission to the top 20% of employees when ranked byfor lodging and meal expenses for traveling a nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinner pay for the preceding year.within the continental United States. It elimi- or cocktail party, or the amount you pay fornates the need to keep a current list of the per  For example, the expenses for food, bever-parking at a sports arena, are all subject to thediem rate in effect for each city in the continental ages, and entertainment for a company-wide50% limit. However, the cost of transportation toUnited States. picnic are not subject to the 50% limit.and from an otherwise allowable business meal
Under the high-low method, the per diem or a business-related entertainment activity is
amount for travel during 2006 is $226 ($58 for M not subject to the 50% limit.
& IE) for certain high-cost locations. All other Nonaccountable PlansAmount subject to 50% limit. If you provideareas have a per diem amount of $141 ($45 for
your employees with a per diem allowance only A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement thatM & IE). The high-cost locations eligible for the
for meal and incidental expenses, the amount does not meet the requirements for an account-$226 per diem amount under the high-low
treated as an expense for food and beverages is able plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid,method are listed in Publication 1542.
the lesser of the following. under a nonaccountable plan are reported as
wages on Form W-2. The payments are subjectReporting per diem and car allowances. • The per diem allowance.
to income tax withholding, social security, Medi-The following discussion explains how to report • The federal rate for M & IE. care, and federal unemployment taxes. You canper diem and car allowances. The manner in
deduct the reimbursement as compensation orwhich you report them depends on how the If you provide your employees with a per diem wages only to the extent it meets the deductibil-allowance compares to the federal rate. See allowance that covers lodging, meals, and inci- ity tests for employees’ pay in chapter 2. DeductTable 11-1. dental expenses, you must treat an amount the allowable amount as compensation orAllowance less than or equal to the federal equal to the federal M & IE rate for the area of wages on the appropriate line of your income taxrate. If your allowance for the employee is less travel as an expense for food and beverages. If return, as provided in its instructions.than or equal to the appropriate federal rate, that the per diem allowance you provide is less than Generally, amounts paid for meals, enter-allowance is not included as part of the em- the federal per diem rate for the area of travel, tainment, and amusement provided to individu-ployee’s pay in box 1 of the employee’s Form you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance as als who are not your employees are not subjectW-2. Deduct the allowance as travel expenses the amount for food and beverages. to the 50% limit. Such activities must be directly(including meals that may be subject to the 50% related to the active conduct of your trade orMeal expenses when subject to “hours oflimit, discussed later). See How to deduct under business. Examples include:service” limits. For tax years beginning inAccountable Plans, earlier. 2006, 75% of the reimbursed meals your em- • Amounts paid for meals, goods, services,Allowance more than the federal rate. If ployees consume while away from their tax or the use of a facility. You are allowed ayour employee’s allowance is more than the home on business during, or incident to, any deduction only to the extent it is includedappropriate federal rate, you must report the period subject to the Department of Transporta- in the gross income of the recipient asallowance as two separate items. tion’s hours of service limits are deductible. compensation for services or as a prize orSee Publication 463 for a detailed discussionInclude the allowance amount up to the fed- award.of individuals subject to the Department oferal rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee’s
•  Expenses that exceed $600 and are re-Transportation’s hours of service limits.Form W-2. Deduct it as travel expenses (as
quired to be reported on an informationexplained above). This part of the allowance is De minimis (minimal) fringe benefit. The return, for example, Form 1099-MISC.treated as reimbursed under an accountable 50% limit does not apply to an expense for food See the General Instructions for Formsplan. or beverage that is excluded from the gross 1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G for more in-Include the amount that is more than the income of an employee because it is a de formation about reporting requirements.federal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if they minimis fringe benefit. See Publication 15-B for
apply) of the employee’s Form W-2. Deduct it as • The cost of providing meals, entertain-additional information on de minimis fringe ben-
wages subject to income tax withholding, social ment, goods and services, or use of facili-efits.
security, Medicare, and federal unemployment ties you sell to the public. For example, ifCompany cafeteria or executive diningtaxes. This part of the allowance is treated as you operate a nightclub, your expense forroom. The cost of food and beverages youreimbursed under a nonaccountable plan as ex- the entertainment you furnish to your cus-provide primarily to your employees on yourplained later under Nonaccountable Plans. tomers, such as a floor show, is a busi-business premises is deductible. This includes ness expense that is fully deductible.the cost of maintaining the facilities for providing
the food and beverages. These expenses are • The cost of providing meals, entertain-Meals and Entertainment subject to the 50% limit unless they qualify as a ment, or recreational facilities to the gen-
de minimis fringe benefit, discussed in Publica- eral public as a means of advertising orUnder an accountable plan, you can generally
tion 15-B, or unless they are compensation to promoting goodwill in the community isdeduct only 50% of any otherwise deductible
your employees and you treat them as provided fully deductible.business-related meal and entertainment ex-
under a nonaccountable plan.penses you reimburse your employees. The de-
duction limit applies even if you reimburse them Employee activities. The expense of provid-for 100% of the expenses. ing recreational, social, or similar activities (in-
cluding the use of a facility) for your employees MiscellaneousApplication of the 50% limit. The 50% de- is deductible. The benefit must be primarily for
duction limit applies to reimbursements you your employees who are not highly compen- Expensesmake to your employees for expenses they incur sated.
for meals while traveling away from home on For this purpose, a highly compensated em- In addition to travel, meal, and entertainmentbusiness and for entertaining business custom- ployee is an employee who meets either of the expenses, other miscellaneous expenses thaters at your place of business, a restaurant, or following requirements. are deductible, subject to limitations, include:another location. It applies to expenses incurred
at a business convention or reception, business 1. Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi- • Amounts paid for the reasonable cost of
meeting, or business luncheon at a club. The ness during the year or the preceding year. advertising that are directly related to your
deduction limit may also apply to meals you An employee is treated as owning any in- business activities. Generally, amounts
furnish on your premises to your employees. terest owned by his or her brother, sister, paid to influence legislation (i.e., lobbying)
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 41

Page 42 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are not deductible for tax purposes. See For example, the Yard Corporation is in the • Business leagues.
business of repairing ships. It engages in theLobbying expenses, later. • Chambers of commerce.practice of returning 10% of the repair bills as• Amounts paid that are directly related to • Civic or public service organizations.kickbacks to the captains and chief officers ofthe conduct of business meetings of your the vessels it repairs. Although this practice is • Professional organizations such as bar as-employees, partners, stockholders, considered an ordinary and necessary expense sociations and medical associations.agents, or directors. Some minor social of getting business, it is clearly a violation of aactivities may be allowed, however, these • Real estate boards.state law that is generally enforced. These ex-expenses are subject to the 50% limit. penditures are not deductible for tax purposes, • Trade associations.whether or not the owners of the shipyard are• Amounts paid that are directly related to
subsequently prosecuted.and necessary for attending business
Credit card convenience fees. Credit cardmeetings or conventions of certain Form 1099-MISC. It does not matter companies charge a fee to businesses who ac-tax-exempt organizations. These organi- whether any kickbacks paid during the tax year cept their cards. This fee when paid or incurredzations include business leagues, cham- are deductible on your income tax return in re- by the business can be deducted as a businessbers of commerce, real estates boards, gards to information reporting. See Form expense.and trade and professional associations. 1099-MISC for more information.
Damages recovered. Special rules apply toCar and truck expenses. The costs of operat-Advertising expenses. You can usually de- compensation you receive for damages sus-ing a car, truck, or other vehicle in your businessduct as a business expense the cost of institu- tained as a result of patent infringement, breachare deductible. For more information on how totional or goodwill advertising to keep your name of contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola-figure your deduction, see Publication 463.before the public if it relates to business you tions. You must include this compensation inreasonably expect to gain in the future. For ex- Charitable contributions. Cash payments to your income. However, you may be able to takeample, the cost of advertising that encourages an organization, charitable or otherwise, may be a special deduction. The deduction applies onlydeductible as business expenses if the pay-people to contribute to the Red Cross, to buy to amounts recovered for actual injury, not anyments are not charitable contributions or gifts. IfU.S. Savings Bonds, or to participate in similar additional amount. The deduction is the smallerthe payments are charitable contributions orcauses is usually deductible. of the following.gifts, you cannot deduct them as business ex-
• The amount you received or accrued forpenses. However, corporations (other than SAnticipated liabilities. Anticipated liabilities
damages in the tax year reduced by thecorporations) can deduct charitable contribu-or reserves for anticipated liabilities are not de-
amount you paid or incurred in the year totions on their income tax returns, subject toductible. For example, assume you sold 1-year
recover that amount.limitations. See the Instructions for Form 1120TV service contracts this year totaling $50,000.
and 1120-A for more information. Sole proprie-From experience, you know you will have ex- • Your losses from the injury you have nottors, partners in a partnership, or shareholderspenses of about $15,000 in the coming year for deducted.in an S corporation may be able to deduct chari-these contracts. You cannot deduct any of the
table contributions made by their business on$15,000 this year by charging expenses to a
Demolition expenses or losses. AmountsSchedule A (Form 1040).reserve or liability account. You can deduct your
paid or incurred to demolish a structure are notexpenses only when you actually pay or accrue
deductible. These amounts are added to theExample. You paid $15 to a local church forthem, depending on your accounting method.
basis of the land where the demolished structurea half-page ad in a program for a concert it is
was located. Any loss for the remaining un-sponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en-Bribes and kickbacks. Engaging in the pay- depreciated basis of a demolished structurecourage readers to buy your products. Your pay-ment of bribes or kickbacks is a serious criminal would not be recognized until the property isment is not a charitable contribution. However,matter. Such activity could result in criminal disposed.you may deduct it as an advertising expense.prosecution. Any payments that appear to have
been made, either directly or indirectly, to an Example. You made a $100,000 donation Education expenses. Ordinary and neces-official or employee of any government or an to a committee organized by the local Chamber sary expenses paid for the cost of the educationagency or instrumentality of any government are of Commerce to bring a convention to your city, and training of your employees are deductible.not deductible for tax purposes and are in viola- intended to increase business activity, including See Education Expenses in chapter 2.tion of the law. yours. Your payment is not a charitable contribu- You may also deduct the cost of your ownPayments paid directly or indirectly to a per- tion. However, you may deduct it as a business education (including certain related travel) re-son in violation of any federal or state law (but expense. lated to your trade or business. You must beonly if that state law is generally enforced, de- See Publication 526 for a discussion of able to show the education maintains or im-fined below) that provides for a criminal penalty donated inventory, including capital gain prop- proves skills required in your trade or business,or for the loss of a license or privilege to engage erty. or that it is required by law or regulations, forin a trade or business are also not allowed as a
keeping your license to practice, status, or job.deduction for tax purposes. Club dues and membership fees. Generally,
For example, an attorney can deduct the cost ofamounts paid or incurred for membership in anyMeaning of “generally enforced.” A state attending Continuing Legal Education (CLE)club organized for business, pleasure, recrea-law is considered generally enforced unless it is classes that are required by the state bar associ-tion, or any other social purpose are not deducti-never enforced or enforced only for infamous ation to maintain his or her license to practiceble. Clubs organized for business, pleasure,persons or persons whose violations are ex- law.recreation, or other social purpose include, buttraordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law is Education expenses you incur to meet theare not limited to country clubs, golf and athleticgenerally enforced unless proper reporting of a minimum requirements of your present trade orclubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline clubs,violation of the law results in enforcement only business, or those that qualify you for a newand clubs operated to provide meals under cir-under unusual circumstances. trade or business, are not deductible. This is truecumstances generally considered to be condu-
even if the education maintains or improvesKickbacks. A kickback is a payment for re- cive to business discussions.
skills presently required in your business. Forferring a client, patient, or customer. The com- Exception. The following organizations are more information on education expenses, seemon kickback situation occurs when money or not treated as clubs organized for business, Publication 970.property is given to someone as payment for pleasure, recreation, or other social purpose un-influencing a third party to purchase from, use less one of the main purposes is to conduct Franchise, trademark, trade name. If youthe services of, or otherwise deal with the per- entertainment activities for members or their buy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, youson who pays the kickback. In many cases, the guests or to provide members or their guests can deduct the amount you pay or incur as aperson whose business is being sought or en- with access to entertainment facilities. business expense only if your payments are partjoyed by the person who pays the kickback is not
of a series of payments that are:aware of the payment. • Boards of trade.
Page 42 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 43 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Contingent on productivity, use, or disposi- pay to acquire business assets are not deducti- • The organization conducts lobbying activi-
tion of the item, ties on matters of direct financial interestble. These costs are added to the basis of the
to your business.property.2. Payable at least annually for the entire
Fees that include payments for work of aterm of the transfer agreement, and • A principal purpose of your contribution is
personal nature (such as drafting a will, or dam- to avoid the rules discussed earlier that3. Substantially equal in amount (or payable ages arising from a personal injury), are not prohibit a business deduction for lobbyingunder a fixed formula). allowed as a business deduction on Schedule C expenses.
or C-EZ. If the invoice includes both businessWhen determining the term of the transfer
and personal charges, compute the businessagreement, include all renewal options and any If a tax-exempt organization, other than a sec-
portion as follows: multiply the total amount ofother period for which you and the transferrer tion 501(c)(3) organization, provides you with a
the bill by a fraction, the numerator of which isreasonably expect the agreement to be re- notice on the part of dues that is allocable to
the amount attributable to business matters, thenewed. nondeductible lobbying and political expenses,
denominator of which is the total amount paid. you cannot deduct that part of the dues.A franchise includes an agreement that gives
The result is the portion of the invoice attributa-one of the parties to the agreement the right to Covered executive branch official. Forble to business expenses. The portion attributa-distribute, sell, or provide goods, services, or purposes of this discussion, a covered executiveble to personal matters is the differencefacilities within a specified area. branch official is any of the following.between the total amount and the business por-
tion (computed above).Impairment-related expenses. If you are dis- 1. The President.
Legal fees relating to personal tax adviceabled, you can deduct expenses necessary for 2. The Vice President.may be deductible on Line 22, Schedule Ayou to be able to work (impairment-related ex-
(Form 1040), if you itemize deductions. How- 3. Any officer or employee of the Whitepenses) as a business expense, rather than as a
ever, the deduction is subject to the 2% limita- House Office of the Executive Office of themedical expense.
tion on miscellaneous itemized deductions. See President and the two most senior levelYou are disabled if you have either of the Publication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. officers of each of the other agencies infollowing.
the Executive Office.Tax preparation fees. The cost of hiring a• A physical or mental disability (for exam- tax professional, such as a C.P.A., to prepare 4. Any individual who:ple, blindness or deafness) that function- that part of your tax return relating to your busi-ally limits your being employed. a. Is serving in a position in Level I of theness as a sole proprietor is deductible on Sched-
• A physical or mental impairment that sub- Executive Schedule under section 5312ule C or Schedule C-EZ. Any remaining cost
stantially limits one or more of your major of title 5, United States Code,may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if
life activities. you itemize deductions. b. Has been designated by the President
You can also claim a business deduction for as having Cabinet-level status, orThe expense qualifies as a business expense amounts paid or incurred in resolving assertedif all the following apply. c. Is an immediate deputy of an individualtax deficiencies for your business operated as a
listed in item (a) or (b).sole proprietor.• Your work clearly requires the expense for
you to satisfactorily perform that work.
Licenses and regulatory fees. Licenses and Exceptions to denial of deduction. The• The goods or services purchased are regulatory fees for your trade or business paid general denial of the deduction does not apply toclearly not needed or used, other than in- annually to state or local governments generally the following.cidentally, in your personal activities. are deductible. Some licenses and fees may • Expenses of appearing before, or commu-have to be amortized. See chapter 8 for more• Their treatment is not specifically provided nicating with, any local council or similarinformation.for under other tax law provisions. governing body concerning its legislation
(local legislation) if the legislation is of di-Lobbying expenses. Generally, lobbying ex-Example. You are blind. You must use a rect interest to you or to you and an organ-penses are not deductible. Lobbying expensesreader to do your work, both at and away from ization of which you are a member. Aninclude amounts paid or incurred for any of theyour place of work. The reader’s services are Indian tribal government is treated as afollowing activities.only for your work. You can deduct your ex- local council or similar governing body.
penses for the reader as a business expense. • Influencing legislation. • Any in-house expenses for influencing leg-
• Participating in or intervening in any politi- islation and communicating directly with aInternet-related expenses. Generally, you cal campaign for, or against, any candi- covered executive branch official if thosecan deduct internet-related expenses including date for public office. expenses for the tax year do not exceeddomain registrations fees and webmaster con- $2,000 (excluding overhead expenses).sulting costs. If you are starting a business you • Attempting to influence the general public,
may have to amortize these expenses as or segments of the public, about elections, • Expenses incurred by taxpayers engaged
start-up costs. For more information about am- legislative matters, or referendums. in the trade or business of lobbying (pro-
ortizing start-up and organizational costs, see fessional lobbyists) on behalf of another• Communicating directly with covered ex-chapter 8. person (but does apply to payments by theecutive branch officials (defined later) in other person to the lobbyist for lobbyingany attempt to influence the official actions activities).Interview expense allowances. Reimburse- or positions of those officials.ments you make to job candidates for transpor-
• Researching, preparing, planning, or coor-tation or other expenses related to interviews for Moving machinery. Generally, the cost ofdinating any of the preceding activities.possible employment are not wages. You can moving machinery from one city to another is adeduct the reimbursements as a business ex- deductible expense. So is the cost of movingYour expenses for influencing legislation andpense. However, expenses for food, beverages, machinery from one plant to another, or fromcommunicating directly with a covered execu-and entertainment are subject to the 50% limit one part of your plant to another. You can de-tive branch official include a portion of your labordiscussed earlier under Meals and Entertain- duct the cost of installing the machinery in thecosts and general and administrative costs ofment. new location. However, you must capitalize theyour business. For information on making this costs of installing or moving newly purchasedallocation, see section 1.162-28 of the regula-Legal and professional fees. Fees charged machinery.tions.by accountants and attorneys that are ordinary
You cannot claim a charitable or businessand necessary expenses directly related to op- Outplacement services. The costs of out-
expense deduction for amounts paid to an or-erating your business are deductible as busi- placement services you provide to your employ-
ganization if both of the following apply.ness expenses. However, usually legal fees you ees to help them find new employment, such as
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 43

Page 44 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
career counseling, r´esum´e assistance, skills as- deductible. In addition, expenses paid or in- that is subject to the 2% limitation. However, if
sessment, etc. are deductible. curred to take part in any political campaign of a the repayment is over $3,000 and Method 1
candidate for public office are not deductible. (discussed later) applies, deduct it on ScheduleThe costs of outplacement services may A (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized de-cover more than one deduction category. For Indirect political contributions. You can- duction that is not subject to the 2% limitation.example, deduct as a utilities expense the cost not deduct indirect political contributions and
of telephone calls made under this service and costs of taking part in political activities as busi- Repayment—$3,000 or less. If the
deduct as rental expense the cost of renting ness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex- amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it
machinery and equipment for this service. penses include the following. from your income in the year you repaid it.
For information on whether the value of out- • Advertising in a convention program of a Repayment—over $3,000. If the amountplacement services is includable in your employ- political party, or in any other publication if you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de-ees’ income, see Publication 15-B. any of the proceeds from the publication duct the repayment, as described earlier. How-
are for, or intended for, the use of a politi- ever, you can instead choose to take a tax credit
Penalties and fines. Penalties paid for late cal party or candidate. for the year of repayment if you included the
performance or nonperformance of a contract income under a “claim of right.” This means that• Admission to a dinner or program (includ-are generally deductible. For instance, you own at the time you included the income, it appeareding, but not limited to, galas, dances, filmand operate a construction company. You have that you had an unrestricted right to it. If youpresentations, parties, and sportingbeen contracted to construct a building by a qualify for this choice, figure your tax under bothevents) if any of the proceeds from thecertain date. Due to construction delays, the methods and use the method that results in lessfunction are for, or intended for, the use ofbuilding is not completed and ready for occu- tax.a political party or candidate.pancy on the date stipulated in the contract. You Method 1. Figure your tax for 2006 claimingare now required to pay an additional amount for • Admission to an inaugural ball, gala, a deduction for the repaid amount.each day that completion is delayed beyond the parade, concert, or similar event if identi-
completion date stipulated in the contract. fied with a political party or candidate. Method 2. Figure your tax for 2006 claiming
These additional costs are deductible business a credit for the prepaid amount. Follow these
expenses. steps.Repairs. The cost of repairing or improving
On the other hand, penalties or fines paid to property used in your trade or business is either 1. Figure your tax for 2006 without deductingany government agency or instrumentality be- a deductible or capital expense. Routine mainte- the repaid amount.cause of a violation of any law are not deducti- nance that keeps your property in a normal effi-
ble. These fines or penalties include the 2. Refigure your tax from the earlier yearcient operating condition, but that does not
following amounts. without including in income the amountmaterially increase the value or substantially
you repaid in 2006.prolong the useful life of the property is deducti-• Paid because of a conviction for a crime or
ble in the year that it is incurred. Otherwise, theafter a plea of guilty or no contest in a 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown
cost must be depreciated over the useful life ofcriminal proceeding. on your return for the earlier year. This is
the property. See Form 4562 and its instructions the amount of your credit.• Paid as a penalty imposed by federal, for how to compute and claim the depreciation
state, or local law in a civil action, includ- 4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax fordeduction.
ing certain additions to tax and additional 2006 figured without the deduction (stepThe cost of repairs includes the costs ofamounts and assessable penalties im- 1).labor, supplies, and certain other items. Theposed by the Internal Revenue Code. If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct thevalue of your own labor is not deductible. Exam-
• Paid in settlement of actual or possible amount repaid as discussed earlier under Typeples of repairs include:
liability for a fine or penalty, whether civil of deduction.• Reconditioning floors (but not replace-or criminal. If Method 2 results in less tax, claim thement),
credit on line 70 of Form 1040, and write “I.R.C.• Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro- • Repainting the interior and exterior walls 1341” next to line 70.ceeding that could result in a fine or pen- of a building,alty.
Example. For 2005, you filed a return and• Cleaning and repairing roofs and gutters,
reported your income on the cash method. InExamples of nondeductible penalties and and
2005, you repaid $5,000 included in your 2005fines include the following. • Fixing plumbing leaks (but not replace- gross income under a claim of right. Your filing• Fines for violating city housing codes. ment of fixtures). status in 2006 and 2005 is single. Your income
and tax for both years are as follows:• Fines paid by truckers for violating state
maximum highway weight laws. Repayments. If you had to repay an amount
2005 2005you included in your income in an earlier year,• Fines for violating air quality laws. With Income Without Incomeyou may be able to deduct the amount repaid for
Taxable• Civil penalties for violating federal laws re- the year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amount Income $15,000 $10,000garding mining safety standards and dis- you repaid is more than $3,000, you may be able
charges into navigable waters. to take a credit against your tax for the year in Tax $ 1,889 $ 1,139
which you repaid it.
A fine or penalty does not include any of the 2006 2006Type of deduction. The type of deduction Without Deduction With Deductionfollowing. you are allowed in the year of repayment de- Taxable• Legal fees and related expenses to defend pends on the type of income you included in the Income $49,950 $44,950yourself in a prosecution or civil action for earlier year. For instance, if you repay an
Tax  $9,051  $ 7,801a violation of the law imposing the fine or amount you previously reported as a capital
civil penalty. gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss on Your tax under Method 1 is $7,801. Your taxSchedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it as• Court costs or stenographic and printing under Method 2 is $8,301, figured as follows:self-employment income, deduct it as a busi-charges. ness deduction on Schedule C or Schedule Tax previously determined for 2005 $ 1,889• Compensatory damages paid to a govern- C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040). Less: Tax as refigured .......... − 1,139ment. If you reported the amount as wages, unem- Decrease in 2005 tax $ 750
ployment compensation, or other nonbusiness Regular tax liability for 2006 ....... $9,051
Political contributions. Contributions or gifts ordinary income, enter it on Schedule A (Form Less: Decrease in 2005 tax ....... − 750
Refigured tax for 2006 $ 8,301paid to political parties or candidates are not 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized deduction
Page 44 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 45 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Because you pay less tax under Method 1, you • Download forms, instructions, and publica-
tions.should take a deduction for the repayment in
2006. • Order IRS products online.12.
Repayment does not apply. This discus- • Research your tax questions online.
sion does not apply to the following.
• Search publications online by topic or
• Deductions for bad debts. How To Get Tax keyword.
• Deductions from sales to customers, such • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)
as returns and allowances, and similar Help published in the last few years.
items.
• Figure your withholding allowances using
You can get help with unresolved tax issues,• Deductions for legal and other expenses our withholding calculator.
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-of contesting the repayment. • Sign up to receive local and national taxtions, and get information from the IRS in sev-
news by email.eral ways. By selecting the method that is bestYear of deduction (or credit). If you use
for you, you will have quick and easy access tothe cash method of accounting, you can take the • Get information on starting and operating
tax help.deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the tax a small business.
year in which you actually make the repayment. Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. TheIf you use any other accounting method, you can Taxpayer Advocate Service is an independentdeduct the repayment or claim a credit for it only Phone. Many services are available byorganization within the IRS whose employees phone.for the tax year in which it is a proper deduction assist taxpayers who are experiencing eco-
under your accounting method. For example, if nomic harm, who are seeking help in resolving
you use the accrual method, you are entitled to tax problems that have not been resolved • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-
the deduction or credit in the tax year in which through normal channels, or who believe that an tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur-
the obligation for the repayment accrues. IRS system or procedure is not working as it rent-year forms, instructions, and
should. publications, and prior-year forms and in-
You can contact the Taxpayer Advocate structions. You should receive your orderSubscriptions. Subscriptions to professional, Service by calling toll-free 1-877-777-4778 or within 10 days.technical, and trade journals that deal with your TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi-business field are deductible. • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withble for assistance. You can also call or write to
your tax questions at 1-800-829-4933.your local taxpayer advocate, whose phone
number and address are listed in your localSupplies and materials. Unless you have de- • Solving problems. You can get
telephone directory and in Publication 1546, Theducted the cost in any earlier year, you generally face-to-face help solving tax problems
Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS - How To every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-can deduct the cost of materials and supplies Get Help With Unresolved Tax Problems. You sistance Centers. An employee can ex-actually consumed and used during the tax year. can file Form 911, Application for Taxpayer As- plain IRS letters, request adjustments toIf you keep incidental materials and supplies sistance Order, or ask an IRS employee to com- your account, or help you set up a pay-on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inciden- plete it on your behalf. For more information, go ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-tal materials and supplies you bought during the to www.irs.gov/advocate. tance Center for an appointment. To findtax year if all the following requirements are met. the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-Low income tax clinics (LITCs). LITCs are
• You do not keep a record of when they are tacts or look in the phone book underindependent organizations that provide low in-
United States Government, Internal Reve-come taxpayers with representation in federalused.
tax controversies with the IRS for free or for a nue Service.• You do not take an inventory of the nominal charge. The clinics also provide tax • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessamount on hand at the beginning and end education and outreach for taxpayers with lim- to TTY/TDD equipment, callof the tax year. ited English proficiency or who speak English as 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toa second language. Publication 4134, Low In-• This method does not distort your income. order forms and publications.come Taxpayer Clinic List, provides information
on clinics in your area. It is available at www.irs. • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-You can also deduct the cost of books, profes-
gov or at your local IRS office. ten to pre-recorded messages coveringsional instruments, equipment, etc., if you nor-
various tax topics.mally use them within a year. However, if the Free tax services. To find out what servicesusefulness of these items extends substantially • Refund information. To check the status ofare available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide tobeyond the year they are placed in service, you your 2006 refund, call 1-800-829-4477Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free taxgenerally must recover their costs through de- and press 1 for automated refund informa-publications and describes other free tax infor-preciation. For more information regarding de- tion or call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure tomation services, including tax education andpreciation see Publication 946, How to wait at least 6 weeks from the date youassistance programs and a list of TeleTax top-
Depreciate Property. filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-ics.
tronically). Have your 2006 tax return
Internet. You can access the IRS web- available because you will need to knowUtilities. Business expenses for heat, lights, site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 your social security number, your filingpower, telephone service, and water and sewer- days a week to: status, and the exact whole dollar amountage are deductible. However, any part attributa- of your refund.• E-file your return. Find out about commer-ble to personal use is not deductible. cial tax preparation and e-file services
Telephone. The cost of basic local tele- available free to eligible taxpayers. Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-phone service (including any taxes) for the first ices. To ensure IRS representatives give accu-• Check the status of your 2006 refund.telephone line you have in your home, even rate, courteous, and professional answers, weClick on Where’s My Refund. Wait at leastthough you have an office in your home is not use several methods to evaluate the quality of6 weeks from the date you filed your re-
deductible. However, charges for business our telephone services. One method is for aturn (3 weeks if you filed electronically).
long-distance phone calls on that line, as well as second IRS representative to listen in on orHave your 2006 tax return available be-
the cost of a second line into your home used record random telephone calls. Another is to askcause you will need to know your social
exclusively for business, are deductible busi- some callers to complete a short survey at thesecurity number, your filing status, and the
ness expenses. exact whole dollar amount of your refund. end of the call.
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help Page 45

Page 46 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Walk-in. Many products and services Mail. You can send your order for $25 (no handling fee) or call 1-877-CDFORMS
are available on a walk-in basis. forms, instructions, and publications to (1-877-233-6767) toll free to buy the CD for $25
the address below. You should receive (plus a $5 handling fee). Price is subject to
a response within 10 business days after your change.• Products. You can walk in to many post request is received.offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up CD for small businesses. Publication
certain forms, instructions, and publica- 3207, The Small Business ResourceNational Distribution Centertions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery Guide CD for 2006, is a must for everyP.O. Box 8903stores, copy centers, city and county gov- small business owner or any taxpayer about toBloomington, IL 61702-8903ernment offices, credit unions, and office start a business. This year’s CD includes:
supply stores have a collection of products CD for Tax Products. You can order • Helpful information, such as how to pre-available to print from a CD or photocopy Publication 1796, IRS Tax Products pare a business plan, find financing forfrom reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS CD, and obtain: your business, and much more.offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-
• The CD is released twice so that you haveenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue • All the business tax forms, instructions,
the latest products. The first release shipsBulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail- and publications needed to successfully
in January and the final release ships inable for research purposes. manage a business.
March.• Services. You can walk in to your local • Tax law changes for 2006.
• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
• Tax Map: an electronic research tool andlications.ness day for personal, face-to-face tax
finding aid.help. An employee can explain IRS letters, • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-request adjustments to your tax account, • Web links to various government agen-tions.or help you set up a payment plan. If you cies, business associations, and IRS orga-
• Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD –need to resolve a tax problem, have ques- nizations.
Ships with the final release.tions about how the tax law applies to your
• “Rate the Product” survey—your opportu-individual tax return, or you’re more com- • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and nity to suggest changes for future editions.fortable talking with someone in person, finding aid.visit your local Taxpayer Assistance • A site map of the CD to help you navigate
• Tax law frequently asked questionsCenter where you can spread out your the pages of the CD with ease.
records and talk with an IRS representa- (FAQs).
• An interactive “Teens in Biz” module thattive face-to-face. No appointment is nec- • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re- gives practical tips for teens about startingessary, but if you prefer, you can call your sponse system. their own business, creating a businesslocal Center and leave a message re-
plan, and filing taxes.questing an appointment to resolve a tax • Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax
account issue. A representative will call forms.
An updated version of this CD is availableyou back within 2 business days to sched- • Internal Revenue Bulletins. each year in early April. You can get a free copyule an in-person appointment at your con-
by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.venience. To find the number, go to www. • Toll-free and email technical support.
gov/smallbiz.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phone
Buy the CD from National Technical Informa-book under United States Government, In-
ternal Revenue Service. tion Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for
Page 46 Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

Page 47 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Carrying charges ............ 2 0 Environmental remediation Intangible drilling costs ..... 2 1A
costs (See EnvironmentalCharitable: Intangibles, amortization .... 2 7Advertising .................. 4 2
cleanup costs)Contributions ............... 4 2 Interest:Amortization:
Excise taxes ................ 1 7 Allocation of ................ 1 1Anti-abuse rule ............. 2 9 Circulation costs, newspapers
Experimentation costs ..... 2 1 , Below-market .............. 1 4Anti-churning rules ......... 2 8 and periodicals ........... 2 2
31 Business expense for ....... 1 0Atmospheric pollution control Cleanup costs,
Capitalized ............. 13, 14facilities ................. 3 1 Exploration costs ........... 2 1environmental ...........2 ,  2 2
Carrying charge ............ 2 0Corporate organization Club dues ................... 4 2
Deductible ................. 1 2costs .................... 2 5 Comments on publication .... 1 F Forgone ................... 1 4Dispositions of section 197 Commitment fees ........... 1 3 Fees: Life insurance policies ...... 1 3intangibles ............... 3 0 Computer software .......... 2 8 Commitment ............... 1 3 Not deductible ............. 1 3Experimental costs ......... 3 1 Constant-yield method, Legal and professional ...... 4 3 Refunds of ................. 1 4Geological and geophysical OID ....................... 1 3 Loan origination ............ 1 3 When to deduct ............ 1 4costs .................... 3 1
Contested liability ............ 5 Regulatory ................. 4 3How to deduct ............. 2 5 Internet-related
Tax return preparation ...... 4 3Contributions:Incorrect amount expenses ................. 4 3
Fines ........................ 4 4Charitable ................. 4 2deducted ................ 2 9 Interview expenses .......... 4 3
Partnership organization Political .................... 4 4 Forgone interest ............ 1 4
costs .................... 2 6 Copyrights .................. 2 7 Form: KPollution control facilities .... 3 1 1098 ...................... 1 2Cost depletion .............. 3 2 Key person .................. 1 3Reforestation costs ......... 3 0 3115 .................. 16, 29Cost of getting lease ......9 ,  2 6 Kickbacks ................... 4 2Reforestation expenses ..... 2 3 4562 ...................... 2 5Cost of goods sold ........... 3Related person ............. 2 9 5213 ....................... 5Cost recovery ................ 3Research costs ............ 3 1 8826 ...................... 2 4 LCovenant not toSection 197 intangibles 8885 ...................... 1 8 Leases:compete .................. 2 7defined .................. 2 7 T .......................... 3 7 Canceling ................... 9Credit card convenienceStart-up costs .............. 2 5 Franchise ............... 28, 42 Cost of getting ...........9 ,  2 6fees ....................... 4 2Starting a business Franchise taxes ............. 1 7 Improvements by lessee .... 1 0costs .................... 2 5 Free tax services ............ 4 5 Leveraged .................. 9Anticipated liabilities ........ 4 2 Fringe benefits ............... 7 Mineral .................... 3 6DAssessments, local ......... 1 6 Oil and gas ................ 3 6Fuel taxes ................... 1 7De minimis OID ............. 1 2Assistance (See Tax help) Sales distinguished .......... 9Debt-financed:At-risk limits ................. 4 Taxes on ................... 9Distributions ............... 1 2 GAttorney fees ................ 4 3 Legal and professionalDefinitions: Gas wells ................... 3 5Awards: fees ....................... 4 3Business bad debt .......... 3 7 Geological and geophysicalAchievement ................ 6 Licenses ................ 27, 43Necessary expense ......... 3 costs:Length-of-service ............ 6 Life insurance coverage ...... 7Ordinary expense ........... 3 Development, oil andSafety achievement ......... 7 Limit on deductions .......... 5Section 197 intangibles ..... 2 7 g a s...................... 3 1 Line of credit ................ 1 2Demolition expenses ........ 4 2 Exploration, oil and gas ..... 3 1 Loans:B Depletion: Geothermal wells ........ 21, 35 Below-market interestBad debts (See Business bad Mineral property ............ 3 2 Gifts, nominal value .......... 7 rate ..................... 1 4debts) Oil and gas wells ........... 3 3 Going into business ......... 2 5 Discounted ................ 1 4Bonuses: Percentage table ........... 3 5 Goodwill .................... 2 7 Origination fees ............ 1 3Employee ................... 7 Timber ..................... 3 6 Loans or Advances ........... 7Royalties .................. 3 6 Who can claim ............. 3 2 Lobbying expenses ......... 4 3Bribes ....................... 4 2 HDepreciation (See Cost recovery) Long-term careBrownfields (See Environmental Health insurance, deduction forDevelopment costs, insurance ................. 1 8cleanup costs) self-employed ............. 1 8miners .................... 2 2 Losses:Business: Heating equipment ........... 3Disabled, improvements At-risk limits ................. 4Assets ...................... 3 Help (See Tax help)for ........................ 2 4 Net operating ............... 4Books and records ......... 2 7 Drilling and development Passive activities ............ 4Meal expenses ............. 4 1 costs ...................... 2 1 IUse of car ...............4 ,  4 2 Dues, membership .......... 4 2 Impairment-relatedUse of home ................ 3 Mexpenses ................. 4 3Business bad debts: Machinery parts .............. 3Improvements ................ 3Defined .................... 3 7 E Meals ....................... 3 9By lessee .................. 1 0How to treat ................ 3 8 Economic interest ........... 3 2 Meals and entertainment .... 4 1For disabled and elderly .... 2 4Recovery .................. 3 9 Economic performance ...... 4 Meals and lodging ............ 7Types of ................... 3 7 Income taxes ................ 1 6Education expenses .......7 ,  4 2 Medical expenses ........... 4 3When worthless ............ 3 8 Incorrect amount ofElderly, improvements Methods of accounting ....... 4amortization deducted .... 2 9for ........................ 2 4 Mining:Insurance:C Employee benefit Depletion .................. 3 5Capitalized premiums ....... 2 0Campaign contribution ...... 4 4 programs .................. 7 Development costs ......... 2 2Deductible premiums ....... 1 7
Capital expenses ............. 3 Employment taxes .......... 1 7 Exploration costs ........... 2 1Nondeductible
Capitalization of interest .... 1 4 Entertainment ............... 3 9 More information (See Tax help)premiums ................ 1 9
Car allowance ............... 4 0 Environmental cleanup Self-employed Mortgage:
costs ....................2 ,  2 2Car and truck expenses ..... 4 2 individuals ............... 1 8 Cost of acquiring ........... 1 2
Publication 535 (2006) Page 47

Page 48 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mortgage: (Cont.) Per diem and car allowances: Coal or iron ore ............ 3 6 Taxes:
Interest .................... 1 2 High-low rate ............... 4 0 Payments to .............5 ,  1 4 Carrying charge ............ 2 0
Regular rate ............... 4 0 Refiners ................... 3 3 Employment ............... 1 7Moving expenses,
Reporting allowance ........ 4 0 Rent expense ............... 8 Excise ..................... 1 7machinery ................ 4 3
Standard meal Unreasonable rent ........... 8 Franchise .................. 1 7
allowance ................ 4 0 Fuel ....................... 1 7Removal:N Standard mileage rate ...... 4 0 Income .................... 1 6Barrier ..................... 2 4Natural gas .................. 3 5 Leased property ............. 9Percentage depletion ........ 3 3 Retired asset ............... 2 4Nonqualifying Personal property .......... 1 7Personal property tax ....... 1 7 Rent expense,intangibles ................ 2 8 Real estate ................ 1 6capitalizing ................ 1 0Points ....................... 1 3Not-for-profit activities ....... 5 Sales ...................... 1 7Repairs ..................... 4 4Political contributions ....... 4 4 Unemployment fund ........ 1 7Repayments (claim ofPollution control Taxpayer Advocate .......... 4 5O right) ...................... 4 4facilities ................... 3 1 Telephone ................... 4 5Office in home ............... 3 Research costs ......... 21, 31Prepaid expense ............. 4 Timber .................. 30, 36Oil and gas wells: Extends useful life .......... 2 0
Tools ......................... 3Depletion .................. 3 3 Interest .................... 1 4 SDrilling costs ............... 2 1 Trademark, trade name ..... 2 8 ,Rent ........................ 8 Sales taxes .................. 1 7Partnerships ............... 3 4 42Prepayment penalty ......... 1 2 Section 179 expense deductionS corporations ............. 3 4 Travel ....................... 3 9Presumption of profit ......... 5 (See Cost recovery)Optional write-off method: TTY/TDD information ........ 4 5Publications (See Tax help) Self-employed health insuranceCirculation costs ........... 3 1 deduction ................. 1 8Experimental costs ......... 3 1 UR Self-employment tax ........ 1 7Intangible drilling and Unemployment fundTax rates and maximum netReal estate taxes ............ 1 6development costs ....... 3 1 taxes ...................... 1 7earnings .................. 2Recapture:Mining exploration and
Unpaid expenses, relatedSelf-insurance, reserveClean-fuel deductions ....... 2development costs ....... 3 1
person .................... 1 4for ........................ 1 9Exploration expenses ....... 2 2Research costs ............ 3 1
Utilities ...................... 4 5Timber property ............ 3 0 Sick pay ...................... 8Organization costs:
Recovery of amount Standard meal allowance .... 4 0Corporate .................. 2 5
deducted ................... 4Partnership ................ 2 6 Standard mileage rate ....... 4 0 V
Refiners who cannot claimOrganizational costs ........ 2 3 Standby charges ............ 1 3 Vacation pay ................. 8
percentage depletion ...... 3 3Original issue discount ...... 1 2 Start-up costs ........... 23, 25
Reforestation costs ..... 23, 30Outplacement services ...... 4 3 Subscriptions ........... 42, 45 WRegulatory fees ............. 4 3 Suggestions for Wages:Reimbursements ............ 3 9 publication ................. 1P Property .................... 8Business expenses .......... 8 Supplies and materials ...... 4 5Passive activities ............. 4 Tests for deducting pay ...... 6Mileage .................... 4 0Payments in kind ............. 4 Welfare benefit funds ......... 7Nonaccountable plan ....... 4 1 TPenalties: Per diem ................... 4 0 ■Deductible ................. 4 4 Tax help ..................... 4 5Related persons:Nondeductible ............. 4 4 Tax preparation fees ........ 4 3Anti-churning rules ......... 2 9Prepayment ................ 1 2
Page 48 Publication 535 (2006)

Page 49 of 49 of Publication 535 16:48 - 15-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Business Taxpayers See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including by computer,
phone, and mail.
General Guides 527 Residential Rental Property 686 Certification for Reduced Tax Rates
in Tax Treaty Countries1 Your Rights as a Taxpayer 534 Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987 901 U.S. Tax Treaties17 Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals) 535 Business Expenses 908 Bankruptcy Tax Guide
334 Tax Guide for Small Business (For 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or Individuals, Estates, and Trusts 946 How To Depreciate Property
C-EZ) 537 Installment Sales 947 Practice Before the IRS and Power of
509 Tax Calendars for 2007 538 Accounting Periods and Methods Attorney
553 Highlights of 2006 Tax Changes 541 Partnerships 954 Tax Incentives for Distressed
910 Guide to Free Tax Services Communities542 Corporations
1544 Reporting Cash Payments of Over544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofEmployer’s Guides $10,000 (Received in a Trade orAssets15 (Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guide Business)551 Basis of Assets15-A Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide 1546 The Taxpayer Advocate Service of556 Examination of Returns, Appeal15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe the IRS—How to Get Help WithRights, and Claims for RefundBenefits Unresolved Tax Problems560 Retirement Plans for Small Business51 (Circular A), Agricultural Employer’s (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Spanish Language PublicationsTax Guide Plans) 1SP Derechos del Contribuyente80 (Circular SS), Federal Tax Guide For 561 Determining the Value of Donated 179 (Circular PR) Gu´ıa ContributivaEmployers in the U.S. Virgin Property Federal Para PatronosIslands, Guam, American Samoa, 583 Starting a Business and Keeping Puertorrique˜nosand the Commonwealth of the RecordsNorthern Mariana Islands 579SP C´omo Preparar la Declaraci´on de587 Business Use of Your Home Impuesto Federal926 Household Employer’s Tax Guide (Including Use by Daycare 594SP Qu´e es lo Debemos Saber Sobre ElSpecialized Publications Providers) Proceso de Cobro del IRS225 Farmer’s Tax Guide 594 What You Should Know About The 850 English-Spanish Glossary of WordsIRS Collection Process378 Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds and Phrases Used in Publications595 Capital Construction Fund for463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Issued by the Internal RevenueCommercial FishermenExpenses Service597 Information on the United505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 1544SP Informe de Pagos en Efectivo enStates-Canada Income Tax Treaty510 Excise Taxes for 2007 Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en598 Tax on Unrelated Business Income of515 Withholding of Tax on Nonresident una Ocupaci´on o Negocio)Exempt OrganizationsAliens and Foreign Entities
517 Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
Commonly Used Tax Forms See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
Form Number and Form Title Form Number and Form Title
Sch. K-1 Shareholder’s Share of Income, Deductions, Credits,W-2 Wage and Tax Statement etc.W-4 Employee’s Withholding Allowance Certificate 2106 Employee Business Expenses940 Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment (FUTA) Tax 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee Business ExpensesReturn 2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals, Estates,941 Employer’s QUARTERLY Federal Tax Return and Trusts944 Employer’s ANNUAL Federal Tax Return 2441 Child and Dependent Care Expenses1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration of RepresentativeSch. A & B Itemized Deductions & Interest and Ordinary 3800 General Business CreditDividends 3903 Moving ExpensesSch. C Profit or Loss From Business 4562 Depreciation and AmortizationSch. C-EZ Net Profit From Business 4797 Sales of Business PropertySch. D Capital Gains and Losses 4868 Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S.Sch. D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D Individual Income Tax ReturnSch. E Supplemental Income and Loss 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) andSch. F Profit or Loss From Farming Other Tax-Favored AccountsSch. H Household Employment Taxes 6252 Installment Sale IncomeSch. J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen 7004 Application for Automatic 6-Month Extension of Time ToSch. R Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled File Certain Business Income Tax, Information, andSch. SE Self-Employment Tax Other Returns1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions1040X Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 8300 Report of Cash Payments Over $10,000 Received in a1065 U.S. Return of Partnership Income Trade or BusinessSch. D Capital Gains and Losses 8582 Passive Activity Loss LimitationsSch. K-1 Partner’s Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc. 8606 Nondeductible IRAs1120 U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return 8822 Change of Address1120-A U.S. Corporation Short-Form Income Tax Return 8829 Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
1120S U.S. Income Tax Return for an S Corporation
Sch. D Capital Gains and Losses and Built-In Gains
Publication 535 (2006) Page 49