Userid: SD_N1RNB schema tipx Leadpct: -2% Pt. size: 10 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/XML Fileid: D:\Users\n1rnb\documents\2011 Products\502\2010 P 502 - 2.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ContentsDepartment of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
 What's New .............................. . 1
Reminder ................................ . 2
Publication 502 Introduction ............................. . 2Cat. No. 15002Q
What Are Medical Expenses? ............... . 2
What Expenses Can You Include ThisMedical and Year? ................................ . 2
How Much of the Expenses Can You
Dental Deduct? ............................. . 3
Whose Medical Expenses Can You
Include? ............................. . 3Expenses
What Medical Expenses Are Includible? ....... . 5
(Including the Health What Expenses Are Not Includible? .......... . 15
Coverage Tax Credit) How Do You Treat Reimbursements? ......... . 17
How Do You Figure and Report the
For use in preparing Deduction on Your Tax Return? .......... . 20
Sale of Medical Equipment or Property ........ . 212011 Returns
Damages for Personal Injuries ............... . 23
Impairment-Related Work Expenses .......... . 23
Health Insurance Costs for Self-Employed
Persons .............................. . 24
COBRA Premium Assistance ................ . 24
Health Coverage Tax Credit ................. . 26
How To Get Tax Help ...................... . 29
Index ................................... . 32
What's New
Standard mileage rate. The standard mileage rate al-
lowed for operating expenses for a car when you use it for
medical reasons is:
• 19 cents per mile from January 1±June 30, and
• 23.5 cents per mile from July 1±December 31, 2011.
See Transportation under What Medical Expenses Are
Includible.
Future developments.  The IRS has created a page on
IRS.gov for information about Publication 502, at www.irs.
gov/pub502. Information about any future developments
affecting Publication 502 (such as legislation enacted after
we release it) will be posted on that page.
Get forms and other information
Health coverage tax credit. The credit decreases tofaster and easier by:
72.5% (.725) for amounts paid for qualified health insur-Internet IRS.gov ance coverage after February 2011. For more information,
see Health Coverage Tax Credit, later.
Feb 09, 2012

Page 2 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Although we cannot respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and willReminder
consider your comments as we revise our tax products.
Ordering forms and publications. Visit www.irs.gov/Photographs of missing children. The Internal Reve-
formspubs/ to download forms and publications, callnue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for
1-800-829-3676, or write to the address below and receiveMissing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missing
a response within 10 days after your request is received.children selected by the Center may appear in this publica-
tion on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can help Internal Revenue Servicebring these children home by looking at the photographs 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayand calling 1-800-THE-LOST (1-800-843-5678) if you rec- Bloomington, IL 61705-6613ognize a child.
Tax questions. If you have a tax question, check the
information available on IRS.gov or call 1-800-829-1040.Introduction We cannot answer tax questions sent to either of the
above addresses.This publication explains the itemized deduction for medi-
cal and dental expenses that you claim on Schedule A
(Form 1040). It discusses what expenses, and whose Useful Items
expenses, you can and cannot include in figuring the You may want to see:
deduction. It explains how to treat reimbursements and
how to figure the deduction. It also tells you how to report Publication
the deduction on your tax return and what to do if you sell ❏ 969 Health Savings Accounts and Othermedical property or receive damages for a personal injury. Tax-Favored Health PlansMedical expenses include dental expenses, and in this
publication the term ªmedical expensesº is often used to Forms (and Instructions)refer to medical and dental expenses.
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax ReturnYou can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) only the
part of your medical and dental expenses that is more than ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions7.5% of your adjusted gross income (AGI). If your medical
❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax Creditand dental expenses are not more than 7.5% of your AGI,
you cannot claim a deduction.
This publication also explains how to treat impair-
ment-related work expenses, health insurance premiums if What Are Medical Expenses?
you are self-employed, and the health coverage tax credit
that is available to certain individuals. Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, cure, mitiga-
tion, treatment, or prevention of disease, and the costs forPub. 502 covers many common medical expenses but
treatments affecting any part or function of the body. Thesenot every possible medical expense. If you cannot find the
expenses include payments for legal medical servicesexpense you are looking for, refer to the definition of
rendered by physicians, surgeons, dentists, and othermedical expenses under What Are Medical Expenses.
medical practitioners. They include the costs of equipment,See How To Get Tax Help near the end of this publica-
supplies, and diagnostic devices needed for these pur-tion for information about getting publications and forms.
poses.
Medical care expenses must be primarily to alleviate orComments and suggestions. We welcome your com-
prevent a physical or mental defect or illness. They do notments about this publication and your suggestions for
include expenses that are merely beneficial to generalfuture editions.
health, such as vitamins or a vacation.You can write to us at the following address:
Medical expenses include the premiums you pay forInternal Revenue Service insurance that covers the expenses of medical care, andIndividual and Specialty Forms and Publications the amounts you pay for transportation to get medical care.Branch Medical expenses also include amounts paid for qualifiedSE:W:CAR:MP:T:I long-term care services and limited amounts paid for any1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526 qualified long-term care insurance contract.Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it What Expenses Can Youwould be helpful if you would include your daytime phone
number, including the area code, in your correspondence. Include This Year?
You can email us at taxforms@irs.gov. Please put ªPub-
lications Commentº on the subject line. You can also send You can include only the medical and dental expenses you
us comments from www.irs.gov/formspubs/. Select ªCom- paid this year, regardless of when the services were pro-
ment on Tax Forms and Publicationsº under ªInformation vided. (But see Decedent under Whose Medical Expenses
about.º Can You Include , for an exception.) If you pay medical
Page 2 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 3 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver the check
generally is the date of payment. If you use a Whose Medical Expenses 
ªpay-by-phoneº or ªonlineº account to pay your medical
Can You Include?expenses, the date reported on the statement of the finan-
cial institution showing when payment was made is the
You can generally include medical expenses you pay fordate of payment. If you use a credit card, include medical
yourself, as well as those you pay for someone who wasexpenses you charge to your credit card in the year the
your spouse or your dependent either when the servicescharge is made, not when you actually pay the amount
were provided or when you paid for them. There arecharged.
different rules for decedents and for individuals who areIf you did not claim a medical or dental expense that the subject of multiple support agreements. See Supportwould have been deductible in an earlier year, you can file claimed under a multiple support agreement , later underForm 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re- Qualifying Person.turn, for the year in which you overlooked the expense. Do
not claim the expense on this year's return. Generally, an
Yourselfamended return must be filed within 3 years from the date
the original return was filed or within 2 years from the time
You can include medical expenses that you paid for your-the tax was paid, whichever is later.
self.You cannot include medical expenses that were paid by
insurance companies or other sources. This is true
Spousewhether the payments were made directly to you, to the
patient, or to the provider of the medical services.
You can include medical expenses you paid for your
spouse. To include these expenses, you must have beenSeparate returns. If you and your spouse live in a non-
married either at the time your spouse received the medi-community property state and file separate returns, each of
cal services or at the time you paid the medical expenses.you can include only the medical expenses each actually
paid. Any medical expenses paid out of a joint checking
Example 1. Mary received medical treatment beforeaccount in which you and your spouse have the same she married Bill. Bill paid for the treatment after theyinterest are considered to have been paid equally by each married. Bill can include these expenses in figuring hisof you, unless you can show otherwise. medical expense deduction even if Bill and Mary file sepa-
Community property states. If you and your spouse rate returns.
live in a community property state and file separate returns If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could not include
or are registered domestic partners in Nevada, Washing- Mary's expenses in his separate return. Mary would in-
ton, or California (or a person in California who is married clude the amounts she paid during the year in her separate
to a person of the same sex), any medical expenses paid return. If they filed a joint return, the medical expenses
out of community funds are divided equally. Each of you both paid during the year would be used to figure their
should include half the expenses. If medical expenses are medical expense deduction.
paid out of the separate funds of one individual, only the
individual who paid the medical expenses can include Example 2. This year, John paid medical expenses for
them. If you live in a community property state and are not his wife Louise, who died last year. John married Belle this
filing a joint return, see Publication 555, Community Prop- year and they file a joint return. Because John was married
erty. to Louise when she received the medical services, he can
include those expenses in figuring his medical expense
deduction for this year.
How Much of the Expenses DependentCan You Deduct?
You can include medical expenses you paid for your de-
pendent. For you to include these expenses, the personYou can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) only the
must have been your dependent either at the time theamount of your medical and dental expenses that is more
medical services were provided or at the time you paid thethan 7.5% of your AGI (Form 1040, line 38).
expenses. A person generally qualifies as your dependentIn this publication, the term ª7.5% limitº is used to refer
for purposes of the medical expense deduction if both ofto 7.5% of your AGI. The phrase ªsubject to the 7.5% limitº
the following requirements are met.is also used. This phrase means that you must subtract
7.5% (.075) of your AGI from your medical expenses to 1. The person was a qualifying child (defined later) or afigure your medical expense deduction. qualifying relative (defined later), and
Example. Your AGI is $40,000, 7.5% of which is 2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national or a resi-
$3,000. You paid medical expenses of $2,500. You cannot dent of the United States, Canada, or Mexico. If your
deduct any of your medical expenses because they are not qualifying child was adopted, see Exception for
more than 7.5% of your AGI. adopted child, below.
Publication 502 (2011) Page 3

Page 4 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can include medical expenses you paid for an individ- Child of divorced or separated parents. For purposes
of the medical and dental expenses deduction, a child ofual that would have been your dependent except that:
divorced or separated parents can be treated as a depen-
1. He or she received gross income of $3,700 or more dent of both parents. Each parent can include the medical
in 2011, expenses he or she pays for the child, even if the other
parent claims the child's dependency exemption, if:2. He or she filed a joint return for 2011, or
3. You, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed 1. The child is in the custody of one or both parents for
more than half the year,as a dependent on someone else's 2011 return.
2. The child receives over half of his or her support
during the year from his or her parents, andException for adopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen or
national and your adopted child lived with you as a mem- 3. The child's parents:
ber of your household for 2011, that child does not have to
a. Are divorced or legally separated under a decreebe a U.S. citizen or national, or a resident of the United
of divorce or separate maintenance,States, Canada, or Mexico.
b. Are separated under a written separation agree-
ment, orQualifying Child
c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 months ofA qualifying child is a child who: the year.
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother, This does not apply if the child's exemption is beingsister, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, claimed under a multiple support agreement (discussedor a descendant of any of them (for example, your later).grandchild, niece, or nephew),
2. Was:
Qualifying Relative
a. Under age 19 at the end of 2011 and younger
A qualifying relative is a person:than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly),
b. Under age 24 at the end of 2011, a full-time stu- 1. Who is your:
dent, and younger than you (or your spouse, if
a. Son, daughter, stepchild, or foster child, or a de-filing jointly), or
scendant of any of them (for example, yourc. Any age and permanently and totally disabled, grandchild),
b. Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, or a son or3. Lived with you for more than half of 2011,
daughter of any of them,4. Did not provide over half of his or her own support for
c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sibling of either2011, and
of them (for example, your grandmother, grandfa-5. Did not file a joint return, other than to claim a refund. ther, aunt, or uncle),
d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, stepmother,
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law,Adopted child. A legally adopted child is treated as your
mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, orown child. This child includes a child lawfully placed with
you for legal adoption. e. Any other person (other than your spouse) who
You can include medical expenses that you paid for a lived with you all year as a member of your
child before adoption if the child qualified as your depen- household if your relationship did not violate local
dent when the medical services were provided or when the law,
expenses were paid.
2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Qualifying Child,If you pay back an adoption agency or other persons for
earlier) of any taxpayer for 2011, andmedical expenses they paid under an agreement with you,
you are treated as having paid those expenses provided 3. For whom you provided over half of the support inyou clearly substantiate that the payment is directly attribu- 2011. But see Child of divorced or separated par-table to the medical care of the child. ents, earlier, Support claimed under a multiple sup-
But if you pay the agency or other person for medical port agreement, next, and Kidnapped child under
care that was provided and paid for before adoption negoti- Qualifying Relative in Publication 501, Exemptions,
ations began, you cannot include them as medical ex- Standard Deduction, and Filing Information.
penses.
You may be able to take a credit for other ex- Support claimed under a multiple support agreement.
penses related to an adoption. See the Instruc- If you are considered to have provided more than half of a
tions for Form 8839, Qualified Adoption qualifying relative's support under a multiple support
TIP
Expenses, for more information. agreement, you can include medical expenses you pay for
Page 4 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 5 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that person. A multiple support agreement is used when What if you pay medical expenses of a deceased
two or more people provide more than half of a person's spouse or dependent? If you paid medical expenses for
support, but no one alone provides more than half. your deceased spouse or dependent, include them as
Any medical expenses paid by others who joined you in medical expenses on your Form 1040 in the year paid,
the agreement cannot be included as medical expenses by whether they are paid before or after the decedent's death.
anyone. However, you can include the entire un- The expenses can be included if the person was your
reimbursed amount you paid for medical expenses. spouse or dependent either at the time the medical serv-
ices were provided or at the time you paid the expenses.
Example. You and your three brothers each provide
one-fourth of your mother's total support. Under a multiple
support agreement, you treat your mother as your depen-
What Medical Expenses Aredent. You paid all of her medical expenses. Your brothers
repaid you for three-fourths of these expenses. In figuring
Includible?your medical expense deduction, you can include only
one-fourth of your mother's medical expenses. Your broth- Following is a list of items that you can include in figuringers cannot include any part of the expenses. However, if
your medical expense deduction. The items are listed inyou and your brothers share the nonmedical support items
alphabetical order.and you separately pay all of your mother's medical ex-
penses, you can include the unreimbursed amount you This list does not include all possible medical expenses.
paid for her medical expenses in your medical expenses. To determine if an expense not listed can be included in
figuring your medical expense deduction, see What Are
Medical Expenses, earlier.Decedent
Medical expenses paid before death by the decedent are Abortionincluded in figuring any deduction for medical and dental
expenses on the decedent's final income tax return. This You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
includes expenses for the decedent's spouse and depen- for a legal abortion.
dents as well as for the decedent.
The survivor or personal representative of a decedent Acupuncturecan choose to treat certain expenses paid by the dece-
dent's estate for the decedent's medical care as paid by You can include in medical expenses the amount you paythe decedent at the time the medical services were pro- for acupuncture.vided. The expenses must be paid within the 1-year period
beginning with the day after the date of death. If you are the
Alcoholismsurvivor or personal representative making this choice,
you must attach a statement to the decedent's Form 1040 You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for(or the decedent's amended return, Form 1040X) saying an inpatient's treatment at a therapeutic center for alcoholthat the expenses have not been and will not be claimed on addiction. This includes meals and lodging provided by thethe estate tax return. center during treatment.
 Qualified medical expenses paid before death by You can also include in medical expenses amounts youthe decedent are not deductible if paid with a pay for transportation to and from Alcoholics Anonymoustax-free distribution from any Archer MSA, Medi-
CAUTION
! meetings in your community if the attendance is pursuantcare Advantage MSA, or health savings account. to medical advice that membership in Alcoholics Anony-What if the decedent's return had been filed and the mous is necessary for the treatment of a disease involvingmedical expenses were not included? Form 1040X can the excessive use of alcoholic liquors.be filed for the year or years the expenses are treated as
paid, unless the period for filing an amended return for that
Ambulanceyear has passed. Generally, an amended return must be
filed within 3 years of the date the original return was filed, You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay foror within 2 years from the time the tax was paid, whichever ambulance service.date is later.
Annual Physical ExaminationExample. John properly filed his 2010 income tax re-
turn. He died in 2011 with unpaid medical expenses of
See Physical Examination, later.$1,500 from 2010 and $1,800 in 2011. If the expenses are
paid within the 1-year period, his survivor or personal
representative can file an amended return for 2010 claim- Artificial Limb
ing a deduction based on the $1,500 medical expenses.
You can include in medical expenses the amount you payThe $1,800 of medical expenses from 2011 can be in-
cluded on the decedent's final return for 2011. for an artificial limb.
Publication 502 (2011) Page 5

Page 6 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Constructing entrance or exit ramps for your home.Artificial Teeth
• Widening doorways at entrances or exits to yourYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay home.for artificial teeth.
• Widening or otherwise modifying hallways and inte-
rior doorways.Autoette
• Installing railings, support bars, or other modifica-
See Wheelchair, later. tions to bathrooms.
• Lowering or modifying kitchen cabinets and equip-
Bandages ment.
• Moving or modifying electrical outlets and fixtures.You can include in medical expenses the cost of medical
supplies such as bandages. • Installing porch lifts and other forms of lifts (but ele-
vators generally add value to the house).
Birth Control Pills • Modifying fire alarms, smoke detectors, and other
warning systems.You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for birth control pills prescribed by a doctor. • Modifying stairways.
• Adding handrails or grab bars anywhere (whether orBody Scan not in bathrooms).
You can include in medical expenses the cost of an elec- • Modifying hardware on doors.
tronic body scan. • Modifying areas in front of entrance and exit door-
ways.
Braille Books and Magazines • Grading the ground to provide access to the resi-
dence.You can include in medical expenses the part of the cost of
Braille books and magazines for use by a visually impaired
Only reasonable costs to accommodate a home to aperson that is more than the cost of regular printed edi-
disabled condition are considered medical care. Additionaltions. costs for personal motives, such as for architectural or
aesthetic reasons, are not medical expenses.Breast Pumps and Supplies
Capital expense worksheet. Use Worksheet A to figure
You can include in medical expenses the cost of breast the amount of your capital expense to include in your
pumps and supplies that assist lactation. medical expenses.
Worksheet A. Capital ExpenseBreast Reconstruction Surgery Worksheet
Keep for Your Records
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any, offor breast reconstruction surgery, as well as breast pros-
your medical expenses due to a home improvement.thesis, following a mastectomy for cancer. See Cosmetic
Surgery, later. 1. Enter the amount you paid for the home
improvement ..................... . 1.
Capital Expenses 2. Enter the value of your home
immediately after theYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for improvement ........... . 2.special equipment installed in a home, or for improve-
3. Enter the value of your homements, if their main purpose is medical care for you, your
immediately before thespouse, or your dependent. The cost of permanent im-
improvement ........... . 3.provements that increase the value of your property may
be partly included as a medical expense. The cost of the 4. Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the
improvement is reduced by the increase in the value of increase in the value of your home due to
the improvement. .................. . 4.your property. The difference is a medical expense. If the
value of your property is not increased by the improve- • If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1, you
ment, the entire cost is included as a medical expense. have no medical expenses due to the home
improvement; stop here.Certain improvements made to accommodate a home
to your disabled condition, or that of your spouse or your • If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.
dependents who live with you, do not usually increase the
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are yourvalue of the home and the cost can be included in full as medical expenses due to the homemedical expenses. These improvements include, but are improvement ..................... . 5.not limited to, the following items.
Page 6 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 7 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Car
Example. You have a heart ailment. On your doctor's
You can include in medical expenses the cost of specialadvice, you install an elevator in your home so that you will
hand controls and other special equipment installed in anot have to climb stairs. The elevator costs $8,000. An
car for the use of a person with a disability.appraisal shows that the elevator increases the value of
your home by $4,400. You figure your medical expense as Special design. You can include in medical expenses the
shown in the filled-in example of Worksheet A. difference between the cost of a regular car and a car
specially designed to hold a wheelchair.Worksheet A.  Capital Expense
Cost of operation. The includible costs of using a car forWorksheetÐIllustrated
medical reasons are explained under Transportation, later.Keep for Your Records
ChiropractorInstructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any, of
your medical expenses due to a home improvement.
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to a
chiropractor for medical care.1. Enter the amount you paid for the home
improvement ..................... . 1. 8,000
Christian Science Practitioner2. Enter the value of your home
immediately after the
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay toimprovement ........... . 2. 124,400
Christian Science practitioners for medical care.3. Enter the value of your home
immediately before the
improvement ........... . 3. 120,000 Contact Lenses
4. Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forincrease in the value of your home due to contact lenses needed for medical reasons. You can alsothe improvement. .................. . 4. 4,400 include the cost of equipment and materials required for
• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1, you using contact lenses, such as saline solution and enzyme
have no medical expenses due to the home cleaner. See Eyeglasses and Eye Surgery, later.improvement; stop here.
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5. Crutches
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are your You can include in medical expenses the amount you paymedical expenses due to the home
to buy or rent crutches.improvement ..................... . 5. 3,600
Dental Treatment
Operation and upkeep. Amounts you pay for operation You can include in medical expenses the amounts you payand upkeep of a capital asset qualify as medical expenses, for the prevention and alleviation of dental disease. Pre-as long as the main reason for them is medical care. This ventive treatment includes the services of a dental hygien-rule applies even if none or only part of the original cost of ist or dentist for such procedures as teeth cleaning, thethe capital asset qualified as a medical care expense. application of sealants, and fluoride treatments to prevent
tooth decay. Treatment to alleviate dental disease includeExample. If, in the previous example, the elevator in- services of a dentist for procedures such as X-rays, fillings,creased the value of your home by $8,000, you would have braces, extractions, dentures, and other dental ailments.no medical expense for the cost of the elevator. However, But see Teeth Whitening under What Expenses Are Not
the cost of electricity to operate the elevator and any costs Includible, later.
to maintain it are medical expenses as long as the medical
reason for the elevator exists. Diagnostic Devices
Improvements to property rented by a person with a You can include in medical expenses the cost of devices
disability. Amounts paid to buy and install special plumb- used in diagnosing and treating illness and disease.
ing fixtures for a person with a disability, mainly for medical
Example. You have diabetes and use a blood sugarreasons, in a rented house are medical expenses.
test kit to monitor your blood sugar level. You can include
the cost of the blood sugar test kit in your medical ex-Example. John has arthritis and a heart condition. He
penses.cannot climb stairs or get into a bathtub. On his doctor's
advice, he installs a bathroom with a shower stall on the
first floor of his two-story rented house. The landlord did Disabled Dependent Care Expenses
not pay any of the cost of buying and installing the special
plumbing and did not lower the rent. John can include in Some disabled dependent care expenses may qualify as
medical expenses the entire amount he paid. either:
Publication 502 (2011) Page 7

Page 8 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Medical expenses, or and veterinary care, incurred in maintaining the health and
vitality of the service animal so that it may perform its• Work-related expenses for purposes of taking a duties.credit for dependent care. (See Publication 503,
Child and Dependent Care Expenses.)
Health InstituteYou can choose to apply them either way as long as you do
not use the same expenses to claim both a credit and a You can include in medical expenses fees you pay for
medical expense deduction. treatment at a health institute only if the treatment is pre-
scribed by a physician and the physician issues a state-
ment that the treatment is necessary to alleviate a physical
Drug Addiction or mental defect or illness of the individual receiving the
treatment.You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
an inpatient's treatment at a therapeutic center for drug
Health Maintenanceaddiction. This includes meals and lodging at the center
during treatment. Organization (HMO)
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay toDrugs entitle you, your spouse, or a dependent to receive medical
care from an HMO. These amounts are treated as medicalSee Medicines, later.
insurance premiums. See Insurance Premiums, later.
Eye Exam Hearing Aids
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a hearingfor eye examinations.
aid and batteries, repairs, and maintenance needed to
operate it.Eyeglasses
Home CareYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
eyeglasses and contact lenses needed for medical rea-
See Nursing Services, later.sons. See Contact Lenses, earlier, for more information.
Home ImprovementsEye Surgery
See Capital Expenses, earlier.You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for eye surgery to treat defective vision, such as laser eye
surgery or radial keratotomy. Hospital Services
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forFertility Enhancement the cost of inpatient care at a hospital or similar institution if
a principal reason for being there is to receive medicalYou can include in medical expenses the cost of the
care. This includes amounts paid for meals and lodging.following procedures to overcome an inability to have chil-
Also see Lodging, later.dren.
• Procedures such as in vitro fertilization (including Insurance Premiumstemporary storage of eggs or sperm).
You can include in medical expenses insurance premiums• Surgery, including an operation to reverse prior sur-
you pay for policies that cover medical care. Medical caregery that prevented the person operated on from
policies can provide payment for treatment that includes:having children.
• Hospitalization, surgical services, X-rays,
• Prescription drugs and insulin,Founder's Fee
• Dental care,
See Lifetime CareÐAdvance Payments, later. • Replacement of lost or damaged contact lenses, and
• Long-term care (subject to additional limitations).Guide Dog or Other Service Animal
See Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts
You can include in medical expenses the costs of buying, under Long-Term Care, later.
training, and maintaining a guide dog or other service
animal to assist a visually impaired or hearing-impaired If you have a policy that provides payments for other
person, or a person with other physical disabilities. In than medical care, you can include the premiums for the
general, this includes any costs, such as food, grooming, medical care part of the policy if the charge for the medical
Page 8 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 9 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
part is reasonable. The cost of the medical part must be enrolled in Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare A
separately stated in the insurance contract or given to you is not a medical expense.
in a separate statement. If you are not covered under social security (or were not
a government employee who paid Medicare tax), you canHealth coverage tax credit. If, during 2011, you were an voluntarily enroll in Medicare A. In this situation you caneligible trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, alter- include the premiums you paid for Medicare A as a medicalnative TAA (ATAA) recipient, reemployment TAA (RTAA) expense.recipient, or Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
(PBGC) pension recipient, you must complete Form 8885
before completing Schedule A, line 1. When figuring the Medicare Bamount of insurance premiums you can deduct on Sched-
ule A, do not include: Medicare B is a supplemental medical insurance. Premi-
ums you pay for Medicare B are a medical expense. Check• Any amounts you included on Form 8885, line 4,
the information you received from the Social Security Ad-• Any qualified health insurance premiums you paid to ministration to find out your premium.ªU.S. Treasury±HCTCº, or
• Any health coverage tax credit advance payments Medicare Dshown in box 1 and any additional credit reported in
the box to the left of box 8 of Form 1099-H. Medicare D is a voluntary prescription drug insurance
program for persons with Medicare A or B. You can include
as a medical expense premiums you pay for Medicare D.Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Plan
Do not include in your medical and dental expenses any
Prepaid Insurance Premiumsinsurance premiums paid by an employer-sponsored
health insurance plan unless the premiums are included in Premiums you pay before you are age 65 for insurance forbox 1 of your Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. Also, medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your dependentsdo not include any other medical and dental expenses paid
after you reach age 65 are medical care expenses in theby the plan unless the amount paid is included in box 1 of
year paid if they are:your Form W-2.
1. Payable in equal yearly installments or more often,Example. You are a federal employee participating in andthe premium conversion plan of the Federal Employee
Health Benefits (FEHB) program. Your share of the FEHB 2. Payable for at least 10 years, or until you reach age
premium is paid by making a pre-tax reduction in your 65 (but not for less than 5 years).
salary. Because you are an employee whose insurance
premiums are paid with money that is never included in
your gross income, you cannot deduct the premiums paid Unused Sick Leave Used To Pay Premiumswith that money.
You must include in gross income cash payments you
Long-term care services. Contributions made by your receive at the time of retirement for unused sick leave. Youemployer to provide coverage for qualified long-term care also must include in gross income the value of unused sickservices under a flexible spending or similar arrangement leave that, at your option, your employer applies to the costmust be included in your income. This amount will be of your continuing participation in your employer's healthreported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2. plan after you retire. You can include this cost of continuing
participation in the health plan as a medical expense.Retired public safety officers. If you are a retired public
safety officer, do not include as medical expenses any If you participate in a health plan where your employer
health or long-term care insurance premiums that you automatically applies the value of unused sick leave to the
elected to have paid with tax-free distributions from a cost of your continuing participation in the health plan (and
retirement plan. This applies only to distributions that you do not have the option to receive cash), do not include
would otherwise be included in income. the value of the unused sick leave in gross income. You
cannot include this cost of continuing participation in thatHealth reimbursement arrangement (HRA). If you have health plan as a medical expense.medical expenses that are reimbursed by a health reim-
bursement arrangement, you cannot include those ex-
penses in your medical expenses. This is because an HRA Insurance Premiums You Cannot Include
is funded solely by the employer.
You cannot include premiums you pay for:
• Life insurance policies,Medicare A
• Policies providing payment for loss of earnings,If you are covered under social security (or if you are a
government employee who paid Medicare tax), you are • Policies for loss of life, limb, sight, etc.,
Publication 502 (2011) Page 9

Page 10 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Policies that pay you a guaranteed amount each Lead-Based Paint Removal
week for a stated number of weeks if you are hospi-
You can include in medical expenses the cost of removingtalized for sickness or injury,
lead-based paints from surfaces in your home to prevent a• The part of your car insurance that provides medical child who has or had lead poisoning from eating the paint.insurance coverage for all persons injured in or by These surfaces must be in poor repair (peeling or cracking)your car because the part of the premium providing or within the child's reach. The cost of repainting the
insurance for you, your spouse, and your depen- scraped area is not a medical expense.
dents is not stated separately from the part of the If, instead of removing the paint, you cover the area withpremium providing insurance for medical care for wallboard or paneling, treat these items as capital ex-
others, or penses. See Capital Expenses, earlier. Do not include the
cost of painting the wallboard as a medical expense.• Health or long-term care insurance if you elected to
pay these premiums with tax-free distributions from
Learning Disabilitya retirement plan made directly to the insurance pro-
vider and these distributions would otherwise have See Special Education, later.been included in income.
Taxes imposed by any governmental unit, such as Medi- Legal Feescare taxes, are not insurance premiums.
You can include in medical expenses legal fees you paid
Coverage for nondependents. Generally, you cannot that are necessary to authorize treatment for mental ill-
deduct any additional premium you pay as the result of ness. However, you cannot include in medical expenses
including on your policy someone who is not your spouse fees for the management of a guardianship estate, fees for
or dependent, even if that person is your child under age conducting the affairs of the person being treated, or other
fees that are not necessary for medical care.27. However, you can deduct the additional premium if that
person is:
Lifetime CareÐAdvance Payments• Your child whom you do not claim as a dependent
because of the rules for children of divorced or sepa- You can include in medical expenses a part of a life-carerated parents, fee or ªfounder's feeº you pay either monthly or as a lump
sum under an agreement with a retirement home. The part• Any person you could have claimed as a dependent
of the payment you include is the amount properly alloca-on your return except that person received $3,700 or
ble to medical care. The agreement must require that youmore of gross income or filed a joint return, or
pay a specific fee as a condition for the home's promise to• Any person you could have claimed as a dependent provide lifetime care that includes medical care. You can
except that you, or your spouse if filing jointly, can use a statement from the retirement home to prove the
be claimed as a dependent on someone else's 2011 amount properly allocable to medical care. The statement
return. must be based either on the home's prior experience or on
information from a comparable home.Also, if you had family coverage when you added this
individual to your policy and your premiums did not in- Dependents with disabilities. You can include in medi-crease, you can enter on line 1 the full amount of your cal expenses advance payments to a private institution formedical and dental insurance premiums. lifetime care, treatment, and training of your physically or
mentally impaired child upon your death or when you
become unable to provide care. The payments must be aIntellectually and Developmentally condition for the institution's future acceptance of your
Disabled, Special Home for child and must not be refundable.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of keeping a Payments for future medical care. Generally, you can-person who is intellectually and developmentally disabled not include in medical expenses current payments forin a special home, not the home of a relative, on the medical care (including medical insurance) to be providedrecommendation of a psychiatrist to help the person adjust substantially beyond the end of the year. This rule does not
from life in a mental hospital to community living. apply in situations where the future care is purchased in
connection with obtaining lifetime care of the type de-
scribed earlier.Laboratory Fees
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay Lodgingfor laboratory fees that are part of medical care.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals and
lodging at a hospital or similar institution if a principalLactation Expenses
reason for being there is to receive medical care. See
See Breast Pumps and Supplies, earlier. Nursing Home, later.
Page 10 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 11 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You may be able to include in medical expenses the Maintenance and personal care services.  Mainte-
cost of lodging not provided in a hospital or similar institu- nance or personal care services is care which has as its
tion. You can include the cost of such lodging while away primary purpose the providing of a chronically ill individual
from home if all of the following requirements are met. with needed assistance with his or her disabilities (includ-
ing protection from threats to health and safety due to1. The lodging is primarily for and essential to medical severe cognitive impairment).care.
2. The medical care is provided by a doctor in a li-
Qualified Long-Term Care Insurancecensed hospital or in a medical care facility related
to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital. Contracts
3. The lodging is not lavish or extravagant under the A qualified long-term care insurance contract is an insur-circumstances. ance contract that provides only coverage of qualified
4. There is no significant element of personal pleasure, long-term care services. The contract must:
recreation, or vacation in the travel away from home.
1. Be guaranteed renewable,The amount you include in medical expenses for lodg-
2. Not provide for a cash surrender value or othering cannot be more than $50 for each night for each
money that can be paid, assigned, pledged, or bor-person. You can include lodging for a person traveling with
the person receiving the medical care. For example, if a rowed,
parent is traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per night 3. Provide that refunds, other than refunds on the deathcan be included as a medical expense for lodging. Meals of the insured or complete surrender or cancellationare not included. of the contract, and dividends under the contract
Do not include the cost of lodging while away from home must be used only to reduce future premiums or
for medical treatment if that treatment is not received from increase future benefits, and
a doctor in a licensed hospital or in a medical care facility
4. Generally not pay or reimburse expenses incurredrelated to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital or if that
for services or items that would be reimbursed underlodging is not primarily for or essential to the medical care
Medicare, except where Medicare is a secondaryreceived.
payer, or the contract makes per diem or other peri-
odic payments without regard to expenses.Long-Term Care
The amount of qualified long-term care premiums youYou can include in medical expenses amounts paid for can include is limited. You can include the following asqualified long-term care services and premiums paid for medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040).qualified long-term care insurance contracts.
1. Qualified long-term care premiums up to the
amounts shown below.Qualified Long-Term Care Services
a. Age 40 or under ± $340.Qualified long-term care services are necessary diagnos-
tic, preventive, therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, re- b. Age 41 to 50 ± $640.
habilitative services, and maintenance and personal care c. Age 51 to 60 ± $1,270.services (defined later) that are:
d. Age 61 to 70 ± $3,390.1. Required by a chronically ill individual, and
e. Age 71 or over ± $4,240.2. Provided pursuant to a plan of care prescribed by a
licensed health care practitioner. 2. Unreimbursed expenses for qualified long-term care
services.
Chronically ill individual. An individual is chronically ill if, Note. The limit on premiums is for each person.
within the previous 12 months, a licensed health care Also, if you are an eligible retired public safety officer,practitioner has certified that the individual meets either of you cannot include premiums for long-term care insurancethe following descriptions. if you elected to pay these premiums with tax-free distribu-
1. He or she is unable to perform at least two activities tions from a qualified retirement plan made directly to the
of daily living without substantial assistance from an- insurance provider and these distributions would otherwise
other individual for at least 90 days, due to a loss of have been included in your income.
functional capacity. Activities of daily living are eat-
ing, toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing, and con- Mealstinence.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals at a2. He or she requires substantial supervision to be pro-
hospital or similar institution if a principal reason for beingtected from threats to health and safety due to se-
vere cognitive impairment. there is to get medical care.
Publication 502 (2011) Page 11

Page 12 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of bathing and grooming the patient. These services can be
provided in your home or another care facility.meals that are not part of inpatient care. Also see
Weight-Loss Program and Nutritional Supplements, later. Generally, only the amount spent for nursing services is
a medical expense. If the attendant also provides personal
and household services, amounts paid to the attendantMedical Conferences must be divided between the time spent performing house-
hold and personal services and the time spent for nursingYou can include in medical expenses amounts paid for
services. For example, because of your medical conditionadmission and transportation to a medical conference if
you pay a visiting nurse $300 per week for medical andthe medical conference concerns the chronic illness of
household services. She spends 10% of her time doingyourself, your spouse, or your dependent. The costs of the
household services such as washing dishes and laundry.medical conference must be primarily for and necessary to You can include only $270 per week as medical expenses.the medical care of you, your spouse, or your dependent. The $30 (10% ×  $300) allocated to household servicesThe majority of the time spent at the conference must be cannot be included. However, certain maintenance or per-spent attending sessions on medical information. sonal care services provided for qualified long-term care
The cost of meals and lodging while attending the can be included in medical expenses. See Maintenance
conference is not deductible as a medical ex- and personal care services under Long-Term Care, earlier.
pense. Additionally, certain expenses for household services or
CAUTION
!
for the care of a qualifying individual incurred to allow you
to work may qualify for the child and dependent care credit.
Medical Information Plan See Publication 503, Child and Dependent Care Ex-
penses.You can include in medical expenses amounts paid to a You can also include in medical expenses part of theplan that keeps medical information in a computer data amount you pay for that attendant's meals. Divide the foodbank and retrieves and furnishes the information upon expense among the household members to find the cost ofrequest to an attending physician. the attendant's food. Then divide that cost in the same
manner as in the preceding paragraph. If you had to pay
Medicines additional amounts for household upkeep because of the
attendant, you can include the extra amounts with your
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for medical expenses. This includes extra rent or utilities you
prescribed medicines and drugs. A prescribed drug is one pay because you moved to a larger apartment to provide
that requires a prescription by a doctor for its use by an space for the attendant.
individual. You can also include amounts you pay for
insulin. Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical Employment taxes. You can include as a medical ex-expenses amounts you pay for a drug that is not pre- pense social security tax, FUTA, Medicare tax, and statescribed. employment taxes you pay for an attendant who provides
medical care. If the attendant also provides personal andImported medicines and drugs. If you imported household services, you can include as a medical expensemedicines or drugs from other countries, see Medicines only the amount of employment taxes paid for medical
and Drugs From Other Countries , under What Expenses services as explained earlier. For information on employ-
Are Not Includible, later. ment tax responsibilities of household employers, see
Publication 926, Household Employer's Tax Guide.
Nursing Home
OperationsYou can include in medical expenses the cost of medical
care in a nursing home, home for the aged, or similar You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
institution, for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents. legal operations that are not for unnecessary cosmetic
This includes the cost of meals and lodging in the home if a surgery. See Cosmetic Surgery under What Expenses Are
principal reason for being there is to get medical care. Not Includible, later.
Do not include the cost of meals and lodging if the
reason for being in the home is personal. You can, how- Optometrist
ever, include in medical expenses the part of the cost that
is for medical or nursing care. See Eyeglasses, earlier.
Nursing Services Organ Donors
You can include in medical expenses wages and other See Transplants, later.
amounts you pay for nursing services. The services need
not be performed by a nurse as long as the services are of Osteopath
a kind generally performed by a nurse. This includes serv-
ices connected with caring for the patient's condition, such You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
as giving medication or changing dressings, as well as an osteopath for medical care.
Page 12 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 13 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the school. Overcoming the learning disabilities must be aOxygen
principal reason for attending the school, and any ordinary
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for education received must be incidental to the special edu-
oxygen and oxygen equipment to relieve breathing cation provided. Special education includes:
problems caused by a medical condition. • Teaching Braille to a visually impaired person,
• Teaching lip reading to a hearing-impaired person,Physical Examination
or
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay • Giving remedial language training to correct a condi-for an annual physical examination and diagnostic tests by tion caused by a birth defect.a physician. You do not have to be ill at the time of the
examination. You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
sending a problem child to a school where the course ofExample. Beth goes to see Dr. Hayes for her annual study and the disciplinary methods have a beneficial effectcheck-up. Dr. Hayes does a physical examination and has
on the child's attitude if the availability of medical care insome lab tests done. Beth can include the cost of the exam
the school is not a principal reason for sending the studentand lab tests in her medical expenses, if her insurance
there.does not cover the cost.
SterilizationPregnancy Test Kit
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a legalYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
sterilization (a legally performed operation to make a per-to purchase a pregnancy test kit to determine if you are
pregnant. son unable to have children). Also see Vasectomy, later.
Prosthesis Stop-Smoking Programs
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forSee Artificial Limb  and Breast Reconstruction Surgery ,
earlier. a program to stop smoking. However, you cannot include
in medical expenses amounts you pay for drugs that do not
require a prescription, such as nicotine gum or patches,Psychiatric Care
that are designed to help stop smoking.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
psychiatric care. This includes the cost of supporting a Surgerymentally ill dependent at a specially equipped medical
center where the dependent receives medical care. See See Operations, earlier.
Psychoanalysis, next, and Transportation, later.
TelephonePsychoanalysis
You can include in medical expenses the cost of special
You can include in medical expenses payments for psy- telephone equipment that lets a hearing-impaired personchoanalysis. However, you cannot include payments for communicate over a regular telephone. This includes tele-psychoanalysis that is part of required training to be a typewriter (TTY) and telecommunications device for thepsychoanalyst. deaf (TDD) equipment. You can also include the cost of
repairing the equipment.
Psychologist
TelevisionYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
a psychologist for medical care. You can include in medical expenses the cost of equip-
ment that displays the audio part of television programs as
Special Education subtitles for hearing-impaired persons. This may be the
cost of an adapter that attaches to a regular set. It also mayYou can include in medical expenses fees you pay on a be the part of the cost of a specially equipped televisiondoctor's recommendation for a child's tutoring by a teacher that exceeds the cost of the same model regular televisionwho is specially trained and qualified to work with children
set.who have learning disabilities caused by mental or physi-
cal impairments, including nervous system disorders.
You can include in medical expenses the cost (tuition, Therapy
meals, and lodging) of attending a school that furnishes
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forspecial education to help a child to overcome learning
disabilities. A doctor must recommend that the child attend therapy received as medical treatment.
Publication 502 (2011) Page 13

Page 14 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Going to and from work, even if your condition re-Transplants quires an unusual means of transportation.
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for • Travel for purely personal reasons to another city formedical care you receive because you are a donor or a an operation or other medical care.possible donor of a kidney or other organ. This includes
• Travel that is merely for the general improvement oftransportation.
one's health.You can include any expenses you pay for the medical
care of a donor in connection with the donating of an organ. • The costs of operating a specially equipped car for
This includes transportation. other than medical reasons.
Transportation
TripsYou can include in medical expenses amounts paid for
transportation primarily for, and essential to, medical care. You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
transportation to another city if the trip is primarily for, andYou can include: essential to, receiving medical services. You may be able
to include up to $50 per night for lodging. See Lodging,• Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares or ambulance service,
earlier.• Transportation expenses of a parent who must go You cannot include in medical expenses a trip or vaca-with a child who needs medical care, tion taken merely for a change in environment, improve-
• Transportation expenses of a nurse or other person ment of morale, or general improvement of health, even if
who can give injections, medications, or other treat- the trip is made on the advice of a doctor. However, see
ment required by a patient who is traveling to get Medical Conferences, earlier.
medical care and is unable to travel alone, and
Tuition• Transportation expenses for regular visits to see a
mentally ill dependent, if these visits are recom-
Under special circumstances, you can include charges formended as a part of treatment.
tuition in medical expenses. See Special Education, ear-
lier.
Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocket expenses, You can include charges for a health plan included in asuch as the cost of gas and oil, when you use a car for lump-sum tuition fee if the charges are separately stated ormedical reasons. You cannot include depreciation, insur- can easily be obtained from the school.ance, general repair, or maintenance expenses.
If you do not want to use your actual expenses for 2011
Vasectomyyou can use the standard medical mileage rate of 19 cents
a mile for miles driven from January 1 to June 30, and 23.5 You can include in medical expenses the amount you paycents a mile for miles driven from July 1 to December 31, for a vasectomy.2011.
 You can also include parking fees and tolls. You can
Vision Correction Surgeryadd these fees and tolls to your medical expenses whether
you use actual expenses or use the standard mileage rate. See Eye Surgery, earlier.
Example. In 2011, Bill Jones drove 1,800 miles for
medical reasons from January through June and 1,000 Weight-Loss Program
miles from July through December. He spent $500 for gas,
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to$30 for oil, and $100 for tolls and parking. He wants to
lose weight if it is a treatment for a specific disease diag-figure the amount he can include in medical expenses both
nosed by a physician (such as obesity, hypertension, orways to see which gives him the greater deduction.
heart disease). This includes fees you pay for membershipHe figures the actual expenses first. He adds the $500 in a weight reduction group as well as fees for attendancefor gas, the $30 for oil, and the $100 for tolls and parking for at periodic meetings. You cannot include membershipa total of $630. dues in a gym, health club, or spa as medical expenses,He then figures the standard mileage amount. He multi- but you can include separate fees charged there for weightplies 1,800 miles by 19 cents a mile and 1,000 miles by loss activities.23.5 cents a mile for a total of $577. He then adds the $100
You cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages intolls and parking for a total of $677.
medical expenses because the diet food and beveragesBill includes the $677 of car expenses with his other
substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-medical expenses for the year because the $677 is more
tional needs. You can include the cost of special food inthan the $630 he figured using actual expenses.
medical expenses only if:
Transportation expenses you cannot include. You 1. The food does not satisfy normal nutritional needs,cannot include in medical expenses the cost of transporta-
tion in the following situations. 2. The food alleviates or treats an illness, and
Page 14 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 15 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. The need for the food is substantiated by a physi- disease. You generally cannot include in medical ex-
cian. penses the amount you pay for procedures such as face
lifts, hair transplants, hair removal (electrolysis), and li-The amount you can include in medical expenses is limited posuction.to the amount by which the cost of the special food ex-
You can include in medical expenses the amount youceeds the cost of a normal diet. See also Weight-Loss
pay for cosmetic surgery if it is necessary to improve aProgram under What Expenses Are Not Includible, later.
deformity arising from, or directly related to, a congenital
abnormality, a personal injury resulting from an accident orWheelchair trauma, or a disfiguring disease.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for Example. An individual undergoes surgery thatan autoette or a wheelchair used mainly for the relief of removes a breast as part of treatment for cancer. She payssickness or disability, and not just to provide transportation a surgeon to reconstruct the breast. The surgery to recon-to and from work. The cost of operating and maintaining
struct the breast corrects a deformity directly related to thethe autoette or wheelchair is also a medical expense.
disease. The cost of the surgery is includible in her medical
expenses.Wig
Dancing LessonsYou can include in medical expenses the cost of a wig
purchased upon the advice of a physician for the mental
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of danc-health of a patient who has lost all of his or her hair from
ing lessons, swimming lessons, etc., even if they are rec-disease.
ommended by a doctor, if they are only for the
improvement of general health.X-ray
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for Diaper Service
X-rays for medical reasons.
You cannot include in medical expenses the amount you
pay for diapers or diaper services, unless they are needed
to relieve the effects of a particular disease.What Expenses Are Not
Includible? Electrolysis or Hair Removal
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.Following is a list of some items that you cannot include in
figuring your medical expense deduction. The items are
listed in alphabetical order. Flexible Spending Account
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts forBaby Sitting, Childcare, and Nursing
which you are fully reimbursed by your flexible spendingServices for a Normal, Healthy Baby account if you contribute a part of your income on a pre-tax
basis to pay for the qualified benefit.You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for the care of children, even if the expenses enable you,
your spouse, or your dependent to get medical or dental Funeral Expenses
treatment. Also, any expense allowed as a childcare credit
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you paycannot be treated as an expense paid for medical care.
for funerals.
Controlled Substances Future Medical Care
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses currentfor controlled substances (such as marijuana, laetrile,
payments for medical care (including medical insurance)etc.). Such substances may be legalized by state law.
to be provided substantially beyond the end of the year.However, they are in violation of federal law and cannot be
This rule does not apply in situations where the future careincluded in medical expenses.
is purchased in connection with obtaining lifetime care or
long-term care of the type described at Lifetime Care ÐCosmetic Surgery Advance Payments or Long-Term Care earlier under What
Medical Expenses Are Includible.Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses the
amount you pay for unnecessary cosmetic surgery. This
includes any procedure that is directed at improving the Hair Transplant
patient's appearance and does not meaningfully promote
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.the proper function of the body or prevent or treat illness or
Publication 502 (2011) Page 15

Page 16 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount of the distribution and include the expenses. ForHealth Club Dues more information on Archer MSAs, see Publication 969.
You cannot include in medical expenses health club dues
or amounts paid to improve one's general health or to Medicines and Drugs From Other
relieve physical or mental discomfort not related to a partic- Countriesular medical condition.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of In general, you cannot include in your medical expensesmembership in any club organized for business, pleasure, the cost of a prescribed drug brought in (or orderedrecreation, or other social purpose. shipped) from another country. You can only include the
cost of a drug that was imported legally. For example, you
can include the cost of a prescribed drug the Food andHealth Coverage Tax Credit
Drug Administration announces can be legally imported by
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay individuals.
for health insurance that you use in figuring your health You can include the cost of a prescribed drug you
coverage tax credit. For more information, see Health purchase and consume in another country if the drug is
Coverage Tax Credit, later. legal in both the other country and the United States.
Health Savings Accounts Nonprescription Drugs and Medicines
You cannot include in medical expenses any payment or Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical expenses
distribution for medical expenses out of a health savings amounts you pay for a drug that is not prescribed.
account. Contributions to health savings accounts are de-
ducted separately. See Publication 969. Example. Your doctor recommends that you take aspi-
rin. Because aspirin is a drug that does not require a
physician's prescription, you cannot include its cost in yourHousehold Help
medical expenses.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of house-
hold help, even if such help is recommended by a doctor. Nutritional SupplementsThis is a personal expense that is not deductible. However,
you may be able to include certain expenses paid to a You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of nutri-
person providing nursing-type services. For more informa- tional supplements, vitamins, herbal supplements, ªnatural
tion, see Nursing Services , earlier under What Medical medicines,º etc. unless they are recommended by a medi-
Expenses Are Includible . Also, certain maintenance or cal practitioner as treatment for a specific medical condi-
personal care services provided for qualified long-term tion diagnosed by a physician. Otherwise, these items are
care can be included in medical expenses. For more infor- taken to maintain your ordinary good health, and are not
mation, see Long-Term Care, earlier under What Medical for medical care.
Expenses Are Includible.
Personal Use ItemsIllegal Operations and Treatments
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of an
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay item ordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposes
for illegal operations, treatments, or controlled substances unless it is used primarily to prevent or alleviate a physical
whether rendered or prescribed by licensed or unlicensed or mental defect or illness. For example, the cost of a
practitioners. toothbrush and toothpaste is a nondeductible personal
expense.
In order to accommodate an individual with a physicalInsurance Premiums
defect, you may have to purchase an item ordinarily used
as a personal, living, or family item in a special form. YouSee Insurance Premiums under What Medical Expenses
can include the excess of the cost of the item in a specialAre Includible, earlier.
form over the cost of the item in normal form as a medical
expense. (See Braille Books and Magazines  under WhatMaternity Clothes Medical Expenses Are Includible, earlier.)
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for maternity clothes. Swimming Lessons
See Dancing Lessons, earlier.Medical Savings Account (MSA)
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you Teeth Whitening
contribute to an Archer MSA. You cannot include ex-
penses you pay for with a tax-free distribution from your You cannot include in medical expenses amounts paid to
Archer MSA. You also cannot use other funds equal to the whiten teeth. See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Page 16 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 17 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You have insurance policies that cover yourVeterinary Fees hospital and doctors' bills but not your nursing bills. The
insurance you receive for the hospital and doctors' bills isYou generally cannot include veterinary fees in your medi-
more than their charges. In figuring your medical deduc-cal expenses, but see Guide Dog or Other Service Animal
tion, you must reduce the total amount you spent forunder What Medical Expenses Are Includible, earlier.
medical care by the total amount of insurance you re-
ceived, even if the policies do not cover some of yourWeight-Loss Program medical expenses.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of a Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). A health
weight-loss program if the purpose of the weight loss is the reimbursement arrangement is an employer-funded plan
improvement of appearance, general health, or sense of that reimburses employees for medical care expenses and
well-being. You cannot include amounts you pay to lose allows unused amounts to be carried forward. An HRA is
weight unless the weight loss is a treatment for a specific funded solely by the employer and the reimbursements for
disease diagnosed by a physician (such as obesity, hyper- medical expenses, up to a maximum dollar amount for a
tension, or heart disease). If the weight-loss treatment is coverage period, are not included in your income.
not for a specific disease diagnosed by a physician, you Other reimbursements. Generally, you do not reducecannot include either the fees you pay for membership in a medical expenses by payments you receive for:weight reduction group or fees for attendance at periodic
meetings. Also, you cannot include membership dues in a • Permanent loss or loss of use of a member or func-
gym, health club, or spa. tion of the body (loss of limb, sight, hearing, etc.) or
You cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages in disfigurement to the extent the payment is based on
medical expenses because the diet food and beverages the nature of the injury without regard to the amount
substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri- of time lost from work, or
tional needs. • Loss of earnings.See Weight-Loss Program  under What Medical Ex-
penses Are Includible, earlier. You must, however, reduce your medical expenses by
any part of these payments that is designated for medical
costs. See How Do You Figure and Report the DeductionHow Do You Treat on Your Tax Return, later.
For how to treat damages received for personal injury orReimbursements? sickness, see Damages for Personal Injuries, later.
You can include in medical expenses only those amounts
paid during the tax year for which you received no insur- What If Your Insurance Reimbursement Is
ance or other reimbursement. More Than Your Medical Expenses?
If you are reimbursed more than your medical expenses,Insurance Reimbursement
you may have to include the excess in income. You may
want to use Figure 1 to help you decide if any of yourYou must reduce your total medical expenses for the year
reimbursement is taxable.by all reimbursements for medical expenses that you re-
ceive from insurance or other sources during the year. This
includes payments from Medicare.
Even if a policy provides reimbursement only for certain
specific medical expenses, you must use amounts you
receive from that policy to reduce your total medical ex-
penses, including those it does not provide reimbursement
for.
Publication 502 (2011) Page 17

Page 18 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet B. Excess Reimbursement
Includible in Income
When You Have Only One
Policy
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess
reimbursement you must include in income when both you and your
employer contributed to your medical insurance and your employer's
contributions are not included in your gross income.
1. Enter the amount contributed to your
medical insurance for the year by your
employer ...................... . 1.
2. Enter the total annual cost of the policy 2.
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............. . 3.
4. Enter the amount of excess
reimbursement ................. . 4.
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the
amount of the excess reimburse-
ment you must include as other income
on Form 1040, line 21 ............ . 5.
Example. You are covered by your employer's medical
insurance policy. The annual premium is $2,000. Your
employer pays $600 of that amount, which is not included
in your gross income, and the balance of $1,400 is taken
out of your wages. You receive $500 excess reimburse-
ment for your medical expenses. The part of the excess
reimbursement you receive under the policy that is from
your employer's contributions is figured as follows.
Worksheet B. Excess Reimbursement
Includible in Income
Figure 1.
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer.
Was any part of
your premiums
paid by your
employer?
Were your
employer’s
contributions to
your premiums
included in your
income?
Did you pay any
part of the
premiums?
NONE of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Is Your Excess Medical
Reimbursement Taxable?
When You Have Only One
PolicyÐIllustratedPremiums paid by you. If you pay either the entire pre-
Keep for Your Records
mium for your medical insurance or all the costs of a plan
similar to medical insurance and your insurance payments
or other reimbursements are more than your total medical Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess
reimbursement you must include in income when both you and yourexpenses for the year, you have excess reimbursement.
employer contributed to your medical insurance and your employer'sGenerally, you do not include the excess reimbursement in contributions are not included in your gross income.
your gross income. However, gross income does include
total payments in excess of $300 a day ($109,500 for 1. Enter the amount contributed to your
2011) for qualified long-term care services. medical insurance for the year by your
employer ...................... . 1. 600Premiums paid by you and your employer. If both you
2. Enter the total annual cost of the policy 2. 2,000and your employer contribute to your medical insurance
plan and your employer's contributions are not included in 3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............. . 3. .30
your gross income, you must include in your gross income 4. Enter the amount of excessthe part of your excess reimbursement that is from your reimbursement .................. . 4. 500employer's contribution.
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is theIf you are not covered by more than one policy, you can
amount of the excess reimbursementfigure the amount of the excess reimbursement you must
you must include as other income oninclude in gross income using Worksheet B. If you are Form 1040, line 21 ............... . 5. 150covered under more than one policy, see More than one
policy, later. You must include in your gross income 30% (.30) of
$500, or $150, of the excess reimbursement you received
for medical expenses under the policy.
Premiums paid by your employer. If your employer or
your former employer pays the total cost of your medical
insurance plan and your employer's contributions are not
Page 18 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 19 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
included in your income, you must report all of your excess employer pays $300 and the balance of $900 is deducted
reimbursement as other income. from your wages. You also paid the entire premium ($250)
for a personal health insurance policy.
More than one policy. If you are covered under more During the year, you paid medical expenses of $3,600.than one policy, the cost of at least one of which is paid by In the same year, you were reimbursed $2,400 under yourboth you and your employer, you must first divide the employer's policy and $1,600 under your own personalmedical expenses among the policies to figure the excess policy. The amount you must report as other income isreimbursement from each policy. Then divide the policy figured as follows.costs to figure the part of any excess reimbursement that is
from your employer's contribution. Any excess reimburse- Worksheet C. Excess Reimbursement
ment that is due to your employer's contributions is includi- Includible in Income When You
ble in your income. Have More Than One PolicyÐYou can figure the part of the excess reimbursement Illustratedthat is from your employer's contribution by using Work-
sheet C. Use Worksheet C only if both you and your
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excessemployer paid part of the cost of at least one policy. If you reimbursement you must include as income on your tax return when
had more than one policy, but you did not share in the cost a) you are reimbursed under two or more health insurance policies, b)
at least one of which is paid for by both you and your employer, andof at least one policy, do not use Worksheet C.
c) your employer's contributions are not included in your gross
income. If you and your employer did not share in the cost of at leastWorksheet C. Excess Reimbursement
one policy, do not use this worksheet.Includible in Income
When You Have More 1. Enter the reimbursement from your
employer's policy .................. . 1. 2,400Than One Policy
Keep for Your Records
 2. Enter the reimbursement from your own
policy ........................... . 2. 1,600
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess 3. Add lines 1 and 2 .................. . 3. 4,000reimbursement you must include as income on your tax return when
a) you are reimbursed under two or more health insurance policies, b) 4. Divide line 1 by line 3 ............... . 4. .60at least one of which is paid for by both you and your employer, and
c) your employer's contributions are not included in your gross 5. Enter the total medical expenses you paid
income. If you and your employer did not share in the cost of at least during the year. If this amount is at least as
one policy, do not use this worksheet. much as the amount on line 3, stop here
because there is no excess reimbursement. 5. 3,600
1. Enter the reimbursement from your
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 .............. . 6. 2,160employer's policy ................. . 1.
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1 ............ . 7. 2402. Enter the reimbursement from your own
policy .......................... . 2. 8. Enter employer's contribution to the annual
cost of the employer's policy .......... . 8. 3003. Add lines 1 and 2 ................. . 3.
9. Enter total annual cost of the employer's4. Divide line 1 by line 3. .............. . 4.
policy ........................... . 9. 1,200
5. Enter the total medical expenses you paid
10. Divide line 8 by line 9. This is theduring the year. If this amount is at least as
percentage of your total excessmuch as the amount on line 3, stop here
reimbursement you must report as otherbecause there is no excess reimbursement. 5.
income ......................... . 10. .25
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ............. . 6.
11. Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the amount
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1 ........... . 7. of your total excess reimbursement you
must report as other income on Form 1040,8. Enter employer's contribution to the annual line 21 .......................... . 11. 60cost of the employer's policy ......... . 8.
9. Enter total annual cost of the employer's
What If You Receive Insurancepolicy .......................... . 9.
Reimbursement in a Later Year?10. Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the
percentage of your total excess If you are reimbursed in a later year for medical expensesreimbursement you must report as other you deducted in an earlier year, you generally must reportincome ........................ . 10.
the reimbursement as income up to the amount you previ-
11. Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the amount ously deducted as medical expenses.of your total excess However, you do not report as income the amount ofreimbursement you must report as other
reimbursement you received up to the amount of yourincome on Form 1040, line 21 ........ . 11.
medical deductions that did not reduce your tax for the
earlier year.
Example. You are covered by your employer's health For more information about the recovery of an amount
insurance policy. The annual premium is $1,200. Your that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier
Publication 502 (2011) Page 19

Page 20 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE A  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Itemized Deductions
/uni25B6 Attach to Form 1040.            /uni25B6 See Instructions for Schedule A (Form 1040). 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2011
Attachment   
Sequence No. 07 
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Medical 
and 
Dental  
Expenses 
Caution.  Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others. 
1 Medical and dental expenses (see instructions) . . . . .  1 
2 Enter amount from Form 1040, line 38 2 
3 Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075) . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
4 Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0- . . . . . . . . 4 
Bill and Helen Jones 000-00-0000
3,434
2,475
33,004
959
year, see Recoveries in Publication 525, Taxable and Line 1. Enter the amount you paid for medical expenses
after reducing the amount by payments you received fromNontaxable Income.
insurance and other sources.
Line 2. Enter your AGI from Form 1040, line 38.What If You Are Reimbursed for Medical
Expenses You Did Not Deduct? Line 3. Multiply the amount on line 2 (AGI) by 7.5% (.075)
and enter the result.If you did not deduct a medical expense in the year you
paid it because your medical expenses were not more than Line 4. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-. Otherwise,
7.5% of your AGI, or because you did not itemize deduc- subtract the amount on line 3 from the amount on line 1.
tions, do not include the reimbursement, up to the amount This is your deduction for medical and dental expenses.
of the expense, in income. However, if the reimbursement
Example. Bill and Helen Jones belong to a group medi-is more than the expense, see What If Your Insurance
cal plan and part of their insurance is paid by Bill's em-Reimbursement Is More Than Your Medical Expenses ,
ployer. They file a joint return, and their AGI is $33,004.earlier.
The following list shows the net amounts, after insurance
reimbursements, that Bill and Helen paid this year forExample. Last year, you had $500 of medical ex-
medical expenses.penses. You cannot deduct the $500 because it is less
than 7.5% of your AGI. If, in a later year, you are reim- 1. For themselves, Bill and Helen paid $375 for pre-bursed for any of the $500 of medical expenses, you do not scription medicines and drugs, $337 for hospital bills,include that amount in your gross income. $439 for doctor bills, $295 for hospitalization insur-
ance, $380 for medical and surgical insurance, and
$33 for transportation for medical treatment, which
How Do You Figure and Report totals $1,859.
2. For Grace Taylor (Helen's dependent mother), theythe Deduction on Your Tax paid $300 for doctors, $300 for insulin, and $175 for
eyeglasses, which totals $775.Return?
3. For Betty Jones (Bill's dependent sister), they paidOnce you have determined which medical expenses you $450 for doctors and $350 for prescription medicinescan include, figure and report the deduction on your tax and drugs, which totals $800.return.
Bill and Helen add all their medical and dental expenses
together ($1,859 + $775 + $800 = $3,434). They figureWhat Tax Form Do You Use? their deduction on the medical and dental expenses part of
Schedule A, Form 1040, as shown.You report your medical expense deduction on Schedule
A, Form 1040. You cannot claim medical expenses on  Recordkeeping. For each medical expense, you
Form 1040A, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, or Form should keep a record of:
1040EZ, Income Tax Return for Single and Joint Filers
RECORDS
With No Dependents. An example of a filled-in medical and
• The name and address of each person you paid,dental expense part of Schedule A is shown.
and
How Do You Figure Your Deduction? • The amount and date of each payment.
To figure your medical and dental expense deduction,
complete lines 1 through 4 of Schedule A, Form 1040, as
follows: You can keep a record like the following.
Page 20 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 21 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Record of medical expenses
Name of Address of Transportation
person paid person paid Amount paid Date paid (mileage, taxi, etc.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
You should also keep a statement or itemized invoice 2. Enter your total includible medical
showing the following. expenses for the year you included
the cost in your medical expenses . . 2.• What medical care was received.
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 .......... . 3.• Who received the care.
4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the year• The nature and purpose of any other medical ex- the cost was included in your medical
penses. expenses ................... . 4.
• Who the other medical expenses were for. 5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your
allowable itemized deductions for the• The amount of the other medical expenses and the year you purchased the equipment or
date of payment. property were not more than your
AGI for that year, stop here. This isDo not send these records with your return. the adjusted basis of the equipment
or property. If your allowable itemized
deductions for the year you
purchased the equipment or property
Sale of Medical Equipment or were more than your AGI for that
year, complete lines 6 through 11 .. . 5.
Property 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ....... . 6.
If you deduct the cost of medical equipment or property in 7. Enter your total allowable itemized
deductions for the year the cost wasone year and sell it in a later year, you may have a taxable
included in your medical expenses . . 7.gain. The taxable gain is the amount of the selling price
that is more than the adjusted basis of the equipment or 8. Divide line 6 by line 7 .......... . 8.
property. 9. Enter your AGI for the year the cost
was included in your medicalThe adjusted basis is the portion of the cost of the
expenses ................... . 9.equipment or property that you could not deduct because
of the 7.5% limit used to compute the medical deduction. 10. Subtract line 9 from line 7 ....... . 10.
Use Worksheet D, later, to figure the adjusted basis of the 11. Multiply line 8 by line 10. ........ . 11.equipment or property.
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your allowable
itemized deductions for the year youWorksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical
purchased the equipment or propertyEquipment or Property were more than your AGI for that
Sold year, this is the adjusted basis of the
Keep for Your Records
 equipment or property .......... . 12.
Next, use Worksheet E to figure the total gain or loss onInstructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of medical
equipment or property in one year and sold the equipment or property the sale of the medical equipment or property.
in a later year. This worksheet will give you the adjusted basis of the
equipment or property you sold.
1. Enter the cost of the equipment or
property. ................... . 1.
Publication 502 (2011) Page 21

Page 22 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet E. Gain or Loss On the Sale Worksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical
of Medical Equipment or Equipment or Property
Property SoldÐIllustrated
Keep for Your Records
 Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure total gain or Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost ofloss on the sale of medical equipment or property that you medical equipment or property in one year and sold thededucted in an earlier year. equipment or property in a later year. This worksheet will give
you the adjusted basis of the equipment or property you sold.1. Enter the amount that the medical
equipment or property sold for ..... . 1. 1. Enter the cost of the equipment or
property. .................. . 1. 3,0002. Enter your selling expenses ....... . 2.
2. Enter your total includible medical3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........ . 3.
expenses for the year you included4. Enter the adjusted basis of the the cost in your medical expenses 2. 13,750equipment or property from Worksheet
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ......... . 3. .218D, line 5, or line 12, if applicable .... . 4.
4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the year5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the
the cost was included in yourtotal gain or loss from the sale of the
medical expenses ............ . 4. 1,125medical equipment or property. .... . 5.
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If yourIf you have a loss, it is not deductible. If you have a gain, allowable itemized deductions for
it is includible in your income. The part of the gain that is a the year you purchased the
recovery of an amount you previously deducted is taxable equipment or property were not
more than your AGI for that year,as ordinary income. Enter it on Form 1040, line 21. Any
stop here. This is the adjustedpart of the gain that is more than the recovery of an amount
basis of the equipment or property.you previously deducted is taxable as a capital gain. Enter
If your allowable itemizedit on Form 8949, Sales and Other Dispositions of Capital deductions for the year youAssets, and Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains and purchased the equipment orLosses. property were more than your AGIFor more information about the recovery of an amount for that year, complete lines 6that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier through 11 ................. . 5. 245
year, see Recoveries in Publication 525.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ...... . 6. 2,755
Example. You have a heart condition and difficulty 7. Enter your total allowable itemized
breathing. Your doctor prescribed oxygen equipment to deductions for the year the cost
was included in your medicalhelp you breathe. Last year, you bought the oxygen equip-
expenses .................. . 7. 19,025ment for $3,000. You itemized deductions and included it
in your medical expense deduction. 8. Divide line 6 by line 7 ......... . 8. .145
Last year you also paid $10,750 for deductible medical
9. Enter your AGI for the year theservices and $6,400 for other itemized deductions. Your cost was included in your medicalAGI was $15,000. expenses .................. . 9. 15,000Taking into account the 7.5% limit on medical expenses,
10. Subtract line 9 from line 7 ...... . 10. 4,025your allowable itemized deductions totaled $19,025, fig-
ured as follows: 11. Multiply line 8 by line 10. ....... . 11. 584
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If yourOxygen equipment .................... . 3,000
allowable itemized deductions forMedical services ...................... . 10,750
the year you purchased theTotal medical expenses ................ . 13,750
equipment or property were more7.5% of AGI (.075 ×  $15,000) ............ . −1,125
than your AGI for that year, this isAllowable medical expense deduction ...... . 12,625 the adjusted basis of theOther itemized deductions .............. . 6,400 equipment or property. ........ . 12. 829
Allowable itemized deductions ........... . 19,025
This year you sold the oxygen equipment for $2,025 and
you had selling expenses of $25. You must report on this
year's tax return part of the $2,000 as ordinary income. ToYou figure your adjusted basis as shown on the filled-in compute the part of the sales price that is taxable, youWorksheet D. must determine the gain by subtracting the total adjusted
basis from the selling price.
Page 22 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 23 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that injury, you must include the workers' compensation inWorksheet E. Gain or Loss On the income up to the amount you deducted. If you receivedSale of Medical workers' compensation, but did not deduct medical ex-
Equipment or penses related to that injury, do not include the workers'
PropertyÐIllustrated compensation in your income.Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure gain or loss
Impairment-Related Workon the sale of medical equipment or property that you deducted
in an earlier year.
Expenses
1. Enter the amount that the medical
equipment or property sold for ..... . 1. 2,025 If you are a person with disabilities, you can take a busi-
ness deduction for expenses that are necessary for you to2. Enter your selling expenses ....... . 2. 25
be able to work. If you take a business deduction for these3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........ . 3. 2,000 impairment-related work expenses, they are not subject to
4. Enter the adjusted basis of the the 7.5% limit that applies to medical expenses.
equipment or property from Worksheet You have a disability if you have:D, line 5, or line 12, if applicable .... . 4. 829
• A physical or mental disability (for example, blind-5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the
ness or deafness) that functionally limits your beingtotal gain or loss from the sale of the
employed, ormedical equipment or property. .... . 5. 1,171
• A physical or mental impairment (for example, a
sight or hearing impairment) that substantially limits
one or more of your major life activities, such as
Damages for Personal Injuries performing manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-
ing, learning, or working.
If you receive an amount in settlement of a personal injury
suit, part of that award may be for medical expenses that
Impairment-related expenses defined. Impair-you deducted in an earlier year. If it is, you must include
ment-related expenses are those ordinary and necessarythat part in your income in the year you receive it to the
business expenses that are:extent it reduced your taxable income in the earlier year.
See What If You Receive Insurance Reimbursement in a • Necessary for you to do your work satisfactorily,Later Year , discussed earlier under How Do You Treat
• For goods and services not required or used, otherReimbursements.
than incidentally, in your personal activities, and
Example. You sued this year for injuries you suffered in • Not specifically covered under other income taxan accident last year. You sought $10,000 for your injuries laws.and did not itemize your damages. Last year, you paid
$500 for medical expenses for your injuries. You deducted
those expenses on last year's tax return. This year you Where to report. If you are self-employed, deduct the
settled your lawsuit for $2,000. Your settlement did not business expenses on the appropriate form (Schedule C,
itemize or allocate the damages. The $2,000 is first pre- C-EZ, E, or F) used to report your business income and
sumed to be for the medical expenses that you deducted. expenses.The $500 is includible in your income this year because If you are an employee, complete Form 2106, Employeeyou deducted the entire $500 as a medical expense de- Business Expenses, or Form 2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Em-duction last year.
ployee Business Expenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form
1040), line 28, that part of the amount on Form 2106, lineFuture medical expenses. If you receive an amount in
settlement of a damage suit for personal injuries, part of 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, that is related to your impair-
that award may be for future medical expenses. If it is, you ment. Enter the amount that is unrelated to your impair-
must reduce any future medical expenses for these injuries ment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. Your
until the amount you received has been completely used. impairment-related work expenses are not subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies to otherExample. You were injured in an accident. You sued employee business expenses.and sought a judgment of $50,000 for your injuries. You
settled the suit for $45,000. The settlement provided that Example. You are blind. You must use a reader to do$10,000 of the $45,000 was for future medical expenses your work. You use the reader both during your regularfor your injuries. You cannot include the first $10,000 that working hours at your place of work and outside youryou pay for medical expenses for those injuries. regular working hours away from your place of work. The
reader's services are only for your work. You can deductWorkers' compensation. If you received workers' com-
pensation and you deducted medical expenses related to your expenses for the reader as business expenses.
Publication 502 (2011) Page 23

Page 24 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040, line 29. If you cannot claim 100% of your
self-employed health insurance costs on line 29, any ex-Health Insurance Costs for
cess amounts attributable to that child are not eligible to be
claimed on Schedule A (Form 1040).Self-Employed Persons
Generally, family health insurance premiums do not
If you were self-employed and had a net profit for the year, increase if coverage for an additional child is added. If this
you may be able to deduct, as an adjustment to income, is the situation, no allocation would be necessary. If the
amounts paid for medical and qualified long-term care premiums did increase (such as where coverage was
insurance on behalf of yourself, your spouse, your depen- expanded from single to family to add the non-dependent
dents, and your children who were under age 27 at the end child), you can allocate the amount on line 29 to the
of 2011. For this purpose, you were self-employed if you non-dependent child and any excess amounts not attribu-
were a general partner (or a limited partner receiving table to that child would be eligible to be claimed on
guaranteed payments) or you received wages from an S Schedule A.
corporation in which you were more than a 2% share-
holder. The insurance plan must be established under your Example 1. Naomi is self-employed in 2011 and has
trade or business and the deduction cannot be more than self-only coverage for health insurance. Her premium for
your earned income from that trade or business. that coverage was $5,000 for the year. She changes to
You cannot deduct payments for medical insurance for family coverage only to add her 26-year-old nondependent
any month in which you were eligible to participate in a child to the plan. Her health insurance premium increases
health plan subsidized by your employer, your spouse's to $10,000 for the year. After completing the
employer or an employer of your dependent or your child Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet for
under age 27 at the end of 2011. You cannot deduct Form 1040, line 29, she can only deduct $4,000 on line 29.
payments for a qualified long-term care insurance contract The $4,000 is allocable to the nondependent child. On
for any month in which you were eligible to participate in a Schedule A, she can only claim the $5,000 allocable to her
long-term care insurance plan subsidized by your em- coverage. She cannot claim the $1,000 excess premiums
ployer or your spouse's employer. allocable to the nondependent child.
If you qualify to take the deduction, use the
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1,Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet in
except that Naomi had family coverage when she addedthe Form 1040 instructions to figure the amount you can
her 26-year-old nondependent child to the policy. Therededuct. But if any of the following applies, do not use that
was no increase in the $10,000 premium. In this case, sheworksheet.
could claim $4,000 on line 29 and $6,000 on Schedule A.• You had more than one source of income subject to
self-employment tax. More information. For more information, see Publication
535.• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or
Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.
• You are using amounts paid for qualified long-term
COBRA Premium Assistancecare insurance to figure the deduction.
If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc- The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of
tions, use the worksheet in Publication 535, Business 1985 (COBRA) provides that if you were covered under a
Expenses, to figure your deduction. group health plan and you would lose coverage because of
a qualifying event, you should be allowed an opportunity toIf, during 2011, you were an eligible trade adjustment elect COBRA continuation health coverage under the plan.assistance (TAA) recipient, alternative TAA (ATAA) recipi- If there was no available election, your employer or theent, reemployment TAA (RTAA) recipient, or Pension Ben- plan was subject to an excise tax. You can be required toefit Guaranty Corporation pension recipient, see the pay the full premium for the COBRA continuation cover-instructions for Form 8885 to figure the amount to enter on age.line 1 of the worksheet.
 If you are an assistance eligible individual, you pay 35%When figuring the amount you can deduct for insurance of the premium otherwise payable for this coverage andpremiums, do not include amounts paid for health insur- are treated as having paid the full premium. You are anance coverage with retirement plan distributions that were assistance eligible individual if:tax-free because you are a retired public safety officer.
• You are a qualified beneficiary as a result of anWhere to report. You take this deduction on Form 1040, involuntary termination that occurred during the pe-line 29. If you itemize your deductions and do not claim riod beginning on September 1, 2008, and ending on100% of your self-employed health insurance costs on line May 31, 2010, or had a reduction of hours during29, include any remaining premiums with all other medical that period, which was followed by a termination ofexpenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to the 7.5% your employment that occurred after March 1, 2010,limit. and before June 1, 2010,
Child under age 27. If the insurance policy covers your • You are eligible for COBRA continuation coverage
nondependent child who was under age 27 at the end of related to the qualifying event occurring during the
2011, you can claim the premiums for that coverage on period beginning on September 1, 2008, and
Page 24 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 25 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You elect the coverage. Worksheet F. Recapture of COBRA
Premium Assistance forA qualified beneficiary is generally any individual who is
Higher Incomecovered under a group health plan on the day before the
involuntary termination. This includes the covered em- Taxpayers
ployee, the employee's spouse, and the employee's de- Keep for Your Records
pendent.
The premium assistance (the 65% reduction of the Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure the taxable
premium) applies to the first period of coverage beginning portion of your COBRA premium if your modified AGI (line 3
below) is more than $125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly)after February 16, 2009. The reduction applies until the
but less than $145,000 ($290,000 if married filing jointly).earliest of:
1. Enter your AGI (Form 1040, line 38 or1. The first date the assistance eligible individual be-
Form 1040NR, line 36) .......... . 1.comes eligible for other group health plan coverage
or Medicare coverage, 2. Enter the total of any amounts from
Form 2555, lines 45 and 50; Form2. The date that is 15 months after the first day of the 2555-EZ, line 18; and Form 4563, linefirst month for which the reduced premium applies to 15, and any exclusion of income fromthe individual, or American Samoa and Puerto Rico .. . 2.
3. The date the individual ceases to be eligible for CO- 3. Modified AGI. Add lines 1 and 2 .... . 3.BRA continuation coverage.
4. Enter $125,000 ($250,000 if married
The premium assistance is not included in your gross filing jointly) ................... . 4.
income. However, if your modified adjusted gross income 5. Subtract line 4 from line 3 ........ . 5.(AGI) is more than $125,000 ($250,000 if married filing
jointly) but not more than $145,000 ($290,000 if married 6. Enter $20,000 ($40,000 if married filing
jointly) ....................... . 6.filing jointly), your income tax for the year is increased by a
percentage of the premium assistance. Use Worksheet F 7. Divide line 5 by line 6. Enter the resultto figure the amount you must include as tax on your as a decimal (rounded to at least 3
return. If your modified AGI is more than $145,000 places) ...................... . 7. .
($290,000 if married filing jointly), your income tax for the 8. Enter the amount of the COBRAtax year is increased by the total premium assistance. premium assistance* you received inInclude the increase in your income tax on Form 1040, line 2011 ........................ . 8.60, or Form 1040NR, line 59. On the dotted line next to that
9. Multiply line 8 by line 7. Enter resultline, enter the amount of the tax and identify it as ªCOBRA.º
here and include it on Form 1040, line
60 or Form 1040NR, line 59. On the
dotted line next to that line, enter the
amount shown on line 9 and identify it
as ªCOBRA.º .................. . 9.
*Contact your former employer or health insurance plan to
obtain the total premium assistance, if unknown.
You may elect to permanently waive the right to the
premium assistance. You will not receive the premium
assistance and you will not have to include the assistance
in your income tax if your modified AGI is more than
$125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly). To make this
election, give a signed and dated notification (include a
reference to ªpermanent waiverº) to the person to whom
premiums are payable.
You will not qualify for the health coverage tax credit
(discussed next) for any month for which you receive
premium assistance.
For more information see Notice 2009-27, available at
www.irs.gov/irb/2009-16_irb/ar09.
Publication 502 (2011) Page 25

Page 26 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
be able to claim the yearly HCTC for these premiums when
you file your tax return.Health Coverage Tax Credit
No credit if dependent of another taxpayer.You cannot
If you paid the premiums for qualified health insurance take this credit if you can be claimed as a dependent on
coverage, you may be able to claim the health coverage someone else's tax return.
tax credit (HCTC). If you are eligible, you can get monthly
HCTC (advance payments), a yearly HCTC, or a combina- Qualifying Family Membertion of these methods (see How To Take the Credit, later).
The HCTC is 80% of the payments made in January and You can include the premiums you pay for qualified health
February 2011; it is 72.5% of the payments made in March insurance for qualifying family members in figuring your
through December 2011. Participants who received an credit. A qualifying family member is:
advance (monthly) payment for any months from March • Your spouse (but see Both spouses eligible below),through December are now eligible to receive an additional or7.5% retroactive credit. For more information on how to
• Anyone whom you can claim as a dependent onclaim the retroactive tax credit, see Yearly HCTC, later.
your tax return. (For children whose parents are di-
vorced, see Children of divorced or separated par-More information.  For a complete discussion of the
ents, later.)HCTC, visit IRS.gov and enter ªHCTCº in the search box.
Also, see Form 8885. However, anyone who has other specified coverage (de-
fined later) is not a qualifying family member.
Who Can Take This Credit?
Both spouses eligible.  Your spouse is not treated as a
You can take this credit for any month in which all of the qualifying family member if all of the following are true.
following were true on the first day of the month.
• You are married at the end of the year.
1. You were an eligible: • You and your spouse are both eligible recipients
during the year.a. Trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient,
• You file separate tax returns.b. Alternative TAA recipient,
c. Reemployment TAA recipient, Married and living apart. For purposes of this credit,
you are not considered married on the last day of the year ifd. Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC)
all of the following apply.pension payee, or
• You file a separate return.e. You were a qualifying family member of an indi-
vidual described in a, b, c, or d when he or she • Your home is the home for more than half the year
enrolled in Medicare, died, or got divorced. See of a dependent under age 13 or a dependent who is
Family members in certain life events, later. physically or mentally not able to care for himself or
herself.
2. You paid the premium for qualified health insurance • You pay more than half the cost of keeping up yourcoverage for yourself or a qualifying family member. home for the year.See Qualified Health Insurance, later.
• Your spouse does not live in your home for the last 63. You were not imprisoned under federal, state, or months of the year.local authority.
4. You did not have other specified coverage. See Legally separated. You are not considered married if
Other Specified Coverage, later. you are legally separated from your spouse under a decree
of divorce or separate maintenance.If you were an eligible individual described in 1a, 1b, 1c,
or 1d, your state's workforce agency (unemployment of- Children of divorced or separated parents. Under the
fice) or the PBGC will notify the HCTC Program that you rules for medical expenses, a child of divorced or sepa-
may be eligible for the credit. When notified, the HCTC rated parents can be treated as a dependent of both
Program will mail you an HCTC Eligibility Certificate. If parents if certain requirements are met. See Qualifying
you have not received the Eligibility Certificate, you may Child under Whose Medical Expenses Can You Include ,
not be an eligible individual and not qualify for the credit. earlier. However, for purposes of the HCTC, only the
If you believe you are eligible for the HCTC and have not custodial parent can treat the child as a qualifying family
received a Eligibility Certificate, go to IRS.gov and enter member, even if the other parent can claim the child as a
ªHCTCº in the search box for information on how to dependent. The custodial parent is the parent having cus-
contact the HCTC Program. tody for the greater portion of the tax year.
It can take the state or PBGC time to notify the Family members in certain life events (enrollment in
HCTC Program about the event. You should Medicare, death, or divorce). Qualifying family members
make the full premium payments to your health (spouses and dependents) are considered recipients and
CAUTION
!
plan until you are enrolled in the HCTC Program. You may are eligible to receive the HCTC in the event that the TAA,
Page 26 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 27 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ATAA, RTAA recipient or PBGC payee enrolls in Medicare, 1. Medicare supplemental (Medigap) insurance, Tricare
supplemental insurance, or similar supplemental in-dies, or gets divorced. Qualifying family members can
surance to an employer-sponsored group healthreceive the tax credit for up to 24 months from the month of
plan.the event, or until January 1, 2014, whichever comes first.
Eligible taxpayers who plan to claim this credit because of 2. Any insurance if substantially all of the coverage is:these life events must call the HCTC Program prior to filing
Form 8885 to ensure the form is processed correctly. See a. Coverage for on-site medical clinics,
State-qualified health insurance, later, for the phone num- b. Hospital indemnity or other fixed indemnity insur-ber. ance,
c. Accident or disability income insurance (or a com-Qualified Health Insurance bination of the two),
The following health insurance qualifies for the credit. d. Liability insurance,
• COBRA continuation coverage. (This is coverage e. A supplement to liability insurance,that employers with 20 or more employees must
f. Workers' compensation or similar insurance,offer to employees or former employees and their
beneficiaries who have lost coverage because of g. Automobile medical payment insurance,certain events.) See the caution below.
h. Credit-only insurance,• Coverage under a group health plan that is available
i. Limited scope dental or vision benefits,through the employment of your spouse. (But see
Other Specified Coverage, later.) j. Benefits for long-term care, nursing home care,
home health care, community-based care (or any• Coverage under an individual health insurance pol-
combination), oricy if you were covered during the entire 30-day
period that ends on the date you separated from the k. Coverage for only a specified disease or illness.
employment which qualified you for TAA, ATAA,
RTAA, or PBGC pension benefits. For this purpose, 3. Coverage under a flexible spending or similar ar-
coverage under an individual health insurance policy rangement.
includes medical insurance offered to individuals and
their families, but does not include any insurance Insurance that covers other individuals. If you have
connected with a group health plan or federal- or qualified health insurance that covers anyone besides
state-based health insurance coverage. yourself and your qualifying family member(s) (defined
earlier), you may not be able to take into account all of your
payments. You cannot treat an amount as paid for insur-COBRA continuation coverage allows individuals ance for yourself and qualifying family members unless allwho had lost their jobs to receive a reduction in of the following requirements are met.health insurance premiums. You do  not qualify
CAUTION
!
for the HCTC for any month that you received a reduction • The charge for insurance for yourself and qualifying
in premium. family members is either separately stated in the
contract or furnished to you by the insurance com-Voluntary Employee's Beneficiary Association (VEBA)
pany in a separate statement.A health plan purchased through a VEBA that was estab-
lished through the bankruptcy of your former employer and • The amount you paid for insurance for yourself andwas offered to you in lieu of COBRA coverage and retiree qualifying family members is not more than thebenefits is a qualified plan. Not all VEBAs qualify for the charge that is stated in the contract or furnished byHCTC. the insurance company.
• The amount stated in the contract or furnished byState-qualified health insurance. Certain state qualified
the insurance company is not unreasonably large inhealth insurance can qualify for a credit. To find out which
relation to the total charges under the contract.plans are qualified for your state, you can:
• Visit IRS.gov, and type ªhctcº in the search box, and
then, click on HCTC: List of State-Qualified Health Eligible Coverage MonthPlans, or
Eligibility for the credit is determined on a monthly basis.• You can call 1-866-628-4282 (tollfree) (or TDD/TTY
An eligible coverage month is any month in which, as of the1-866-626-4282).
first day of the month, you:
1. Are an eligible recipient or a qualified family memberNonqualified Health Insurance in certain life events (defined earlier),
The following health insurance does not qualify for the 2. Are covered by qualified health insurance (defined
credit. earlier) that you pay for,
Publication 502 (2011) Page 27

Page 28 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Do not have other specified coverage (defined later), Yearly HCTC
and
The HCTC is 80% for payments made in January and4. Are not imprisoned under federal, state, or local au- February 2011; it is 72.5% for payments made in Marchthority. through December 2011. To claim the yearly HCTC, com-
plete Form 8885, and attach it to your Form 1040, FormIf you file a joint return, only one spouse has to satisfy
1040NR, U.S. Nonresident Alien Income Tax Return; Formthe requirements.
1040-SS, U.S. Self-Employment Tax Return; or FormCOBRA premium assistance. An individual who re- 1040-PR, Planilla para la Declaraci Âon de la Contribuci Âonceives COBRA premium assistance (discussed earlier) for Federal sobre al Trabajo por Cuenta Propia. You cannota month is disqualified from receiving the HCTC for that claim the credit on Form 1040A, Form 1040EZ, or Formmonth. 1040NR-EZ, U.S. Income Tax Return for Certain Nonresi-
dent Aliens With No Dependents.
You may claim the yearly HCTC if you were an eligibleOther Specified Coverage
recipient and:
Even if you or your qualifying family member are otherwise • Did not receive monthly HCTC (advanced pay-eligible, you or your qualifying family member are not ments), oreligible for the credit for a month if, as of the first day of the
month, you or your qualifying family member have other • Received advanced payments and also made eligi-
specified coverage. Other specified coverage is coverage ble payments directly to your health plan.
under the following.
A participant in the monthly HCTC who received an1. Any insurance which constitutes medical care (un- advance (monthly) payment for any month from Marchless substantially all of that insurance is for benefits through December 2011 is now eligible to receive anlisted earlier under (1) or (2) under Nonqualified additional 7.5% retroactive credit. The HCTC Program hasHealth Insurance) if at least 50% of the cost of the calculated and reported this additional credit in the box tocoverage is paid by an employer (or former em- the left of box 8 on your 2011 Form 1099-H. Add thisployer) of you or your spouse. amount to the sum of any amounts on Form 8885, line 6,
and then enter the total on Form 8885, line 7.2. Any of the following government health programs:
a. Medicare Part A, B, or C, Example. You became eligible for the HCTC on June 1,
2011. You enrolled in a state-qualified health plan andb. Medicaid, or the Children's Health Insurance Pro-
registered for advance payments in June. You paid thegram (CHIP),
premiums for the first 2 months to the health plan. You
c. The Federal Employees Health Benefit Program receive your first HCTC invoice for the amount due at the
(FEHBP), or end of July (for August coverage). You begin paying the
HCTC Program at that time. You may claim the yearlyd. Tricare, the medical and dental care program for
HCTC for the payments you made directly to the healthmembers and certain former members of the uni-
plan during enrollment in the HCTC.formed services and their dependents.
Required documents. You must attach to your tax return
Benefits from the Veterans Administration. Entitle- the documents listed in the Form 8885 instructions.
ment to or receipt of benefits from the Veterans Adminis-  If you e-file, you must attach a copy of Form 8885 and
tration is not other specified coverage. the required documents to Form 8453, U.S. Individual
Income Tax Transmittal for an IRS e-file Return. Mail Form
8453 and the attachments to the address shown in theHow To Take the Credit
Form 8453 instructions.
If you claim this credit, you cannot take the same expenses
Refundable credit. The HCTC is refundable. You canthat you use to figure your HCTC into account in determin-
claim the full credit even if you do not owe any taxes oring your:
earn any income. To get the credit, you must:• Medical and dental expenses on Schedule A (Form
1040), or 1. Qualify for the credit, and
• Self-employed health insurance deduction. 2. File a tax return, even if you:
a. Do not owe any tax,You cannot use payments you made with funds from the
following accounts to figure the credit: b. Did not earn enough money to file a return, or
• Health Savings Accounts (HSAs), or c. Did not have income taxes withheld from your
pay.• Archer Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs).
Page 28 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 29 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internet. You can access the IRS website atMonthly HCTC
IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to:
Under monthly HCTC (advance payments), you only pay
part of the premium for health insurance and the HCTC
Program pays the rest of the premium. The part paid by the • Check the status of your 2011 refund. Go to IRS.gov
HCTC Program is your monthly HCTC. and click on Where's My Refund. Wait at least 72
hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt of yourYou pay your part of the premium to the HCTC Program.
e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paperThe program adds the advance payment and pays the total
return. If you filed Form 8379 with your return, waitpremium to your health plan.
14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed electronically). HaveIf you want to receive the monthly HCTC, you must fill your 2011 tax return available so you can provideout the registration form and send it and any supporting your social security number, your filing status, anddocuments to the HCTC Program. Once you are enrolled the exact whole dollar amount of your refund.in the HCTC Program, you will receive a monthly invoice
• E-file your return. Find out about commercial taxstating the amount you must pay to the program and the
preparation and e-file services available free to eligi-due date.
ble taxpayers.If you receive a monthly HCTC, you will get Form
1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Advance • Download forms, including talking tax forms, instruc-
Payments. The form shows you the total of your advance tions, and publications.
payments and for which months payments were made • Order IRS products online.(including months for which retroactive payments were
• Research your tax questions online.made). You cannot claim the yearly HCTC for any month
for which you received a monthly HCTC. • Search publications online by topic or keyword.
However, participants who received an advance • Use the online Internal Revenue Code, regulations,(monthly) payment for any month from March through or other official guidance.December 2011 are now eligible to receive an additional
7.5% retroactive credit. The HCTC Program has calcu- • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published in
lated and reported this additional credit in the box to the left the last few years.
of box 8 on your 2011 Form 1099-H. Add this amount to the • Figure your withholding allowances using the with-sum of any amounts on Form 8885, line 6, and then enter holding calculator online at www.irs.gov/individuals.the total on Form 8885, line 7.
• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by using our
Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) Assistant available
online at www.irs.gov/individuals.How To Get Tax Help • Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
email.
• Get information on starting and operating a smallYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free business.publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa-
tion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method
that is best for you, you will have quick and easy access to
Phone. Many services are available by phone. tax help.
Free help with your return. Free help in preparing your
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Callreturn is available nationwide from IRS-certified volun-
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676) to order cur-teers. The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) pro-
rent-year forms, instructions, and publications, andgram is designed to help low-moderate income taxpayers
prior-year forms and instructions. You should receiveand the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) program is
your order within 10 days.designed to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their
tax returns. Most VITA and TCE sites offer free electronic • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax
filing and all volunteers will let you know about credits and questions at 1-800-829-1040.
deductions you may be entitled to claim. To find the near- • Solving problems. You can get face-to-face helpest VITA or TCE site, visit IRS.gov or call 1-800-906-9887 solving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax-or 1-800-829-1040. payer Assistance Centers. An employee can explainAs part of the TCE program, AARP offers the Tax-Aide IRS letters, request adjustments to your account, orcounseling program. To find the nearest AARP Tax-Aide help you set up a payment plan. Call your localsite, call 1-888-227-7669 or visit AARP's website at Taxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. Towww.aarp.org/money/taxaide. find the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or
For more information on these programs, go to IRS.gov look in the phone book under United States Govern-
and enter keyword ªVITAº in the upper right-hand corner. ment, Internal Revenue Service.
Publication 502 (2011) Page 29

Page 30 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/ your local Center and leave a message requesting
TDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax an appointment to resolve a tax account issue. A
questions or to order forms and publications. representative will call you back within 2 business
days to schedule an in-person appointment at your• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen to convenience. If you have an ongoing, complex taxpre-recorded messages covering various tax topics. account problem or a special need, such as a disa-
• Refund information. You can check the status of bility, an appointment can be requested. All other
your refund on the new IRS phone app . Download issues will be handled without an appointment. To
the free IRS2Go app by visiting the iTunes app store find the number of your local office, go to 
or the Android Marketplace. IRS2Go is a new way to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phone book
provide you with information and tools. To check the under United States Government, Internal Revenue
status of your refund by phone, call 1-800-829-4477 Service.
(automated refund information 24 hours a day, 7
days a week). Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
acknowledges receipt of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 tions, and publications to the address below. You
weeks after mailing a paper return. If you filed Form should receive a response within 10 days after
8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if your request is received.
you filed electronically). Have your 2011 tax return
available so you can provide your social security
number, your filing status, and the exact whole dollar Internal Revenue Service
amount of your refund. If you check the status of 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
your refund and are not given the date it will be Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
issued, please wait until the next week before check-
ing back. Taxpayer Advocate Service. The Taxpayer Advocate
Service (TAS) is your voice at the IRS. Our job is to ensure• Other refund information. To check the status of a
that every taxpayer is treated fairly, and that you know andprior-year refund or amended return refund, call
understand your rights. We offer free help to guide you1-800-829-1040.
through the often-confusing process of resolving tax
problems that you haven't been able to solve on your own.Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To
Remember, the worst thing you can do is nothing at all.ensure IRS representatives give accurate, courteous, and
TAS can help if you can't resolve your problem with theprofessional answers, we use several methods to evaluate
IRS and:the quality of our telephone services. One method is for a
second IRS representative to listen in on or record random • Your problem is causing financial difficulties for you,
telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to complete your family, or your business.
a short survey at the end of the call.
• You face (or your business is facing) an immediate
Walk-in. Many products and services are avail- threat of adverse action.
able on a walk-in basis. • You have tried repeatedly to contact the IRS but no
one has responded, or the IRS has not responded to
• Products. You can walk in to many post offices, you by the date promised.
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,
instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li- If you qualify for our help, we'll do everything we can to
braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county get your problem resolved. You will be assigned to one
government offices, credit unions, and office supply advocate who will be with you at every turn. We have
stores have a collection of products available to print offices in every state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto
from a CD or photocopy from reproducible proofs. Rico. Although TAS is independent within the IRS, our
Also, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter- advocates know how to work with the IRS to get your
nal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue problems resolved. And our services are always free.
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re- As a taxpayer, you have rights that the IRS must abide
search purposes. by in its dealings with you. Our tax toolkit at www.
TaxpayerAdvocate.irs.gov can help you understand these• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer rights.Assistance Center every business day for personal, If you think TAS might be able to help you, call your localface-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRS advocate, whose number is in your phone book and on ourletters, request adjustments to your tax account, or website at www.irs.gov/advocate. You can also call ourhelp you set up a payment plan. If you need to toll-free number at 1-877-777-4778.resolve a tax problem, have questions about how the TAS also handles large-scale or systemic problems thattax law applies to your individual tax return, or you affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of these broadare more comfortable talking with someone in per- issues, please report it to us through our Systemic Advo-son, visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Center cacy Management System at www.irs.gov/advocate.where you can spread out your records and talk with
an IRS representative face-to-face. No appointment Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). Low Income
is necessaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you can call Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are independent from the IRS.
Page 30 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 31 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Some clinics serve individuals whose income is below a • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.
certain level and who need to resolve a tax problem. These • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.clinics provide professional representation before the IRS
• Tax law frequently asked questions.or in court on audits, appeals, tax collection disputes, and
other issues for free or for a small fee. Some clinics can • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys-provide information about taxpayer rights and responsibili- tem.ties in many different languages for individuals who speak
• Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the U.S. Code.English as a second language. For more information and
to find a clinic near you, see the LITC page on www.irs.gov/ • Links to other Internet based Tax Research materi-advocate or IRS Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer als.Clinic List . This publication is also available by calling
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.1-800-829-3676 or at your local IRS office.
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.Free tax services. Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free
Tax Services, is your guide to IRS services and resources. • Toll-free and email technical support.Learn about free tax information from the IRS, including
• Two releases during the year.publications, services, and education and assistance pro-
± The first release will ship the beginning of Januarygrams. The publication also has an index of over 100
2012.TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) you can listen to
± The final release will ship the beginning of Marchon the telephone. The majority of the information and
2012.services listed in this publication are available to you free
of charge. If there is a fee associated with a resource or
Purchase the DVD from National Technical Informationservice, it is listed in the publication.
Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no han-Accessible versions of IRS published products are
dling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVDavailable on request in a variety of alternative formats for
for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee).people with disabilities.
DVD for tax products. You can order Publication
1796, IRS Tax Products DVD, and obtain:
• Current-year forms, instructions, and publications.
Publication 502 (2011) Page 31

Page 32 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Chronically ill persons ......... . 11 Employer-sponsored healthA
insurance plans ............... . 9COBRA assistance:Abortion .......................... . 5
Recapture of COBRA premium Employment taxes .............. . 12Acupuncture ..................... . 5
assistance ................... . 25 Equipment  (See Medical equipmentAdopted child's medical
COBRA premium assistance ... . 24 or property)expenses ...................... . 4
Community property states ..... . 3 Excluded expenses:AGI limitation .................. . 2, 3
Insurance premiums ............ . 9Computer banks to track medicalAlcoholism ....................... . 5
information ................... . 12 Eye surgery ...................... . 8Ambulances ..................... . 5
Contact lenses ................... . 7 Eyeglasses ....................... . 8Archer MSAs:
Controlled substances ......... . 15Health coverage tax credit ..... . 28
Cosmetic surgery ............... . 15Medical expenses paid for F
Credit  (See Health coverage taxdecedent from ................ . 5 Fertility enhancement:
credit)Artificial limbs ................... . 5 Eggs, temporary storage of ..... . 8
Crutches ......................... . 7 Fertility.......................... . 8Artificial teeth .................... . 6
In vitro fertilization .............. . 8Aspirin .......................... . 16
Figuring the deduction ...... . 20-21Assistance  (See Tax help) D
Final return for decedent:Assisted living homes .......... . 12 Dancing lessons ................ . 15
Medical expenses paid ......... . 5Athletic club dues .............. . 16 Decedent's medical
Flexible spending account ..... . 15expenses ...................... . 5Autoette ......................... . 15
Food  (See Weight-loss programs)Deductible amount .............. . 3Automobiles  (See Cars)
Form 1040:Deductible expenses ......... . 3-15
Health coverage tax credit ..... . 28Definition of medical expenses:B Self-employed persons, healthDoctor .......................... . 2Baby sitting ..................... . 15 insurance costs ............. . 24Physician ....................... . 2Bandages ........................ . 6 Form 1040, Schedule A:Dental treatment ................. . 7Basis: Impairment-related workArtificial teeth ................... . 6Medical equipment or property expenses .................... . 23Teeth whitening ................ . 16(Worksheet D) ............... . 21 Medical and dentalDentures ......................... . 6 expenses ................. . 2, 20Birth control pills ................ . 6 Dependent's medical expenses: Self-employed persons, healthBody scan ........................ . 6 Adopted child ................... . 4 insurance costs ............. . 24Braille books and magazines ... . 6 Multiple support agreement ..... . 4 Form 1040, Schedule C:Breast pumps and supplies ..... . 6 Qualifying child ................. . 3 Impairment-related workBreast reconstruction Qualifying relative .............. . 3 expenses .................... . 23surgery ........................ . 6 Dependents: Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:Disabled dependent care ... . 7, 10 Impairment-related workDiagnostic devices .............. . 7C expenses .................... . 23Diaper services ................. . 15Calculation of deduction ....... . 20 Form 1040, Schedule E:Disabilities, persons with:Capital expenses ................ . 6 Impairment-related workDependent care expenses ...... . 7,Improvements to rented expenses .................... . 2310property ...................... . 7 Form 1040, Schedule F:Improvements to rentedOperation and upkeep .......... . 7 Impairment-related workproperty ...................... . 7Worksheet A .................... . 7 expenses .................... . 23Special education .............. . 13Cars .............................. . 7 Form 1040NR:Divorced taxpayers:Out-of-pocket expenses ....... . 14 Health coverage tax credit ..... . 28Medical expenses of child ...... . 4Standard medical mileage Form 1040X:Drug addiction ................... . 8rates......................... . 14 Amended return ................ . 3Drugs  (See Medicines)Child care ....................... . 15 Deceased taxpayer ............. . 5Dues:Children's medical expenses: Form 1099-H:Health club .................... . 16Adopted child ................... . 4 Self-employed persons, health
Dependents .................... . 3 insurance costs ............. . 24
EChiropractor ..................... . 7 Form 2106:
Education, special .............. . 13Christian Scientist Impairment-related work
practitioner .................... . 7 Electrolysis ..................... . 15 expenses .................... . 23
Page 32 Publication 502 (2011)

Page 33 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2106-EZ: TAA recipient .................. . 26 Laser eye surgery ............... . 8
Impairment-related work Yearly HCTC .................. . 28 Lead-based paint removal ...... . 10
expenses .................... . 23 Health institutes ................. . 8 Learning disabilities ............ . 13
Form 2555: Health insurance: Legal fees ....................... . 10
Self-employed persons, health Credit (See Health coverage tax Lessons, dancing and
insurance costs ............. . 24 credit) swimming ..................... . 15
Form 2555-EZ: Employer-sponsored plan ...... . 9 Lifetime care:
Self-employed persons, health Premiums: Advance payments for ......... . 10
insurance costs ............. . 24 Deductible .................... . 8 Lodging  (See also Trips) ... . 10, 14
Form 8453: Nondeductible ................ . 9 Long-term care ................. . 11
Health coverage tax credit ..... . 28 Paid by employer ............ . 18 Chronically ill individuals ....... . 11
Form 8885: Paid by employer and you ... . 18 Maintenance and personal care
Health coverage tax credit ..... . 28 Paid by you ................. . 18 services ..................... . 11
Self-employed persons, health Prepaid ....................... . 9 Qualified insuranceinsurance costs ............. . 24 Unused sick leave used to contracts .................... . 11
Founder's fee  (See Lifetime care, pay ......................... . 9 Qualified services .............. . 11
advance payments) Reimbursements (See
Free tax services ............... . 29 Reimbursements) MFuneral expenses ............... . 15 Self-employed persons ........ . 24
Maintenance and personal careFuture medical care ........ . 10, 15 Health maintenance organizations services ....................... . 11(HMOs) ......................... . 8
Maternity clothes ............... . 16Health reimbursementG Meals  (See also Weight-lossarrangements (HRAs) ........ . 17Glasses .......................... . 8 programs) ................. . 11, 14Health savings accounts (HSAs):Guide dog or other animal ...... . 8 Medical conferences ........... . 12Payments from ................ . 16
Medical equipment or property:Hearing aids ..................... . 8
Adjusted basis (WorksheetH Hearing-impaired persons: D) ........................... . 21Guide dog or other animal for ... . 8Hair: Gain or loss (Worksheet E) .... . 23Removal ....................... . 15 Help  (See Tax help) Sale of ......................... . 21Transplants .................... . 15 HMOs (Health maintenance Medical expense records ....... . 20Wigs ........................... . 15 organizations) ................. . 8
Medical information plans ...... . 12Health club dues ................ . 16 Home care  (See Nursing services)
Medical savings accountsHealth coverage tax credit ..... . 16 Home improvements  (See Capital (MSAs) ........................ . 16Advanced payments ........... . 29 expenses:)
Medicare:Alternative TAA recipient ...... . 26 Hospital services ................ . 8 Medicare A, deductibleArcher MSAs .................. . 28 Hotels ........................... . 10 expense ...................... . 9Both spouses eligible .......... . 26 Household help ................. . 16 Medicare B, deductibleChildren of divorced parents ... . 26 HRAs (Health reimbursement expense ...................... . 9Eligible coverage month ....... . 27 arrangements) ................ . 17 Medicare D, deductibleInsurance that covers other
expense ...................... . 9individuals ................... . 27
Medicines ....................... . 12ILegally separated .............. . 26
Imported ................... . 12, 16Illegal operations andMarried persons filing separate
Nonprescription drugs andtreatments .................... . 16returns ...................... . 26
medicines ................... . 16Illegal substances .............. . 15Monthly HCTC ................. . 29
Missing children, photographs ofNonqualified health Impairment-related work
in IRS publications ............ . 2insurance .................... . 27 expenses ..................... . 23
More information  (See Tax help)Other specified coverage: Reporting of ................... . 23
Benefits from the Veterans Multiple support agreement ..... . 4Insulin ........................... . 16
Administration ............. . 28 Insurance  (See Health insurance)
PBGC pension payee .......... . 26 Intellectually and developmentally NPension Benefit Guaranty disabled persons: Nondeductible expenses .... . 15-17Corporation (PBGC) Mentally retarded .............. . 10 Nonprescription drugs andrecipient ..................... . 26 Special homes for ............. . 10 medicines ..................... . 16Qualified health insurance ..... . 27
Nursing homes ................. . 12Qualifying family member ...... . 26
Nursing services ............ . 12, 15LReimbursement credit ......... . 29
Chronically ill individuals ....... . 11Laboratory fees ................. . 10Reporting ...................... . 28
Nutritional supplements:State-qualified health Lactation expenses  (See Breast
Natural medicines ............. . 16insurance .................... . 27 pumps and supplies)
Publication 502 (2011) Page 33

Page 34 of 34 of Publication 502 11:46 -  9-FEB-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Medical and dental Telephone ....................... . 13O
expenses .................... . 20 Television ....................... . 13Operations ...................... . 12
Medical deduction (See Form Therapy ......................... . 13Cosmetic surgery .............. . 15
1040, Schedule A)Eye surgery ..................... . 8 Transplants ..................... . 14
Self-employed persons, healthIllegal operations and Travel and transportationinsurance costs ............. . 24treatments ................... . 16 expenses ..................... . 14
Optometrist ..................... . 12 Car expenses .................. . 14
S Includible expenses............ . 14Optometrist services ............ . 8
Parking fees and tolls .......... . 14Sale of medical equipment orOrgan donors ................... . 14
property ....................... . 21 Trips ............................. . 14Osteopath ....................... . 12
Adjusted basis (Worksheet TTY/TDD information ........... . 29Oxygen .......................... . 13 D) ........................... . 21 Tuition ........................... . 14
Gain or loss (Worksheet E) .... . 23P Schedules  (See Form 1040) VPaint removal, for Seeing-eye dogs ................. . 8 Vasectomy ...................... . 14lead-based .................... . 10 Self-employed persons: Veterinary fees .................. . 17Parking fees and tolls .......... . 14 Health coverage tax credit ..... . 28 Vision correction surgery ....... . 8Personal injury damages ....... . 23 Health insurance costs ........ . 24 Visually impaired persons:Personal use items ............. . 16 Senior housing ................. . 12 Guide dog or other animal for ... . 8Photographs of missing children in Separate returns: Vitamins or minerals ........... . 16IRS publications ............... . 2 Community property states ..... . 3 Voluntary Employee's BeneficiaryPhysical examination ........... . 13 Medical and dental expenses ... . 3 Association (VEBA):Physical therapy ................ . 13 Separated taxpayers: Qualified health insurance ..... . 27Plastic surgery .................. . 15 Health coverage tax credit ..... . 26
Pregnancy test kit .............. . 13 Medical expenses of child ...... . 4
WPremiums  (See Health insurance) Service animals .................. . 8
Weight-loss programs ...... . 14, 17Prepaid insurance premiums ... . 9 Sick leave:
What's new:Prosthesis ....................... . 5 Used to pay health insurance
COBRA continuous coverage ... . 1premiums .................... . 9Psychiatric care ................ . 13
Health coverage tax credit ...... . 1Special education............... . 13Psychoanalysis ................. . 13 Standard medical mileageSpouse's medical expenses .... . 3Psychologists ................... . 13 rate ........................... . 1Deceased spouse .............. . 5Publications  (See Tax help) Wheelchairs ..................... . 15Sterilization ..................... . 13
Wigs ............................. . 15Stop-smoking programs ....... . 13R Work expenses:Surgery  (See Operations)Radial keratotomy ............... . 8 Disabled dependent care ....... . 7Swimming lessons ............. . 15Recordkeeping.................. . 20 Impairment-related ............ . 23
Rehabilitation facilities ......... . 12 Workers' compensation ........ . 23TReimbursements ............ . 17-20 Worksheets:Tables and figures:Excess includible in income: Capital expenses (WorksheetMedical equipment or property:More than one policy (Worksheet A) ............................ . 7Adjusted basis (WorksheetC) ......................... . 19 Medical equipment or property:D) ......................... . 21One policy (Worksheet B) ... . 18 Adjusted basis (WorksheetGain or loss (WorksheetExcess may be taxable (Figure D) ......................... . 21E) ......................... . 231) ............................ . 17 Gain or loss (WorksheetReimbursements, excess includibleHealth Reimbursement E) ......................... . 23in income:Arrangement (HRA) ......... . 17 Reimbursements, excess includibleMore than one policy (WorksheetInsurance ...................... . 17 in income:C) ......................... . 19Medical expenses not More than one policy (WorksheetOne policy (Worksheet B) ... . 18deducted .................... . 19 C) ......................... . 19Reimbursements, excess may beMore than one policy .......... . 19 One policy (Worksheet B) ... . 18taxable (Figure 1) ........... . 17Received in later year ......... . 20
Tax help ......................... . 29Rental property: XImprovements to ................ . 7 Taxpayer Advocate ............. . 30 X-rays ........................... . 15Reporting: Teeth:
Health coverage tax credit ..... . 28 Artificial ......................... . 6 ■
Impairment-related work Dental treatment ................ . 7
expenses .................... . 23 Whitening ...................... . 16
Page 34 Publication 502 (2011)