Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 10  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 54  10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Tax Guide for 
Small Business
(For Individuals Who Use 
Schedule C)
Publication 334
Catalog Number 11063P
For use in preparing
2020 Returns
Mar 08, 2021

Page 2 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Contents
What's New for 2020 ........................... 4
What's New for 2021 ........................... 4
Reminders ................................. 5
Photographs of Missing Children ................... 5
Chapter 1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes ........... 5
Identification Numbers ...................... 5
Income Tax ............................. 6
Self-Employment (SE) Tax .................... 9
Employment Taxes ........................ 10
Excise Taxes ........................... 10
Information Returns ....................... 11
Chapter 2. Accounting Periods and Methods .......... 12
Accounting Periods ....................... 12
Accounting Methods ....................... 13
Chapter 3. Dispositions of Business Property ......... 16
What Is a Disposition of Property? .............. 17
How Do I Figure a Gain or Loss? ............... 17
Where Do I Report Gains and Losses? ............ 18
Chapter 4. General Business Credits ............... 18
Business Credits ......................... 18
How To Claim the Credit .................... 20
Chapter 5. Business Income .................... 20
Kinds of Income ......................... 20
Items That Are Not Income ................... 24
Guidelines for Selected Occupations ............ 25
Accounting for Your Income .................. 26
Chapter 6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold ......... 27
Figuring Cost of Goods Sold on Schedule C, Lines 
35 Through 42 ......................... 27
Chapter 7. Figuring Gross Profit .................. 29
Items To Check .......................... 30
Testing Gross Profit Accuracy ................. 30
Additions to Gross Profit .................... 30
Chapter 8. Business Expenses ................... 30
Bad Debts ............................. 31
Car and Truck Expenses .................... 31
Depreciation ............................ 32
Employees' Pay .......................... 33
Insurance ............................. 34
Interest ............................... 35
Legal and Professional Fees .................. 35
Pension Plans ........................... 35
Rent Expense ........................... 36
Taxes ................................ 36
Travel and Meals ......................... 37
Business Use of Your Home .................. 37
Other Expenses You Can Deduct ............... 39
Expenses You Cannot Deduct ................. 39
Chapter 9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss .............. 39
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) ................. 40
Not-for-Profit Activities ..................... 40
Chapter 10. Self-Employment (SE) Tax .............. 40
Who Must Pay SE Tax? ..................... 40
Reporting Self-Employment Tax ................ 44
Chapter 11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer .............. 44
Taxpayer Bill of Rights ..................... 44
Examinations, Appeals, Collections, and Refunds .... 45
Chapter 12. How To Get More Information ............ 46
Small Business Administration ................ 50
Other Federal Agencies ..................... 50
How To Get Tax Help ......................... 46
Index ................................... 51
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments related to 
Pub. 334, such as legislation enacted after it was 
published, go to IRS.gov/Pub334.
Introduction
This publication provides general information about the 
federal tax laws that apply to you if you are a self -em-
ployed person or a statutory employee. This publication 
has information on business income, expenses, and tax 
credits that may help you, as a small business owner, file 
your income tax return.
This publication does not cover the topics listed in 
the following table. 
IF you need information about: THEN you should see:
Corporations ................... Pub. 542
Business expenses ................ Pub. 535
Farming ....................... Pub. 225
Fishermen (Capital Construction Fund) ... Pub. 595
International business .............. IRS.gov/International
Partnerships .................... Pub. 541
Passive activities ................. Pub. 925
Recordkeeping .................. Pub. 583
Rental ........................ Pub. 527
S corporations ................... Instructions for Form 
1120-S
Starting a business ................ Pub. 583
Are You Self-Employed?
You are a self -employed person if you carry on a trade or 
business as a sole proprietor or an independent 
contractor.
You do not have to carry on regular full -time busi-
ness activities to be self -employed. Having a 
part-time business in addition to your regular job 
or business may be self-employment.
CAUTION
!
Page 2 Publication 334 (2020)

Page 3 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Trade or business.  A trade or business is generally an 
activity carried on to make a profit. The facts and circum-
stances of each case determine whether or not an activity 
is a trade or business. You do not need to actually make a 
profit to be in a trade or business as long as you have a 
profit motive. You do need to make ongoing efforts to fur-
ther the interests of your business.
Limited liability company (LLC).  An LLC is an entity 
formed under state law by filing articles of organization. 
Generally, for income tax purposes, a single -member LLC 
is disregarded as an entity separate from its owner and 
reports its income and deductions on its owner's federal 
income tax return. For example, if the single -member LLC 
is not engaged in farming and the owner is an individual, 
he or she may use Schedule C.
Sole proprietor. A sole proprietor is someone who owns 
an unincorporated business by himself or herself. You are 
also a sole proprietor for income tax purposes if you are 
an individual and the sole member of a domestic LLC un-
less you elect to have the LLC treated as a corporation.
Independent contractor. People such as doctors, den-
tists, veterinarians, lawyers, accountants, contractors, 
subcontractors, public stenographers, or auctioneers who 
are in an independent trade, business, or profession in 
which they offer their services to the general public are 
generally independent contractors. Also, people who pro-
vide a service generally associated with the gig (or on -de-
mand, sharing, or access) economy, such as ride-sharing, 
may be treated as independent contractors. However, 
whether they are independent contractors or employees 
depends on the facts in each case. The general rule is 
that an individual is an independent contractor if the per-
son paying for the work has the right to control or to direct 
only the result of the work and not how it will be done. The 
earnings of a person who is working as an independent 
contractor are subject to self -employment tax. For more 
information on determining whether you are an employee 
or independent contractor, see Pub. 15 -A, Employer's 
Supplemental Tax Guide.
Are You a Statutory Employee?
A statutory employee has a checkmark in box 13 of his or 
her Form W -2, Wage and Tax Statement. Statutory 
employees use Schedule C to report their wages and 
expenses.
Business Owned and Operated 
by Spouses
If you and your spouse jointly own and operate an 
unincorporated business and share in the profits and 
losses, you are partners in a partnership, whether or not 
you have a formal partnership agreement. Do not use 
Schedule C. Instead, file Form 1065, U.S. Return of 
Partnership Income. For more information, see Pub. 541, 
Partnerships.
Exception—Community income.  If you and your 
spouse wholly own an unincorporated business as com-
munity property under the community property laws of a 
state, foreign country, or U.S. possession, you can treat 
the business either as a sole proprietorship or a partner-
ship. States with community property laws include Ari-
zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, 
Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin. A change in your re-
porting position will be treated as a conversion of the en-
tity. See Pub. 555 for more information about community 
property laws.
Exception—Qualified joint venture.  If you and your 
spouse each materially participate as the only members of 
a jointly owned and operated business, and you file a joint 
return for the tax year, you can make a joint election to be 
treated as a qualified joint venture instead of a partnership 
for the tax year. Making this election will allow you to avoid 
the complexity of Form 1065 but still give each spouse 
credit for social security earnings on which retirement 
benefits are based. For an explanation of "material partici-
pation," see the instructions for Schedule C, line G.
Only businesses that are owned and operated by 
spouses as co -owners (and not in the name of a 
state law entity) qualify for the election. Thus, a 
business owned and operated by spouses through an 
LLC does not qualify for the election of a qualified joint 
venture.
To make this election, you must divide all items of 
income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit attributable to 
the business between you and your spouse in accordance 
with your respective interests in the venture. Each of you 
must file a separate Schedule C and a separate 
Schedule SE. For more information, see Qualified Joint 
Ventures in the Instructions for Schedule SE.
Additional Information
What you need to know.  Table A  provides a list of 
questions you need to answer to help you meet your fed-
eral tax obligations. After each question is the location in 
this publication where you will find the related discussion.
The IRS mission. Provide America's taxpayers top -qual-
ity service by helping them understand and meet their tax 
responsibilities and enforce the law with integrity and fair-
ness to all.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and suggestions for future 
editions.
You can send us comments through IRS.gov/
FormComments. Or, you can write to the Internal Reve-
nue Service, Tax Forms and Publications, 1111 Constitu-
tion Ave. NW, IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will 
consider your comments and suggestions as we revise 
our tax forms, instructions, and publications. Do not send 
tax questions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
CAUTION
!
Publication 334 (2020)   Page 3

Page 4 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Getting answers to your tax questions.  If you have a 
tax question not answered by this publication or the How 
To Get Tax Help  section at the end of this publication, go 
to the IRS Interactive Tax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the search 
feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Visit IRS.gov/Forms to download current and prior -year 
forms, instructions, and publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to order current forms, instruc-
tions, and publications; call 800 -829-3676 to order 
prior-year forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon as possible. 
Do not resubmit requests you’ve already sent us. You can 
get forms and publications faster online.
What's New for 2020
The following are some of the tax changes for 2020.
Maximum net earnings. The maximum net self -employ-
ment earnings subject to the social security part of the 
self-employment tax is $137,700 for 2020. There is no 
maximum limit on earnings subject to the Medicare part.
Standard mileage rate.  For 2020, the standard mileage 
rate for the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or 
panel truck for each mile of business use is 57.5 cents a 
mile.
For more information, see Car and Truck Expenses  in 
chapter 8.
The Families First Coronavirus Response Act 
(FFCRA). The FFCRA provides businesses with tax 
credits to cover certain costs of providing employees with 
required paid sick leave and expanded family and medical 
leave for reasons related to the coronavirus, for periods of 
leave from April 1, 2020, through March 31, 2021. Under 
the FFCRA, the amount of these credits shall be included 
in the recipient employer’s gross income. Report these 
amounts as “Other income” on line 6 of your Schedule C 
(Form 1040). For more information about these credits, 
see COVID-19-Related Tax Credits for Paid Leave 
Provided by Small and Midsize Businesses FAQs.
Credits for self -employed persons. The FFCRA made 
new refundable credits available to certain self -employed 
persons impacted by the coronavirus. See the Instructions 
for Form 7202, Credit for Sick Leave and Family Leave for 
Certain Self-Employed Individuals, for more information.
Excess business loss limitation.  The excess business 
loss limitation under section 461(l) is not applicable for the 
2020 tax year.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security 
(CARES) Act. The CARES Act allows self -employed in-
dividuals to defer the payment of 50 percent of the social 
security tax imposed on net earnings from self -employ-
ment income for the period beginning on March 27, 2020, 
and ending December 31, 2020. The CARES Act also al-
lows employers to defer the deposit and payment of the 
employer share of social security taxes for deposits due 
on or after March 27, 2020, and before January 1, 2021, 
as well as payments due after January 1, 2021, that are 
required for wages paid on or after March 27, 2020, and 
before January 1, 2021. One -half of the deferred tax is 
due by December 31, 2021, and the remainder is due on 
December 31, 2022.
New Form 1099 -NEC. Form 1099 -NEC, Nonemployee 
Compensation, is used beginning with tax year 2020 to re-
port nonemployee compensation.
What's New for 2021
The following are some of the tax changes for 2021. For 
information on other changes, go to IRS.gov.
Maximum net earnings. The maximum net self -employ-
ment earnings subject to the social security part of the 
self-employment tax is $142,800 for 2021.
What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note. The following is a list of questions you may need to answer so you can fill out your federal income tax return. 
Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication.)
 What must I know  Where to find the answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them? See chapter 1.
What forms must I file? See chapter 1.
What must I do if I have employees? See Employment Taxes in chapter 1.
Do I have to start my tax year in January, or can I start it in any other month? See Accounting Periods in chapter 2.
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses? See Accounting Methods in chapter 2.
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year? See chapter 3.
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return? See chapter 5.
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return? See Business Expenses in chapter 8.
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses? See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in chapter 8.
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it? See chapter 9.
What are my rights as a taxpayer? See chapter 11.
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters? See chapter 12.
Table A.
Page 4 Publication 334 (2020)

Page 5 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Standard mileage rate.  For 2021, the standard mileage 
rate for the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or 
panel truck for each mile of business use is 56 cents a 
mile.
Reminders
Reportable transactions. You must file Form 8886, Re-
portable Transaction Disclosure Statement, to report cer-
tain transactions. You may have to pay a penalty if you are 
required to file Form 8886 but do not do so. You may also 
have to pay interest and penalties on any reportable trans-
action understatements. Reportable transactions include:
1. Transactions the same as or substantially similar to 
tax avoidance transactions identified by the IRS;
2. Transactions offered to you under conditions of confi-
dentiality for which you paid an advisor a minimum 
fee;
3. Transactions for which you have, or a related party 
has, contractual protection against disallowance of 
the tax benefits;
4. Transactions that result in losses of at least $2 million 
in any single tax year ($50,000 if from certain foreign 
currency transactions) or $4 million in any combina-
tion of tax years; and
5. Transactions the same or substantially similar to one 
of the types of transactions the IRS has identified as a 
transaction of interest.
For more information, see the Instructions for Form 
8886.
Small Business and Self-Employed (SB/SE) Tax Cen-
ter. Do you need help with a tax issue or preparing your 
return, or do you need a free publication or form? SB/SE 
serves taxpayers who file Form 1040; Form 1040 -SR; 
Schedules C, E, or F; or Form 2106, as well as small busi-
ness taxpayers with assets under $10 million. For addi-
tional information, visit the Small Business and Self -Em-
ployed Tax Center at IRS.gov/Businesses/Small.
Gig Economy Tax Center.  The gig (or on -demand, 
sharing, or access) economy refers to an area of activity 
where people earn income providing on -demand work, 
services, or goods. Visit IRS.gov/Gig to get more informa-
tion about the tax consequences of participating in the gig 
economy.
Photographs of Missing 
Children
The Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing & Exploited Children® 
(NCMEC). Photographs of missing children selected by 
the Center may appear in this publication on pages that 
would otherwise be blank. You can help bring these 
children home by looking at the photographs and calling 
1-800-THE-LOST (1 -800-843-5678) if you recognize a 
child.
1.
Filing and Paying
Business Taxes
Introduction
This chapter explains the business taxes you may have to 
pay and the forms you may have to file. It also discusses 
taxpayer identification numbers.
Table 1-1 lists the benefits of filing electronically.
Table 1-2 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay, 
their due dates, and the forms you use to report them.
Table 1 -3 provides checklists that highlight the typical 
forms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go 
out of business.
You may want to get Pub. 509, Tax Calendars. It 
has tax calendars that tell you when to file returns 
and make tax payments.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
535 Business Expenses
583 Starting a Business and Keeping Records
Form (and Instructions)
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
1040-SR U.S. Tax Return for Seniors
1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals
7202 Credits for Sick Leave and Family Leave for 
Certain Self-Employed Individuals
Sch C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business
Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment Tax
See chapter 12 for information about getting publications 
and forms.
Identification Numbers
This section explains three types of taxpayer identification 
numbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how to 
get them.
Social security number (SSN).  Generally, use your 
SSN as your taxpayer identification number. You must put 
this number on each of your individual income tax forms, 
such as Form 1040 and its schedules.
To apply for an SSN, use Form SS-5, Application for a 
Social Security Card. This form is available at Social Se-
curity Administration (SSA) offices or by calling 
TIP
  505
  535
  583
  1040
  1040-SR
  1040-ES
  7202
  Sch C (Form 1040)
  Sch SE (Form 1040)
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes  Page 5

Page 6 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
800-772-1213. It is also available from the SSA website at 
SSA.gov. 
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).  The 
IRS will issue an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident 
alien and you do not have and are not eligible to get an 
SSN. The ITIN will expire for any taxpayer who does not 
file a federal income tax return (or who is not included as a 
dependent on the return of another taxpayer) for 3 con-
secutive years. In general, if you need to obtain an ITIN, 
you must attach Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual 
Taxpayer Identification Number, with your signed, original, 
completed tax return and any other required documenta-
tion and mail them to the address in the Instructions for 
Form W -7. Exceptions are covered in the instructions. If 
you must include another person's SSN on your return 
and that person does not have and cannot get an SSN, 
enter that person's ITIN. The application is also available 
in Spanish. The form is available at IRS.gov/FormW7.
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle the 
holder to social security benefits or change the 
holder's employment or immigration status.
Employer identification number ( EIN). You must also 
have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number if 
you do either of the following.
• Pay wages to one or more employees.
• File pension or excise tax returns.
If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSN 
on your Schedule C as instructed.
You can apply for an EIN:
• Online by clicking on the Employer ID Numbers (EINs) 
link at IRS.gov/EIN as long as the principal business 
location is in the United States or U.S. territories—the 
EIN is issued immediately once the application infor-
mation is validated;
• By telephone at 267-941-1099 (not a toll-free number) 
only if the principal business is located outside the 
United States or U.S. territories; or
• By mailing or faxing Form SS-4, Application for Em-
ployer Identification Number.
New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either the 
form or the ownership of your business changes. For 
more information, see Pub. 1635, Understanding Your 
EIN.
When you need identification numbers of other per-
sons. In operating your business, you will probably make 
certain payments you must report on information returns. 
These payments are discussed under Information Re-
turns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient of 
these payments (the payee) a statement showing the total 
amount paid during the year. You must include the 
payee's identification number and your identification num-
ber on the returns and statements.
Employee. If you have employees, you must get an 
SSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN of 
CAUTION
!
each employee exactly as they are shown on the employ-
ee's social security card. If the employee's name is not 
correct as shown on the card, the employee should re-
quest a new card from the SSA. This may occur if the em-
ployee's name was changed due to marriage or divorce.
Form W -4, Employee's Withholding Allowance Certifi-
cate, is completed by each employee so the correct fed-
eral income tax can be withheld from their pay.
If your employee does not have an SSN, he or she 
should file Form SS-5 with the SSA.
Other payee. If you make payments to someone who 
is not your employee and you must report the payments 
on an information return, get that person's SSN. If you 
must report payments to an organization, such as a corpo-
ration or partnership, you must get its EIN.
To get the payee's SSN or EIN, use Form W -9, Re-
quest for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certifica-
tion.
A payee who does not provide you with an identifica-
tion number may be subject to backup withholding. For in-
formation on backup withholding, see the Instructions for 
the Requester of Form W -9 and the General Instructions 
for Certain Information Returns.
Income Tax
This part explains whether you have to file an income tax 
return and when you file it. It also explains how you pay 
the tax.
Do I Have To File an Income Tax 
Return?
You have to file an income tax return for 2020 if your net 
earnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If your 
net earnings from self -employment were less than $400, 
you still have to file an income tax return if you meet any 
other filing requirement listed in the Instructions for Forms 
1040 and 1040-SR.
How Do I File?
File your income tax return on Form 1040 or Form 
1040-SR and attach Schedule C. Enter the net profit or 
loss from Schedule C on Schedule 1 (Form 1040). Use 
Schedule C to figure your net profit or loss from your busi-
ness. If you operated more than one business as a sole 
proprietorship, you must attach a separate Schedule C for 
each business.
IRS e-file (Electronic Filing)
You may be able to file your tax returns electronically us-
ing an IRS e-file option. Table 1-1 lists the benefits of IRS 
e-file. IRS e-file uses automation to replace most of the 
Page 6  Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
manual steps needed to process paper returns. As a re-
sult, the processing of e-file returns is faster and more ac-
curate than the processing of paper returns. As with a pa-
per return, you are responsible for making sure your return 
contains accurate information and is filed on time.
Using e-file does not affect your chances of an IRS ex-
amination of your return.
You can file most commonly used business forms using 
IRS e-file. For more information, visit IRS.gov.
Electronic signatures.  Paperless filing is easier than 
you think and it's available to most taxpayers who file 
electronically—including those first -time filers who were 
16 or older at the end of 2020. If you file electronically us-
ing tax preparation software or a tax professional, you will 
sign your return using the Self-Select PIN (personal identi-
fication number) Method for e-file. If you are married filing 
jointly, you and your spouse will each need to create a 
PIN and enter these PINs as your electronic signatures.
To create a PIN, you must know your adjusted gross in-
come (AGI) from your originally filed 2019 income tax re-
turn (not from an amended return, Form 1040 -X, or after 
receiving any math error notice from the IRS). You will 
also need to provide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure 
your DOB is accurate and matches the information on re-
cord with the SSA before you e-file. To do this, check your 
annual Social Security Statement.
With a Self -Select PIN, there is nothing to sign and 
nothing to mail —not even your Forms W -2. For more de-
tails on the Self-Select PIN Method, visit IRS.gov.
State returns. In most states, you can file an electronic 
state return simultaneously with your federal return. For 
more information, check with your state tax agency, tax 
professional, or IRS.gov.
Refunds. You can have your refund check mailed to you, 
or you can have your refund deposited directly to your 
checking or savings account.
With e-file, your refund will be issued in half the time as 
when filing on paper. Most refunds are issued in less than 
21 days.
Offset against debts.  As with a paper return, you 
may not get all of your refund if you owe certain past -due 
amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a student loan, or 
child support. You will be notified if the refund you claimed 
has been offset against your debts.
Refund inquiries. You can check the status of your re-
fund if it has been at least 24 hours (4 weeks if you mailed 
a paper return) from the date you filed your return. Be sure 
to have a copy of your tax return available because you 
will need to know the filing status, the first SSN shown on 
the return, and the exact whole -dollar amount of the re-
fund. To check on your refund, do one of the following.
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the free IRS2Go app to your smart phone 
and use it to check your refund status.
• Call 800-829-1954 for automated refund information, 
and follow the recorded instructions.
The IRS can’t issue refunds before mid -February 2021 
for returns that claimed the earned income credit or the 
additional child tax credit. This applies to the entire refund, 
not just the portion associated with these credits.
Balance due. If your return shows that you owe tax, you 
must pay it by the due date of your return (without regard 
to any extension to file) to avoid late -payment penalties 
and interest. For calendar year 2020, pay by April 15, 
2021. You have many options for making your payment, 
including by scheduling an electronic funds withdrawal 
from your checking or savings account or by credit card. 
For more information about your payment options, go to 
IRS.gov/Payments.
Using an Authorized IRS e-file Provider
Many tax professionals can electronically file paperless 
returns for their clients. You have two options.
1. You can prepare your return, take it to an authorized 
IRS e-file provider, and have the provider transmit it 
electronically to the IRS.
2. You can have an authorized IRS e-file provider pre-
pare your return and transmit it for you electronically.
You will be asked to complete Form 8879, IRS e-file 
Signature Authorization, to authorize the provider to enter 
your self-selected PIN on your return.
Depending on the provider and the specific services re-
quested, a fee may be charged. To find an authorized IRS 
e-file provider near you, go to IRS.gov/Efile/Providers.
Using Your Personal Computer
A computer with Internet access is all you need to file your 
tax return using IRS e-file. When you use your personal 
computer, you can e-file your return from your home any 
time of the day or night. Sign your return electronically us-
ing a self -selected PIN to complete the process. There is 
no signature form to submit or Forms W-2 to send in.
Free software options for doing your taxes.  If your 
AGI was $72,000 or less in 2020, you can use free tax 
software to prepare and e-file your tax return. If you 
earned more than $72,000, you can use Free File Fillable 
Forms.
Free File.  This public -private partnership, between 
the IRS and tax software providers, makes approximately 
a dozen brand name commercial software products and 
e-file available for free. Just visit IRS.gov/FreeFile for de-
tails. You can review each software provider's criteria for 
free usage or use an online tool to find which free software 
products match your situation. Some software providers 
offer state tax return preparation for free.
Free File Fillable Forms.  The IRS also offers elec-
tronic versions of IRS paper forms that can also be e-filed 
for free. Free File Fillable Forms is best for people experi-
enced in preparing their own tax returns. There is no in-
come limitation to using these forms. Free File Fillable 
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes  Page 7

Page 8 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Forms does basic math calculations. It supports only fed-
eral tax forms.
Filing Through Employers and Financial 
Institutions
Some businesses offer free e-file to their employees, 
members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask your 
employer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as 
an employee, member, or customer benefit.
Free Help With Your Return
Free help in preparing your return is available nationwide 
from IRS -trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income Tax 
Assistance (VITA) program is designed to help low -in-
come taxpayers, and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 or 
older with their tax returns. Some locations offer free elec-
tronic filing.
Table 1-1. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is significantly reduced.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic signatures • Create your own personal identification number (PIN) and file a completely paperless return through your 
tax preparation software or tax professional. There is nothing to mail.
Proof of acceptance • You receive an electronic acknowledgment within 48 hours that the IRS has accepted your return for 
processing.
Fast refunds • You get your refund faster with direct deposit.
Free Internet filing options • Use IRS.gov to access commercial tax preparation and e-file services available at no cost to eligible 
taxpayers.
Electronic payment options • Convenient, safe, and secure electronic payment options are available. E-file and pay your taxes in a 
single step. Schedule direct payment from your checking or savings account (up to and including April 15, 
2021) or pay by debit or credit card.
Federal/State filing • Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together and double the benefits you get from e-file.
When Is My Tax Return Due?
For calendar year 2020, Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR are 
due by April 15, 2021. If you use a fiscal year (explained in 
chapter 2), your return is due by the 15th day of the 4th 
month after the end of your fiscal year. If you file late, you 
may have to pay penalties and interest.
If you cannot file your return on time, use Form 4868, 
Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S. 
Individual Income Tax Return, to request an automatic 
6-month extension. For calendar year taxpayers, this will 
extend the tax filing due date until October 15. Filing an 
extension does not extend the time to pay your taxes, only 
the time to file the tax return.
How Do I Pay Income Tax?
Federal income tax is a pay -as-you-go tax. You must pay 
it as you earn or receive income during the year. An em-
ployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her 
pay. If you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do 
not pay enough tax that way, you might have to pay esti-
mated tax.
Estimated tax payments.  You generally have to make 
estimated tax payments if you expect to owe taxes, in-
cluding self -employment tax (discussed later), of $1,000 
or more when you file your return. Use Form 1040 -ES, 
Estimated Tax for Individuals, to figure and pay the tax. If 
you do not have to make estimated tax payments, you can 
pay any tax due when you file your return. For more infor-
mation on estimated tax, see Pub. 505.
What are my options for paying estimated tax? 
You can pay your estimated tax electronically using vari-
ous options. If you pay electronically, there is no need to 
mail in Form 1040 -ES payment vouchers. These options 
include:
1. Paying electronically through the Electronic Federal 
Tax Payment System (EFTPS),
2. Paying with Direct Pay by authorizing an electronic 
funds withdrawal when you file Form 1040 or 
1040-SR electronically, or
3. Paying by credit or debit card over the phone or by In-
ternet.
Other options include crediting an overpayment from your 
2019 return to your 2020 estimated tax, or mailing a check 
or money order with a Form 1040-ES payment voucher.
EFTPS. 
1. To enroll in EFTPS, go to EFTPS.gov or call 
800-555-4477.
2. When you request a new EIN, you may be automati-
cally enrolled in EFTPS.
3. Benefits of EFTPS include the following.
a. The chance of an error in making your payments 
is reduced.
b. You receive immediate confirmation of every 
transaction.
Penalty for underpayment of tax.  If you did not pay 
enough income tax and self -employment tax for 2020 by 
withholding or by making estimated tax payments, you 
may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The 
IRS will figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or 
you can use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax 
by Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to 
Page 8  Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
pay a penalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more 
information, see Pub. 505.
Self-Employment (SE) Tax
SE tax is a social security and Medicare tax primarily for 
individuals who work for themselves. It is similar to the so-
cial security and Medicare taxes withheld from the pay of 
most wage earners.
If you earned income as a statutory employee, 
you do not pay SE tax on that income. Social se-
curity and Medicare tax should already have been 
withheld from those earnings.
Social security coverage.  Social security benefits are 
available to self -employed persons just as they are to 
wage earners. Your payments of SE tax contribute to your 
coverage under the social security system. Social security 
coverage provides you with retirement benefits, disability 
benefits, survivor benefits, and hospital insurance (Medi-
care) benefits.
Be sure to report all of your self -employment in-
come. By not reporting all of it, you could cause 
your social security benefits to be lower when you 
retire.
How to become insured under social security. You 
must be insured under the social security system before 
you begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-
sured if you have the required number of credits (also 
called quarters of coverage), discussed next.
Earning credits in 2020 and 2021.  For 2020, you re-
ceived one credit, up to a maximum of four credits, for 
each $1,410 ($1,470 for 2021) of income subject to social 
security taxes. Therefore, for 2020, if you had income 
(self-employment and wages) of $5,640 that was subject 
to social security taxes, you receive four credits ($5,640 ÷ 
$1,410).
For an explanation of the number of credits you must 
have to be insured and the benefits available to you and 
your family under the social security program, consult your 
nearest SSA office.
Making false statements to get or to increase so-
cial security benefits may subject you to penal-
ties.
The SSA time limit for posting self -employment in-
come. Generally, the SSA will give you credit only for 
self-employment income reported on a tax return filed 
within 3 years, 3 months, and 15 days after the tax year 
you earned the income. If you file your tax return or report 
a change in your self -employment income after this time 
limit, the SSA may change its records, but only to remove 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
or reduce the amount. The SSA will not change its records 
to increase your self-employment income.
Who must pay SE tax.  You must pay SE tax and file 
Schedule SE (Form 1040) if either of the following applies.
1. Your net earnings from self-employment (excluding 
church employee income) were $400 or more.
2. You had church employee income of $108.28 or 
more.
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are 
and even if you are already receiving social secur-
ity or Medicare benefits.
SE tax rate.  The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15. 3% 
(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
Maximum earnings subject to SE tax.  Only the first 
$137,700 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings 
in 2020 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social 
security part of SE tax, social security tax, or the Tier 1 
part of railroad retirement tax.
All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 
2020 are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare 
part of SE tax, Medicare tax, or Medicare part of railroad 
retirement tax.
If wages and tips you receive as an employee are sub-
ject to either social security tax or the Tier 1 part of rail-
road retirement tax, or both, and total at least $137,700, 
do not pay the 12.4% social security part of the SE tax on 
any of your net earnings. However, you must pay the 
2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net earnings.
Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjustment 
to income on line 14 of Schedule 1 (Form 1040). 
Additional Medicare Tax.  A 0.9% Additional Medicare 
Tax may apply to you if your net earnings from self -em-
ployment exceed one of the following threshold amounts 
(based on your filing status).
• Married filing jointly—$250,000
• Married filing separately—$125,000
• Single, Head of household, or Qualifying 
widow(er)—$200,000
If you have both wages and self -employment income, 
the threshold amount for applying the Additional Medicare 
Tax on the self -employment income is reduced (but not 
below zero) by the amount of wages subject to Additional 
Medicare Tax. Use Form 8959, Additional Medicare Tax, 
to figure this tax.
More information. For information on methods of calcu-
lating SE tax, see chapter 10.
CAUTION
!
TIP
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes  Page 9

Page 10 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-2. Which Forms Must I File?
IF you are liable for: THEN use Form: DUE by:1
Income tax 1040 or 1040-SR, and Schedule C2 15th day of 4th month after end of 
tax year.
Self-employment tax Schedule SE File with Form 1040 or Form 1040-SR.
Estimated tax 1040-ES 15th day of 4th, 6th, and 9th months of tax 
year, and 15th day of 1st month after the end 
of tax year.
Social security and Medicare taxes and income 
tax withholding
941 or 944 April 30, July 31, October 31, and January 31.3
See Pub. 15.
Providing information on social security and 
Medicare taxes and income tax withholding
W-2 (to employee)
 
W-2 and W-3 (to the Social Security 
Administration)
January 31.3
 
January 31.3
Federal unemployment tax (FUTA) 940 January 31.3
April 30, July 31, October 31, and January 31, 
but only if the liability for unpaid tax is more 
than $500.
Filing information returns for payments to 
nonemployees and transactions with other 
persons
See Information Returns Forms 1099—to the recipient by January 31 
and to the IRS by February 28 (March 31 if 
filing electronically).4
Other forms—see the General Instructions for 
Certain Information Returns.
Excise tax See Excise Taxes See the instructions for the forms.
1 If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, file by the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. For more information, see Pub. 509, 
Tax Calendars.
2 File a separate schedule for each business.
3 See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
4 Form 1099-NEC—to the IRS by January 31 (even if filing electronically) if you are reporting nonemployee compensation.
Employment Taxes
If you have employees, you will need to file forms to report 
employment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow-
ing items.
• Social security and Medicare taxes.
• Federal income tax withholding.
• Federal unemployment tax (FUTA).
For more information, see Pub. 15 (Circular E), Employ-
er's Tax Guide. That publication explains your tax respon-
sibilities as an employer.
To help you determine whether the people working for 
you are your employees, see Pub. 15 -A, Employer's Sup-
plemental Tax Guide. That publication has information to 
help you determine whether an individual is an independ-
ent contractor or an employee.
If you incorrectly classify an employee as an inde-
pendent contractor, you may be held liable for 
employment taxes for that worker plus a penalty.
An independent contractor is someone who is self -em-
ployed. You generally do not have to withhold or pay any 
taxes on payments made to an independent contractor. 
CAUTION
!
Excise Taxes
This section identifies some of the excise taxes you may 
have to pay and the forms you have to file if you do any of 
the following.
• Manufacture or sell certain products.
• Operate certain kinds of businesses.
• Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or products.
• Receive payment for certain services.
For more information on excise taxes, see Pub. 510.
Form 720.  The federal excise taxes reported on Form 
720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-
eral broad categories of taxes, including the following.
• Environmental taxes on the sale or use of ozone-de-
pleting chemicals and imported products containing or 
manufactured with these chemicals.
• Communications and air transportation taxes.
• Fuel taxes.
• Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers, and 
tractors.
Page 10  Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 11 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Manufacturer’s taxes on the sale or use of a variety of 
different articles.
• Tax on indoor tanning services.
Form 2290.  There is a federal excise tax on the use of 
certain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high-
ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable gross 
weight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on Form 
2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For more 
information, see the Instructions for Form 2290.
Depositing excise taxes.  If you have to file a quarterly 
excise tax return on Form 720, you may have to deposit 
your excise taxes before the return is due. For details on 
depositing excise taxes, see the Instructions for Form 
720.
Information Returns
If you make or receive payments in your business, you 
may have to report them to the IRS on information returns. 
The IRS compares the payments shown on the informa-
tion returns with each person's income tax return to see if 
the payments were included in income. You must give a 
copy of each information return you are required to file to 
the recipient or payer. In addition to the forms described 
below, you may have to use other returns to report certain 
kinds of payments or transactions. For more details on in-
formation returns and when you have to file them, see the 
General Instructions for Certain Information Returns.
Form 1099-MISC. Use Form 1099 -MISC, Miscellaneous 
Income, to report certain payments you make in your busi-
ness. These payments include the following items.
• Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rents paid 
to real estate agents.
• Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not for 
services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows.
• Royalty payments of $10 or more.
• Payments to certain crew members by operators of 
fishing boats.
• Amounts paid for the purchase of fish for resale from 
any person engaged in the business of catching fish.
You also use Form 1099 -MISC to report your sales of 
$5,000 or more of consumer products to a person for re-
sale anywhere other than in a permanent retail establish-
ment.
Form 1099 -NEC. File Form 1099 -NEC, Nonemployee 
Compensation, for each person in the course of your busi-
ness to whom you have paid at least $600 during the year 
in:
• Services performed by someone who is not your em-
ployee (including parts and materials) (box 1),
• Cash payments for fish (or other aquatic life) you pur-
chase from anyone engaged in the trade or business 
of catching fish (box 1), or
• Payments to an attorney (box 1).
You must also file Form 1099 -NEC for each person 
from whom you have withheld any federal income tax (re-
port in box 4) under the backup withholding rules regard-
less of the amount of the payment.
If you use Form 1099 -NEC to report sales totaling 
$5,000 or more of consumer products, then you 
are required to file Form 1099 -NEC with the IRS 
by January 31.
Form W -2. You must file Form W -2, Wage and Tax 
Statement, to report payments to your employees, such 
as wages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income, 
social security, and Medicare taxes. You can file Form 
W-2 online. For more information about Form W -2, see 
the General Instructions for Forms W-2 and W-3.
Penalties. The law provides for the following penalties if 
you do not file Forms 1099 -MISC, Forms 1099 -NEC, or 
Form W -2 or do not correctly report the information. For 
more information, see the General Instructions for Certain 
Information Returns.
• Failure to file information returns. This penalty applies 
if you do not file information returns by the due date, 
do not include all required information, or report incor-
rect information.
• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. This pen-
alty applies if you do not furnish a required statement 
to a payee by the required date, do not include all re-
quired information, or report incorrect information.
Waiver of penalties.  These penalties will not apply if 
you can show that the failure was due to reasonable 
cause and not willful neglect.
In addition, there is no penalty for failure to include all 
required information, or for including incorrect information, 
on a de minimis (small) number of information returns if 
you correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returns 
are due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater of 
10 or 1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you are re-
quired to file for the year.)
Form 8300.  You must file Form 8300, Report of Cash 
Payments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business, 
if you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac-
tion, or two or more related business transactions. Cash 
includes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in-
cludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier's 
and traveler's checks and money orders. Cash does not 
include a check drawn on an individual's personal account 
(personal check). For more information, see Pub. 1544, 
Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Received in a 
Trade or Business).
Penalties. There are civil and criminal penalties, in-
cluding up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, fil-
ing (or causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 
8300, or structuring a transaction to evade reporting re-
quirements.
CAUTION
!
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes  Page 11

Page 12 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Going Out of Business Checklists
(Note. The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out of 
business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms.)
IF you are liable for: THEN you may need to:
Income tax
 File Schedule C with your Form 1040 or 1040-SR for the year in which you go out of business.
File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 or 1040-SR for each year in which you sell or exchange 
property used in your business or in which the business use of certain section 179 or listed 
property drops to 50% or less.
File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 or 1040-SR if you sold your business.
Self-employment tax
 File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 or 1040-SR for the year in which you go out of business.
Employment taxes
 File Form 941 (or Form 944) for the calendar quarter in which you make final wage payments. 
Note. Do not forget to check the box and enter the date final wages were paid on line 17 of 
Form 941 or line 14 of Form 944.
File Form 940 for the calendar year in which final wages were paid. Note. Do not forget to check 
box d, Final: Business closed or stopped paying wages under Type of Return.
Information returns
 Provide Forms W-2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you make final wage 
payments. 
File Form W-3 to file Forms W-2. 
Provide Forms 1099-MISC and 1099-NEC to each person to whom you have paid at least $600 
for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in which you go out of 
business.
File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099-MISC and 1099-NEC.
Table 1-3.
2.
Accounting Periods and 
Methods
Introduction
You must figure your taxable income and file an income 
tax return for an annual accounting period called a tax 
year. Also, you must consistently use an accounting 
method that clearly shows your income and expenses for 
the tax year.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
538 Accounting Periods and Methods
See chapter 12 for information about getting publications 
and forms.
Accounting Periods
When preparing a statement of income and expenses 
(generally your income tax return), you must use your 
books and records for a specific interval of time called an 
  538
accounting period. The annual accounting period for your 
income tax return is called a tax year. You can use one of 
the following tax years.
• A calendar tax year.
• A fiscal tax year.
Unless you have a required tax year, you adopt a tax year 
by filing your first income tax return using that tax year. A 
required tax year is a tax year required under the Internal 
Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regulations.
Calendar tax year.  A calendar tax year is 12 consecu-
tive months beginning January 1 and ending December 
31.
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the fol-
lowing apply.
• You do not keep books.
• You have no annual accounting period.
• Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscal year.
• Your use of the calendar tax year is required under the 
Internal Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regula-
tions.
If you filed your first income tax return using the calen-
dar tax year and you later begin business as a sole pro-
prietor, you must continue to use the calendar tax year un-
less you get IRS approval to change it or are otherwise 
allowed to change it without IRS approval. For more infor-
mation, see Change in tax year, later.
If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintain 
your books and records and report your income and ex-
penses for the period from January 1 through December 
31 of each year.
Page 12  Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 13 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fiscal tax year.  A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutive 
months ending on the last day of any month except De-
cember. A 52 -53-week tax year is a fiscal tax year that 
varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on 
the last day of a month.
If you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain your 
books and records and report your income and expenses 
using the same tax year.
For more information on a fiscal tax year, including a 
52-53-week tax year, see Pub. 538.
Change in tax year.  Generally, you must file Form 
1128, Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax 
Year, to request IRS approval to change your tax year. 
See the Instructions for Form 1128 for exceptions. If you 
qualify for an automatic approval request, a user fee is not 
required. If you do not qualify for automatic approval, a rul-
ing must be requested. See the Instructions for Form 1128 
for information about user fees if you are requesting a rul-
ing.
Accounting Methods
An accounting method is a set of rules used to determine 
when and how income and expenses are reported. Your 
accounting method includes not only the overall method 
of accounting you use, but also the accounting treatment 
you use for any material item.
You choose an accounting method for your business 
when you file your first income tax return that includes a 
Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want to 
change your accounting method, you must generally get 
IRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.
Kinds of methods. Generally, you can use any of the fol-
lowing accounting methods.
• Cash method.
• An accrual method.
• Special methods of accounting for certain items of in-
come and expenses.
• Combination method using elements of two or more of 
the above.
You must use the same accounting method to figure 
your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, you 
must use an accounting method that clearly shows your 
income.
Business and personal items.  You can account for 
business and personal items under different accounting 
methods. For example, you can figure your business in-
come under an accrual method, even if you use the cash 
method to figure personal items.
Two or more businesses.  If you have two or more sep-
arate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-
counting method for each if the method clearly reflects the 
income of each business. They are separate and distinct 
only if you maintain complete and separate books and re-
cords for each business.
Cash Method
Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven-
tory use the cash method because they find it easier to 
keep cash method records. However, if an inventory is 
necessary to account for your income, you must generally 
use an accrual method of accounting for sales and pur-
chases, unless you are a small business taxpayer (de-
fined later in this chapter). For more information, see In-
ventories, later.
Income
Under the cash method, include in your gross income all 
items of income you actually or constructively receive dur-
ing your tax year. If you receive property or services, you 
must include their fair market value in income.
Example. On December 30, 2019, Mrs. Sycamore 
sent you a check for interior decorating services you pro-
vided to her. You received the check on January 2, 2020. 
You must include the amount of the check in income for 
2020.
Constructive receipt.  You have constructive receipt of 
income when an amount is credited to your account or 
made available to you without restriction. You do not need 
to have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be 
your agent and receive income for you, you are treated as 
having received it when your agent received it.
Example. Interest is credited to your bank account in 
December 2020. You do not withdraw it or enter it into 
your passbook until 2021. You must include it in your 
gross income for 2020.
Delaying receipt of income. You cannot hold checks 
or postpone taking possession of similar property from 
one tax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. 
You must report the income in the year the property is re-
ceived or made available to you without restriction.
Example. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was 
entitled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De-
cember 2020. She was told in December that her pay-
ment was available. At her request, she was not paid until 
January 2021. She must include this payment in her 2020 
income because it was constructively received in 2020.
Checks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the tax 
year is constructive receipt of income in that year, even if 
you cannot cash or deposit the check until the following 
year.
Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-
cember 31, 2020, from a patient. She could not deposit 
the check in her business account until January 2, 2021. 
She must include this fee in her income for 2020.
Debts paid by another person or canceled.  If your 
debts are paid by another person or are canceled by your 
creditors, you may have to report part or all of this debt re-
lief as income. If you receive income in this way, you con-
structively receive the income when the debt is canceled 
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods  Page 13

Page 14 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or paid. For more information, see Canceled Debt  under 
Kinds of Income in chapter 5.
Repayment of income.  If you include an amount in in-
come and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it, 
you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in which 
you make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, a 
special rule applies. For details about the special rule, see 
Repayments in chapter 11 of Pub. 535, Business Expen-
ses.
Expenses
Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses 
in the tax year in which you actually pay them. This in-
cludes business expenses for which you contest liability. 
However, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid 
in advance or you may be required to capitalize certain 
costs, as explained later under Uniform Capitalization 
Rules.
Expenses paid in advance.  You can deduct an ex-
pense you pay in advance only in the year to which it ap-
plies.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and you 
pay $1,000 in 2020 for a business insurance policy effec-
tive for 1 year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 in 
2020 and $500 in 2021.
Accrual Method
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally re-
port income in the year earned and deduct or capitalize 
expenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrual 
method of accounting is to match income and expenses in 
the correct year.
Income—General Rule
Under an accrual method, you generally include an 
amount in your gross income for the tax year in which all 
events that fix your right to receive the income have occur-
red and you can determine the amount with reasonable 
accuracy. For a taxpayer with an applicable financial 
statement or other financial statement as the Secretary 
may specify, the all -events test for an item of gross in-
come is considered met no later than when taken into ac-
count in an applicable financial statement or such other fi-
nancial statement.
Example. You are a calendar year accrual method 
taxpayer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2020. 
You billed the customer in the first week of January 2021, 
but you did not receive payment until February 2021. You 
must include the amount received for the computer in your 
2020 income.
Income—Special Rules
The following are special rules that apply to advance pay-
ments, estimating income, and changing a payment 
schedule for services.
Estimated income.  If you include a reasonably estima-
ted amount in gross income, and later determine the exact 
amount is different, take the difference into account in the 
tax year in which you make the determination.
Change in payment schedule for services.  If you per-
form services for a basic rate specified in a contract, you 
must accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you 
agree to receive payments at a lower rate until you com-
plete the services and then receive the difference.
Advance payments.  Generally, you report an advance 
payment as income in the year you receive the payment. 
However, if you receive an advance payment, you can 
elect to postpone including the advance payment in in-
come until the next tax year. You cannot postpone includ-
ing any payment beyond that tax year.
For more information, see Pub. 538. Also see Notice 
2018-35, 2018 -18 I.R.B. 520, available at IRS.gov/IRB/
2018-18_IRB#NOT-2018-35, for transitional guidance re-
lating to advance payments.
Expenses
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally de-
duct or capitalize a business expense when both the fol-
lowing apply.
1. The all-events test has been met. The test has been 
met when:
a. All events have occurred that fix the fact of liability, 
and
b. The liability can be determined with reasonable 
accuracy.
2. Economic performance has occurred.
Economic performance.  You generally cannot deduct 
or capitalize a business expense until economic perform-
ance occurs. If your expense is for property or services 
provided to you, or for your use of property, economic per-
formance occurs as the property or services are provided 
or as the property is used. If your expense is for property 
or services you provide to others, economic performance 
occurs as you provide the property or services. An excep-
tion allows certain recurring items to be treated as incur-
red during a tax year even though economic performance 
has not occurred. For more information on economic per-
formance, see Economic Performance  under Accrual 
Method in Pub. 538.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use 
an accrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies 
in December 2020. You receive the supplies and the bill in 
December, but you pay the bill in January 2021. You can 
deduct the expense in 2020 because all events that fix the 
Page 14  Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 15 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liability 
could be reasonably determined, and economic perform-
ance occurred in that year.
Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring ex-
pense. In that case, you can deduct them in 2020 even if 
the supplies are not delivered until 2021 (when economic 
performance occurs).
Keeping inventories.  When the production, purchase, 
or sale of merchandise is an income -producing factor in 
your business, you must generally take inventories into 
account at the beginning and the end of your tax year, un-
less you are a small business taxpayer. If you must ac-
count for an inventory, you must generally use an accrual 
method of accounting for your purchases and sales. For 
more information, see Inventories, later.
Special rule for related persons.  You cannot deduct 
business expenses and interest owed to a related person 
who uses the cash method of accounting until you make 
the payment and the corresponding amount is includible 
in the related person's gross income. Determine the rela-
tionship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for 
which the expense or interest would otherwise be deducti-
ble. If a deduction is not allowed under this rule, the rule 
will continue to apply even if your relationship with the per-
son ends before the expense or interest is includible in the 
gross income of that person.
Related persons include members of your immediate 
family, including brothers and sisters (either whole or 
half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For 
a list of other related persons, see section 267 of the Inter-
nal Revenue Code.
Combination Method
You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual, 
and special methods of accounting if the combination 
clearly shows your income and expenses and you use it 
consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.
• If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-
come, you must generally use an accrual method for 
purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories, 
later.) You can use the cash method for all other items 
of income and expenses.
• If you use the cash method for figuring your income, 
you must use the cash method for reporting your ex-
penses.
• If you use an accrual method for reporting your expen-
ses, you must use an accrual method for figuring your 
income.
• If you use a combination method that includes the 
cash method, treat that combination method as the 
cash method.
Inventories
Generally, if you produce, purchase, or sell merchandise 
in your business, you must keep an inventory and use an 
accrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise.
Exception for small business taxpayers.  If you are a 
small business taxpayer, you can choose not to keep an 
inventory, but you must still use a method of accounting 
for inventory that clearly reflects income. If you choose not 
to keep an inventory, you won’t be treated as failing to 
clearly reflect income if your method of accounting for in-
ventory treats inventory as non -incidental material or sup-
plies, or conforms to your financial accounting treatment 
of inventories. If, however, you choose to keep an inven-
tory, you must generally use an accrual method of ac-
counting and value the inventory each year to determine 
your cost of goods sold in Part III of Schedule C.
Small business taxpayer.  You qualify as a small 
business taxpayer if you (a) have average annual gross 
receipts of $26 million or less for the 3 prior tax years, and 
(b) are not a tax shelter (as defined in section 448(d)(3)). If 
your business has not been in existence for all of the 
3-tax-year period used in figuring average gross receipts, 
base your average on the period it has existed, and if your 
business has a predecessor entity, include the gross re-
ceipts of the predecessor entity from the 3 -tax-year period 
when figuring average gross receipts. If your business (or 
predecessor entity) had short tax years for any of the 
3-tax-year period, annualize your business’ gross receipts 
for the short tax years that are part of the 3 -tax-year pe-
riod. See Pub. 538 for more information.
Treating inventory as non -incidental material or 
supplies. If you account for inventories as materials and 
supplies that are not incidental, you deduct the amounts 
paid or incurred to acquire or produce the inventoriable 
items treated as non -incidental materials and supplies in 
the year in which they are first used or consumed in your 
operations. Inventory treated as non -incidental materials 
and supplies is used or consumed in your business in the 
year you provide the inventory to your customers.
Financial accounting treatment of inventories. 
Your financial accounting treatment of inventories is deter-
mined with regard to the method of accounting you use in 
your applicable financial statement (as defined in section 
451(b)(3)) or, if you do not have an applicable financial 
statement, with regard to the method of accounting you 
use in your books and records that have been prepared in 
accordance with your accounting procedures.
Changing your method of accounting for inven-
tory. If you want to change your method of accounting for 
inventory, you must file Form 3115. See Change in Ac-
counting Method, later.
Items included in inventory.  If you are required to ac-
count for inventories, include the following items when ac-
counting for your inventory.
• Merchandise or stock in trade.
• Raw materials.
• Work in process.
• Finished products.
• Supplies that physically become a part of the item in-
tended for sale.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods  Page 15

Page 16 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Valuing inventory. You must value your inventory at the 
beginning and end of each tax year to determine your cost 
of goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine the 
value of your inventory, you need a method for identifying 
the items in your inventory and a method for valuing these 
items.
Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for all 
kinds of businesses. The method you use to value your in-
ventory must conform to generally accepted accounting 
principles for similar businesses and must clearly reflect 
income. Your inventory practices must be consistent from 
year to year.
More information.  For more information about invento-
ries, see Pub. 538.
Uniform Capitalization Rules
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalize 
the direct costs and part of the indirect costs for produc-
tion or resale activities. Include these costs in the basis of 
property you produce or acquire for resale, rather than 
claiming them as a current deduction. You recover the 
costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goods 
sold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop-
erty.
Activities subject to the uniform capitalization rules. 
You may be subject to the uniform capitalization rules if 
you do any of the following, unless the property is pro-
duced for your use other than in a business or an activity 
carried on for profit.
• Produce real or tangible personal property. For this 
purpose, tangible personal property includes a film, 
sound recording, videotape, book, or similar property.
• Acquire property for resale.
Exceptions. These rules do not apply to the following.
1. Small business taxpayers defined earlier under Inven-
tories.
2. Property you produce if your indirect costs of produc-
ing the property are $200,000 or less.
Special Methods
There are special methods of accounting for certain items 
of income or expense. These include the following.
• Amortization, discussed in chapter 8 of Pub. 535, 
Business Expenses.
• Bad debts, discussed in chapter 10 of Pub. 535.
• Depletion, discussed in chapter 9 of Pub. 535.
• Depreciation, discussed in Pub. 946, How To Depreci-
ate Property.
• Installment sales, discussed in Pub. 537, Installment 
Sales.
• Long-term contract methods of accounting. See sec-
tion 460.
Change in Accounting Method
Once you have set up your accounting method, you must 
generally get IRS approval before you can change to an-
other method. A change in your accounting method in-
cludes a change in:
1. Your overall method, such as from cash to an accrual 
method; and
2. Your treatment of any material item.
To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application for 
Change in Accounting Method. You can get IRS approval 
to change an accounting method under either the auto-
matic change procedures or the advance consent request 
procedures. You may have to pay a user fee. For more in-
formation, see the Instructions for Form 3115. 
Automatic change procedures.  Certain taxpayers can 
presume to have IRS approval to change their method of 
accounting. The approval is granted for the tax year for 
which the taxpayer requests a change (year of change), if 
the taxpayer complies with the provisions of the automatic 
change procedures. No user fee is required for an appli-
cation filed under an automatic change procedure gener-
ally covered in Revenue Procedure 2015 -13, 2015 -5 
I.R.B. 419, which is available at IRS.gov/IRB/
2015-05_IRB#RP-2015-13.
Generally, you must use Form 3115 to request an auto-
matic change. For more information, see the Instructions 
for Form 3115.
3.
Dispositions of
Business Property
Introduction
If you dispose of business property, you may have a gain 
or loss that you report on your tax return. However, in 
some cases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a 
loss that is not deductible. This chapter discusses 
whether you have a disposition, how to figure the gain or 
loss, and where to report the gain or loss.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Form (and Instructions)
4797 Sales of Business Property
  544
  4797
Page 16  Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 17 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sch D (Form 1040) Capital Gains and Losses
See chapter 12 for information about getting publications 
and forms.
What Is a Disposition
of Property?
A disposition of property includes the following transac-
tions.
• You sell property for cash or other property.
• You exchange property for other property.
• You receive money as a tenant for the cancellation of 
a lease.
• You receive money for granting the exclusive use of a 
copyright throughout its life in a particular medium.
• You transfer property to satisfy a debt.
• You abandon property.
• Your bank or other financial institution forecloses on 
your mortgage or repossesses your property.
• Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, and 
you receive property or money in payment.
• Your property is condemned, or disposed of under the 
threat of condemnation, and you receive property or 
money in payment.
For details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property, 
see Pub. 547. For details about other dispositions, see 
chapter 1 of Pub. 544.
Nontaxable exchanges. Certain exchanges of property 
are not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange 
is not recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your 
gain or loss will not be recognized until you sell or other-
wise dispose of the property you receive.
Like-kind exchanges. A like-kind exchange is the ex-
change of property for the other, like -kind property. It is 
the most common type of nontaxable exchange. To be a 
like-kind exchange, the property traded and the property 
received must be both (i) real property, and (ii) business 
or investment property.
Report the exchange of like -kind property on Form 
8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information about 
like-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 of Pub. 544. 
Installment sales. An installment sale is a sale of prop-
erty where you receive at least one payment after the tax 
year of the sale. If you finance the buyer's purchase of 
your property, instead of having the buyer get a loan or 
mortgage from a third party, you probably have an install-
ment sale.
For more information about installment sales, see Pub. 
537.
Sale of a business. The sale of a business is usually not 
a sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the business 
are sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is trea-
  Sch D (Form 1040) ted as being sold separately for determining the treatment 
of gain or loss.
Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of a busi-
ness must report to the IRS the allocation of the sales 
price among the business assets. Use Form 8594, Asset 
Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060, to provide this 
information. The buyer and seller should each attach 
Form 8594 to their federal income tax return for the year in 
which the sale occurred. 
For more information about the sale of a business, see 
chapter 2 of Pub. 544.
How Do I Figure
a Gain or Loss?
Table 3-1. How To Figure a Gain or Loss
IF your... THEN you have a...
adjusted basis is more than the amount 
realized loss.
amount realized is more than the 
adjusted basis gain.
Basis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair market 
value, and amount recognized are defined next. You need 
to know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.
Basis. The cost or purchase price of property is usually 
its basis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or other 
disposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift, 
inheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you must 
use a basis other than its cost. For more information about 
basis, see Pub. 551.
Adjusted basis.  The adjusted basis of property is your 
original cost or other basis plus certain additions, and mi-
nus certain deductions such as depreciation and casualty 
losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of transfer-
ring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses, 
are added to the adjusted basis of the property.
Amount realized. The amount you realize from a dispo-
sition is the total of all money you receive plus the fair 
market value of all property or services you receive. The 
amount you realize also includes any of your liabilities that 
were assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which the 
property you transferred is subject, such as real estate 
taxes or a mortgage.
Fair market value.  Fair market value is the price at 
which the property would change hands between a buyer 
and a seller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having 
reasonable knowledge of all necessary facts.
Amount recognized.  Your gain or loss realized from a 
disposition of property is usually a recognized gain or loss 
for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included in 
gross income. Recognized losses are deductible from 
gross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer-
tain exchanges of property is not recognized. See 
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property  Page 17

Page 18 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nontaxable exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a 
loss from the disposition of property held for personal use.
Is My Gain or Loss
Ordinary or Capital?
You must classify your gains and losses as either ordinary 
or capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure your 
net capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capital 
gain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the most 
part, everything you own and use for personal purposes or 
investment is a capital asset.
Certain property you use in your business is not a capi-
tal asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this property 
is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you held the prop-
erty longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat the gain 
or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains and losses 
are called section 1231 gains and losses.
For more information about ordinary and capital gains 
and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 of Pub. 544.
Is My Capital Gain or Loss
Short Term or Long Term?
If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determine 
whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or 
loss is long or short term depends on how long you own 
the property before you dispose of it. The time you own 
property before disposing of it is called the holding period.
Do I Have a Short-Term or 
Long-Term Gain or Loss?
Table 3-2.
IF you hold the property... THEN you have a...
1 year or less short-term capital gain or loss.
more than 1 year long-term capital gain or loss.
For more information about short -term and long -term 
capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Pub. 544.
Where Do I Report
Gains and Losses?
Report gains and losses from the following dispositions on 
the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explain 
how to fill them out.
Dispositions of business property and depreciable 
property. Use Form 4797. If you have taxable gain, you 
may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 
Like-kind exchanges.  Use Form 8824 , Like -Kind Ex-
changes. You may also have to use Form 4797 and 
Schedule D (Form 1040). 
Installment sales. Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-
come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and Sched-
ule D (Form 1040). 
Casualties and thefts.  Use Form 4684, Casualties and 
Thefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. 
Condemned property.  Use Form 4797 . You may also 
have to use Schedule D (Form 1040).
4.
General Business Credits
Introduction
Your general business credit for the year consists of your 
carryforward of business credits from prior years plus the 
total of your current year business credits. In addition, 
your general business credit for the current year may be 
increased later by the carryback of business credits from 
later years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Form (and Instructions)
3800 General Business Credit
6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
See chapter 12 for information about getting publications 
and forms.
Business Credits
All of the following credits are part of the general business 
credit. The form you use to figure each credit is shown in 
parentheses. You will also have to complete Form 3800.
Some credits have expiration dates. Check the instruc-
tions for each credit to make sure it is available for 2020.
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property credit 
(Form 8911). This credit applies to the cost of any quali-
fied fuel vehicle refueling property. For more information, 
see Form 8911.
Alternative motor vehicle credit (Form 8910).  For 
more information, see Form 8910.
Biodiesel and renewable diesel fuels credit (Form 
8864). For more information, see Form 8864.
Biofuel producer credit (Form 6478).  For more infor-
mation, see Form 6478.
Carbon oxide sequestration credit (Form 8933).  This 
credit is for carbon oxide which is captured at a qualified 
facility and disposed of in a secure geological storage or 
used in a qualified enhanced oil or natural gas recovery 
project. For more information, see Form 8933.
  3800
  6251
Page 18  Chapter 4 General Business Credits

Page 19 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Credit for employer social security and Medicare 
taxes paid on certain employee tips (Form 8846).
This credit is generally equal to your (employer's) portion 
of social security and Medicare taxes paid on tips re-
ceived by employees of your food and beverage estab-
lishment where tipping is customary. The credit applies re-
gardless of whether the food is consumed on or off your 
business premises. For more information, see Form 8846.
Credit for employer differential wage payments 
(Form 8932). This credit provides businesses with an in-
centive to continue to pay wages to an employee perform-
ing services on active duty in the uniformed services of 
the United States for a period of more than 30 days. For 
more information, see Form 8932.
Credit for employer -provided childcare facilities and 
services (Form 8882).  This credit applies to the quali-
fied expenses you paid for employee childcare and quali-
fied expenses you paid for childcare resource and referral 
services. For more information, see Form 8882.
Credit for increasing research activities (Form 6765).
This credit is designed to encourage businesses to in-
crease the amounts they spend on research and experi-
mental activities, including energy research. For more in-
formation, see Form 6765.
Credit for small employer health insurance premi-
ums (Form 8941).  This credit applies to the cost of cer-
tain health insurance coverage you provide to certain em-
ployees. For more information, see Form 8941.
Credit for small employer pension plan startup costs 
(Form 8881). This credit applies to pension plan startup 
costs of a new qualified defined benefit or defined contri-
bution plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or 
simplified employee pension. For more information, see 
Pub. 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business.
Disabled access credit (Form 8826).  This credit is a 
nonrefundable tax credit for an eligible small business that 
pays or incurs expenses to provide access to persons 
who have disabilities. You must pay or incur the expenses 
to enable your business to comply with the Americans 
with Disabilities Act of 1990. For more information, see 
Form 8826.
Distilled spirits credit (Form 8906). This credit is avail-
able to distillers and importers of distilled spirits and eligi-
ble wholesalers of distilled spirits. For more information, 
see Form 8906.
Employee retention credit (Form 5884 -A). You may 
qualify for this credit if you continued to pay or incur wa-
ges after your business became inoperable because of 
damage from certain federally declared disasters. For 
more information, see Form 5884-A.
Employer credit for paid family and medical leave 
(Form 8994). This credit applies for wages paid to quali-
fying employees while they are on family and medical 
leave, subject to certain conditions. For more information, 
see Form 8994.
Empowerment zone employment credit (Form 8844).
You may qualify for this credit if you have employees and 
are engaged in a business in an empowerment zone for 
which the credit is available. For more information, see 
Form 8844.
Energy efficient home credit (Form 8908).  This credit 
is available for eligible contractors of certain homes sold 
for use as a residence. For more information, see Form 
8908.
Indian employment credit (Form 8845). This credit ap-
plies to qualified wages and health insurance costs you 
paid or incurred for qualified employees. For more infor-
mation, see Form 8845.
Investment credit (Form 3468).  The investment credit 
is the total of the several credits. For more information, 
see Form 3468.
Low sulfur diesel fuel production credit (Form 8896).
For more information, see Form 8896.
Low-income housing credit (Form 8586).  This credit 
generally applies to each new qualified low -income build-
ing placed in service after 1986. For more information, see 
Form 8586.
Mine rescue team training credit (Form 8923).  This 
credit applies to training program costs you pay or incur 
for certain mine rescue team employees. For more infor-
mation, see Form 8923.
New markets credit (Form 8874).  This credit is for 
qualified equity investments made in qualified community 
development entities. For more information, see Form 
8874.
Orphan drug credit (Form 8820).  This credit applies to 
qualified expenses incurred in testing certain drugs for 
rare diseases and conditions. For more information, see 
Form 8820.
Qualified plug -in electric drive motor vehicle credit 
(Form 8936).  This credit is for certain new qualified 
plug-in electric vehicles placed in service during the tax 
year. For more information, see Form 8936.
Qualified railroad track maintenance credit (Form 
8900). This credit applies with respect to qualified rail-
road track maintenance expenditures paid or incurred dur-
ing the tax year. For more information, see Form 8900.
Renewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coal 
production credit (Form 8835).  This credit is for the 
sale of electricity, refined coal, or Indian coal produced in 
the United States or U.S. possessions from qualified en-
ergy resources at a qualified facility. For more information, 
see Form 8835.
Chapter 4 General Business Credits  Page 19

Page 20 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Small employer auto -enrollment credit (Form 8881). 
You may qualify for this credit if you are a small employer 
who includes and maintains an automatic contribution ar-
rangement in an employer-sponsored retirement plan. For 
more information, see Form 8881.
Work opportunity credit (Form 5884).  This credit pro-
vides businesses with an incentive to hire individuals from 
targeted groups that have a particularly high unemploy-
ment rate or other special employment needs. For more 
information, see Form 5884.
How To Claim the Credit
To claim a general business credit, you will first have to 
get the forms you need to claim your current year busi-
ness credits.
In addition to the credit form, you also need to file Form 
3800.
5.
Business Income
Introduction
This chapter primarily explains business income and how 
to account for it on your tax return and what items are not 
considered income, and it gives guidelines for selected 
occupations.
If there is a connection between any income you re-
ceive and your business, the income is business income. 
A connection exists if it is clear that the payment of in-
come would not have been made if you did not have the 
business.
You can have business income even if you are not in-
volved in the activity on a regular full -time basis. Income 
from work you do on the side in addition to your regular 
job can be business income. For example, you may be in 
the business of providing services for a ride -sharing busi-
ness as a second job.
You report most business income, such as income 
from selling your products or services, on Schedule C. But 
you report the income from the sale of business assets, 
such as land and office buildings, on other forms instead 
of Schedule C. For information on selling business assets, 
see chapter 3.
Nonemployee compensation.  Business income in-
cludes amounts you received in your business that were 
properly shown on Forms 1099 -NEC. This includes 
amounts reported as nonemployee compensation in box 1 
of the form. You can find more information in the instruc-
tions on the back of the Form 1099-NEC you received.
Payment card and third -party network transactions. 
If you are in a business, you may receive a Form 1099 -K 
representing total dollar amount of total reportable pay-
ment transactions. This may not be the amount you 
should report as income, as it may not include all the re-
ceipts and it may include items that are not included in 
your receipts (such as sales tax).
Business income deduction.  Income you report on 
Schedule C may be qualified business income and entitle 
you to a deduction on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 13. See 
Form 8995 -A or Form 8995 to figure your deduction, if 
any.
Kinds of Income
You must report on your tax return all income you receive 
from your business unless it is excluded by law. In most 
cases, your business income will be in the form of cash, 
checks, and credit card charges. But business income 
can be in other forms, such as property or services. These 
and other types of income are explained next.
If you are a U.S. citizen who has business income 
from sources outside the United States (foreign 
income), you must report that income on your tax 
return unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law. If you 
live outside the United States, you may be able to exclude 
part or all of your foreign-source business income. For de-
tails, see Pub. 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi-
dent Aliens Abroad.
Bartering for Property or Services
Bartering is an exchange of property or services. You 
must include in your gross receipts, at the time received, 
the fair market value of property or services you receive in 
exchange for something else. If you exchange services 
with another person and you both have agreed ahead of 
time on the value of the services, that value will be accep-
ted as the fair market value unless the value can be 
shown to be otherwise.
Example 1. You are a self -employed lawyer. You per-
form legal services for a client, a small corporation. In pay-
ment for your services, you receive shares of stock in the 
corporation. You must include the fair market value of the 
shares in income.
Example 2. You are an artist and create a work of art 
to compensate your landlord for the rent -free use of your 
apartment. You must include the fair rental value of the 
apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in-
clude the fair market value of the work of art in his or her 
rental income.
Example 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Both 
you and a house painter are members of a barter club, an 
organization that each year gives its members a directory 
of members and the services each member provides. 
CAUTION
!
Page 20  Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 21 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Members get in touch with other members directly and 
bargain for the value of the services to be performed.
In return for accounting services you provided for the 
house painter's business, the house painter painted your 
home. You must include in gross receipts the fair market 
value of the services you received from the house painter. 
The house painter must include the fair market value of 
your accounting services in his or her gross receipts.
Example 4.  You are a member of a barter club that 
uses credit units to credit or debit members' accounts for 
goods or services provided or received. As soon as units 
are credited to your account, you can use them to buy 
goods or services or sell or transfer the units to other 
members.
You must include the value of credit units you received 
in your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units 
are credited to your account.
The dollar value of units received for services by an 
employee of the club, who can use the units in the same 
manner as other members, must be included in the em-
ployee's gross income for the tax year in which received. It 
is wages subject to social security and Medicare taxes 
(FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), and income 
tax withholding. See Pub. 15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax 
Guide.
Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and use 
the cash method of accounting. You join a barter club and 
agree to provide plumbing services to any member for a 
specified number of hours. Each member has access to a 
directory that lists the members of the club and the serv-
ices available.
Members contact each other directly and request serv-
ices to be performed. You are not required to provide 
services unless requested by another member, but you 
can use as many of the offered services as you wish with-
out paying a fee.
You must include the fair market value of any services 
you receive from club members in your gross receipts 
when you receive them even if you have not provided any 
services to club members.
Information returns.  If you are involved in a bartering 
transaction, you may have to file either of the following 
forms.
• Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-
change Transactions. 
• Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income.
For information about these forms, see the General In-
structions for Certain Information Returns.
Real Estate Rents
If you are a real estate dealer who receives income from 
renting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc., 
who provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests, re-
port the rental income and expenses on Schedule C. If 
you are not a real estate dealer or the kind of owner de-
scribed in the preceding sentence, report the rental 
income and expenses on Schedule E. For more informa-
tion, see Pub. 527, Residential Rental Property.
Real estate dealer.  You are a real estate dealer if you 
are engaged in the business of selling real estate to cus-
tomers with the purpose of making a profit from those 
sales. Rent you receive from real estate held for sale to 
customers is subject to SE tax. However, rent you receive 
from real estate held for speculation or investment is not 
subject to SE tax.
Trailer park owner.  Rental income from a trailer park is 
subject to SE tax if you are a self -employed trailer park 
owner who provides trailer lots and facilities and substan-
tial services for the convenience of your tenants.
You are generally considered to provide substantial 
services for tenants if they are primarily for the tenants' 
convenience and are not normally provided to maintain 
the lots in a condition for occupancy. Services are sub-
stantial if the compensation for the services makes up a 
material part of the tenants' rental payments.
Examples of services that are not normally provided for 
the tenants' convenience include supervising and main-
taining a recreational hall provided by the park, distribut-
ing a monthly newsletter to tenants, operating a laundry 
facility, and helping tenants buy or sell their trailers.
Examples of services that are normally provided to 
maintain the lots in a condition for tenant occupancy in-
clude city sewerage, electrical connections, and road-
ways.
Hotels, boarding houses, and apartments.  Rental in-
come you receive for the use or occupancy of hotels, 
boarding houses, or apartment houses is subject to SE 
tax if you provide services for the occupants.
Generally, you are considered to provide services for 
the occupants if the services are primarily for their con-
venience and are not services normally provided with the 
rental of rooms for occupancy only. An example of a serv-
ice that is not normally provided for the convenience of the 
occupants is maid service. However, providing heat and 
light, cleaning stairways and lobbies, and collecting trash 
are services normally provided for the occupants' conven-
ience.
Prepaid rent. Advance payments received under a lease 
that does not put any restriction on their use or enjoyment 
are income in the year you receive them. This is true no 
matter what accounting method or period you use.
Lease bonus.  A bonus you receive from a lessee for 
granting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in your 
gross receipts in the year received.
Lease cancellation payments.  Report payments you 
receive from your lessee for canceling a lease in your 
gross receipts in the year received.
Payments to third parties.  If your lessee makes pay-
ments to someone else under an agreement to pay your 
debts or obligations, include the payments in your gross 
Chapter 5 Business Income  Page 21

Page 22 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
receipts when the lessee makes the payments. A com-
mon example of this kind of income is a lessee's payment 
of your property taxes on leased real property.
Settlement payments.  Payments you receive in settle-
ment of a lessee's obligation to restore the leased prop-
erty to its original condition are income in the amount that 
the payments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold 
improvements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon-
nected by the lessee.
Personal Property Rents
If you are in the business of renting personal property 
(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental 
amount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule C. 
Prepaid rent and other payments described in the preced-
ing Real Estate Rents discussion can also be received for 
renting personal property. If you receive any of those pay-
ments, include them in your gross receipts as explained in 
that discussion.
Interest and Dividend Income
Interest and dividends may be considered business in-
come.
Interest. Interest received on notes receivable that you 
have accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi-
ness income. Interest received on loans is business in-
come if you are in the business of lending money.
Uncollectible loans.  If a loan payable to you be-
comes uncollectible during the tax year and you use an 
accrual method of accounting, you must include in gross 
income interest accrued up to the time the loan became 
uncollectible. If the accrued interest later becomes uncol-
lectible, you may be able to take a bad debt deduction. 
See Bad Debts in chapter 8.
Unstated interest. If little or no interest is charged on 
an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of each 
payment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest and 
Original Issue Discount (OID) in Pub. 537.
Dividends. Generally, dividends are business income to 
dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu-
tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in-
come. If you hold stock as a personal investment sepa-
rately from your business activity, the dividends from the 
stock are nonbusiness income.
If you receive dividends from business insurance pre-
miums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all 
or part of the dividend as business income on your return. 
To find out how much you have to report, see
Recovery of items previously deducted  under Other In-
come, later.
Canceled Debt
The following explains the general rule for including can-
celed debt in income and the exceptions to the general 
rule.
General Rule
Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other than 
as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceled 
amount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report the 
canceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurred 
the debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness 
debt, report the canceled amount on line 8 of Schedule 1 
(Form 1040).
Exceptions
The following discussion covers some exceptions to the 
general rule for canceled debt.
Price reduced after purchase.  If you owe a debt to the 
seller for property you bought and the seller reduces the 
amount you owe, you generally do not have income from 
the reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treat 
the amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-
ment and reduce your basis in the property.
Deductible debt. You do not realize income from a can-
celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt would 
have led to a deduction.
Example. You get accounting services for your busi-
ness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi-
ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Your 
accountant forgives part of the amount you owe for the ac-
counting services. How you treat the canceled debt de-
pends on your method of accounting.
• Cash method—You do not include the canceled debt 
in income because payment of the debt would have 
been deductible as a business expense.
• Accrual method—You include the canceled debt in in-
come because the expense was deductible when you 
incurred the debt.
For information on the cash and accrual methods of ac-
counting, see chapter 2.
Exclusions
Do not include canceled debt in income in the following 
situations. However, you may be required to file Form 
982, Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of In-
debtedness. For more information, see Form 982. 
1. The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy case un-
der title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bankruptcy). 
See Pub. 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.
2. The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent. 
You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent you 
are insolvent. See Pub. 4681, Canceled Debts, Fore-
closures, Repossessions, and Abandonments.
Page 22  Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 23 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to a 
qualified person. See chapter 3 of Pub. 225, Farmer's 
Tax Guide.
4. The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi-
ness debt. This situation is explained later.
5. The canceled debt is qualified principal residence in-
debtedness which is discharged after 2006. See the 
Instructions for Form 982 for more information about 
this exclusion.
If a canceled debt is excluded from income because it 
takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa-
tions 2 through 5 do not apply. If it takes place when you 
are insolvent, the exclusions in situations 3 and 4 do not 
apply to the extent you are insolvent.
Debt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes any 
debt for which you are liable or which attaches to property 
you hold.
Qualified real property business debt.  You can elect 
to exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of quali-
fied real property business debt. If you make the election, 
you must reduce the basis of your depreciable real prop-
erty by the amount excluded. Make this reduction at the 
beginning of your tax year following the tax year in which 
the cancellation occurs. However, if you dispose of the 
property before that time, you must reduce its basis imme-
diately before the disposition.
Cancellation of qualified real property business 
debt. Qualified real property business debt is debt (other 
than qualified farm debt) that meets all the following con-
ditions.
1. It was incurred or assumed in connection with real 
property used in a trade or business. Real property 
used in a trade or business does not include real 
property developed and held primarily for sale to cus-
tomers in the ordinary course of business.
2. It was secured by such real property.
3. It was incurred or assumed at either of the following 
times.
a. Before January 1, 1993.
b. After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumed 
to acquire, construct, or substantially improve the 
real property.
4. It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.
Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-
ing of debt described in (3) earlier, but only to the extent it 
does not exceed the debt being refinanced.
If you are the owner of a disregarded entity (for 
example, a single -member LLC), see Qualified 
Real Property Business Indebtedness  in chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 4681 to see if you qualify for this exclusion.
You cannot exclude more than either of the following 
amounts.
1. The excess (if any) of:
TIP
a. The outstanding principal of qualified real property 
business debt (immediately before the cancella-
tion); over
b. The fair market value (immediately before the can-
cellation) of the business real property that is se-
curity for the debt, reduced by the outstanding 
principal amount of any other qualified real prop-
erty business debt secured by this property imme-
diately before the cancellation.
2. The total adjusted bases of depreciable real property 
held by you immediately before the cancellation. 
These adjusted bases are determined after any basis 
reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy or insol-
vency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take into ac-
count depreciable real property acquired in contem-
plation of the cancellation.
Election. To make this election, complete Form 982 
and attach it to your income tax return for the tax year in 
which the cancellation occurs. You must file your return by 
the due date (including extensions). If you timely filed your 
return for the year without making the election, you can 
still make the election by filing an amended return within 6 
months of the due date of the return (excluding exten-
sions). For more information, see When To File in the form 
instructions.
Other Income
The following discussion explains how to treat other types 
of business income you may receive.
Restricted property. Restricted property is property that 
has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receive 
restricted stock or other property for services performed, 
the fair market value of the property in excess of your cost 
is included in your income on Schedule C when the re-
striction is lifted. However, you can choose to be taxed in 
the year you receive the property. For more information on 
including restricted property in income, see Pub. 525, 
Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
Gains and losses.  Do not report on Schedule C a gain 
or loss from the disposition of property that is neither stock 
in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers. Instead, 
you must report these gains and losses on other forms. 
For more information, see chapter 3.
Promissory notes.  Report promissory notes and other 
evidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange of 
property that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale to 
customers on Schedule C. In general, you report them at 
their stated principal amount (minus any unstated interest) 
when you receive them.
Lost income payments. If you reduce or stop your busi-
ness activities, report on Schedule C any payment you re-
ceive for the lost income of your business from insurance 
or other sources. Report it on Schedule C even if your 
business is inactive when you receive the payment.
Chapter 5 Business Income  Page 23

Page 24 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Damages. You must include in gross income compensa-
tion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of 
the following injuries connected with your business.
• Patent infringement.
• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty.
• Antitrust injury.
Economic injury. You may be entitled to a deduction 
against the income if it compensates you for actual eco-
nomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the following 
amounts.
• The amount you receive or accrue for damages in the 
tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incur in the 
tax year to recover that amount.
• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet deduc-
ted.
Punitive damages.  You must also include punitive 
damages in income.
Kickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them in 
your income on Schedule C. However, do not include 
them if you properly treat them as a reduction of a related 
expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost of goods 
sold.
Recovery of items previously deducted. If you recover 
a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year, 
include the recovery in income on Schedule C. However, 
if all or part of the deduction in earlier years did not reduce 
your tax, you can exclude the part that did not reduce your 
tax. If you exclude part of the recovery from income, you 
must include with your return a computation showing how 
you figured the exclusion.
Exception for depreciation. This rule does not apply 
to depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rules 
explained next.
Recapture of depreciation.  In the following situations, 
you have to recapture the depreciation deduction. This 
means you include in income part or all of the depreciation 
you deducted in previous years.
Listed property.  If your business use of listed prop-
erty (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 
50% or less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the 
property in service, you may have to recapture part of the 
depreciation deduction. You do this by including in income 
on Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in 
previous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of Busi-
ness Property, to figure the amount to include on Sched-
ule C. For more information, see What Is the Busi-
ness-Use Requirement? in chapter 5 of Pub. 946, How To 
Depreciate Property. That chapter explains how to deter-
mine whether property is used more than 50% in your 
business.
Section 179 property.  If you take a section 179 de-
duction (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an 
asset and before the end of the asset's recovery period 
the percentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you 
must recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do 
this by including in income on Schedule C part of the de-
duction you took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the 
amount to include on Schedule C. See chapter 2 of Pub. 
946 to find out when you recapture the deduction.
Sale or exchange of depreciable property.  If you 
sell or exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may 
have to treat all or part of the gain due to depreciation as 
ordinary income. You figure the income due to deprecia-
tion recapture in Part III of Form 4797. For more informa-
tion, see chapter 4 of Pub. 544, Sales and Other Disposi-
tions of Assets.
Items That Are Not Income
In some cases, the property or money you receive is not 
income.
Appreciation. Increases in value of your property are not 
income until you realize the increases through a sale or 
other taxable disposition.
Consignments. Consignments of merchandise to others 
to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandise re-
mains with you, the consignor, even after the consignee 
possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goods 
on consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con-
signee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you have 
shipped out on consignment is included in your inventory 
until it is sold.
Do not include merchandise you receive on consign-
ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commission 
on merchandise consigned to you in your income when 
you sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit 
or commission, depending upon the method of accounting 
you use.
Construction allowances. If you enter into a lease after 
August 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con-
struction allowance you receive (in cash or as a rent re-
duction) from your landlord if you receive it under both the 
following conditions.
• Under a short-term lease of retail space.
• For the purpose of constructing or improving qualified 
long-term real property for use in your business at that 
retail space.
Amount you can exclude.  You can exclude the con-
struction allowance to the extent it does not exceed the 
amount you spent for construction or improvements.
Short-term lease.  A short -term lease is a lease (or 
other agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space for 
15 years or less. The following rules apply in determining 
whether the lease is for 15 years or less.
• Take into account options to renew when figuring 
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do not 
take into account any option to renew at fair market 
value determined at the time of renewal.
Page 24  Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 25 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Two or more successive leases that are part of the 
same transaction (or a series of related transactions) 
for the same or substantially similar retail space are 
treated as one lease.
Retail space. Retail space is real property leased, oc-
cupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your busi-
ness of selling tangible personal property or services to 
the general public.
Qualified long -term real property.  Qualified 
long-term real property is nonresidential real property that 
is part of, or otherwise present at, your retail space and 
that reverts to the landlord when the lease ends.
Exchange of like -kind property.  Generally, if you ex-
change real property used for business or held as an in-
vestment solely for other business or investment real 
property of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized. This 
means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is not de-
ductible. For more information, see Form 8824.
Leasehold improvements.  If a tenant erects buildings 
or makes improvements to your property, the increase in 
the value of the property due to the improvements is not 
income to you. However, if the facts indicate that the im-
provements are a payment of rent to you, then the in-
crease in value would be income.
Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is not 
income.
Sales tax.  State and local sales taxes imposed on the 
buyer, which you were required to collect and pay over to 
state or local governments, are not income.
Guidelines for Selected 
Occupations
This section provides information to determine whether 
your earnings should be reported on Schedule C (Form 
1040).
Direct seller. You must report all income you receive as 
a direct seller on Schedule C. This includes any of the fol-
lowing.
• Income from sales—Payments you receive from cus-
tomers for products they buy from you.
• Commissions, bonuses, or percentages you receive 
for sales and the sales of others who work under you.
• Prizes, awards, and gifts you receive from your selling 
business.
You must report this income regardless of whether it is re-
ported to you on an information return.
You are a direct seller if you meet all the following con-
ditions.
1. You are engaged in one of the following trades or 
businesses.
a. Selling or soliciting the sale of consumer products 
either in a home or other place that is not a perma-
nent retail establishment, or to any buyer on a 
buy-sell basis or a deposit-commission basis for 
resale in a home or other place of business that is 
not a permanent retail establishment.
b. Delivering or distributing newspapers or shopping 
news (including any services directly related to 
that trade or business).
2. Substantially all your pay (whether paid in cash or not) 
for services described above is directly related to 
sales or other output (including performance of serv-
ices) rather than to the number of hours worked.
3. Your services are performed under a written contract 
between you and the person for whom you perform 
the services, and the contract provides that you will 
not be treated as an employee for federal tax purpo-
ses.
Executor or administrator.  If you administer a de-
ceased person's estate, your fees are reported on Sched-
ule C if you are one of the following.
1. A professional fiduciary.
2. A nonprofessional fiduciary (personal representative) 
and both of the following apply.
a. The estate includes an active trade or business in 
which you actively participate.
b. Your fees are related to the operation of that trade 
or business.
3. A nonprofessional fiduciary of a single estate that re-
quires extensive managerial activities on your part for 
a long period of time, provided these activities are 
enough to be considered a trade or business.
If the fees do not meet the above requirements, report 
them on line 8 of Schedule 1 (Form 1040).
Fishing crew member. If you are a member of the crew 
that catches fish or other water life, your earnings are re-
ported on Schedule C if you meet all the requirements 
shown in chapter 10 under Fishing crew member.
Insurance agent, former. Termination payments you re-
ceive as a former self -employed insurance agent from an 
insurance company because of services you performed 
for that company are not reported on Schedule C if all the 
following conditions are met.
• You received payments after your agreement to per-
form services for the company ended.
• You did not perform any services for the company af-
ter your service agreement ended and before the end 
of the year in which you received the payment.
• You entered into a covenant not to compete against 
the company for at least a 1-year period beginning on 
the date your service agreement ended.
• The amount of the payments depended primarily on 
policies sold by you or credited to your account during 
Chapter 5 Business Income  Page 25

Page 26 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the last year of your service agreement or the extent to 
which those policies remain in force for some period 
after your service agreement ended, or both.
• The amount of the payment did not depend to any ex-
tent on length of service or overall earnings from serv-
ices performed for the company (regardless of 
whether eligibility for the payments depended on 
length of service).
Insurance agent, retired.  Income paid by an insurance 
company to a retired self -employed insurance agent 
based on a percentage of commissions received before 
retirement is reported on Schedule C. Also, renewal com-
missions and deferred commissions for sales made be-
fore retirement are generally reported on Schedule C.
However, renewal commissions paid to the survivor of 
an insurance agent are not reported on Schedule C.
Newspaper carrier or distributor.  You are a direct 
seller and your earnings are reported on Schedule C if all 
the following conditions apply.
• You are in the business of delivering or distributing 
newspapers or shopping news (including directly rela-
ted services such as soliciting customers and collect-
ing receipts).
• Substantially all your pay for these services directly re-
lates to your sales or other output rather than to the 
number of hours you work.
• You perform the services under a written contract that 
says you will not be treated as an employee for federal 
tax purposes.
This rule applies whether or not you hire others to help 
you make deliveries. It also applies whether you buy the 
papers from the publisher or are paid based on the num-
ber of papers you deliver.
Newspaper or magazine vendor.  If you are age 18 or 
older and you sell newspapers or magazines, your earn-
ings are reported on Schedule C if all the following condi-
tions apply.
• You sell newspapers or magazines to ultimate con-
sumers.
• You sell them at a fixed price.
• Your earnings are based on the difference between 
the sales price and your cost of goods sold.
This rule applies whether or not you are guaranteed a 
minimum amount of earnings. It also applies whether or 
not you receive credit for unsold newspapers or maga-
zines you return to your supplier.
Notary public.  Fees you receive for services you per-
form as a notary public are reported on Schedule C. 
These payments are not subject to SE tax (see the In-
structions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).
Public official.  Public officials generally do not report 
what they earn for serving in public office on Schedule C. 
This rule applies to payments received by an elected tax 
collector from state funds on the basis of a fixed percent-
age of the taxes collected. Public office includes any elec-
tive or appointive office of the United States or its posses-
sions, the District of Columbia, a state or its political 
subdivisions, or a wholly owned instrumentality of any of 
these.
Public officials of state or local governments report their 
fees on Schedule C if they are paid solely on a fee basis 
and if their services are eligible for, but not covered by, 
social security under a federal-state agreement.
Real estate agent or direct seller.  If you are a licensed 
real estate agent or a direct seller, your earnings are re-
ported on Schedule C if both the following apply.
• Substantially all your pay for services as a real estate 
agent or direct seller directly relates to your sales or 
other output rather than to the number of hours you 
work.
• You perform the services under a written contract that 
says you will not be treated as an employee for federal 
tax purposes.
Securities dealer. If you are a dealer in options or com-
modities, your gains and losses from dealing or trading in 
section 1256 contracts (regulated futures contracts, for-
eign currency contracts, nonequity options, dealer equity 
options, and dealer securities futures contracts) or prop-
erty related to those contracts (such as stock used to 
hedge options) are reported on Schedule C. For more in-
formation, see sections 1256 and 1402(i).
Securities trader.  You are a trader in securities if you 
are engaged in the business of buying and selling securi-
ties for your own account. As a trader in securities, your 
gain or loss from the disposition of securities is not repor-
ted on Schedule C. However, see Securities dealer, ear-
lier, for an exception that applies to section 1256 con-
tracts. For more information about traders in securities or 
commodities, see Pub. 550, Investment Income and Ex-
penses.
Accounting for Your Income
Accounting for your income for income tax purposes dif-
fers at times from accounting for financial purposes. This 
section discusses some of the more common differences 
that may affect business transactions.
Figure your business income on the basis of a tax year 
and according to your regular method of accounting (see 
chapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income -producing 
factor in your business, you usually have to use invento-
ries to clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate 
are not allowed to use inventories. For more information 
on inventories, see chapter 2.
Income paid to a third party.  All income you earn is 
taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income 
paid to a third party.
Page 26  Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 27 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You rent out your property and the rental 
agreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son. 
The amount paid to your son is gross income to you.
Cash discounts.  These are amounts the seller permits 
you to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment. 
For income tax purposes, you can use either of the follow-
ing two methods to account for cash discounts.
1. Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see 
Line 36, Purchases Less Cost of Items Withdrawn for 
Personal Use in chapter 6).
2. Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac-
count.
You must use the chosen method every year for all your 
purchase discounts.
If you use the second method, the credit balance in the 
account at the end of your tax year is business income. 
Under this method, you do not reduce the cost of goods 
sold by the cash discounts you received. When valuing 
your closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice 
price of merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year 
by the average or estimated discounts received on the 
merchandise.
Trade discounts. These are reductions from list or cata-
log prices and are usually not written into the invoice or 
charged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on 
your books of account. Instead, use only the net amount 
as the cost of the merchandise purchased. For more infor-
mation, see Trade discounts in chapter 6.
Payment placed in escrow. If the buyer of your property 
places part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you do 
not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually or 
constructively receive it. However, upon completion of the 
terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you will 
have taxable income, even if you do not accept the money 
until the next year.
Sales returns and allowances.  Credits you allow cus-
tomers for returned merchandise and any other allowan-
ces you make on sales are deductions from gross sales in 
figuring net sales.
Advance payments.  Special rules dealing with an ac-
crual method of accounting for payments received in ad-
vance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.
Insurance proceeds. If you receive insurance or another 
type of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you 
must subtract it from the loss when you figure your deduc-
tion. You cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty 
or theft loss.
For information on casualty or theft losses, see Pub. 
547.
6.
How To Figure
Cost of Goods Sold
Introduction
If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost 
of goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. 
However, to determine these costs, you must value your 
inventory at the beginning and end of each tax year.
This chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer, 
wholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-
ness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income. 
This chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-
ness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter, 
or painter. However, if you work in a personal service 
business and also sell or charge for the materials and sup-
plies normally used in your business, this chapter applies 
to you.
There are exceptions for small business taxpay-
ers that may change how you figure cost of goods 
sold for your business. For more information, see 
chapter 2.
Figuring Cost of Goods Sold 
on Schedule C, Lines 35
Through 42
Figure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35 
through 42 of Schedule C. These lines are reproduced be-
low and are explained in the discussion that follows.
35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last 
year's closing inventory, attach explanation .......  
36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal 
use ................................  
37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to 
yourself .............................  
38 Materials and supplies ....................  
39 Other costs ...........................
40 Add lines 35 through 39 ...................  
41 Inventory at end of year ...................
42 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40.
Enter the result here and on line 4 .............
Line 35
Inventory at Beginning of Year
If you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost of 
merchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that you 
CAUTION
!
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold  Page 27

Page 28 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro-
ducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work in 
process, finished goods, and materials and supplies used 
in manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2).
Opening inventory will usually be identical to the clos-
ing inventory of the year before. You must explain any dif-
ference in a schedule attached to your return.
Donation of inventory. If you contribute inventory (prop-
erty that you sell in the course of your business), the 
amount you can claim as a contribution deduction is the 
smaller of its fair market value on the day you contributed 
it or its basis. The basis of donated inventory is any cost 
incurred for the inventory in an earlier year that you would 
otherwise include in your opening inventory for the year of 
the contribution. You must remove the amount of your 
contribution deduction from your opening inventory. It is 
not part of the cost of goods sold.
If the cost of donated inventory is not included in your 
opening inventory, the inventory's basis is zero and you 
cannot claim a charitable contribution deduction. Treat the 
inventory's cost as you would ordinarily treat it under your 
method of accounting. For example, include the purchase 
price of inventory bought and donated in the same year in 
the cost of goods sold for that year.
A special rule may apply to certain donations of food in-
ventory. See Pub. 526, Charitable Contributions.
Example 1.  You are a calendar year taxpayer who 
uses an accrual method of accounting. In 2020, you con-
tributed property from inventory to a church. It had a fair 
market value of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 
2019 properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisi-
tion of the property, and in 2019, you properly deducted 
$50 of administrative and other expenses attributable to 
the property as business expenses. The charitable contri-
bution allowed for 2020 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 
is the amount that would be ordinary income if you had 
sold the contributed inventory at fair market value on the 
date of the gift. The cost of goods sold you use in deter-
mining gross income for 2020 must not include the $400. 
You remove that amount from opening inventory for 2020.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-
uted property in 2020 at a cost of $400, you would include 
the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goods 
sold for 2020 and deduct the $50 of administrative and 
other expenses attributable to the property for that year. 
You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-
duction for the contributed property.
Line 36
Purchases Less Cost of Items 
Withdrawn for Personal Use
If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise you 
bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, this 
includes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased 
for manufacture into a finished product.
Trade discounts.  The differences between the stated 
prices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them 
are called trade discounts. You must use the prices you 
pay (not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purcha-
ses. Do not show the discount amount separately as an 
item in gross income.
An automobile dealer must record the cost of a car in 
inventory reduced by any manufacturer's rebate that rep-
resents a trade discount.
Cash discounts. Cash discounts are amounts your sup-
pliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices for 
prompt payments. There are two methods of accounting 
for cash discounts. You can either credit them to a sepa-
rate discount account or deduct them from total purcha-
ses for the year. Whichever method you use, you must be 
consistent. If you want to change your method of figuring 
inventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application for 
Change in Accounting Method. For more information, see 
Change in Accounting Method in chapter 2.
If you credit cash discounts to a separate account, you 
must include this credit balance in your business income 
at the end of the tax year. If you use this method, do not 
reduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts.
Purchase returns and allowances. You must deduct all 
returns and allowances from your total purchases during 
the year.
Merchandise withdrawn from sale.  If you withdraw 
merchandise for your personal or family use, you must ex-
clude this cost from the total amount of merchandise you 
bought for sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or 
sales account with the cost of merchandise you withdraw 
for personal use. You must also charge the amount to 
your drawing account. 
A drawing account is a separate account you should 
keep to record the business income you withdraw to pay 
for personal and family expenses. As stated above, you 
also use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per-
sonal or family use. This account is also known as a with-
drawals account or personal account.
Line 37
Cost of Labor
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold 
only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer-
chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do not 
have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of 
goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs 
properly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both 
the direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw 
material into a finished, saleable product.
Direct labor. Direct labor costs are the wages you pay to 
those employees who spend all their time working directly 
on the product being manufactured. They also include a 
part of the wages you pay to employees who work directly 
on the product part time if you can determine that part of 
their wages.
Page 28  Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 29 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Indirect labor.  Indirect labor costs are the wages you 
pay to employees who perform a general factory function 
that does not have any immediate or direct connection 
with making the saleable product, but that is a necessary 
part of the manufacturing process.
Other labor.  Other labor costs not properly chargeable 
to the cost of goods sold can be deducted as selling or 
administrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of la-
bor costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold 
are the direct or indirect labor costs and certain other 
costs treated as overhead expenses properly charged to 
the manufacturing process, as discussed later under 
Line 39, Other Costs.
Line 38
Materials and Supplies
Materials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals, 
used in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of 
goods sold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing 
process are treated as deferred charges. You deduct 
them as a business expense when you use them. Busi-
ness expenses are discussed in chapter 8.
Line 39
Other Costs
Examples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing or 
mining process that you charge to your cost of goods sold 
are as follows.
Containers. Containers and packages that are an inte-
gral part of the product manufactured are a part of your 
cost of goods sold. If they are not an integral part of the 
manufactured product, their costs are shipping or selling 
expenses.
Freight-in. Freight-in, express -in, and cartage -in on raw 
materials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-
dise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods 
sold.
Overhead expenses.  Overhead expenses include ex-
penses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-
ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. The 
overhead expenses you have as direct and necessary ex-
penses of the manufacturing operation are included in 
your cost of goods sold.
Line 40
Add Lines 35 Through 39
The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of the 
goods available for sale during the year.
Line 41
Inventory at End of Year
Subtract the value of your closing inventory (including, as 
appropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materi-
als and supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) 
from line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known 
as closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory will 
usually become the beginning inventory of your next tax 
year.
Line 42
Cost of Goods Sold
When you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at the 
end of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale, 
the remainder is your cost of goods sold during the tax 
year.
7.
Figuring Gross Profit
Introduction
After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-
ness ( chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold ( chapter 6 ), 
you are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter-
mine gross profit before you can deduct any business ex-
penses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8.
Businesses that sell products.  Figure your gross profit 
by first figuring your net receipts. Figure net receipts 
(line 3) on Schedule C by subtracting any returns and al-
lowances (line 2) from gross receipts (line 1). Returns and 
allowances include cash or credit refunds you make to 
customers, rebates, and other allowances off the actual 
sales price.
Next, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from net 
receipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from your 
business.
Businesses that sell services.  You do not have to fig-
ure the cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not 
an income-producing factor for your business. Your gross 
profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receipts mi-
nus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Most pro-
fessions and businesses that sell services rather than 
products can figure gross profit directly from net receipts 
in this way.
Illustration. This illustration of the gross profit section of 
the income statement of a retail business shows how 
gross profit is figured.
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit  Page 29

Page 30 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Income Statement
Year Ended December 31, 2020
Gross receipts ............................ $400,000
Minus: Returns and allowances ................. 14,940
Net receipts ............................. $385,060
Minus: Cost of goods sold .................... 288,140
Gross profit ............................. $96,920
The cost of goods sold for this business is figured as 
follows.
Inventory at beginning of year .................. $37,845
Plus: Purchases ................... $285,900
Minus: Items withdrawn for personal use ... 2,650 283,250
Goods available for sale ..................... $321,095
Minus: Inventory at end of year ................. 32,955
Cost of goods sold ....................... $288,140
Items To Check
Consider the following items before figuring your gross 
profit.
Gross receipts. At the end of each business day, make 
sure your records balance with your actual cash and 
credit receipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use 
cash registers to keep track of receipts. You should also 
use a proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank 
account for your business.
Sales tax collected.  Check to make sure your records 
show the correct sales tax collected.
If you collect state and local sales taxes imposed on 
you as the seller of goods or services from the buyer, you 
must include the amount collected in gross receipts.
If you are required to collect state and local taxes im-
posed on the buyer and turn them over to state or local 
governments, you generally do not include these amounts 
in income.
Inventory at beginning of year.  Compare this figure 
with last year's ending inventory. The two amounts should 
usually be the same.
Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per-
sonal use (use them yourself, provide them to your family, 
or give them as personal gifts, etc.), be sure to remove 
them from the cost of goods sold. For details on how to 
adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise withdrawn 
from sale in chapter 6.
Inventory at end of year.  Check to make sure your pro-
cedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-
dures should ensure all items have been included in in-
ventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.
Use inventory forms and adding machine tapes as the 
only evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are 
available at office supply stores. These forms have col-
umns for recording the description, quantity, unit price, 
and value of each inventory item. Each page has space to 
record who made the physical count, who priced the 
items, who made the extensions, and who proofread the 
calculations. These forms will help satisfy you that the to-
tal inventory is accurate. They will also provide you with a 
permanent record to support its validity.
Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.
Testing Gross Profit Accuracy
If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can check 
the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide gross 
profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measures 
the average spread between the merchandise cost of 
goods sold and the selling price.
Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy. 
Little or no difference between these two percentages 
shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large dif-
ference between these percentages may show that you 
did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, or 
other items of cost. You should determine the reason for 
the difference.
Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On the 
average, he marks up his merchandise so that he will real-
ize a gross profit of 33 1/3% on its sales. The net receipts 
(gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown on 
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold 
is $200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000 
($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year's 
results, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receipts 
($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per-
centage of 331/3%.
Additions to Gross Profit
If your business has income from a source other than its 
regular business operations, enter the income on line 6 of 
Schedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is gross 
business income. Some examples include income from 
an interest-bearing checking account, income from scrap 
sales, income from certain fuel tax credits and refunds, 
and amounts recovered from bad debts.
8.
Business Expenses
Introduction
You can deduct the costs of operating your business. 
These costs are known as business expenses. These are 
costs you do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of 
goods sold but can deduct in the current year.
Page 30  Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 31 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To be deductible, a business expense must be both or-
dinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that is 
common and accepted in your field of business. A neces-
sary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for 
your business. An expense does not have to be indispen-
sable to be considered necessary.
For more information about the general rules for de-
ducting business expenses, see chapter 1 of Pub. 535.
If you have an expense that is partly for business 
and partly personal, separate the personal part 
from the business part. The personal part is not 
deductible.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
463 Travel, Gift, and Car Expenses
535 Business Expenses
946 How To Depreciate Property
See chapter 12 for information about getting publications 
and forms.
Bad Debts
If someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have 
a bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts —business 
bad debts and nonbusiness bad debts.
A business bad debt is generally one that comes from 
operating your trade or business. You may be able to de-
duct business bad debts as an expense on your business 
tax return.
Business bad debt.  A business bad debt is a loss from 
the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the follow-
ing.
1. Created or acquired in your business.
2. Closely related to your business when it became 
partly or totally worthless.
A debt is closely related to your business if your primary 
motive for incurring the debt is a business reason.
Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit sales 
to customers. They can also be the result of loans to sup-
pliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and serv-
ices customers have not paid for are shown in your books 
as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. If you 
are unable to collect any part of these accounts or notes 
receivable, the uncollectible part is a business bad debt.
You can take a bad debt deduction for these ac-
counts and notes receivable only if the amount 
you were owed was included in your gross in-
come either for the year the deduction is claimed or for a 
prior year.
Accrual method. If you use an accrual method of ac-
counting, you normally report income as you earn it. You 
CAUTION
!
  463
  535
  946
CAUTION
!
can take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiv-
able if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-
come.
Cash method. If you use the cash method of account-
ing, you normally report income when you receive pay-
ment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amounts 
owed to you that you have not received and cannot collect 
if you never included those amounts in income.
More information. For more information about business 
bad debts, see chapter 10 of Pub. 535.
Nonbusiness bad debts.  All other bad debts are non-
business bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-
tal losses on Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040). For 
more information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub. 
550, Investment Income and Expenses.
Car and Truck Expenses
If you use your car or truck in your business, you may be 
able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining your 
vehicle. You may also be able to deduct other costs of lo-
cal transportation and traveling away from home overnight 
on business.
Local transportation expenses.  Local transportation 
expenses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all 
the following.
• Getting from one workplace to another in the course of 
your business or profession when you are traveling 
within the city or general area that is your tax home. 
Tax home is defined later.
• Visiting clients or customers.
• Going to a business meeting away from your regular 
workplace.
• Getting from your home to a temporary workplace 
when you have one or more regular places of work. 
These temporary workplaces can be either within the 
area of your tax home or outside that area.
Local business transportation does not include expenses 
you have while traveling away from home overnight. 
Those expenses are deductible as travel expenses and 
are discussed later under Travel and Meals . However, if 
you use your car while traveling away from home over-
night, use the rules in this section to figure your car ex-
pense deduction. 
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home. 
It includes the entire city or general area in which your 
business or work is located.
Example. You operate a printing business out of ren-
ted office space. You use your van to deliver completed 
jobs to your customers. You can deduct the cost of 
round-trip transportation between your customers and 
your print shop.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses  Page 31

Page 32 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot deduct the costs of driving your car or 
truck between your home and your main or regu-
lar workplace. These costs are personal commut-
ing expenses.
Office in the home.  Your workplace can be your 
home if you have an office in your home that qualifies as 
your principal place of business. For more information, 
see Business Use of Your Home, later.
Example. You are a graphic designer. You operate 
your business out of your home. Your home qualifies as 
your principal place of business. You occasionally have to 
drive to your clients to deliver your completed work. You 
can deduct the cost of the round -trip transportation be-
tween your home and your clients.
Methods for Deducting Car and Truck 
Expenses
For local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck, 
you can generally use one of the following methods to fig-
ure your expenses.
• Standard mileage rate.
• Actual expenses.
Standard mileage rate.  You may be able to use the 
standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs of op-
erating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for business 
purposes. For 2020, the standard mileage rate is 57. 5 
cents a mile.
If you choose to use the standard mileage rate for 
a year, you cannot deduct your actual expenses 
for that year except for business -related parking 
fees and tolls.
Choosing the standard mileage rate.  If you want to 
use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own, 
you must choose to use it in the first year the car is availa-
ble for use in your business. In later years, you can 
choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actual 
expenses.
If you choose to use the standard mileage rate for a car 
you lease, you must use it for the entire lease period (in-
cluding renewals).
Standard mileage rate not allowed.  You cannot use 
the standard mileage rate if you:
1. Operate five or more cars at the same time;
2. Claimed a depreciation deduction using any method 
other than straight line, for example, ACRS or 
MACRS;
3. Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car;
4. Claimed the special depreciation allowance on the 
car;
5. Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased; or
6. Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-
bursement.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using the stand-
ard mileage rate, you can deduct any business -related 
parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park your 
car at your place of work are nondeductible commuting 
expenses.)
Actual expenses. If you do not choose to use the stand-
ard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actual 
car or truck expenses.
If you qualify to use both methods, figure your de-
duction both ways to see which gives you a larger 
deduction.
Actual car expenses include the costs of the following 
items.
Depreciation Lease payments Registration 
Garage rent Licenses Repairs
Gas Oil Tires
Insurance Parking fees Tolls
If you use your vehicle for both business and personal 
purposes, you must divide your expenses between busi-
ness and personal use. You can divide your expenses 
based on the miles driven for each purpose.
Example. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop. 
You drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000 
miles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000 
miles were for personal use (including commuting miles). 
You can claim only 80% (16,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of 
operating your van as a business expense.
More information. For more information about the rules 
for claiming car and truck expenses, see Pub. 463.
Reimbursing Your Employees
for Expenses
You can generally deduct the amount you reimburse your 
employees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse-
ment you deduct and the manner in which you deduct it 
depend in part on whether you reimburse the expenses 
under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. For 
details, see chapter 11 of Pub. 535. That chapter explains 
accountable and nonaccountable plans and tells you 
whether to report the reimbursement on your employee's 
Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
Depreciation
If property you acquire to use in your business is expected 
to last more than 1 year, you generally cannot deduct the 
entire cost as a business expense in the year you acquire 
it. You must spread the cost over more than 1 tax year 
and deduct part of it each year on Schedule C. This 
method of deducting the cost of business property is 
called depreciation.
The following is a brief overview. You will find more in-
formation about depreciation in Pub. 946.
TIP
Page 32  Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What property can be depreciated?  You can depreci-
ate property if it meets all the following requirements.
• It must be property you own.
• It must be used in business or held to produce in-
come. You can never depreciate inventory (explained 
in chapter 2) because it is not held for use in your 
business.
• It must have a useful life that extends substantially be-
yond the year it is placed in service.
• It must have a determinable useful life, which means 
that it must be something that wears out, decays, gets 
used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value from 
natural causes. You can never depreciate the cost of 
land because land does not wear out, become obso-
lete, or get used up.
• It must not be excepted property. This includes prop-
erty placed in service and disposed of in the same 
year.
Repairs. In general, you do not depreciate the costs of 
repairs or maintenance if they do not improve your prop-
erty. Instead, you deduct these amounts on line 21 of 
Schedule C. Improvements are amounts paid for better-
ments to your property, restorations of your property, or 
work that adapts your property to a new or different use.
Election to capitalize repair and maintenance 
costs that do not improve your property.  You can 
make an election to treat certain repairs or replacements 
in your trade or business as improvements subject to de-
preciation. This election is available if you treat these 
amounts as capital expenditures on your books and re-
cords regularly used in computing your income and ex-
penses. The election to capitalize repair and maintenance 
costs is discussed in chapter 1 of Pub. 535.
Depreciation method.  The method for depreciating 
most business and investment property placed in service 
after 1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recov-
ery System (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in 
Pub. 946.
Section 179 deduction.  You can elect to deduct a limi-
ted amount of the cost of certain depreciable property in 
the year you place the property in service. This deduction 
is known as the section 179 deduction. The maximum 
amount you can elect to deduct during 2020 is generally 
$1,040,000 (higher limits apply to certain property).
This limit is generally reduced by the amount by which 
the cost of the property placed in service during the tax 
year exceeds $2,590,000. The total amount of deprecia-
tion (including the section 179 deduction) you can take for 
a passenger automobile you use in your business and first 
place in service in 2020 is $10,100 ($18,100 if you take 
the special depreciation allowance for qualified passenger 
automobiles placed in service in 2020). Special rules ap-
ply to trucks and vans. For more information, see Pub. 
946. It explains what property qualifies for the deduction, 
what limits apply to the deduction, and when and how to 
recapture the deduction.
Your section 179 election for the cost of any sport 
utility vehicle (SUV) and certain other vehicles is 
limited to $25,900. For more information, see the 
Instructions for Form 4562 or Pub. 946.
Listed property.  You must follow special rules and re-
cordkeeping requirements when depreciating listed prop-
erty. Listed property includes any of the following.
• Most passenger automobiles.
• Most other property used for transportation.
• Any property of a type generally used for entertain-
ment, recreation, or amusement.
For more information about listed property, see Pub. 
946.
Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-
tion, if you are claiming any of the following.
• Depreciation on property placed in service during the 
current tax year.
• A section 179 deduction.
• Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of 
when it was placed in service).
Employees' Pay
You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give 
your employees for the services they perform for your 
business. The pay may be in cash, property, or services.
To be deductible, your employees' pay must be an ordi-
nary and necessary expense and you must pay or incur it 
in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet both the fol-
lowing tests.
• The pay must be reasonable.
• The pay must be for services performed.
Chapter 2 of Pub. 535 explains and defines these require-
ments.
You cannot deduct your own salary or any personal 
withdrawals you make from your business. As a sole pro-
prietor, you are not an employee of the business.
Kinds of pay. Some of the ways you may provide pay to 
your employees are listed below. For an explanation of 
each of these items, see chapter 2 of Pub. 535.
• Awards.
• Bonuses.
• Education expenses.
• Fringe benefits (discussed later).
• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee to 
repay if they are for personal services actually per-
formed.
• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for 
services.
CAUTION
!
Chapter 8 Business Expenses  Page 33

Page 34 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Reimbursements for employee business expenses.
• Sick pay.
• Vacation pay.
Fringe benefits.  A fringe benefit is a form of pay for 
the performance of services. The following are examples 
of fringe benefits.
• Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs.
• Meals and lodging.
• The use of a car.
• Flights on airplanes.
• Discounts on property or services.
Employee benefit programs include the following.
• Accident and health plans.
• Adoption assistance.
• Cafeteria plans.
• Dependent care assistance.
• Educational assistance.
• Group-term life insurance coverage.
• Welfare benefit funds.
You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you 
provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost 
falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car 
or other property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease 
as a rent or lease expense. If you own the property, in-
clude your deduction for its cost or other basis as a sec-
tion 179 deduction or a depreciation deduction.
You may be able to exclude all or part of the 
fringe benefits you provide from your employees' 
wages. For more information about fringe benefits 
and the exclusion of benefits, see Pub. 15-B.
Insurance
You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the fol-
lowing kinds of insurance related to your business.
1. Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.
2. Credit insurance that covers losses from business 
bad debts.
3. Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-
ployees, including long-term care insurance.
4. Liability insurance.
5. Malpractice insurance that covers your personal liabil-
ity for professional negligence resulting in injury or 
damage to patients or clients.
6. Workers' compensation insurance set by state law 
that covers any claims for bodily injuries or job-related 
diseases suffered by employees in your business, re-
gardless of fault.
TIP
7. Contributions to a state unemployment insurance 
fund are deductible as taxes if they are considered 
taxes under state law.
8. Overhead insurance that pays for business overhead 
expenses you have during long periods of disability 
caused by your injury or sickness.
9. Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehicles 
used in your business for liability, damages, and other 
losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for personal 
use, deduct only the part of the insurance premium 
that applies to the business use of the vehicle. If you 
use the standard mileage rate to figure your car ex-
penses, you cannot deduct any car insurance premi-
ums.
10. Life insurance covering your employees if you are not 
directly or indirectly the beneficiary under the con-
tract.
11. Business interruption insurance that pays for lost prof-
its if your business is shut down due to a fire or other 
cause.
Nondeductible premiums.  You cannot deduct premi-
ums on the following kinds of insurance.
1. Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deduct 
amounts credited to a reserve set up for self-insur-
ance. This applies even if you cannot get business in-
surance coverage for certain business risks. How-
ever, your actual losses may be deductible. For more 
information, see Pub. 547, Casualties, Disasters, and 
Thefts.
2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for a 
policy that pays for your lost earnings due to sickness 
or disability. However, see item (8) in the previous list.
3. Certain life insurance and annuities.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, you 
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insurance 
policy covering you, an employee, or any person 
with a financial interest in your business if you are 
directly or indirectly a beneficiary of the policy. 
You are included among possible beneficiaries of 
the policy if the policy owner is obligated to repay 
a loan from you using the proceeds of the policy. 
A person has a financial interest in your business 
if the person is an owner or part owner of the busi-
ness or has lent money to the business.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen-
erally cannot deduct the premiums on any life in-
surance policy, endowment contract, or annuity 
contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
ciary. The disallowance applies without regard to 
whom the policy covers.
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policy on 
your life or on the life of another person with a finan-
cial interest in your business to get or protect a busi-
ness loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as a busi-
ness expense. Nor can you deduct the premiums as 
Page 34  Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
interest on business loans or as an expense of financ-
ing loans. In the event of death, the proceeds of the 
policy are not taxed as income even if they are used 
to liquidate the debt.
Self-employed health insurance deduction.  You may 
be able to deduct the amount you paid for medical and 
dental insurance and qualified long -term care insurance 
for you and your family.
How to figure the deduction. Generally, you can use 
the worksheet in the Instructions for Forms 1040 and 
1040-SR to figure your deduction. However, if any of the 
following apply, you must use the worksheet in chapter 6 
of Pub. 535.
• You have more than one source of income subject to 
SE tax.
• You file Form 2555 (relating to foreign earned in-
come).
• You are using amounts paid for qualified long-term 
care insurance to figure the deduction.
Use Pub. 974 instead of the worksheet in the Instruc-
tions for Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR if the insurance plan 
established, or considered to be established, under your 
business was obtained through the Health Insurance Mar-
ketplace and you are claiming the premium tax credit.
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance, 
even if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to any 
expense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create 
an asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond 
the end of the current tax year.
Example. In 2020, you signed a 3-year insurance con-
tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2020, 2021, 
and 2022 when you signed the contract, you can only de-
duct the premium for 2020 on your 2020 tax return. You 
can deduct in 2021 and 2022 the premium allocable to 
those years.
More information.  For more information about deduct-
ing insurance, see chapter 6 of Pub. 535.
Interest
You can generally deduct as a business expense some or 
all interest you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts 
related to your business. Interest relates to your business 
if you use the proceeds of the loan for a business ex-
pense. It does not matter what type of property secures 
the loan. You can deduct interest on a debt only if you 
meet all of the following requirements.
• You are legally liable for that debt.
• Both you and the lender intend that the debt be re-
paid.
• You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-
tionship.
Certain taxpayers are required to limit their business in-
terest expense deduction. See the Instructions for Form 
8990 to determine whether you are required to limit your 
business interest expense deduction, who is required to 
file Form 8990, and how certain businesses may elect out 
of the business interest expense limitation.
You cannot deduct on Schedule C the interest you paid 
on personal loans. If a loan is part business and part per-
sonal, you must divide the interest between the personal 
part and the business part.
Example. In 2020, you paid $600 interest on a car 
loan. During 2020, you used the car 60% for business and 
40% for personal purposes. You are claiming actual ex-
penses on the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% (0. 60) 
× $600) for 2020 on Schedule C. The remaining interest of 
$240 is a nondeductible personal expense.
More information.  For more information about deduct-
ing interest, see chapter 4 of Pub. 535. That chapter ex-
plains the following items.
• Interest you can deduct.
• Interest you cannot deduct.
• How to allocate interest between personal and busi-
ness use.
• Limitation on business interest.
• When to deduct interest.
• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (This 
is generally a loan on which no interest is charged or 
on which interest is charged at a rate below the appli-
cable federal rate.)
Legal and Professional Fees
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged by ac-
countants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses di-
rectly related to operating your business are deductible on 
Schedule C. However, you usually cannot deduct legal 
fees you pay to acquire business assets. Add them to the 
basis of the property.
If the fees include payments for work of a personal na-
ture (such as making a will), you can take a business de-
duction only for the part of the fee related to your busi-
ness.
Tax preparation fees. You can deduct on Schedule C 
the cost of preparing that part of your tax return relating to 
your business as a sole proprietor or statutory employee.
You can also deduct on Schedule C the amount you 
pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficiencies for your 
business as a sole proprietor or statutory employee.
Pension Plans
You can set up and maintain the following small business 
retirement plans for yourself and your employees.
• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses  Page 35

Page 36 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ-
ees) plans.
• Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans).
SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and your 
employees a tax -favored way to save for retirement. You 
can deduct contributions you make to the plan for your 
employees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a sole pro-
prietor, you can deduct contributions you make to the plan 
for yourself on line 15 of Schedule 1 (Form 1040). You 
can also deduct trustees' fees if contributions to the plan 
do not cover them. Earnings on the contributions are gen-
erally tax free until you or your employees receive distribu-
tions from the plan. You may also be able to claim a tax 
credit if you begin a new qualified defined benefit or de-
fined contribution plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE 
plan, or SEP plan. The credit equals 50% of the cost to set 
up and administer the plan and educate employees about 
the plan, up to a maximum of $500 per year for each of 
the first 3 years of the plan.
Under certain plans, employees can have you contrib-
ute limited amounts of their before -tax pay to a plan. 
These amounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax 
free until your employees receive distributions from the 
plan.
For more information on retirement plans for small busi-
ness, see Pub. 560.
Pub. 590 -A, Contributions to Individual Retire-
ment Arrangements (IRAs), discusses other 
tax-favored ways to save for retirement.
Rent Expense
Rent is any amount you pay for the use of property you do 
not own. In general, you can deduct rent as a business ex-
pense only if the rent is for property you use in your busi-
ness. If you have or will receive equity in or title to the 
property, you cannot deduct the rent.
Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental deduction 
for unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-
bleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Rent 
paid to a related person is reasonable if it is the same 
amount you would pay to a stranger for use of the same 
property. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-
ured as a percentage of gross receipts.
Related persons include members of your immediate 
family, including brothers and sisters (either whole or 
half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For 
a list of the other related persons, see section 267 of the 
Internal Revenue Code.
Rent on your home.  If you rent your home and use part 
of it as your place of business, you may be able to deduct 
the rent you pay for that part. You must meet the require-
ments for business use of your home. For more informa-
tion, see Business Use of Your Home, later.
Rent paid in advance.  Generally, rent paid in your busi-
ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you pay 
TIP
rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount that ap-
plies to your use of the rented property during the tax 
year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only over 
the period to which it applies.
More information. For more information about rent, see 
chapter 3 of Pub. 535.
Taxes
You can deduct on Schedule C various federal, state, lo-
cal, and foreign taxes directly attributable to your busi-
ness.
Income taxes.  You can deduct on Schedule C a state 
tax on gross income (as distinguished from net income) 
directly attributable to your business. You can deduct 
other state and local income taxes on Schedule A (Form 
1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deduct fed-
eral income tax.
Employment taxes. You can deduct the social security, 
Medicare, and federal unemployment taxes (FUTA) you 
paid out of your own funds as an employer. Employment 
taxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can also de-
duct payments you made as an employer to a state unem-
ployment compensation fund or to a state disability benefit 
fund. Deduct these payments as taxes.
SE tax. You can deduct one-half of your SE tax on line 14 
of Schedule 1 (Form 1040). SE tax is discussed in chap-
ter 1 and chapter 10.
Personal property tax.  You can deduct on Schedule C 
any tax imposed by a state or local government on per-
sonal property used in your business.
You can also deduct registration fees for the right to 
use property within a state or local area.
Example. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000 
business miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had to 
pay $25 for their annual state license tags and $20 for 
their city registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city 
personal property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They 
are claiming their actual car expenses. Because they 
used the car 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of 
the $280, or $196, as a business expense.
Real estate taxes.  You can deduct on Schedule C the 
real estate taxes you pay on your business property. De-
ductible real estate taxes are any state, local, or foreign 
taxes on real estate levied for the general public welfare. 
The taxing authority must assess these taxes uniformly at 
a like rate on all real property under its jurisdiction, and the 
proceeds must be for general community or governmental 
purposes.
For more information about real estate taxes, see chap-
ter 5 of Pub. 535. That chapter explains special rules for 
deducting the following items.
• Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks, 
streets, water mains, and sewer lines.
Page 36  Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 37 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell property during 
the year.
• Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method of ac-
counting and choose to accrue real estate tax related 
to a definite period ratably over that period.
Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or on 
the purchase or use of property as part of the cost of the 
service or property. If the service or the cost or use of the 
property is a deductible business expense, you can de-
duct the tax as part of that service or cost. If the property 
is merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of 
the cost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, 
add the sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For infor-
mation on the basis of property, see Pub. 551, Basis of 
Assets.
Do not deduct state and local sales taxes im-
posed on the buyer that you must collect and pay 
over to the state or local government. Do not in-
clude these taxes in gross receipts or sales.
Excise taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C all excise 
taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses of carry-
ing on your business. Excise taxes are discussed briefly in 
chapter 1.
Fuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and other mo-
tor fuels you use in your business are usually included as 
part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a 
separate item.
You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federal ex-
cise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. For 
more information, see Pub. 510, Excise Taxes.
Travel and Meals
This section briefly explains the kinds of travel and meal 
expenses you can deduct on Schedule C.
Travel expenses. These are the ordinary and necessary 
expenses of traveling away from home for your business. 
You are traveling away from home if both the following 
conditions are met.
1. Your duties require you to be away from the general 
area of your tax home (defined later) substantially lon-
ger than an ordinary day's work.
2. You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demands of 
your work while away from home.
Generally, your  tax home is your regular place of busi-
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home. 
It includes the entire city or general area in which your 
business is located. See Pub. 463 for more information.
The following is a brief discussion of the expenses you 
can deduct.
CAUTION
!
Transportation. You can deduct the cost of travel by 
airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your 
business destination.
Taxi, commuter bus, and limousine.  You can de-
duct fares for these and other types of transportation be-
tween the airport or station and your hotel, or between the 
hotel and your work location away from home.
Baggage and shipping.  You can deduct the cost of 
sending baggage and sample or display material between 
your regular and temporary work locations.
Car or truck.  You can deduct the costs of operating 
and maintaining your vehicle when traveling away from 
home on business. You can deduct actual expenses or 
the standard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car 
and Truck Expenses ), as well as business -related tolls 
and parking. If you rent a car while away from home on 
business, you can deduct only the business-use portion of 
the expenses.
Meals and lodging. You can deduct the cost of meals 
and lodging if your business trip is overnight or long 
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly 
perform your duties. You can use actual expenses or 
standard meal allowance to calculate your deduction. In 
most cases, you can deduct only 50% of your meal ex-
penses. See Pub. 463 for additional information.
Cleaning. You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning 
and laundry while on your business trip.
Telephone. You can deduct the cost of business calls 
while on your business trip, including business communi-
cation by fax machine or other communication devices.
Tips. You can deduct the tips you pay for any expense 
in this list.
More information.  For more information about travel 
expenses, see Pub. 463.
Reimbursing your employees for expenses.  You can 
generally deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-
ees for travel and meal expenses. The reimbursement you 
deduct and the manner in which you deduct it depend in 
part on whether you reimburse the expenses under an ac-
countable plan or a nonaccountable plan. For details, see 
chapter 11 of Pub. 535. That chapter explains accounta-
ble and nonaccountable plans and tells you whether to re-
port the reimbursement on your employee's Form W -2, 
Wage and Tax Statement.
Business Use of Your Home
To deduct expenses related to the part of your home used 
for business, you must meet specific requirements. Even 
then, your deduction may be limited.
To qualify to claim expenses for business use of your 
home, you must meet the following tests.
1. Your use of the business part of your home must be:
Chapter 8 Business Expenses  Page 37

Page 38 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclusive 
use, later),
b. Regular, and
c. For your business.
2. The business part of your home must be:
a. Your principal place of business (defined later);
b. A place where you meet or deal with patients, cli-
ents, or customers in the normal course of your 
business; or
c. A separate structure (not attached to your home) 
you use in connection with your business.
Exclusive use.  To qualify under the exclusive use test, 
you must use a specific area of your home only for your 
trade or business. The area used for business can be a 
room or other separately identifiable space. The space 
does not need to be marked off by a permanent partition.
You do not meet the requirements of the exclusive use 
test if you use the area in question both for business and 
for personal purposes.
Example. You are an attorney and use a den in your 
home to write legal briefs and prepare clients' tax returns. 
Your family also uses the den for recreation. The den is 
not used exclusively in your profession, so you cannot 
claim a business deduction for its use.
Exceptions to exclusive use.  You do not have to 
meet the exclusive use test to the extent you use part of 
your home in either of the following ways.
1. For the storage of inventory or product samples.
2. As a daycare facility.
For an explanation of these exceptions, see Pub. 587, 
Business Use of Your Home.
Regular use.  To qualify under the regular use test, you 
must use a specific area of your home for business on a 
continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your business 
use of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if you 
do not use that area for any other purpose.
Principal place of business.  You can have more than 
one business location, including your home, for a single 
trade or business. To qualify to deduct the expenses for 
the business use of your home under the principal place 
of business test, your home must be your principal place 
of business for that business. To determine your principal 
place of business, you must consider all the facts and cir-
cumstances.
Your home office will qualify as your principal place of 
business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet 
the following requirements.
• You use it exclusively and regularly for administrative 
or management activities of your business.
• You have no other fixed location where you conduct 
substantial administrative or management activities of 
your business.
Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively and reg-
ularly for your business, but your home office does not 
qualify as your principal place of business based on the 
previous rules, you determine your principal place of busi-
ness based on the following factors.
• The relative importance of the activities performed at 
each location.
• If the relative importance factor does not determine 
your principal place of business, you can also con-
sider the time spent at each location.
If, after considering your business locations, your home 
cannot be identified as your principal place of business, 
you cannot deduct home office expenses. However, for 
other ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, see 
Pub. 587.
Deduction limit. If your gross income from the business 
use of your home equals or exceeds your total business 
expenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all 
your business expenses related to the use of your home. 
If your gross income from the business use is less than 
your total business expenses, your deduction for certain 
expenses for the business use of your home is limited.
Your deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses, 
such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depre-
ciation taken last), allocable to the business is limited to 
the gross income from the business use of your home mi-
nus the sum of the following.
1. The business part of expenses you could deduct even 
if you did not use your home for business (such as 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualty and 
theft losses that are allowable as itemized deductions 
on Schedule A (Form 1040)).
2. The business expenses that relate to the business ac-
tivity in the home (for example, business phone, sup-
plies, and depreciation on equipment), but not to the 
use of the home itself.
Do not include in (2) above your deduction for one -half of 
your SE tax.
Use Form 8829 , Expenses for Business Use of Your 
Home, to figure your deduction. 
Simplified method.  The IRS provides a simplified 
method to determine your expenses for business use of 
your home. The simplified method is an alternative to cal-
culating and substantiating actual expenses. In most ca-
ses, you will figure your deduction by multiplying $5 by the 
area of your home used for a qualified business use. The 
area you use to figure your deduction is limited to 300 
square feet. For more information, see the Instructions for 
Schedule C.
More information.  For more information on deducting 
expenses for the business use of your home, see Pub. 
587.
Page 38  Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 39 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
De Minimis Safe Harbor for 
Tangible Property
Generally, you must capitalize costs to acquire or produce 
real or tangible personal property used in your trade or 
business, such as buildings, equipment, or furniture. How-
ever, if you elect to use the de minimis safe harbor for tan-
gible property, you may deduct de minimis amounts paid 
to acquire or produce certain tangible property if these 
amounts are deducted by you for financial accounting pur-
poses or in keeping your books and records.
If you have an applicable financial statement, you may 
use this safe harbor to deduct amounts paid for tangible 
property up to $5,000 per item or invoice. If you do not 
have an applicable financial statement, you may use the 
de minimis safe harbor to deduct amounts paid for tangi-
ble property up to $2,500 per item or invoice.
Amounts qualifying under this de minimis safe harbor 
should be included as other expenses in Part V of Sched-
ule C.
More information.  For details on making this election 
and requirements for using the de minimis safe harbor for 
tangible property, see chapter 1 of Pub. 535.
Other Expenses You Can 
Deduct
You may also be able to deduct the following expenses. 
See Pub. 535 to find out whether you can deduct them.
• Advertising.
• Bank fees.
• Donations to business organizations.
• Education expenses.
• Impairment-related expenses.
• Interview expense allowances.
• Licenses and regulatory fees.
• Moving machinery.
• Outplacement services.
• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance or 
nonperformance of a contract.
• Repairs and maintenance to real or tangible personal 
property.
• Repayments of income.
• Supplies and materials.
• Utilities.
Expenses You Cannot Deduct
You usually cannot deduct the following as business ex-
penses. For more information, see Pub. 535.
• Bribes and kickbacks.
• Charitable contributions.
• Demolition expenses or losses.
• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sporting, 
airline, and hotel clubs.
• Entertainment expenses.
• Improvements to real or tangible personal property. 
Improvements are amounts paid for betterments to 
your property, restorations of your property, or work 
that adapts your property to a new or different use.
• Lobbying expenses.
• Penalties and fines you pay to a governmental agency 
or instrumentality because you broke the law.
• Personal, living, and family expenses.
• Political contributions.
• Settlements or payments related to sexual harass-
ment or sexual abuse if such settlement or payment is 
subject to a nondisclosure agreement. You also can-
not deduct attorney fees related to such settlement or 
payment.
9.
Figuring Net Profit
or Loss
Introduction
After figuring your business income and expenses, you 
are ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your busi-
ness. You do this by subtracting business expenses from 
business income. If your expenses are less than your in-
come, the difference is net profit and becomes part of 
your income on line 3 of Schedule 1 (Form 1040). If your 
expenses are more than your income, the difference is a 
net loss. You can usually deduct it from gross income on 
line 3 of Schedule 1 (Form 1040). But in some situations 
your loss is limited. This chapter briefly explains three of 
those situations. Other situations that may limit your loss 
are explained in the instructions for Schedule C, line G 
and line 32.
If you have more than one business, you must fig-
ure your net profit or loss for each business on a 
separate Schedule C.
CAUTION
!
Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or Loss  Page 39

Page 40 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Net Operating Losses (NOLs)
If your deductions for the year are more than your income 
for the year, you may have an NOL. You can use an NOL 
by deducting it from your income in another year or years.
Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOL 
include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from the fol-
lowing.
• Your trade or business.
• A casualty or theft resulting from a federally declared 
disaster.
• Moving expenses.
• Rental property.
A loss from operating a business is the most common 
reason for an NOL.
For details about NOLs, see Pub. 536. It explains how 
to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claim an NOL de-
duction, and how to figure an NOL carryover.
Not-for-Profit Activities
If you do not carry on your business to make a profit, there 
is a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use 
a loss from the activity to offset other income. Activities 
you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, come 
under this limit.
For details about not -for-profit activities, see chapter 1 
of Pub. 535, Business Expenses. That chapter explains 
how to determine whether your activity is carried on to 
make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss you can 
deduct.
10.
Self-Employment (SE) Tax
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are 
and even if you are already receiving social secur-
ity and Medicare benefits.
Who Must Pay SE Tax?
Generally, you must pay SE tax and file Schedule SE 
(Form 1040) if your net earnings from self -employment 
were $400 or more. Use Schedule SE to figure net earn-
ings from self-employment.
Sole proprietor or independent contractor.  If you are 
self-employed as a sole proprietor or independent con-
CAUTION
!
tractor, you generally use Schedule C (Form 1040) to fig-
ure your earnings subject to SE tax.
SE tax rate.  The 2020 SE tax rate on net earnings is 
15.3% (12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
Maximum earnings subject to SE tax.  Only the first 
$137,700 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings 
in 2020 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social 
security part of SE tax, social security tax, or the Tier 1 
part of railroad retirement tax.
All of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 
2020 are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare 
part of SE tax, Medicare tax, or Medicare part of railroad 
retirement tax.
If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-
ity tax or the Tier 1 part of railroad retirement tax, or both, 
and total at least $137,700, do not pay the 12.4% social 
security part of the SE tax on any of your net earnings. 
However, you must pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE 
tax on all your net earnings.
Additional Medicare Tax.  A 0.9% Additional Medicare 
Tax may apply to you if your net earnings from self -em-
ployment exceed a threshold amount (based on your filing 
status). For more information, see Self-Employment (SE) 
Tax in chapter 1 and Form 8959 and its instructions.
Special Rules and Exceptions
Aliens. Generally, resident aliens must pay SE tax under 
the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens. Nonresident ali-
ens are not subject to SE tax unless an international social 
security agreement (also known as a totalization agree-
ment) in effect determines that they are covered under the 
U.S. social security system. However, residents of the 
U.S. Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Common-
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or American Sa-
moa are subject to SE tax, as they are considered U.S. 
residents for SE tax purposes. For more information on 
aliens, see Pub. 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Child employed by parent.  You are not subject to SE 
tax if you are under age 18 and you are working for your 
father or mother.
Church employee. If you work for a church or a qualified 
church-controlled organization (other than as a minister, 
member of a religious order, or Christian Science practi-
tioner) that elected an exemption from social security and 
Medicare taxes, you are subject to SE tax if you receive 
$108.28 or more in wages from the church or organiza-
tion. For more information, see Pub. 517, Social Security 
and Other Information for Members of the Clergy and Reli-
gious Workers.
Fishing crew member. If you are a member of the crew 
on a boat that catches fish or other water life, your earn-
ings are subject to SE tax if all the following conditions ap-
ply.
1. You do not get any pay for the work except your share 
of the catch or a share of the proceeds from the sale 
Page 40  Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 41 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the catch, unless the pay meets all the following 
conditions.
a. The pay is not more than $100 per trip.
b. The pay is received only if there is a minimum 
catch.
c. The pay is solely for additional duties (such as 
mate, engineer, or cook) for which additional cash 
pay is traditional in the fishing industry.
2. You get a share of the catch or a share of the pro-
ceeds from the sale of the catch.
3. Your share depends on the amount of the catch.
4. The boat's operating crew normally numbers fewer 
than 10 individuals. (An operating crew is considered 
as normally made up of fewer than 10 if the average 
size of the crew on trips made during the last 4 calen-
dar quarters is fewer than 10.)
Notary public.  Fees you receive for services you per-
form as a notary public are reported on Schedule C but 
are not subject to SE tax (see the Instructions for Sched-
ule SE (Form 1040)).
State or local government employee.  You are subject 
to SE tax if you are an employee of a state or local govern-
ment, are paid solely on a fee basis, and your services are 
not covered under a federal -state social security agree-
ment.
Foreign government or international organization 
employee. You are subject to SE tax if both the following 
conditions are true.
1. You are a U.S. citizen employed in the United States, 
Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Common-
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the U.S. 
Virgin Islands by:
a. A foreign government,
b. A wholly owned agency of a foreign government, 
or
c. An international organization.
2. Your employer is not required to withhold social se-
curity and Medicare taxes from your wages.
U.S. citizen or resident alien residing abroad.  If you 
are a self -employed U.S. citizen or resident alien living 
outside the United States, in most cases you must pay SE 
tax. Do not reduce your foreign earnings from self -em-
ployment by your foreign earned income exclusion.
Exception. The United States has social security 
agreements with many countries to eliminate double taxa-
tion under two social security systems. Under these 
agreements, you must generally only pay social security 
and Medicare taxes to the country in which you live. The 
country to which you must pay the tax will issue a certifi-
cate that serves as proof of exemption from social security 
tax in the other country.
For more information, see the Instructions for Sched-
ule SE (Form 1040).
More Than One Business
If you have earnings subject to SE tax from more than one 
trade, business, or profession, you must combine the net 
profit (or loss) from each to determine your total earnings 
subject to SE tax. A loss from one business reduces your 
profit from another business.
Community Property Income
If any of the income from a trade or business, other than a 
partnership, is community property income under state 
law, it is included in the earnings subject to SE tax of the 
spouse carrying on the trade or business.
Gain or Loss
Do not include in earnings subject to SE tax a gain or loss 
from the disposition of property that is neither stock in 
trade nor held primarily for sale to customers. It does not 
matter whether the disposition is a sale, exchange, or an 
involuntary conversion.
Lost Income Payments
If you are self-employed and reduce or stop your business 
activities, any payment you receive from insurance or 
other sources for the lost business income is included in 
earnings subject to SE tax. If you are not working when 
you receive the payment, it still relates to your business 
and is included in earnings subject to SE tax, even though 
your business is temporarily inactive.
Figuring Earnings Subject to SE Tax
Methods for Figuring Net Earnings
There are three ways to figure net earnings from self -em-
ployment.
1. The regular method.
2. The nonfarm optional method.
3. The farm optional method.
You must use the regular method to the extent you do 
not use one or both of the optional methods.
Why use an optional method?  You may want to use 
the optional methods (discussed later) when you have a 
loss or a small net profit and any one of the following ap-
plies.
• You want to receive credit for social security benefit 
coverage.
• You incurred child or dependent care expenses for 
which you could claim a credit. (An optional method 
may increase your earned income, which could in-
crease your credit.)
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax  Page 41

Page 42 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You are entitled to the earned income credit. (An op-
tional method may increase your earned income, 
which could increase your credit.)
• You are entitled to the additional child tax credit. (An 
optional method may increase your earned income, 
which could increase your credit.)
Effects of using an optional method. Using an optional 
method could increase your SE tax. Paying more SE tax 
could result in your getting higher benefits when you re-
tire.
Using the optional methods may also decrease your 
adjusted gross income (AGI) due to the deduction for 
one-half of SE tax on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, which may 
affect your eligibility for credits, deductions, or other items 
that are subject to an AGI limit. Figure your AGI with and 
without using the optional methods to see if the optional 
methods will benefit you.
If you use either or both optional methods, you must fig-
ure and pay the SE tax due under these methods even if 
you would have had a smaller tax or no tax using the regu-
lar method.
The optional methods may be used only to figure your 
SE tax. To figure your income tax, include your actual 
earnings in gross income, regardless of which method you 
use to determine SE tax.
Regular Method
To figure net earnings using the regular method, multiply 
your self -employment earnings by 92.35% (0.9235). For 
your net earnings figured using the regular method, see 
line 4a of your Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Net earnings figured using the regular method are also 
called actual net earnings.
Nonfarm Optional Method
Use the nonfarm optional method only for earnings that do 
not come from farming. You may use this method if you 
meet all the following tests.
1. You are self-employed on a regular basis. This means 
that your actual net earnings from self-employment 
were $400 or more in at least 2 of the 3 tax years be-
fore the one for which you use this method. For this 
purpose, the prior-year net earnings can be from ei-
ther farm or nonfarm earnings or both.
2. You have used this method less than 5 years. (There 
is a 5-year lifetime limit.) The years do not have to be 
one after another.
3. Your net nonfarm profits were:
a. Less than $6,107, and
b. Less than 72.189% of your gross nonfarm income.
Net nonfarm profits.  Net nonfarm profit is generally the 
total of the amounts from:
• Line 31 of Schedule C (Form 1040); and
• Box 14, code A, of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from 
nonfarm partnerships).
However, you may need to adjust the amount reported 
on Schedule K -1 if you are a general partner or if it is a 
loss.
Gross nonfarm income.  Your gross nonfarm income is 
generally the total of the amounts from:
• Line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040); and
• Box 14, code C, of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from 
nonfarm partnerships).
Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings
If you meet the three tests explained earlier, use the fol-
lowing table to figure your nonfarm net earnings from 
self-employment under the nonfarm optional method.
Table 10-1. Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings
IF your gross nonfarm 
income is...
THEN your net 
earnings are equal to...
$8,460 or less two-thirds of your gross 
nonfarm income.
more than $8,460 $5,640.
Optional net earnings less than actual net earnings. 
You cannot use this method to report an amount less than 
your actual nonfarm net earnings from self -employment. 
Your actual nonfarm net earnings are your nonfarm net 
earnings figured using the regular method, explained ear-
lier.
Gross nonfarm income of $8,460 or less.  The follow-
ing examples illustrate how to figure net earnings when 
gross nonfarm income is $8,460 or less.
Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $6,107 
and less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. 
Ann Green runs a craft business. Her actual net earnings 
from self -employment were $800 in 2018 and $900 in 
2019. She meets the test for being self -employed on a 
regular basis. She has used the nonfarm optional method 
less than 5 years. Her gross income and net profit in 2020 
are as follows.
Gross nonfarm income ...................... $5,400
Net nonfarm profit ......................... $1,200
Ann's actual net earnings for 2020 are $1,108 ($1,200 
× 0.9235). Because her net profit is less than $6,107 and 
less than 72.189% of her gross income, she can use the 
nonfarm optional method to figure net earnings of $3,600 
(2/3 × $5,400). Because these net earnings are higher than 
her actual net earnings, she can report net earnings of 
$3,600 for 2020.
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit less than $6,107 but 
not less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. 
Page 42  Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 43 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Assume that in Example 1 Ann's gross income is $1,200 
and her net profit is $800. She must use the regular 
method to figure her net earnings. She cannot use the 
nonfarm optional method because her net profit is not less 
than 72.189% of her gross income.
Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business.  As-
sume that in Example 1 Ann has a net loss of $700. She 
can use the nonfarm optional method and report $3,600 
(2/3 × $5,400) as her net earnings.
Example 4. Nonfarm net earnings less than $400. 
Assume that in Example 1 Ann has gross income of $525 
and a net profit of $175. In this situation, she would not 
pay any SE tax under either the regular method or the 
nonfarm optional method because her net earnings under 
both methods are less than $400.
Gross nonfarm income of more than $8,460.  The fol-
lowing examples illustrate how to figure net earnings when 
gross nonfarm income is more than $8,460.
Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $6,107 
and less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. 
John White runs an appliance repair shop. His actual net 
earnings from self-employment were $10,500 in 2018 and 
$9,500 in 2019. He meets the test for being self -employed 
on a regular basis. He has used the nonfarm optional 
method less than 5 years. His gross income and net profit 
in 2020 are as follows.
Gross nonfarm income ...................... $12,000
Net nonfarm profit ......................... $1,200
John's actual net earnings for 2020 are $1,108 ($1,200 
× 0.9235). Because his net profit is less than $6,107 and 
less than 72.189% of his gross income, he can use the 
nonfarm optional method to figure net earnings of $5,640. 
Because these net earnings are higher than his actual net 
earnings, he can report net earnings of $5,640 for 2020.
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit not less than 
$6,107. Assume that in Example 1  John's net profit is 
$6,200. He must use the regular method. He cannot use 
the nonfarm optional method because his net nonfarm 
profit is not less than $6,107.
Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business.  As-
sume that in Example 1 John has a net loss of $700. He 
can use the nonfarm optional method and report $5,640 
as his net earnings from self-employment.
Farm Optional Method
Use the farm optional method only for earnings from a 
farming business. See Pub. 225 for information about this 
method.
Using Both Optional Methods
If you have both farm and nonfarm earnings, you may be 
able to use both optional methods to determine your net 
earnings from self-employment.
To figure your net earnings using both optional meth-
ods, you must do the following.
• Figure your farm and nonfarm net earnings separately 
under each method. Do not combine farm earnings 
with nonfarm earnings to figure your net earnings un-
der either method.
• Add the net earnings figured under each method to ar-
rive at your total net earnings from self-employment.
You can report less than your total actual farm and non-
farm net earnings but not less than actual nonfarm net 
earnings. If you use both optional methods, you can report 
no more than $5,640 as your combined net earnings from 
self-employment.
Example. You are a self -employed farmer. You also 
operate a retail grocery store. Your gross income, actual 
net earnings from self-employment, and optional farm and 
optional nonfarm net earnings from self -employment are 
shown in Table 10-2.
Example—Farm and Nonfarm 
Earnings
Table 10-2.
Income and 
Earnings Farm Nonfarm
Gross income $3,000 $6,000
Actual net earnings   $900   $500
Optional net 
earnings (2/3 of 
gross income)   $2,000 $4,000
Table 10 -3 shows four methods or combinations of 
methods you can use to figure net earnings from self -em-
ployment using the farm and nonfarm gross income and 
actual net earnings shown in Table 10-2.
• Method 1. Using the regular method for both farm and 
nonfarm income.
• Method 2. Using the optional method for farm income 
and the regular method for nonfarm income.
• Method 3. Using the regular method for farm income 
and the optional method for nonfarm income.
• Method 4. Using the optional method for both farm 
and nonfarm income.
Note. Actual net earnings are the same as net earnings 
figured using the regular method.
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax  Page 43

Page 44 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example—Net EarningsTable 10-3.
Net 
Earnings 1 2 3 4
Actual
 farm $ 900 $ 900
Optional
 farm $ 2,000 $ 2,000
Actual
 nonfarm $ 500 $ 500
Optional
 nonfarm $4,000 $4,000
Amount 
you can 
report: $1,400 $2,500 $4,900 $5,640*
* Limited to $5,640 because you used both optional methods.
Fiscal Year Filer
If you use a tax year other than the calendar year, you 
must use the tax rate and maximum earnings limit in effect 
at the beginning of your tax year. Even if the tax rate or 
maximum earnings limit changes during your tax year, 
continue to use the same rate and limit throughout your 
tax year.
Reporting Self-Employment 
Tax
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure and report your 
SE tax. Then enter the SE tax on line 4 of Schedule 2 
(Form 1040) and attach Schedule SE to Form 1040 or 
1040-SR.
If you have to pay SE tax, you must file Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR (with Schedule SE attached) 
even if you do not otherwise have to file a federal 
income tax return.
Joint return. Even if you file a joint return, you cannot file 
a joint Schedule SE. This is true whether one spouse or 
both spouses have earnings subject to SE tax. If both of 
you have earnings subject to SE tax, each of you must 
complete a separate Schedule SE. Attach both schedules 
to the joint return.
More than one business.  If you have more than one 
trade or business, you must combine the net profit (or 
loss) from each business to figure your SE tax. A loss from 
one business will reduce your profit from another busi-
ness. File one Schedule SE showing the earnings from 
self-employment, but file a separate Schedule C or F for 
each business.
CAUTION
!
Example. You are the sole proprietor of two separate 
businesses. You operate a restaurant that made a net 
profit of $25,000. You also have a cabinetmaking busi-
ness that had a net loss of $500. You must file a Sched-
ule C for the restaurant showing your net profit of $25,000 
and another Schedule C for the cabinetmaking business 
showing your net loss of $500. You file one Schedule SE 
showing total earnings subject to SE tax of $24,500.
Schedule SE (Form 1040), Part III, 
Maximum Deferral of 
Self-Employment Tax Payments
There is a new Part III to Schedule SE to allow self -em-
ployed persons to figure a maximum amount of SE tax 
payments which may be deferred and paid later. All maxi-
mum deferral amounts will be carried to Schedule 3 (Form 
1040), and the total amount that you may elect to defer 
may be further reduced.
Calendar year filers.  For this new Part III, you can use 
any reasonable method to divide the net profit or (loss) 
you had from your business between (a) January 1, 2020, 
through March 26, 2020, and (b) March 27, 2020, through 
December 31, 2020.
A reasonable method will accurately reflect the time 
when income was earned or accrued and deductible ex-
penses were paid or incurred, depending on your method 
of accounting. In most cases, a proportional division of the 
amount reported on line 3 based upon the number of days 
in each period will be considered reasonable.
Fiscal year filers.  If your tax year is not a calendar year, 
then divide amounts on line 3 between (a) the beginning 
of your tax year through March 26, 2020, and (b) March 
27, 2020, through the end of your tax year.
11.
Your Rights as a 
Taxpayer
The first part of this chapter explains some of your most 
important rights as a taxpayer. The second part explains 
the examination, appeal, collection, and refund pro-
cesses.
Taxpayer Bill of Rights
All taxpayers have fundamental rights they should be 
aware of when dealing with the IRS. The Taxpayer Bill of 
Rights, which the IRS adopted in June of 2014, takes ex-
isting rights in the tax code and groups them into the fol-
lowing 10 broad categories, making them easier to 
Page 44  Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer

Page 45 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
understand. Explore your rights and our obligations to pro-
tect them.
The right to be informed.  Taxpayers have the right to 
know what they need to do to comply with the tax laws. 
They are entitled to clear explanations of the laws and IRS 
procedures in all tax forms, instructions, publications, noti-
ces, and correspondence. They have the right to be in-
formed of IRS decisions about their tax accounts and to 
receive clear explanations of the outcomes.
The right to quality service. Taxpayers have the right to 
receive prompt, courteous, and professional assistance in 
their dealings with the IRS, to be spoken to in a way they 
can easily understand, to receive clear and easily under-
standable communications from the IRS, and to speak to 
a supervisor about inadequate service.
The right to pay no more than the correct amount of 
tax. Taxpayers have the right to pay only the amount of 
tax legally due, including interest and penalties, and to 
have the IRS apply all tax payments properly.
The right to challenge the IRS’s position and be 
heard. Taxpayers have the right to raise objections and 
provide additional documentation in response to formal 
IRS actions or proposed actions, to expect that the IRS 
will consider their timely objections and documentation 
promptly and fairly, and to receive a response if the IRS 
does not agree with their position.
The right to appeal an IRS decision in an independ-
ent forum. Taxpayers are entitled to a fair and impartial 
administrative appeal of most IRS decisions, including 
many penalties, and have the right to receive a written re-
sponse regarding the Office of Appeals' decision. Taxpay-
ers generally have the right to take their cases to court.
The right to finality.  Taxpayers have the right to know 
the maximum amount of time they have to challenge the 
IRS’s position as well as the maximum amount of time the 
IRS has to audit a particular tax year or collect a tax debt. 
Taxpayers have the right to know when the IRS has fin-
ished an audit.
The right to privacy. Taxpayers have the right to expect 
that any IRS inquiry, examination, or enforcement action 
will comply with the law and be no more intrusive than 
necessary, and will respect all due process rights, includ-
ing search and seizure protections, and will provide, 
where applicable, a collection due process hearing.
The right to confidentiality. Taxpayers have the right to 
expect that any information they provide to the IRS will not 
be disclosed unless authorized by the taxpayer or by law. 
Taxpayers have the right to expect appropriate action will 
be taken against employees, return preparers, and others 
who wrongfully use or disclose taxpayer return informa-
tion.
The right to retain representation. Taxpayers have the 
right to retain an authorized representative of their choice 
to represent them in their dealings with the IRS. Taxpay-
ers have the right to seek assistance from a Low Income 
Taxpayer Clinic if they cannot afford representation.
The right to a fair and just tax system.  Taxpayers 
have the right to expect the tax system to consider facts 
and circumstances that might affect their underlying liabili-
ties, ability to pay, or ability to provide information timely. 
Taxpayers have the right to receive assistance from the 
Taxpayer Advocate Service if they are experiencing finan-
cial difficulty or if the IRS has not resolved their tax issues 
properly and timely through its normal channels.
Examinations, Appeals, 
Collections, and Refunds
Examinations (audits).  We accept most taxpayers' re-
turns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it for 
examination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest. 
The inquiry or examination may or may not result in more 
tax. We may close your case without change or you may 
receive a refund.
The process of selecting a return for examination usu-
ally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computer 
programs to identify returns that may have incorrect 
amounts. These programs may be based on information 
returns, such as Forms 1099 and W -2, on studies of past 
examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli-
ance projects. Second, we use information from outside 
sources that indicates that a return may have incorrect 
amounts. These sources may include newspapers, public 
records, and individuals. If we determine that the informa-
tion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a re-
turn for examination.
Pub. 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights, and 
Claims for Refund, explains the rules and procedures that 
we follow in examinations. The following sections give an 
overview of how we conduct examinations.
By mail. We handle many examinations and inquiries 
by mail. We will send you a letter with either a request for 
more information or a reason why we believe a change to 
your return may be needed. You can respond by mail or 
you can request a personal interview with an examiner. If 
you mail us the requested information or provide an ex-
planation, we may or may not agree with you, and we will 
explain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi-
tate to write to us about anything you do not understand.
By interview. If we notify you that we will conduct your 
examination through a personal interview, or you request 
such an interview, you have the right to ask that the ex-
amination take place at a reasonable time and place that 
is convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examiner 
proposes any changes to your return, he or she will ex-
plain the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with 
these changes, you can meet with the examiner's supervi-
sor.
Repeat examinations. If we examined your return for 
the same items in either of the 2 previous years and pro-
posed no change to your tax liability, please contact us as 
Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer  Page 45

Page 46 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinue 
the examination.
Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner's pro-
posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals Of-
fice of the IRS. Most differences can be settled without ex-
pensive and time -consuming court trials. Your appeal 
rights are explained in detail in both Pub. 5, Your Appeal 
Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don't Agree, 
and Pub. 556.
If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagree 
with its findings, you may be able to take your case to the 
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S. 
District Court where you live. If you take your case to 
court, the IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts 
if you kept adequate records to show your tax liability, co-
operated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. 
If the court agrees with you on most issues in your case 
and finds that our position was largely unjustified, you may 
be able to recover some of your administrative and litiga-
tion costs. You will not be eligible to recover these costs 
unless you tried to resolve your case administratively, in-
cluding going through the appeals system, and you gave 
us the information necessary to resolve the case.
Collections. Pub. 594, The IRS Collection Process, ex-
plains your rights and responsibilities regarding payment 
of federal taxes. It describes the following.
• What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what to 
do if you get a tax bill and what to do if you think your 
bill is wrong. It also covers making installment pay-
ments, delaying collection action, and submitting an 
offer in compromise.
• IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing a lien, 
levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, and re-
lease of property.
• IRS certification to the State Department of a seriously 
delinquent tax debt, which will generally result in de-
nial of a passport application and may lead to revoca-
tion of a passport.
Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail in 
Pub. 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
Innocent spouse relief.  Generally, both you and your 
spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for paying 
the full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on 
your joint return. To seek relief from any liability related to 
your spouse (or former spouse), you must file a claim on 
Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief. In some 
cases, Form 8857 may need to be filed within 2 years of 
the date on which the IRS first attempted to collect the tax 
from you. Do not file Form 8857 with your Form 1040 or 
1040-SR. For more information, see Pub. 971, Innocent 
Spouse Relief, and Form 8857, or you can call the Inno-
cent Spouse office toll free at 855-851-2009.
Potential third party contacts.  Generally, the IRS will 
deal directly with you or your duly authorized representa-
tive. However, we sometimes talk with other persons if we 
need information that you have been unable to provide, or 
to verify information we have received. If we do contact 
other persons, such as a neighbor, bank, employer, or 
employees, we will generally need to tell them limited in-
formation, such as your name. The law prohibits us from 
disclosing any more information than is necessary to ob-
tain or verify the information we are seeking. Our need to 
contact other persons may continue as long as there is 
activity in your case. If we do contact other persons, you 
have a right to request a list of those contacted. Your re-
quest can be made by telephone, in writing, or during a 
personal interview.
Refunds. You can file a claim for refund if you think you 
paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim within 
3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2 
years from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later. 
The law generally provides for interest on your refund if it 
is not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return 
or claim for refund. Pub. 556 has more information on re-
funds.
If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, 
you must file within 3 years from the date the return was 
due (including extensions) to get that refund.
12.
How To Get More 
Information
This section describes the help the IRS and other federal 
agencies offer to taxpayers who operate their own busi-
nesses.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue, need help prepar-
ing your tax return, or want to download free publications, 
forms, or instructions, go to IRS.gov and find resources 
that can help you right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After receiving all 
your wage and earnings statements (Form W -2, W -2G, 
1099-R, 1099 -MISC, 1099 -NEC, etc.); unemployment 
compensation statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 1099 -G); 
and interest, dividend, and retirement statements from 
banks and investment firms (Forms 1099), you have sev-
eral options to choose from to prepare and file your tax re-
turn. You can prepare the tax return yourself, see if you 
qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax professional to 
prepare your return.
Free options for tax preparation.  Go to IRS.gov to see 
your options for preparing and filing your return online or 
Page 46  Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 47 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in your local community, if you qualify, which include the 
following.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare and file your 
federal individual income tax return for free using 
brand-name tax-preparation-and-filing software or 
Free File fillable forms. However, state tax preparation 
may not be available through Free File. Go to IRS.gov/
FreeFile to see if you qualify for free online federal tax 
preparation, e-filing, and direct deposit or payment op-
tions.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) 
program offers free tax help to people with 
low-to-moderate incomes, persons with disabilities, 
and limited-English-speaking taxpayers who need 
help preparing their own tax returns. Go to IRS.gov/
VITA, download the free IRS2Go app, or call 
800-906-9887 for information on free tax return prepa-
ration.
• TCE. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) pro-
gram offers free tax help for all taxpayers, particularly 
those who are 60 years of age and older. TCE volun-
teers specialize in answering questions about pen-
sions and retirement-related issues unique to seniors. 
Go to IRS.gov/TCE, download the free IRS2Go app, 
or call 888-227-7669 for information on free tax return 
preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed Forces and 
qualified veterans may use MilTax, a free tax service 
offered by the Department of Defense through Military 
OneSource.
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable Forms, which can 
be completed online and then filed electronically re-
gardless of income.
Using online tools to help prepare your return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Tools for the following.
• The Earned Income Tax Credit Assistant (IRS.gov/
EITCAssistant) determines if you’re eligible for the 
earned income credit (EIC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) helps you 
get an employer identification number (EIN).
• The Tax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/W4app) 
makes it easier for everyone to pay the correct amount 
of tax during the year. The tool is a convenient, online 
way to check and tailor your withholding. It’s more 
user-friendly for taxpayers, including retirees and 
self-employed individuals. The features include the 
following.
– Easy to understand language.
– The ability to switch between screens, correct pre-
vious entries, and skip screens that don’t apply.
– Tips and links to help you determine if you qualify 
for tax credits and deductions.
– A progress tracker.
– A self-employment tax feature.
– Automatic calculation of taxable social security ben-
efits.
• The First Time Homebuyer Credit Account Look-up 
(IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool provides information on 
your repayments and account balance.
• The Sales Tax Deduction Calculator (IRS.gov/
SalesTax) figures the amount you can claim if you 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax questions.  On 
IRS.gov, you can get up -to-date information on 
current events and changes in tax law.
• IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to help you get an-
swers to some of the most common tax questions.
• IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive Tax Assistant, a tool that 
will ask you questions on a number of tax law topics 
and provide answers.
• IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instructions, and publica-
tions. You will find details on 2020 tax changes and 
hundreds of interactive links to help you find answers 
to your questions.
• You may also be able to access tax law information in 
your electronic filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return?  There are 
various types of tax return preparers, including tax prepar-
ers, enrolled agents, certified public accountants (CPAs), 
attorneys, and many others who don’t have professional 
credentials. If you choose to have someone prepare your 
tax return, choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax pre-
parer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall substantive accu-
racy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax identification 
number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs the return, 
you're ultimately responsible for providing all the informa-
tion required for the preparer to accurately prepare your 
return. Anyone paid to prepare tax returns for others 
should have a thorough understanding of tax matters. For 
more information on how to choose a tax preparer, go to 
Tips for Choosing a Tax Preparer on IRS.gov.
Coronavirus. Go to IRS.gov/Coronavirus for links to in-
formation on the impact of the coronavirus, as well as tax 
relief available for individuals and families, small and large 
businesses, and tax-exempt organizations.
Tax reform.  Tax reform legislation affects individuals, 
businesses, and tax -exempt and government entities. Go 
to IRS.gov/TaxReform for information and updates on 
how this legislation affects your taxes.
Employers can register to use Business Services On-
line. The Social Security Administration (SSA) offers on-
line service at SSA.gov/employer for fast, free, and secure 
online W -2 filing options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled 
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information  Page 47

Page 48 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
agents, and individuals who process Form W -2, Wage 
and Tax Statement, and Form W-2c, Corrected Wage and 
Tax Statement.
IRS social media. Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia to see the 
various social media tools the IRS uses to share the latest 
information on tax changes, scam alerts, initiatives, prod-
ucts, and services. At the IRS, privacy and security are 
paramount. We use these tools to share public informa-
tion with you. Don’t post your SSN or other confidential in-
formation on social media sites. Always protect your iden-
tity when using any social networking site.
The following IRS YouTube channels provide short, in-
formative videos on various tax -related topics in English, 
Spanish, and ASL.
• Youtube.com/irsvideos.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSVideos.gov) contains video and audio presentations 
for individuals, small businesses, and tax professionals.
Online tax information in other languages.  You can 
find information on IRS.gov/MyLanguage if English isn’t 
your native language.
Free interpreter service.  Multilingual assistance, provi-
ded by the IRS, is available at Taxpayer Assistance Cen-
ters (TACs) and other IRS offices. Over -the-phone inter-
preter service is accessible in more than 350 languages.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to IRS.gov/
Forms to view, download, or print all of the forms, instruc-
tions, and publications you may need. You can also down-
load and view popular tax publications and instructions 
(including the Instructions for Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR) 
on mobile devices as an eBook at IRS.gov/eBooks. Or 
you can go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to place an order.
Access your online account (individual taxpayers 
only). Go to IRS.gov/Account to securely access infor-
mation about your federal tax account.
• View the amount you owe, pay online, or set up an on-
line payment agreement.
• Access your tax records online.
• Review your payment history.
• Go to IRS.gov/SecureAccess to review the required 
identity authentication process.
Using direct deposit.  The fastest way to receive a tax 
refund is to file electronically and choose direct deposit, 
which securely and electronically transfers your refund di-
rectly into your financial account. Direct deposit also 
avoids the possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
or returned undeliverable to the IRS. Eight in 10 taxpayers 
use direct deposit to receive their refunds. The IRS issues 
more than 90% of refunds in less than 21 days.
Getting a transcript of your return.  The quickest way 
to get a copy of your tax transcript is to go to IRS.gov/
Transcripts. Click on either “Get Transcript Online” or “Get 
Transcript by Mail” to order a free copy of your transcript. 
If you prefer, you can order your transcript by calling 
800-908-9946.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related identity 
theft issues. 
• Tax-related identity theft happens when someone 
steals your personal information to commit tax fraud. 
Your taxes can be affected if your SSN is used to file a 
fraudulent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with taxpayers by 
email, text messages, telephone calls, or social media 
channels to request personal or financial information. 
This includes requests for personal identification num-
bers (PINs), passwords, or similar information for 
credit cards, banks, or other financial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Identity Theft 
Central webpage, for information on identity theft and 
data security protection for taxpayers, tax professio-
nals, and businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of tax-related 
identity theft, you can learn what steps you should 
take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP PINs are 
six-digit numbers assigned to eligible taxpayers to 
help prevent the misuse of their SSNs on fraudulent 
federal income tax returns. When you have an IP PIN, 
it prevents someone else from filing a tax return with 
your SSN. To learn more, go to IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Checking on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• The IRS can’t issue refunds before mid-February 2021 
for returns that claimed the EIC or the additional child 
tax credit (ACTC). This applies to the entire refund, 
not just the portion associated with these credits.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your mobile de-
vice to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 800-829-1954.
Making a tax payment.  The IRS uses the latest encryp-
tion technology to ensure your electronic payments are 
safe and secure. You can make electronic payments on-
line, by phone, and from a mobile device using the 
IRS2Go app. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and 
faster than mailing in a check or money order. Go to 
IRS.gov/Payments for information on how to make a pay-
ment using any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill or estima-
ted tax payment directly from your checking or sav-
ings account at no cost to you.
• Debit or Credit Card: Choose an approved payment 
processor to pay online, by phone, or by mobile de-
vice.
Page 48  Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 49 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Offered only when filing 
your federal taxes using tax return preparation soft-
ware or through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal Tax Payment System: Best option 
for businesses. Enrollment is required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment to the ad-
dress listed on the notice or instructions.
• Cash: You may be able to pay your taxes with cash at 
a participating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: You may be able to do same-day 
wire from your financial institution. Contact your finan-
cial institution for availability, cost, and cut-off times.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/Payments for 
more information about your options.
• Apply for an online payment agreement (IRS.gov/
OPA) to meet your tax obligation in monthly install-
ments if you can’t pay your taxes in full today. Once 
you complete the online process, you will receive im-
mediate notification of whether your agreement has 
been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier to see if 
you can settle your tax debt for less than the full 
amount you owe. For more information on the Offer in 
Compromise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  You can now file Form 
1040-X electronically with tax filing software to amend 
2019 Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR. To do so, you must have 
e-filed your original 2019 return. Amended returns for all 
prior years must be mailed. See Tips for taxpayers who 
need to file an amended tax return  and go to IRS.gov/
Form1040X for information and updates.
Checking the status of your amended return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status of Form 1040 -X amen-
ded returns. Please note that it can take up to 3 weeks 
from the date you filed your amended return for it to show 
up in our system, and processing it can take up to 16 
weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter you’ve re-
ceived. Go to IRS.gov/Notices to find additional informa-
tion about responding to an IRS notice or letter.
Contacting your local IRS office.  Keep in mind, many 
questions can be answered on IRS.gov without visiting an 
IRS Taxpayer Assistance Center (TAC). Go to IRS.gov/
LetUsHelp for the topics people ask about most. If you still 
need help, IRS TACs provide tax help when a tax issue 
can’t be handled online or by phone. All TACs now pro-
vide service by appointment, so you’ll know in advance 
that you can get the service you need without long wait 
times. Before you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to find 
the nearest TAC and to check hours, available services, 
and appointment options. Or, on the IRS2Go app, under 
the Stay Connected tab, choose the Contact Us option 
and click on “Local Offices.”
The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) 
Is Here To Help You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organization within the IRS that 
helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer rights. Their job is 
to ensure that every taxpayer is treated fairly and that you 
know and understand your rights under the Taxpayer Bill 
of Rights.
How Can You Learn About Your Taxpayer 
Rights?
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic rights that 
all taxpayers have when dealing with the IRS. Go to 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to help you understand what 
these rights mean to you and how they apply. These are 
your rights. Know them. Use them.
What Can TAS Do For You?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you can’t resolve 
with the IRS. And their service is free. If you qualify for 
their assistance, you will be assigned to one advocate 
who will work with you throughout the process and will do 
everything possible to resolve your issue. TAS can help 
you if:
• Your problem is causing financial difficulty for you, 
your family, or your business;
• You face (or your business is facing) an immediate 
threat of adverse action; or
• You’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS but no one 
has responded, or the IRS hasn’t responded by the 
date promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of Columbia, 
and Puerto Rico . Your local advocate’s number is in your 
local directory and at TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/
Contact-Us. You can also call them at 877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale problems that affect 
many taxpayers. If you know of one of these broad issues, 
please report it to them at IRS.gov/SAMS.
TAS for Tax Professionals
TAS can provide a variety of information for tax professio-
nals, including tax law updates and guidance, TAS pro-
grams, and ways to let TAS know about systemic prob-
lems you’ve seen in your practice.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the IRS. LITCs represent in-
dividuals whose income is below a certain level and need 
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information  Page 49

Page 50 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to resolve tax problems with the IRS, such as audits, ap-
peals, and tax collection disputes. In addition, clinics can 
provide information about taxpayer rights and responsibili-
ties in different languages for individuals who speak Eng-
lish as a second language. Services are offered for free or 
a small fee for eligible taxpayers. To find a clinic near you, 
visit www.TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/about-us/Low-
Income-Taxpayer-Clinics-LITC/ or see IRS Pub. 4134, 
Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List.
Small Business Administration
The Small Business Administration (SBA) offers training 
and educational programs, counseling services, financial 
programs, and contract assistance for small business 
owners. The SBA also has publications and videos on a 
variety of business topics. The following briefly describes 
assistance provided by the SBA.
Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs). 
SBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical serv-
ices to current and prospective small business owners 
who cannot afford the services of a private consultant. 
Help is available when beginning, improving, or expand-
ing a small business.
Business Information Centers (BICs).  BICs offer a 
small business reference library, management video-
tapes, and computer technology to help plan a business. 
BICs also offer one -on-one assistance. Individuals who 
are in business or are interested in starting a business can 
use BICs as often as they wish at no charge.
Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE). 
SCORE provides small business counseling and training 
to current and prospective small business owners. 
SCORE is made up of current and former business people 
who offer their expertise and knowledge to help people 
start, manage, and expand a small business. SCORE also 
offers a variety of small business workshops.
Internet. You can visit the SBA website at SBA.gov. 
While visiting the SBA website, you can find a variety of 
information of interest to small business owners.
Phone. Call the SBA Answer Desk at 800 -U-ASK-SBA 
(800-827-5722) for general information about programs 
available to assist small business owners.
Walk-in. You can walk in to an SBDC or BIC to request 
assistance with your small business. To find the location 
nearest you, visit the SBA website or call the SBA Answer 
Desk.
Other Federal Agencies
Other federal agencies also publish publications and pam-
phlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-
able from the Superintendent of Documents at the Gov-
ernment Printing Office. You can get information and 
order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.
Internet. You can visit the GPO website at
Catalog.GPO.gov.
Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.
Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Office
P.O. Box 979050
St. Louis, MO 63917-9000
Phone. Call the GPO toll free at 866 -512-1800 or at 
202-512-1800 from the Washington, DC, area.
Page 50  Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 51 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
A
Accounting method:
Accrual 14, 31
Automatic procedures 16
Cash 13, 31
Change in 16
Combination 15
Special 16
Accounting periods 12
Accrual method:
Income - general rule 14
Income - special rules 14
Of accounting 14
Adjusted basis 17
Administrator 25
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling 
property credit 18
Alternative motor vehicle credit 18
Appeal rights 46
Appreciation 24
Assistance (See Tax help)
Audits 45
Automobile (See Car expenses)
B
Bad debts 31
Barter income 20
Basis of property 17
Biodiesel and renewable diesel 
fuels credit 18
Biofuel producer credit 18
Bribes 39
Business expenses 30
Business income 20
Business use of your home 37
C
Canceled debt 22
Cancellation of qualified real 
property business debt 23
Capital gain or loss 18
Carbon dioxide sequestration 
credit 18
Car expenses 31, 32
Cash discount 27, 28
Cash method:
Expenses 14
Income 13
Charitable contributions 39
Child employed by parent 40
Claim for refund 46
Collection of tax 46
Combination method of 
accounting 15
Condemned property 18
Consignments 24
Construction allowances 24
Cost of goods sold 27
Credit:
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling 
property 18
Alternative motor vehicle 18
Biodiesel and renewable diesel 
fuels credit 18
Biofuel producer credit 18
Carbon dioxide sequestration 18
Credit for employer differential 
wage payments 19
Credit for increasing research 
activities 19
Disabled access 19
Distilled spirits 19
Employer credit for family and 
medical leave 19
Employer-provided childcare 19
Empowerment zone employment 
credit 19
Energy efficient home credit 19
How to claim 20
Indian coal 19
Indian employment credit 19
Investment 19
Low-income housing 19
Low sulfur diesel fuel 
production 19
Mine rescue team training 
credit 19
New markets 19
Orphan drug 19
Qualified plug-in electric drive 
motor vehicle 19
Qualified railroad track 
maintenance credit 19
Refined coal 19
Renewable electricity 19
Small employer health insurance 
premiums 19
Small employer pension plan 
startup costs 19
Taxes paid on certain employee 
tips 19
Work opportunity credit 20
Credit for employer differential 
wage payments 19
Credit for increasing research 
activities 19
D
Damages 24
Debt:
Bad 31
Canceled 22
Qualified real property business 23
Refund offset against 7
Definitions 3
Accounting methods 13
Accounting periods 12
Barter 20
Basis 17
Business bad debt 31
Calendar tax year 12
Cash discount 27, 28
Disposition of property 17
Drawing account 28
Fair market value 17
Fiscal tax year 13
Fringe benefit 34
Local transportation expenses 31
Necessary expense 31
Net operating loss 40
Nonbusiness bad debt 31
Ordinary expense 31
Principal place of business 38
Qualified long-term real 
property 25
Qualified real property business 
debt 23
Rent 36
Restricted property 23
Retail space 25
Self-employment (SE) tax 9
Tax home 31
Trade discount 27, 28
Travel expenses 37
De Minimis Safe Harbor for 
Tangible Property 39
Depreciation, recapture 24
Depreciation:
Deduction 32
Listed property 33
Direct seller 25, 26
Disabled access credit 19
Disposition of property:
Business property 16
Installment sale 17, 18
Like-kind exchange 17, 18, 25
Nontaxable exchange 17
Sale of a business 17
Distilled spirits credit 19
Dividend income 22
Donation of inventory 28
Drawing account 28
Due date of return 8
Publication 334 (2020) Page 51

Page 52 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
E
Economic injury 24
e-file 6
EFTPS 8
Electronic filing 6
Employee 6
Employee benefit programs 34
Employees' pay 33
Employer identification number 
(EIN) 6
Employment taxes:
About 10
Deduction for 36
Empowerment zone employment 
credit 19
Energy efficient home credit 19
Entertainment 
expenses (See Travel expenses)
Escrow, payments placed in 27
Estimated tax 8
Examinations (audits) 45
Excise taxes:
About 10
Deduction for 37
Executor 25
Expenses 30
Bad debts 31
Car 31
Depreciation 32
Employees' pay 33
Entertainment 37
Home, business use 37
Insurance 34
Interest 35
Legal and professional fees 35
Meals 37
Nondeductible 39
Other 39
Pension plans 35
Rent 36
Taxes 36
Travel 37
Truck 31
F
Fair market value 17
Filing business taxes 5
Fishing crew member 25, 40
Form:
Form :
1040 (tax return) 6, 10
1040-ES (estimated tax) 8, 10
1040-SR (tax return) 6, 10
1040-V (voucher) 7
1099-B (barter) 21
1099-MISC (miscellaneous) 11
1099-NEC (nonemployee 
compensation) 11
1128 (change tax year) 13
2210 (underpayment of estimated 
tax) 8
2290 (excise tax for heavy 
trucks) 11
3115 (change accounting 
method) 16
3468 (investment credit) 19
3800 (general business credit) 18
4562 (depreciation) 33
4684 (casualty and theft) 18
4797 (sale of business 
property) 18, 24
4868 (extension) 8
6251 (alternative minimum tax) 18
6252 (installment sale) 18
720 (excise tax return) 10
8300 (cash payments over 
$10,000) 11
8586 (low-income housing) 19
8594 (asset acquisition) 17
8820 (orphan drug credit) 19
8824 (like-kind exchange) 17, 18
8826 (disabled access credit) 19
8829 (business in home) 38
8835 (renewable electricity, coal 
credit) 19
8846 (credit for social security on 
tip income) 19
8857 (innocent spouse) 46
8874 (new markets credit) 19
8879 (self-selected PIN) 7
8881 (pension plan startup costs 
credit) 19
8882 (employer-provided childcare 
credit) 19
8886 (transaction statement) 5
8896 (low sulfur diesel fuel 
production credit) 19
8906 (distilled spirits credit) 19
8910 (alternative vehicle credit) 18
8911 (alternative fuel refueling 
property credit) 18
8933 (carbon dioxide sequestration 
credit) 18
8936 (qualified plug-in electric drive 
motor vehicle) 19
8941 (small employer health 
insurance premiums) 19
8994 (Employer credit for paid 
family and medical leave) 19
940 (unemployment tax) 10
941 (quarterly employment tax) 10
944 (annual employment tax) 10
982 (discharge of 
indebtedness) 22
Final 12
Information returns 10
Schedule C (sole proprietor) 10
Schedule SE (self-employment 
tax) 9, 10
SS-4 (application for EIN) 6
SS-5 (application for SSN) 6
W-2 (report wages) 10, 11
W-3 (transmittal of W-2) 10
W-4 (employee withholding) 6
W-7 (application for ITIN) 6
W-9 (request for TIN) 6
When to file 10
Which to file 10
Fringe benefits 34
Fuel taxes 37
G
Gains and losses 23
General business credits 18
Gross profit:
Accuracy 30
Additions to 30
Guidelines for selected 
occupations 25
 (See also Occupations, selected)
H
Home, business use of 37
Hotels, boarding houses, and 
apartments 21
Husband and wife business 3
I
Identification numbers 5
Income 24
 (See also Not income)
Accounting for your 26
Barter 20
Business 20
Damages 24
Gains and losses 23
Kickbacks 24
Kinds of income 20
Lost income payments 23
Other 23
Paid to a third party 26
Personal property rent 22
Promissory notes 23
Recapture of depreciation 24
Recovery of items previously 
deducted 24
Rental 21, 22
Restricted property 23
Income tax:
About 6
Deduction for 36
How to pay 8
Underpayment penalty 8
Income tax return, who must file 6
Independent contractor 3, 10, 40
Indian employment credit 19
Individual taxpayer identification 
number (ITIN) 6
Information, How to get more 46
Page 52 Publication 334 (2020)

Page 53 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Information returns 11
Innocent spouse relief 46
Installment sales 17
Insurance:
Expense 34
Nondeductible premiums 34
Prepayment 35
Proceeds 27
Insurance agent:
Former 25
Retired 26
Interest:
Expenses 35
Income 22
Inventories 15
Investment credit 19
K
Kickbacks 24, 39
L
Lease bonus 21
Lease cancellation payments 21
Legal fees 35
Like-kind exchanges 17, 25
Limited liability company 3
Listed property 24
Lobbying expense 39
Local transportation expenses 31
Lodging 37
Long-term capital gain or loss 18
Lost income payments 23
Low-income housing credit 19
Low sulfur diesel fuel production 
credit 19
M
Meals (See Travel expenses)
Methods for figuring net 
earnings 41
Mileage rate for vehicles 32
Mine rescue team training 
credit 19
Motor vehicle, alternative credit 18
N
Net operating losses 40
Net profit or loss 39
New markets credit 19
Newspaper carrier or 
distributor 26
Newspaper or magazine vendor 26
Nonbusiness bad debt 31
Nondeductible insurance 
premiums 34
Nonemployee compensation 20
Nontaxable exchanges 17
Notary public 26, 41
Not-for-profit activities 40
Not income:
Appreciation 24
Consignments 24
Constructions allowances 24
Exchange of like-kind property 25
Leasehold improvements 25
Loans 25
Sales tax 25
O
Occupations, selected:
Administrator 25
Direct seller 25, 26
Executor 25
Fishing crew member 25
Insurance agent, former 25
Insurance agent, retired 26
Newspaper carrier or distributor 26
Newspaper or magazine vendor 26
Notary public 26
Public official 26
Real estate agent 26
Securities dealer 26
Securities trader 26
Office in the home 32
 (See also Business use of your 
home)
Optional methods, using both 43
Ordinary gain or loss 18
Orphan drug credit 19
P
Parking fees 32
Partners, husband and wife 3
Pay, kinds of 33
Paying:
Business taxes 5
Income tax 8
Payments to third parties 21
Penalties and fines 39
Penalty:
Failure to file Form 8300 11
Failure to file information 
returns 11
Failure to furnish correct payee 
statements 11
Underpayment of tax 8
Waiver of 11
Pension plans 35
Personal property tax 36
Prepaid expense:
Extends useful life 35
Rent 36
Professional fees 35
Promissory notes 23
Publications (See Tax help)
Public official 26
Punitive damages 24
Q
Qualified plug-in electric drive 
motor vehicle credit 19
Qualified railroad track 
maintenance credit 19
Qualified real property business 
debt 23
R
Real estate:
Agent 26
Dealer 21
Rent 21
Taxes 36
Recovery of items previously 
deducted 24
Refund:
Inquiries 7
Offsets against debts 7
Related persons:
Unreasonable rent 36
Renewable electricity, refined coal, 
and Indian coal production 
credit 19
Rental income 21
Rent expense 36
Repayment of income 14
Reportable transaction disclosure 
statement 5
Reporting self-employment tax 44
Restricted property 23
Retirement plans (See Pension 
plans)
S
Salaries 33
Sale of a business 17
Sale of property 17
 (See also Disposition of property)
Sales of assets 16
Sales tax 37
Schedule C 6
Schedule SE, filing requirement 44
Schedule SE (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR) 9
Section 179:
Deduction 33
Property 24
Securities:
Dealer 26
Trader 26
Self-employment tax (See SE tax)
SE tax:
About 9
Aliens 40
Child employed by parent 40
Church employee 40
Community property income 41
Publication 334 (2020) Page 53

Page 54 of 54  Fileid: … tions/P334/2020/A/XML/Cycle04/source 10:07 - 8-Mar-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deduction for 36
Earning credits 9
Effects of using an optional 
method 42
Farm optional method 43
Fiscal year filer 44
Fishing crew member 40
Gain or loss 41
Government employee 41
Joint return 44
Lost income payments 41
Maximum earnings:
For 2020 9
Subject to 40
Methods for figuring net 
earnings 41
More than one business 41, 44
Nonfarm optional method 42
Notary public 41
Optional methods:
Farm 43
Nonfarm 42
Rate 40
Regular method 42
Residing abroad 41
Special rules and exceptions 40
Tax rate 9
Time limit for posting income 9
Who must pay? 40
Why use an optional method 41
Settlement payments 22
Short-term capital gain or loss 18
Signature, electronic 7
Small Business Administration 50
Small employer health insurance 
premiums credit 19
Social security coverage 9
Social security number (SSN) 5
Sole proprietor 3, 40
Sport utility vehicle 33
Standard mileage rate 32
Statutory employee 3
SUV 33
T
Taxes:
Deduction for 36
Employment 10, 36
Excise 10, 37
Fuel 37
Income 6, 36
Paid on certain employee tips 19
Personal property 36
Real estate 36
Sales 37
Self-employment 9, 36
Tax help 46
Tax home 31, 37
Taxpayer rights 44
Tax preparation fees 35
Tax refund:
Claim for 46
Offset against debts 7
Tax return:
How to file 6
Who must file 6
Tax year 12
Calendar 12
Change in 13
Fiscal 13
Third parties, Payments to 21
Tolls 32
Trade discount 27, 28
Trade or business 3
Trailer park owner 21
Transportation expenses 31
Travel expenses 37
U
Underpayment of tax penalty 8
Uniform capitalization rules 16
W
Wages 33
Work opportunity credit 20
Page 54 Publication 334 (2020)