Contents
Future Developments ............ 2
What's New .................. 2
Reminder .................... 2
Introduction .................. 2
Chapter 1. Travel .............. 3
Traveling Away From Home ....... 3
Tax Home .............. 3
Tax Home Different From 
Family Home .......... 3
Temporary Assignment or Job ..... 4
What Travel Expenses Are 
Deductible? .............. 4
Meals ................ 5
Travel in the United States .... 6
Travel Outside the United 
States .............. 7
Luxury Water Travel ........ 8
Conventions ............ 9
Chapter 2. Entertainment ........ 10
Directly Related Test .......... 10
Associated Test ............ 10
50% Limit ................ 11
Exceptions to the 50% Limit ... 11
What Entertainment Expenses 
Are Deductible? .......... 12
What Entertainment Expenses 
Aren’t Deductible? ......... 13
Chapter 3. Gifts .............. 14
Chapter 4. Transportation ........ 14
Car Expenses .............. 15
Standard Mileage Rate ..... 15
Actual Car Expenses ....... 16
Leasing a Car ........... 23
Disposition of a Car .......... 24
Chapter 5. Recordkeeping ........ 25
How To Prove Expenses ....... 25
What Are Adequate 
Records? ........... 25
What if I Have Incomplete 
Records? ........... 25
Separating and Combining 
Expenses ........... 26
How Long To Keep 
Records and Receipts .... 27
Examples of Records ...... 27
Chapter 6. How To Report ........ 27
Where To Report ............ 27
Vehicle Provided by Your 
Employer ........... 29
Reimbursements ............ 29
Accountable Plans ........ 30
Nonaccountable Plans ...... 32
Rules for Independent 
Contractors and Clients ... 33
How To Use Per Diem Rate 
Tables ................ 33
The Two Substantiation 
Methods ............ 33
Transition Rules ......... 33
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 463
Cat. No. 11081L
Travel,
Entertainment,
Gift, and Car
Expenses
For use in preparing
2017 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (TiếngViệt) 
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 50  15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jan 16, 2018

Completing Forms 2106 and 
2106-EZ ............... 34
Special Rules ........... 35
How To Get Tax Help ........... 36
Appendices ................. 38
Index ..................... 49
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments 
related to Pub. 463, such as legislation enacted 
after it was published, go to IRS.gov/Pub463.
What's New
Standard mileage rate.  For 2017, the stand-
ard mileage rate for the cost of operating your 
car for business use is 53.5 cents (0.535) per 
mile. Car expenses  and use of the standard 
mileage rate are explained in chapter 4.
Depreciation limits on cars, trucks, and 
vans. For 2017, the first-year limit on the total 
depreciation deduction for cars remains at 
$11,160 ($3,160 if you elect not to claim the 
special depreciation allowance). For trucks and 
vans, the first-year limit is $11,560 ($3,560 if 
you elect not to claim the special depreciation 
allowance). Depreciation limits are explained in-
chapter 4. Also, for vehicles purchased and 
placed in service after September 27, 2017, you 
may be able to take a special depreciation al-
lowance of 100% and you may apply the de-
duction to used vehicles.
Section 179 deduction. For 2017, the section 
179 deduction limit on qualifying property pur-
chases (including cars, trucks, and vans) is a 
total of $510,000, and the limit on those purcha-
ses at which the deduction begins to be phased 
out is $2,030,000. Section 179 deduction  is ex-
plained in chapter 4.
Special depreciation allowance.  For 2017, 
the special (“bonus”) depreciation allowance on 
qualified property (including cars, trucks, and 
vans) remains at 50%. Special depreciation al-
lowance is explained in chapter 4.
Reminder
Photographs of missing children. The IRS is 
a proud partner with the National Center for 
Missing  & Exploited Children® (NCMEC) . Pho-
tographs of missing children selected by the 
Center may appear in this publication on pages 
that would otherwise be blank. You can help 
bring these children home by looking at the 
photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST 
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Per diem rates.  Current and prior per diem 
rates may be found on the U.S. General Serv-
ices Administration (GSA) website at GSA.gov/
Perdiem.
Introduction
You may be able to deduct the ordinary and 
necessary business-related expenses you have 
for:
Travel,
Entertainment,
Gifts, or
Transportation.
An ordinary expense is one that is common and 
accepted in your trade or business. A neces-
sary expense is one that is helpful and appropri-
ate for your business. An expense doesn’t have 
to be required to be considered necessary.
This publication explains:
What expenses are deductible,
How to report them on your return,
What records you need to prove your ex-
penses, and
How to treat any expense reimbursements 
you may receive.
Who should use this publication.  You 
should read this publication if you are an em-
ployee or a sole proprietor who has busi-
ness-related travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-
portation expenses.
Users of employer-provided vehicles.  If 
an employer-provided vehicle was available for 
your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener-
ally, your employer must include the value of 
the use or availability of the vehicle in your in-
come. However, there are exceptions if the use 
of the vehicle qualifies as a working condition 
fringe benefit (such as the use of a qualified 
nonpersonal use vehicle).
A working condition fringe benefit is any 
property or service provided to you by your em-
ployer for which you could deduct the cost as 
an employee business expense if you had paid 
for it.
A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is one 
that isn’t likely to be used more than minimally 
for personal purposes because of its design. 
See Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles  under 
Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4.
For information on how to report your car ex-
penses that your employer didn’t provide or re-
imburse you for (such as when you pay for gas 
and maintenance for a car your employer pro-
vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employer 
in chapter 6.
Who doesn’t need to use this publication. 
Partnerships, corporations, trusts, and employ-
ers who reimburse their employees for business 
expenses should refer to the instructions for 
their required tax forms and chapter 11 of Pub. 
535, Business Expenses, for information on de-
ducting travel, meals, and entertainment expen-
ses.
If you are an employee, you won’t need to 
read this publication if all of the following are 
true.
You fully accounted to your employer for 
your work-related expenses.
You received full reimbursement for your 
expenses.
Your employer required you to return any 
excess reimbursement and you did so.
There is no amount shown with a code L in 
box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and Tax 
Statement.
If you meet all of these conditions, there is no 
need to show the expenses or the reimburse-
ments on your return. If you would like more in-
formation on reimbursements and accounting to 
your employer, see chapter 6.
If you meet these conditions and your 
employer included reimbursements on 
your Form W-2 in error, ask your em-
ployer for a corrected Form W-2.
Volunteers. If you perform services as a 
volunteer worker for a qualified charity, you may 
be able to deduct some of your costs as a chari-
table contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Expenses 
in Giving Services in Pub. 526, Charitable Con-
tributions, for information on the expenses you 
can deduct.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and your 
suggestions for future editions.
You can send us comments through 
IRS.gov/FormComments. Or you can write to:
Internal Revenue Service
Tax Forms and Publications
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
Although we can’t respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments as 
we revise our tax forms, instructions, and publi-
cations.
Ordering forms and publications.  Visit 
IRS.gov/FormsPubs to download forms and 
publications. Otherwise, you can go to IRS.gov/
OrderForms to order current and prior-year 
forms and instructions. Your order should arrive 
within 10 business days.
Tax questions. If you have a tax question 
not answered by this publication, check 
IRS.gov and How To Get Tax Help at the end of 
this publication.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Business Expenses
How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
Itemized 
Deductions
Profit or Loss 
From Business
Net Profit 
From Business
Profit or Loss 
From Farming
Employee Business Expenses
Unreimbursed Employee 
Business Expenses
TIP
  535
  946
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
  Schedule C (Form 1040)
  Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040)
  Schedule F (Form 1040)
  2106
  2106-EZ
Page 2 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2 Publication 463 (2017)

Depreciation and Amortization
See How To Get Tax Help for information about 
getting these publications and forms.
1.
Travel
If you temporarily travel away from your tax 
home, you can use this chapter to determine if 
you have deductible travel expenses.
This chapter discusses:
Traveling away from home,
Temporary assignment or job, and
What travel expenses are deductible.
It also discusses the standard meal allowance, 
rules for travel inside and outside the United 
States, luxury water travel, and deductible con-
vention expenses.
Travel expenses defined.  For tax purposes, 
travel expenses are the ordinary and necessary 
expenses of traveling away from home for your 
business, profession, or job.
An ordinary expense is one that is common 
and accepted in your trade or business. A nec-
essary expense is one that is helpful and appro-
priate for your business. An expense doesn’t 
have to be required to be considered neces-
sary.
You will find examples of deductible travel 
expenses in Table 1-1.
Traveling Away From 
Home
You are traveling away from home if:
Your duties require you to be away from 
the general area of your tax home (defined 
later) substantially longer than an ordinary 
day's work, and
You need to sleep or rest to meet the de-
mands of your work while away from 
home.
This rest requirement isn’t satisfied by merely 
napping in your car. You don’t have to be away 
from your tax home for a whole day or from 
dusk to dawn as long as your relief from duty is 
long enough to get necessary sleep or rest.
Example 1.  You are a railroad conductor. 
You leave your home terminal on a regularly 
scheduled round-trip run between two cities 
and return home 16 hours later. During the run, 
you have 6 hours off at your turnaround point 
where you eat two meals and rent a hotel room 
to get necessary sleep before starting the return 
trip. You are considered to be away from home.
Example 2.  You are a truck driver. You 
leave your terminal and return to it later the 
same day. You get an hour off at your turn-
around point to eat. Because you aren’t off to 
get necessary sleep and the brief time off isn’t 
an adequate rest period, you aren’t traveling 
away from home.
  4562 Members of the Armed Forces.  If you are a 
member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-
nent duty assignment overseas, you aren’t trav-
eling away from home. You can’t deduct your 
expenses for meals and lodging. You can’t de-
duct these expenses even if you have to main-
tain a home in the United States for your family 
members who aren’t allowed to accompany you 
overseas. If you are transferred from one per-
manent duty station to another, you may have 
deductible moving expenses, which are ex-
plained in Pub. 521, Moving Expenses.
A naval officer assigned to permanent duty 
aboard a ship that has regular eating and living 
facilities has a tax home (explained next) 
aboard the ship for travel expense purposes.
Tax Home
To determine whether you are traveling away 
from home, you must first determine the loca-
tion of your tax home.
Generally, your tax home is your regular 
place of business or post of duty, regardless of 
where you maintain your family home. It in-
cludes the entire city or general area in which 
your business or work is located.
If you have more than one regular place of 
business, your tax home is your main place of 
business. See Main place of business or work , 
later.
If you don’t have a regular or a main place of 
business because of the nature of your work, 
then your tax home may be the place where you 
regularly live. See No main place of business or 
work, later.
If you don’t have a regular or main place of 
business or post of duty and there is no place 
where you regularly live, you are considered an 
itinerant (a transient) and your tax home is 
wherever you work. As an itinerant, you can’t 
claim a travel expense deduction because you 
are never considered to be traveling away from 
home.
Main place of business or work.  If you have 
more than one place of work, consider the fol-
lowing when determining which one is your 
main place of business or work.
The total time you ordinarily spend in each 
place.
The level of your business activity in each 
place.
Whether your income from each place is 
significant or insignificant.
Example. You live in Cincinnati where you 
have a seasonal job for 8 months each year and 
earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months in 
Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn 
$15,000. Cincinnati is your main place of work 
because you spend most of your time there and 
earn most of your income there.
No main place of business or work.  You 
may have a tax home even if you don’t have a 
regular or main place of work. Your tax home 
may be the home where you regularly live.
Factors used to determine tax home.  If 
you don’t have a regular or main place of busi-
ness or work, use the following three factors to 
determine where your tax home is.
1. You perform part of your business in the 
area of your main home and use that 
home for lodging while doing business in 
the area.
2. You have living expenses at your main 
home that you duplicate because your 
business requires you to be away from 
that home.
3. You haven’t abandoned the area in which 
both your historical place of lodging and 
your claimed main home are located; you 
have a member or members of your family 
living at your main home; or you often use 
that home for lodging.
If you satisfy all three factors, your tax home 
is the home where you regularly live. If you sat-
isfy only two factors, you may have a tax home 
depending on all the facts and circumstances. If 
you satisfy only one factor, you are an itinerant; 
your tax home is wherever you work and you 
can’t deduct travel expenses.
Example 1. You are single and live in Bos-
ton in an apartment you rent. You have worked 
for your employer in Boston for a number of 
years. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-month 
executive training program. You don’t expect to 
return to work in Boston after you complete your 
training.
During your training, you don’t do any work 
in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and 
on-the-job training throughout the United 
States. You keep your apartment in Boston and 
return to it frequently. You use your apartment 
to conduct your personal business. You also 
keep up your community contacts in Boston. 
When you complete your training, you are 
transferred to Los Angeles.
You don’t satisfy factor (1) because you 
didn’t work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-
cause you had duplicate living expenses. You 
also satisfy factor (3) because you didn’t aban-
don your apartment in Boston as your main 
home, you kept your community contacts, and 
you frequently returned to live in your apart-
ment. Therefore, you have a tax home in Bos-
ton.
Example 2.  You are an outside salesper-
son with a sales territory covering several 
states. Your employer's main office is in New-
ark, but you don’t conduct any business there. 
Your work assignments are temporary, and you 
have no way of knowing where your future as-
signments will be located. You have a room in 
your married sister's house in Dayton. You stay 
there for one or two weekends a year, but you 
do no work in the area. You don’t pay your sis-
ter for the use of the room.
You don’t satisfy any of the three factors lis-
ted earlier. You are an itinerant and have no tax 
home.
Tax Home Different From 
Family Home
If you (and your family) don’t live at your tax 
home (defined earlier), you can’t deduct the 
cost of traveling between your tax home and 
your family home. You also can’t deduct the 
cost of meals and lodging while at your tax 
home. See Example 1, later.
Page 3 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Travel  Page 3

If you are working temporarily in the same 
city where you and your family live, you may be 
considered as traveling away from home. See 
Example 2, later.
Example 1. You are a truck driver and you 
and your family live in Tucson. You are em-
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in 
Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you re-
turn to your home terminal in Phoenix and 
spend one night there before returning home. 
You can’t deduct any expenses you have for 
meals and lodging in Phoenix or the cost of 
traveling from Phoenix to Tucson. This is be-
cause Phoenix is your tax home.
Example 2.  Your family home is in Pitts-
burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The 
rest of the year you work for the same employer 
in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants 
and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is 
the same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-
more.
Because you spend most of your working 
time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore, 
that city is your tax home. You can’t deduct any 
expenses you have for meals and lodging 
there. However, when you return to work in 
Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax home 
even though you stay at your family home. You 
can deduct the cost of your round trip between 
Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct 
your part of your family's living expenses for 
meals and lodging while you are living and 
working in Pittsburgh.
Temporary
Assignment or Job
You may regularly work at your tax home and 
also work at another location. It may not be 
practical to return to your tax home from this 
other location at the end of each work day.
Temporary assignment vs. indefinite as-
signment. If your assignment or job away from 
your main place of work is temporary, your tax 
home doesn’t change. You are considered to 
be away from home for the whole period you 
are away from your main place of work. You 
can deduct your travel expenses if they other-
wise qualify for deduction. Generally, a tempo-
rary assignment in a single location is one that 
is realistically expected to last (and does in fact 
last) for 1 year or less.
However, if your assignment or job is indefi-
nite, the location of the assignment or job be-
comes your new tax home and you can’t deduct 
your travel expenses while there. An assign-
ment or job in a single location is considered in-
definite if it is realistically expected to last for 
more than 1 year, whether or not it actually lasts 
for more than 1 year.
If your assignment is indefinite, you must in-
clude in your income any amounts you receive 
from your employer for living expenses, even if 
they are called travel allowances and you ac-
count to your employer for them. You may be 
able to deduct the cost of relocating to your new 
tax home as a moving expense. See Pub. 521 
for more information.
Exception for federal crime investigations 
or prosecutions.  If you are a federal em-
ployee participating in a federal crime investiga-
tion or prosecution, you aren’t subject to the 
1-year rule. This means you may be able to de-
duct travel expenses even if you are away from 
your tax home for more than 1 year provided 
you meet the other requirements for deductibil-
ity.
For you to qualify, the Attorney General (or 
his or her designee) must certify that you are 
traveling:
For the federal government;
In a temporary duty status; and
To investigate, prosecute, or provide sup-
port services for the investigation or prose-
cution of a federal crime.
Determining temporary or indefinite.  You 
must determine whether your assignment is 
temporary or indefinite when you start work. If 
you expect an assignment or job to last for 1 
year or less, it is temporary unless there are 
facts and circumstances that indicate other-
wise. An assignment or job that is initially tem-
porary may become indefinite due to changed 
circumstances. A series of assignments to the 
same location, all for short periods but that to-
gether cover a long period, may be considered 
an indefinite assignment.
The following examples illustrate whether an 
assignment or job is temporary or indefinite.
Example 1. You are a construction worker. 
You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. You 
are a member of a trade union in Los Angeles 
that helps you get work in the Los Angeles area. 
Your tax home is Los Angeles. Because of a 
shortage of work, you took a job on a construc-
tion project in Fresno. Your job was scheduled 
to end in 8 months. The job actually lasted 10 
months.
You realistically expected the job in Fresno 
to last 8 months. The job actually did last less 
than 1 year. The job is temporary and your tax 
home is still in Los Angeles.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that you realistically expec-
ted the work in Fresno to last 18 months. The 
job actually was completed in 10 months.
Your job in Fresno is indefinite because you 
realistically expected the work to last longer 
than 1 year, even though it actually lasted less 
than 1 year. You can’t deduct any travel expen-
ses you had in Fresno because Fresno became 
your tax home.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that you realistically expec-
ted the work in Fresno to last 9 months. After 8 
months, however, you were asked to remain for 
7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15 
months).
Initially, you realistically expected the job in 
Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, due 
to changed circumstances occurring after 8 
months, it was no longer realistic for you to ex-
pect that the job in Fresno would last for 1 year 
or less. You can deduct only your travel expen-
ses for the first 8 months. You can’t deduct any 
travel expenses you had after that time because 
Fresno became your tax home when the job be-
came indefinite.
Going home on days off.  If you go back to 
your tax home from a temporary assignment on 
your days off, you aren’t considered away from 
home while you are in your hometown. You 
can’t deduct the cost of your meals and lodging 
there. However, you can deduct your travel ex-
penses, including meals and lodging, while 
traveling between your temporary place of work 
and your tax home. You can claim these expen-
ses up to the amount it would have cost you to 
stay at your temporary place of work.
If you keep your hotel room during your visit 
home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel 
room. In addition, you can deduct your expen-
ses of returning home up to the amount you 
would have spent for meals had you stayed at 
your temporary place of work.
Probationary work period.  If you take a job 
that requires you to move, with the understand-
ing that you will keep the job if your work is sat-
isfactory during a probationary period, the job is 
indefinite. You can’t deduct any of your expen-
ses for meals and lodging during the probation-
ary period.
What Travel Expenses 
Are Deductible?
Once you have determined that you are travel-
ing away from your tax home, you can deter-
mine what travel expenses are deductible.
You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-
penses you have when you travel away from 
home on business. The type of expense you 
can deduct depends on the facts and your cir-
cumstances.
Table 1-1  summarizes travel expenses you 
may be able to deduct. You may have other de-
ductible travel expenses that aren’t covered 
there, depending on the facts and your circum-
stances.
When you travel away from home on 
business, you must keep records of all 
the expenses you have and any advan-
ces you receive from your employer. You can 
use a log, diary, notebook, or any other written 
record to keep track of your expenses. The 
types of expenses you need to record, along 
with supporting documentation, are described 
in Table 5-1 (see chapter 5).
Separating costs.  If you have one expense 
that includes the costs of meals, entertainment, 
and other services (such as lodging or transpor-
tation), you must allocate that expense between 
the cost of meals and entertainment and the 
cost of other services. You must have a reason-
able basis for making this allocation. For exam-
ple, you must allocate your expenses if a hotel 
includes one or more meals in its room charge.
Travel expenses for another individual.  If a 
spouse, dependent, or other individual goes 
with you (or your employee) on a business trip 
or to a business convention, you generally can’t 
deduct his or her travel expenses.
Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-
penses of someone who goes with you if that 
person:
RECORDS
Page 4 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4  Chapter 1 Travel

1. Is your employee,
2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the 
travel, and
3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the 
travel expenses.
Business associate.  If a business asso-
ciate travels with you and meets the conditions 
in (2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel 
expenses you have for that person. A business 
associate is someone with whom you could rea-
sonably expect to actively conduct business. A 
business associate can be a current or pro-
spective (likely to become) customer, client, 
supplier, employee, agent, partner, or profes-
sional advisor.
Bona fide business purpose.  A bona fide 
business purpose exists if you can prove a real 
business purpose for the individual's presence. 
Incidental services, such as typing notes or as-
sisting in entertaining customers, aren’t enough 
to make the expenses deductible.
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi-
ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda 
isn’t Jerry's employee. Linda occasionally types 
notes, performs similar services, and accompa-
nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per-
formance of these services doesn’t establish 
that her presence on the trip is necessary to the 
conduct of Jerry's business. Her expenses 
aren’t deductible.
Jerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A 
single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct 
the total cost of driving his car to and from Chi-
cago, but only $149 a day for his hotel room. If 
both Jerry and Linda use public transportation, 
Jerry can deduct only his fare.
Meals
You can deduct the cost of meals in either of 
the following situations.
It is necessary for you to stop for substan-
tial sleep or rest to properly perform your 
duties while traveling away from home on 
business.
The meal is business-related entertain-
ment.
Business-related entertainment is discussed in 
chapter 2 . The following discussion deals only 
with meals that aren’t business-related enter-
tainment.
Lavish or extravagant.  You can’t deduct ex-
penses for meals that are lavish or extravagant. 
An expense isn’t considered lavish or extrava-
gant if it is reasonable based on the facts and 
circumstances. Expenses won’t be disallowed 
merely because they are more than a fixed dol-
lar amount or take place at deluxe restaurants, 
hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.
50% limit on meals.  You can figure your 
meals expense using either of the following 
methods.
Actual cost.
The standard meal allowance.
Both of these methods are explained below. 
But, regardless of the method you use, you 
generally can deduct only 50% of the unreim-
bursed cost of your meals.
If you are reimbursed for the cost of your 
meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on 
whether your employer's reimbursement plan 
was accountable or nonaccountable. If you 
aren’t reimbursed, the 50% limit applies 
whether the unreimbursed meal expense is for 
business travel or business entertainment. 
Chapter 2 discusses the 50% limit in more de-
tail, and chapter 6 discusses accountable and 
nonaccountable plans.
Actual Cost
You can use the actual cost of your meals to fig-
ure the amount of your expense before reim-
bursement and application of the 50% deduc-
tion limit. If you use this method, you must keep 
records of your actual cost.
Standard Meal Allowance
Generally, you can use the “standard meal al-
lowance” method as an alternative to the actual 
cost method. It allows you to use a set amount 
for your daily meals and incidental expenses 
(M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac-
tual costs. The set amount varies depending on 
where and when you travel. In this publication, 
“standard meal allowance” refers to the federal 
rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount of 
standard meal allowance . If you use the stand-
ard meal allowance, you still must keep records 
to prove the time, place, and business purpose 
of your travel. See the recordkeeping rules for 
travel in chapter 5.
Incidental expenses. The term “incidental ex-
penses” means fees and tips given to porters, 
baggage carriers, hotel staff, and staff on ships.
Incidental expenses don’t include expenses 
for laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, 
lodging taxes, costs of telegrams or telephone 
calls, transportation between places of lodging 
or business and places where meals are taken, 
or the mailing cost of filing travel vouchers and 
paying employer-sponsored charge card bill-
ings.
Incidental-expenses-only method.  You can 
use an optional method (instead of actual cost) 
for deducting incidental expenses only. The 
amount of the deduction is $5 a day. You can 
use this method only if you didn’t pay or incur 
any meal expenses. You can’t use this method 
on any day that you use the standard meal al-
lowance. This method is subject to the proration 
rules for partial days. See Travel for days you 
depart and return, later in this chapter.
Note.  The incidental-expenses-only 
method isn’t subject to the 50% limit discussed 
below.
Table 1-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from 
home for business purposes.
IF you have 
expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of...
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your 
business destination. If you were provided with a free ticket or you are 
riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your 
cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise 
Ships, under Conventions, earlier, for additional rules and limits.
taxi, commuter bus, 
and airport 
limousine
fares for these and other types of transportation that take you between:
The airport or station and your hotel; and
The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, your 
business meeting place, or your temporary work location.
baggage and 
shipping
sending baggage and sample or display material between your 
regular and temporary work locations.
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home on 
business. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileage 
rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a car 
while away from home on business, you can deduct only the 
business-use portion of the expenses.
lodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long 
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform your 
duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages, taxes, and 
related tips. See Meals, later, for additional rules and limits.
cleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes business 
communication by fax machine or other communication devices.
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart.
other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your 
business travel. These expenses might include transportation to or 
from a business meal, public stenographer's fees, computer rental 
fees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer.
Page 5 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Travel  Page 5

Federal employees should refer to the 
Federal Travel Regulations at GSA.gov 
for changes affecting claims for reim-
bursement.
50% limit may apply.  If you use the standard 
meal allowance method for meal expenses and 
you aren’t reimbursed or you are reimbursed 
under a nonaccountable plan, you can gener-
ally deduct only 50% of the standard meal al-
lowance. If you are reimbursed under an ac-
countable plan and you are deducting amounts 
that are more than your reimbursements, you 
can deduct only 50% of the excess amount. 
The 50% limit  is discussed in more detail in 
chapter 2, and accountable and nonaccounta-
ble plans are discussed in chapter 6.
There is no optional standard lodging 
amount similar to the standard meal al-
lowance. Your allowable lodging ex-
pense deduction is your actual cost.
Who can use the standard meal allowance.
You can use the standard meal allowance 
whether you are an employee or self-employed, 
and whether or not you are reimbursed for your 
traveling expenses.
Use of the standard meal allowance for 
other travel.  You can use the standard meal 
allowance to figure your meal expenses when 
you travel in connection with investment and 
other income-producing property. You can also 
use it to figure your meal expenses when you 
travel for qualifying educational purposes. You 
can’t use the standard meal allowance to figure 
the cost of your meals when you travel for medi-
cal or charitable purposes.
Amount of standard meal allowance.  The 
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE 
rate. For travel in 2017, the rate for most small 
localities in the United States is $51 a day.
Most major cities and many other localities 
in the United States are designated as 
high-cost areas, qualifying for higher standard 
meal allowances.
You can find this information (organ-
ized by state) at GSA.gov/Perdiem. En-
ter a zip code or select a city and state 
for the per diem rates for the current fiscal year. 
Per diem rates for prior fiscal years are availa-
ble by using the drop-down menu.
If you travel to more than one location in one 
day, use the rate in effect for the area where 
you stop for sleep or rest. If you work in the 
transportation industry, however, see Special 
rate for transportation workers, later.
Federal government's fiscal year.  Per 
diem rates are listed by the federal govern-
ment's fiscal year which runs from October 1 to 
September 30. You can choose to use the rates 
from the 2017 fiscal year per diem tables or the 
rates from the 2018 fiscal year tables, but you 
must consistently use the same tables for all 
travel you are reporting on your income tax re-
turn for the year. See Transition Rules, later.
Standard meal allowance for areas out-
side the continental United States.  The 
standard meal allowance rates above don’t 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
apply to travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other 
location outside the continental United States. 
The Department of Defense establishes per 
diem rates for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, 
American Samoa, Guam, Midway, the Northern 
Mariana Islands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake 
Island, and other non-foreign areas outside the 
continental United States. The Department of 
State establishes per diem rates for all other 
foreign areas.
You can access per diem rates for 
non-foreign areas outside the continen-
tal United States at 
www.Defensetravel.dod.mil/site/
perdiemCalc.cfm. You can access all other for-
eign per diem rates at State.gov/travel/. Click on 
“Travel Per Diem Allowances for Foreign Areas” 
under “Foreign Per Diem Rates” to obtain the 
latest foreign per diem rates.
Special rate for transportation workers.
You can use a special standard meal allowance 
if you work in the transportation industry. You 
are in the transportation industry if your work:
Directly involves moving people or goods 
by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or 
truck; and
Regularly requires you to travel away from 
home and, during any single trip, usually 
involves travel to areas eligible for different 
standard meal allowance rates.
If this applies, you can claim a standard meal al-
lowance of $63 a day ($68 for travel outside the 
continental United States) for travel in 2017.
Using the special rate for transportation 
workers eliminates the need for you to deter-
mine the standard meal allowance for every 
area where you stop for sleep or rest. If you 
choose to use the special rate for any trip, you 
must use the special rate (and not use the regu-
lar standard meal allowance rates) for all trips 
you take that year.
Travel for days you depart and return.  For 
both the day you depart for and the day you re-
turn from a business trip, you must prorate the 
standard meal allowance (figure a reduced 
amount for each day). You can do so by one of 
two methods.
Method 1: You can claim 34 of the standard 
meal allowance.
Method 2: You can prorate using any 
method that you consistently apply and 
that is in accordance with reasonable busi-
ness practice.
Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans 
as a convention planner. In March, her em-
ployer sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, 
DC, to attend a planning seminar. She left her 
home in New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday 
and arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. Af-
ter spending 2 nights there, she flew back to 
New Orleans on Friday and arrived back home 
at 8 p.m. Jen's employer gave her a flat amount 
to cover her expenses and included it with her 
wages.
Under Method 1, Jen can claim 2 12 days of 
the standard meal allowance for Washington, 
DC: 34 of the daily rate for Wednesday and Fri-
day (the days she departed and returned), and 
the full daily rate for Thursday.
Under Method 2 , Jen could also use any 
method that she applies consistently and that is 
in accordance with reasonable business prac-
tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of the 
standard meal allowance even though a federal 
employee would have to use Method 1 and be 
limited to only 212 days.
Travel in the United States
The following discussion applies to travel in the 
United States. For this purpose, the United 
States includes the 50 states and the District of 
Columbia. The treatment of your travel expen-
ses depends on how much of your trip was 
business related and on how much of your trip 
occurred within the United States. See Part of 
Trip Outside the United States, later.
Trip Primarily for Business
You can deduct all of your travel expenses if 
your trip was entirely business related. If your 
trip was primarily for business and, while at your 
business destination, you extended your stay 
for a vacation, made a personal side trip, or had 
other personal activities, you can deduct only 
your business-related travel expenses. These 
expenses include the travel costs of getting to 
and from your business destination and any 
business-related expenses at your business 
destination.
Example. You work in Atlanta and take a 
business trip to New Orleans in May. Your busi-
ness travel totals 900 miles round trip. On your 
way home, you stop in Mobile to visit your pa-
rents. You spend $2,165 for the 9 days you are 
away from home for travel, meals, lodging, and 
other travel expenses. If you hadn’t stopped in 
Mobile, you would have been gone only 6 days, 
and your total cost would have been $1,633.50. 
You can deduct $1,633.50 for your trip, includ-
ing the cost of round-trip transportation to and 
from New Orleans. The deduction for your 
meals is subject to the 50% limit on meals men-
tioned earlier.
Trip Primarily for
Personal Reasons
If your trip was primarily for personal reasons, 
such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is a 
nondeductible personal expense. However, you 
can deduct any expenses you have while at 
your destination that are directly related to your 
business.
A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be a 
vacation even if the promoter advertises that it 
is primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-
dental business activities during a trip, such as 
viewing videotapes or attending lectures deal-
ing with general subjects, won’t change what is 
really a vacation into a business trip.
Part of Trip Outside
the United States
If part of your trip is outside the United States, 
use the rules described later in this chapter un-
der Travel Outside the United States  for that 
part of the trip. For the part of your trip that is 
Page 6 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6  Chapter 1 Travel

inside the United States, use the rules for travel 
in the United States. Travel outside the United 
States doesn’t include travel from one point in 
the United States to another point in the United 
States. The following discussion can help you 
determine whether your trip was entirely within 
the United States.
Public transportation.  If you travel by public 
transportation, any place in the United States 
where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a 
point in the United States. Once the vehicle 
leaves the last scheduled stop in the United 
States on its way to a point outside the United 
States, you apply the rules under Travel Out-
side the United States, later.
Example. You fly from New York to Puerto 
Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. Puerto 
Rico isn’t considered part of the United States 
for purposes of travel. You return to New York 
nonstop. The flight from New York to Miami is in 
the United States, so only the flight from Miami 
to Puerto Rico is outside the United States. Be-
cause there are no scheduled stops between 
Puerto Rico and New York, all of the return trip 
is outside the United States.
Private car. Travel by private car in the United 
States is travel between points in the United 
States, even though you are on your way to a 
destination outside the United States.
Example. You travel by car from Denver to 
Mexico City and return. Your travel from Denver 
to the border and from the border back to Den-
ver is travel in the United States, and the rules 
in this section apply. The rules below under 
Travel Outside the United States  apply to your 
trip from the border to Mexico City and back to 
the border.
Travel Outside
the United States
If any part of your business travel is outside the 
United States, some of your deductions for the 
cost of getting to and from your destination may 
be limited. For this purpose, the United States 
includes the 50 states and the District of Colum-
bia.
How much of your travel expenses you can 
deduct depends in part upon how much of your 
trip outside the United States was business re-
lated.
Travel Entirely for Business or
Considered Entirely for Business
You can deduct all your travel expenses of get-
ting to and from your business destination if 
your trip is entirely for business or considered 
entirely for business.
Travel entirely for business. If you travel out-
side the United States and you spend the entire 
time on business activities, you can deduct all 
of your travel expenses.
Travel considered entirely for business. 
Even if you didn’t spend your entire time on 
business activities, your trip is considered en-
tirely for business if you meet at least one of the 
following four exceptions.
Exception 1—No substantial control. 
Your trip is considered entirely for business if 
you didn’t have substantial control over arrang-
ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing 
of your trip doesn’t, by itself, mean that you 
have substantial control over arranging your 
trip.
You don’t have substantial control over your 
trip if you:
Are an employee who was reimbursed or 
paid a travel expense allowance, and
Aren’t related to your employer, or
Aren’t a managing executive.
“Related to your employer” is defined later in 
chapter 6 under Per Diem and Car Allowances.
A “managing executive” is an employee who 
has the authority and responsibility, without be-
ing subject to the veto of another, to decide on 
the need for the business travel.
A self-employed person generally has sub-
stantial control over arranging business trips.
Exception 2—Outside United States no 
more than a week. Your trip is considered en-
tirely for business if you were outside the United 
States for a week or less, combining business 
and nonbusiness activities. One week means 7 
consecutive days. In counting the days, don’t 
count the day you leave the United States, but 
do count the day you return to the United 
States.
Example. You traveled to Brussels primar-
ily for business. You left Denver on Tuesday 
and flew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew 
from New York to Brussels, arriving the next 
morning. On Thursday and Friday, you had 
business discussions, and from Saturday until 
Tuesday, you were sightseeing. You flew back 
to New York, arriving Wednesday afternoon. On 
Thursday, you flew back to Denver.
Although you were away from your home in 
Denver for more than a week, you weren’t out-
side the United States for more than a week. 
This is because the day you depart doesn’t 
count as a day outside the United States.
You can deduct your cost of the round-trip 
flight between Denver and Brussels. You can 
also deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels for 
Thursday and Friday while you conducted busi-
ness. However, you can’t deduct the cost of 
your stay in Brussels from Saturday through 
Tuesday because those days were spent on 
nonbusiness activities.
Exception 3—Less than 25% of time on 
personal activities.  Your trip is considered 
entirely for business if:
You were outside the United States for 
more than a week, and
You spent less than 25% of the total time 
you were outside the United States on 
nonbusiness activities.
For this purpose, count both the day your trip 
began and the day it ended.
Example. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo, 
where you spent 14 days on business and 5 
days on personal matters. You then flew back 
to Seattle. You spent 1 day flying in each direc-
tion.
Because only 521 (less than 25%) of your to-
tal time abroad was for nonbusiness activities, 
you can deduct as travel expenses what it 
would have cost you to make the trip if you 
hadn’t engaged in any nonbusiness activity. 
The amount you can deduct is the cost of the 
round-trip plane fare and 16 days of meals 
(subject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other re-
lated expenses.
Exception 4—Vacation not a major con-
sideration. Your trip is considered entirely for 
business if you can establish that a personal va-
cation wasn’t a major consideration, even if you 
have substantial control over arranging the trip.
Travel Primarily for Business
If you travel outside the United States primarily 
for business but spend some of your time on 
other activities, you generally can’t deduct all of 
your travel expenses. You can only deduct the 
business portion of your cost of getting to and 
from your destination. You must allocate the 
costs between your business and other activi-
ties to determine your deductible amount. See 
Travel allocation rules, later.
You don’t have to allocate your travel 
expenses if you meet one of the four 
exceptions listed earlier under Travel 
considered entirely for business . In those ca-
ses, you can deduct the total cost of getting to 
and from your destination.
Travel allocation rules. If your trip outside the 
United States was primarily for business, you 
must allocate your travel time on a day-to-day 
basis between business days and nonbusiness 
days. The days you depart from and return to 
the United States are both counted as days out-
side the United States.
To figure the deductible amount of your 
round-trip travel expenses, use the following 
fraction. The numerator (top number) is the total 
number of business days outside the United 
States. The denominator (bottom number) is 
the total number of business and nonbusiness 
days of travel.
Counting business days.  Your business 
days include transportation days, days your 
presence was required, days you spent on busi-
ness, and certain weekends and holidays.
Transportation day.  Count as a business 
day any day you spend traveling to or from a 
business destination. However, if because of a 
nonbusiness activity you don’t travel by a direct 
route, your business days are the days it would 
take you to travel a reasonably direct route to 
your business destination. Extra days for side 
trips or nonbusiness activities can’t be counted 
as business days.
Presence required.  Count as a business 
day any day your presence is required at a par-
ticular place for a specific business purpose. 
Count it as a business day even if you spend 
most of the day on nonbusiness activities.
Day spent on business.  If your principal 
activity during working hours is the pursuit of 
your trade or business, count the day as a busi-
ness day. Also, count as a business day any 
TIP
Page 7 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Travel  Page 7

day you are prevented from working because of 
circumstances beyond your control.
Certain weekends and holidays.  Count 
weekends, holidays, and other necessary 
standby days as business days if they fall be-
tween business days. But if they follow your 
business meetings or activity and you remain at 
your business destination for nonbusiness or 
personal reasons, don’t count them as business 
days.
Example 1.  Your tax home is New York 
City. You travel to Quebec, where you have a 
business appointment on Friday. You have an-
other appointment on the following Monday. 
Because your presence was required on both 
Friday and Monday, they are business days. 
Because the weekend is between business 
days, Saturday and Sunday are counted as 
business days. This is true even though you use 
the weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, or 
other nonbusiness activity.
Example 2.  If, in Example 1, you had no 
business in Quebec after Friday, but stayed un-
til Monday before starting home, Saturday and 
Sunday would be nonbusiness days.
Nonbusiness activity on the way to or from 
your business destination. If you stopped for 
a vacation or other nonbusiness activity either 
on the way from the United States to your busi-
ness destination, or on the way back to the Uni-
ted States from your business destination, you 
must allocate part of your travel expenses to the 
nonbusiness activity.
The part you must allocate is the amount it 
would have cost you to travel between the point 
where travel outside the United States begins 
and your nonbusiness destination and a return 
to the point where travel outside the United 
States ends.
You determine the nonbusiness portion of 
that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The 
numerator (top number) of the fraction is the 
number of nonbusiness days during your travel 
outside the United States and the denominator 
(bottom number) is the total number of days you 
spend outside the United States.
Example. You live in New York. On May 4, 
you flew to Paris to attend a business confer-
ence that began on May 5. The conference 
ended at noon on May 14. That evening you 
flew to Dublin where you visited with friends un-
til the afternoon of May 21, when you flew di-
rectly home to New York. The primary purpose 
for the trip was to attend the conference.
If you hadn’t stopped in Dublin, you would 
have arrived home the evening of May 14. You 
don’t meet any of the exceptions that would al-
low you to consider your travel entirely for busi-
ness. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are busi-
ness days and May 15 through May 21 (7 days) 
are nonbusiness days.
You can deduct the cost of your meals (sub-
ject to the 50% limit ), lodging, and other busi-
ness-related travel expenses while in Paris.
You can’t deduct your expenses while in 
Dublin. You also can’t deduct 718 of what it 
would have cost you to travel round trip be-
tween New York and Dublin.
You paid $750 to fly from New York to Paris, 
$400 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $700 to fly 
from Dublin back to New York. Round-trip air-
fare from New York to Dublin would have been 
$1,250.
You figure the deductible part of your air 
travel expenses by subtracting 718 of the 
round-trip fare and other expenses you would 
have had in traveling directly between New 
York and Dublin ($1,250 × 718 = $486) from your 
total expenses in traveling from New York to 
Paris to Dublin and back to New York ($750 + 
$400 + $700 = $1,850).
Your deductible air travel expense is $1,364 
($1,850 − $486).
Nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond 
business destination. If you had a vacation or 
other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond 
your business destination, you must allocate 
part of your travel expenses to the nonbusiness 
activity.
The part you must allocate is the amount it 
would have cost you to travel between the point 
where travel outside the United States begins 
and your business destination and a return to 
the point where travel outside the United States 
ends.
You determine the nonbusiness portion of 
that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The 
numerator (top number) of the fraction is the 
number of nonbusiness days during your travel 
outside the United States and the denominator 
(bottom number) is the total number of days you 
spend outside the United States.
None of your travel expenses for nonbusi-
ness activities at, near, or beyond your busi-
ness destination are deductible.
Example. Assume that the dates are the 
same as in the previous example but that in-
stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you 
fly to Venice, Italy, for a vacation.
You can’t deduct any part of the cost of your 
trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris. In 
addition, you can’t deduct 718 of the airfare and 
other expenses from New York to Paris and 
back to New York.
You can deduct 1118 of the round-trip plane 
fare and other travel expenses from New York 
to Paris, plus your meals (subject to the 50% 
limit), lodging, and any other business expen-
ses you had in Paris. (Assume these expenses 
total $4,939.) If the round-trip plane fare and 
other travel-related expenses (such as food 
during the trip) are $1,750, you can deduct 
travel costs of $1,069 ( 1118 × $1,750), plus the 
full $4,939 for the expenses you had in Paris.
Other methods. You can use another method 
of counting business days if you establish that it 
more clearly reflects the time spent on other 
than business activities outside the United 
States.
Travel Primarily for Personal 
Reasons
If you travel outside the United States primarily 
for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-
tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personal 
expense. However, if you spend some time at-
tending brief professional seminars or a con-
tinuing education program, you can deduct your 
registration fees and other expenses you have 
that are directly related to your business.
Example. The university from which you 
graduated has a continuing education program 
for members of its alumni association. This pro-
gram consists of trips to various foreign coun-
tries where academic exercises and conferen-
ces are set up to acquaint individuals in most 
occupations with selected facilities in several 
regions of the world. However, none of the con-
ferences are directed toward specific occupa-
tions or professions. It is up to each participant 
to seek out specialists and organizational set-
tings appropriate to his or her occupational in-
terests.
Three-hour sessions are held each day over 
a 5-day period at each of the selected overseas 
facilities where participants can meet with indi-
vidual practitioners. These sessions are com-
posed of a variety of activities including work-
shops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill 
development, and exercises. Professional con-
ference directors schedule and conduct the 
sessions. Participants can choose those ses-
sions they wish to attend.
You can participate in this program since 
you are a member of the alumni association. 
You and your family take one of the trips. You 
spend about 2 hours at each of the planned 
sessions. The rest of the time you go touring 
and sightseeing with your family. The trip lasts 
less than 1 week.
Your travel expenses for the trip aren’t de-
ductible since the trip was primarily a vacation. 
However, registration fees and any other inci-
dental expenses you have for the five planned 
sessions you attended that are directly related 
and beneficial to your business are deductible 
business expenses. These expenses should be 
specifically stated in your records to ensure 
proper allocation of your deductible business 
expenses.
Luxury Water Travel
If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other 
form of luxury water transportation for business 
purposes, there is a daily limit on the amount 
you can deduct. The limit is twice the highest 
federal per diem rate allowable at the time of 
your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem is 
the amount paid to federal government employ-
ees for daily living expenses when they travel 
away from home within the United States for 
business purposes.)
Daily limit on luxury water travel.  The high-
est federal per diem rate allowed and the daily 
limit for luxury water travel in 2017 is shown in 
the following table.
Page 8 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8  Chapter 1 Travel

. . 
2017 Dates
Highest 
Federal 
Per Diem
Daily Limit on 
Luxury Water 
Travel
January 1 – 
March 31
$436 $872
April 1 – April 30 380 760
May 1 – May 31 344 688
June 1 – August 
31 
368 736
September 1 – 
September 30
375 750
October 1 – 
October 31
376 752
November 1 – 
November 30 
365 730
December 1 – 
December 31 
498 996
Example. Caroline, a travel agent, traveled 
by ocean liner from New York to London, Eng-
land, on business in May. Her expense for the 
6-day cruise was $5,200. Caroline's deduction 
for the cruise can’t exceed $4,128 (6 days × 
$688 daily limit).
Meals and entertainment.  If your expenses 
for luxury water travel include separately stated 
amounts for meals or entertainment, those 
amounts are subject to the 50% limit on meals 
and entertainment before you apply the daily 
limit. For a discussion of the 50% limit , see 
chapter 2.
Example. In the previous example, Caro-
line's luxury water travel had a total cost of 
$5,200. Of that amount, $3,700 was separately 
stated as meals and entertainment. Caroline, 
who is self-employed, isn’t reimbursed for any 
of her travel expenses. Caroline figures her de-
ductible travel expenses as follows.
Meals and entertainment ..... $3,700
50% limit .................. × 0.50
Allowable meals & 
entertainment .............. $1,850
Other travel expenses ........ + 1,500
Allowable cost before the daily limit .... $3,350
Daily limit for May 2017 ....... $ 688
Times number of days ....... × 6
Maximum luxury water travel .....
deduction ........................ $4,128
Amount of allowable deduction ..... $3,350
Caroline's deduction for her cruise is limited 
to $3,350, even though the limit on luxury water 
travel is higher.
Not separately stated.  If your meal or en-
tertainment charges aren’t separately stated or 
aren’t clearly identifiable, you don’t have to allo-
cate any portion of the total charge to meals or 
entertainment.
Exceptions
The daily limit on luxury water travel  (discussed 
earlier) doesn’t apply to expenses you have to 
attend a convention, seminar, or meeting on 
board a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships, later, un-
der Conventions.
Conventions
You can deduct your travel expenses when you 
attend a convention if you can show that your 
attendance benefits your trade or business. You 
can’t deduct the travel expenses for your family.
If the convention is for investment, political, 
social, or other purposes unrelated to your 
trade or business, you can’t deduct the expen-
ses.
Your appointment or election as a dele-
gate doesn’t, in itself, determine 
whether you can deduct travel expen-
ses. You can deduct your travel expenses only 
if your attendance is connected to your own 
trade or business.
Convention agenda.  The convention agenda 
or program generally shows the purpose of the 
convention. You can show your attendance at 
the convention benefits your trade or business 
by comparing the agenda with the official duties 
and responsibilities of your position. The 
agenda doesn’t have to deal specifically with 
your official duties and responsibilities; it will be 
enough if the agenda is so related to your posi-
tion that it shows your attendance was for busi-
ness purposes.
Conventions Held Outside
the North American Area
You can’t deduct expenses for attending a con-
vention, seminar, or similar meeting held out-
side the North American area unless:
The meeting is directly related to your 
trade or business, and
It is reasonable to hold the meeting outside 
the North American area. See Reasona-
bleness test, later.
If the meeting meets these requirements, you 
also must satisfy the rules for deducting expen-
ses for business trips in general, discussed ear-
lier under Travel Outside the United States.
North American area.  The North American 
area includes the following locations.
American Samoa Jarvis Island
Antigua and Barbuda Johnston Island
Aruba Kingman Reef
Bahamas Marshall Islands
Baker Island Mexico
Barbados Micronesia
Bermuda Midway Islands
Canada Northern Mariana
Costa Rica Islands
Curaçao Palau
Dominica Palmyra Atoll
Dominican Republic Panama
Grenada Puerto Rico
Guam Saint Lucia
Guyana Trinidad and Tobago
Honduras USA
Howland Island U.S. Virgin Islands
Jamaica Wake Island
CAUTION
!
The North American area also includes U.S. is-
lands, cays, and reefs that are possessions of 
the United States and not part of the 50 states 
or the District of Columbia. See Revenue Ruling 
2016-16, available at IRS.gov/irb/2016-26_IRB/
ar09.html, for more information.
Reasonableness test.  The following factors 
are taken into account to determine if it was rea-
sonable to hold the meeting outside the North 
American area.
The purpose of the meeting and the activi-
ties taking place at the meeting.
The purposes and activities of the spon-
soring organizations or groups.
The homes of the active members of the 
sponsoring organizations and the places at 
which other meetings of the sponsoring or-
ganizations or groups have been or will be 
held.
Other relevant factors you may present.
Cruise Ships
You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of your 
expenses of attending conventions, seminars, 
or similar meetings held on cruise ships. All 
ships that sail are considered cruise ships.
You can deduct these expenses only if all of 
the following requirements are met.
1. The convention, seminar, or meeting is di-
rectly related to your trade or business.
2. The cruise ship is a vessel registered in 
the United States.
3. All of the cruise ship's ports of call are in 
the United States or in possessions of the 
United States.
4. You attach to your return a written state-
ment signed by you that includes informa-
tion about:
a. The total days of the trip (not including 
the days of transportation to and from 
the cruise ship port),
b. The number of hours each day that 
you devoted to scheduled business 
activities, and
c. A program of the scheduled business 
activities of the meeting.
5. You attach to your return a written state-
ment signed by an officer of the organiza-
tion or group sponsoring the meeting that 
includes:
a. A schedule of the business activities 
of each day of the meeting, and
b. The number of hours you attended 
the scheduled business activities.
Page 9 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Travel  Page 9

2.
Entertainment
You may be able to deduct business-related en-
tertainment expenses you have for entertaining 
a client, customer, or employee. The rules and 
definitions are summarized in Table 2-1.
You can deduct entertainment expenses only if 
they are both ordinary and necessary and meet 
one of the following tests.
Directly related test.
Associated test.
Both of these tests are explained later.
An ordinary expense is one that is common and 
accepted in your trade or business. A neces-
sary expense is one that is helpful and appropri-
ate for your business. An expense doesn’t have 
to be required to be considered necessary.
The amount you can deduct for enter-
tainment expenses may be limited. 
Generally, you can deduct only 50% of 
your unreimbursed entertainment expenses. 
This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.
Directly Related Test
To meet the directly related test for entertain-
ment expenses (including entertainment-related 
meals), you must show that:
The main purpose of the combined busi-
ness and entertainment was the active 
conduct of business,
You did engage in business with the per-
son during the entertainment period, and
You had more than a general expectation 
of getting income or some other specific 
business benefit at some future time.
Business generally isn’t considered to be 
the main purpose when business and entertain-
ment are combined on hunting or fishing trips, 
or on yachts or other pleasure boats. Even if 
you show that business was the main purpose, 
CAUTION
!
you generally can’t deduct the expenses for the 
use of an entertainment facility. See Entertain-
ment facilities  under What Entertainment Ex-
penses Aren’t Deductible, later in this chapter.
You must consider all the facts, including 
the nature of the business transacted and the 
reasons for conducting business during the en-
tertainment. It isn’t necessary to devote more 
time to business than to entertainment. How-
ever, if the business discussion is only inciden-
tal to the entertainment, the entertainment ex-
penses don’t meet the directly related test.
You don’t have to show that business 
income or other business benefit ac-
tually resulted from each entertainment 
expense.
Clear business setting.  If the entertainment 
takes place in a clear business setting and is for 
your business or work, the expenses are con-
sidered directly related to your business or 
work. The following situations are examples of 
entertainment in a clear business setting.
Entertainment in a hospitality room at a 
convention where business goodwill is cre-
ated through the display or discussion of 
business products.
Entertainment that is mainly a price rebate 
on the sale of your products (such as a 
restaurant owner providing an occasional 
free meal to a loyal customer).
Entertainment of a clear business nature 
occurring under circumstances where 
there is no meaningful personal or social 
relationship between you and the persons 
entertained. An example is entertainment 
of business and civic leaders at the open-
ing of a new hotel or play when the pur-
pose is to get business publicity rather 
than to create or maintain the goodwill of 
the persons entertained.
Expenses not considered directly related. 
Entertainment expenses generally aren’t con-
sidered directly related if you aren’t there or in 
situations where there are substantial distrac-
tions that generally prevent you from actively 
conducting business. The following are exam-
TIP
ples of situations where there are substantial 
distractions.
A meeting or discussion at a nightclub, the-
ater, or sporting event.
A meeting or discussion during what is es-
sentially a social gathering, such as a 
cocktail party.
A meeting with a group that includes per-
sons who aren’t business associates at 
places such as cocktail lounges, country 
clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacation 
resorts.
Associated Test
Even if your expenses don’t meet the directly 
related test, they may meet the associated test.
To meet the associated test for entertain-
ment expenses (including entertainment-related 
meals), you must show that the entertainment 
is:
Associated with the active conduct of your 
trade or business, and
Directly before or after a substantial busi-
ness discussion (defined later).
Associated with trade or business.  Gener-
ally, an expense is associated with the active 
conduct of your trade or business if you can 
show that you had a clear business purpose for 
having the expense. The purpose may be to get 
new business or to encourage the continuation 
of an existing business relationship.
Substantial business discussion. Whether a 
business discussion is substantial depends on 
the facts of each case. A business discussion 
won’t be considered substantial unless you can 
show that you actively engaged in the discus-
sion, meeting, negotiation, or other business 
transaction to get income or some other specific 
business benefit.
The meeting doesn’t have to be for any 
specified length of time, but you must show that 
the business discussion was substantial in rela-
tion to the meal or entertainment. It isn’t neces-
sary that you devote more time to business than 
to entertainment. You don’t have to discuss 
business during the meal or entertainment.
Meetings at conventions. You are consid-
ered to have a substantial business discussion 
if you attend meetings at a convention or similar 
event, or at a trade or business meeting spon-
sored and conducted by a business or profes-
sional organization. However, your reason for 
attending the convention or meeting must be to 
further your trade or business. The organization 
that sponsors the convention or meeting must 
schedule a program of business activities that is 
the main activity of the convention or meeting.
Directly before or after business discus-
sion. If the entertainment is held on the same 
day as the business discussion, it is considered 
to be held directly before or after the business 
discussion.
If the entertainment and the business dis-
cussion aren’t held on the same day, you must 
consider the facts of each case to see if the as-
sociated test is met. Among the facts to con-
sider are the place, date, and duration of the 
Table 2-1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client, customer, or 
employee if the expenses meet the directly related test or the associated test.
Definitions Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide entertainment, 
amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a customer or client.
An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your trade or business.
A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate.
Tests to be met Directly related test
Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment period, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other specific 
business benefit.
Associated test
Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and 
Entertainment is directly before or after a substantial business discussion.
Other rules You can’t deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if you are claiming 
the meal as a travel expense.
You can’t deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the circumstances.
You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment expenses 
(see 50% Limit, later).
Page 10 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10  Chapter 2 Entertainment

business discussion. If you or your business as-
sociates are from out of town, you must also 
consider the dates of arrival and departure, and 
the reasons the entertainment and the discus-
sion didn’t take place on the same day.
Example.  A group of business associates 
comes from out of town to your place of busi-
ness to hold a substantial business discussion. 
If you entertain those business guests on the 
evening before the business discussion, or on 
the evening of the day following the business 
discussion, the entertainment generally is con-
sidered to be held directly before or after the 
discussion. The expense meets the associated 
test. 
50% Limit
In general, you can deduct only 50% of your 
business-related meal and entertainment ex-
penses. (If you are subject to the Department of 
Transportation's “hours of service” limits, you 
can deduct 80% of your business-related meal 
and entertainment expenses. See Individuals 
subject to “hours of service” limits, later.)
The 50% limit applies to employees or their 
employers, and to self-employed persons (in-
cluding independent contractors) or their 
clients, depending on whether the expenses 
are reimbursed.
Figure A  summarizes the general rules ex-
plained in this section.
The 50% limit applies to business meals or 
entertainment expenses you have while:
Traveling away from home (whether eating 
alone or with others) on business;
Entertaining customers at your place of 
business, a restaurant, or other location; or
Attending a business convention or recep-
tion, business meeting, or business lun-
cheon at a club.
Included expenses.  Expenses subject to the 
50% limit include:
Taxes and tips relating to a business meal 
or entertainment activity,
Cover charges for admission to a night-
club,
Rent paid for a room in which you hold a 
dinner or cocktail party, and
Amounts paid for parking at a sports 
arena.
However, the cost of transportation to and from 
a business meal or a business-related enter-
tainment activity isn’t subject to the 50% limit.
Application of 50% limit.  The 50% limit on 
meal and entertainment expenses applies if the 
expense is otherwise deductible and isn’t cov-
ered by one of the exceptions discussed later.
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal 
and entertainment expenses that aren’t busi-
ness related. It applies to meal and entertain-
ment expenses you have for the production of 
income, including rental or royalty income. It 
also applies to the cost of meals included in de-
ductible educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit.  You apply the 
50% limit after determining the amount that 
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You 
first have to determine the amount of meal and 
entertainment expenses that would be deducti-
ble under the other rules discussed in this publi-
cation.
Example 1.  You spend $200 for a busi-
ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount isn’t 
allowable because it is lavish and extravagant, 
the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit. 
Your deduction can’t be more than $45 (50% 
(0.50) × $90).
Example 2.  You purchase two tickets to a 
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You 
paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face 
value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction 
can’t be more than $80 (50% (0.50) × $160).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit. 
Figure A can help you determine if the 50% limit 
applies to you.
Expenses not subject to 50% limit.  Your 
meal or entertainment expense isn’t subject to 
the 50% limit if the expense meets one of the 
following exceptions.
1—Employee's reimbursed expenses.  If 
you are an employee, you aren’t subject to the 
50% limit on expenses for which your employer 
reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
2—Self-employed. If you are self-em-
ployed, your deductible meal and entertainment 
expenses aren’t subject to the 50% limit if all of 
the following requirements are met.
You have these expenses as an independ-
ent contractor.
Your customer or client reimburses you or 
gives you an allowance for these expenses 
in connection with services you perform.
You provide adequate records of these ex-
penses to your customer or client. (See 
chapter 5.)
In this case, your client or customer is sub-
ject to the 50% limit on the expenses.
Example. You are a self-employed attorney 
who adequately accounts for meal and enter-
tainment expenses to a client who reimburses 
you for these expenses. You aren’t subject to 
the directly related or associated test, nor are 
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit, later.
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer didn’t
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
aren’t included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement wasn’t
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you can’t
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
Start Here
Page 11 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Entertainment  Page 11

you subject to the 50% limit. If the client can de-
duct the expenses, the client is subject to the 
50% limit.
If you (as an independent contractor) have 
expenses for meals and entertainment related 
to providing services for a client but don’t ade-
quately account for and seek reimbursement 
from the client for those expenses, you are sub-
ject to the directly related or associated test and 
to the 50% limit.
3—Advertising expenses.  You aren’t 
subject to the 50% limit if you provide meals, 
entertainment, or recreational facilities to the 
general public as a means of advertising or pro-
moting goodwill in the community. For example, 
neither the expense of sponsoring a television 
or radio show nor the expense of distributing 
free food and beverages to the general public is 
subject to the 50% limit.
4—Sale of meals or entertainment.  You 
aren’t subject to the 50% limit if you actually sell 
meals, entertainment, goods and services, or 
use of facilities to the public. For example, if you 
run a nightclub, your expense for the entertain-
ment you furnish to your customers, such as a 
floor show, isn’t subject to the 50% limit.
5—Charitable sports event.  You aren’t 
subject to the 50% limit if you pay for a package 
deal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita-
ble sports event. For the conditions the sports 
event must meet, see Exception for events that 
benefit charitable organizations under What En-
tertainment Expenses Are Deductible, later.
Individuals subject to “hours of service” 
limits. You can deduct a higher percentage of 
your meal expenses while traveling away from 
your tax home if the meals take place during or 
incident to any period subject to the Department 
of Transportation's “hours of service” limits. The 
percentage is 80%.
Individuals subject to the Department of 
Transportation's “hours of service” limits include 
the following persons.
Certain air transportation workers (such as 
pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and 
control tower operators) who are under 
Federal Aviation Administration regula-
tions.
Interstate truck operators and bus drivers 
who are under Department of Transporta-
tion regulations.
Certain railroad employees (such as engi-
neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-
ers, and control operations personnel) who 
are under Federal Railroad Administration 
regulations.
Certain merchant mariners who are under 
Coast Guard regulations.
What Entertainment 
Expenses
Are Deductible?
This section explains different types of enter-
tainment expenses you may be able to deduct.
Entertainment. Entertainment includes any 
activity generally considered to provide enter-
tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples 
include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-
cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at 
sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-
ing, vacation, and similar trips.
Entertainment also may include meeting 
personal, living, or family needs of individuals, 
such as providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car 
to customers or their families.
A meal as a form of entertainment.  En-
tertainment includes the cost of a meal you pro-
vide to a customer or client, whether the meal is 
a part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal 
expense includes the cost of food, beverages, 
taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter-
tainment-related meal, you or your employee 
must be present when the food or beverages 
are provided.
You can’t claim the cost of your meal 
both as an entertainment expense and 
as a travel expense.
Meals sold in the normal course of your 
business aren’t considered entertain-
ment.
Deduction may depend on your type of 
business. Your kind of business may deter-
mine if a particular activity is considered enter-
tainment. For example, if you are a dress de-
signer and have a fashion show to introduce 
your new designs to store buyers, the show 
generally isn’t considered entertainment. This is 
because fashion shows are typical in your busi-
ness. But, if you are an appliance distributor 
and hold a fashion show for the spouses of your 
retailers, the show generally is considered en-
tertainment.
Separating costs.  If you have one expense 
that includes the costs of entertainment and 
other services (such as lodging or transporta-
tion), you must allocate that expense between 
the cost of entertainment and the cost of other 
services. You must have a reasonable basis for 
making this allocation. For example, you must 
allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-
tainment in its lounge on the same bill with your 
room charge.
Taking turns paying for meals or entertain-
ment. If a group of business acquaintances 
takes turns picking up each others' meal or en-
tertainment checks primarily for personal rea-
sons, without regard to whether any business 
purposes are served, no member of the group 
can deduct any part of the expense.
Lavish or extravagant expenses.  You can’t 
deduct expenses for entertainment that are lav-
ish or extravagant. An expense isn’t considered 
lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable consid-
ering the facts and circumstances. Expenses 
won’t be disallowed just because they are more 
than a fixed dollar amount or take place at de-
luxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.
Allocating between business and nonbusi-
ness. If you entertain business and nonbusi-
ness individuals at the same event, you must di-
vide your entertainment expenses between 
business and nonbusiness. You can deduct 
only the business part. If you can’t establish the 
CAUTION
!
TIP
part of the expense for each person participat-
ing, allocate the expense to each participant on 
a pro rata basis.
Example. You entertain a group of individu-
als that includes yourself, three business pros-
pects, and seven social guests. Only 411 of the 
expense qualifies as a business entertainment 
expense. You can’t deduct the expenses for the 
seven social guests because those costs are 
nonbusiness expenses.
Trade association meetings. You can deduct 
entertainment expenses that are directly related 
to and necessary for attending business meet-
ings or conventions of certain exempt organiza-
tions if the expenses of your attendance are re-
lated to your active trade or business. These 
organizations include business leagues, cham-
bers of commerce, real estate boards, trade as-
sociations, and professional associations.
Entertainment tickets.  Generally, you can’t 
deduct more than the face value of an entertain-
ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. For 
example, you can’t deduct service fees you pay 
to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount 
over the face value of the tickets you pay to re-
sellers.
Exception for events that benefit chari-
table organizations.  Different rules apply 
when the cost of a ticket to a sports event bene-
fits a charitable organization. You can take into 
account the full cost you pay for the ticket, even 
if it is more than the face value, if all of the fol-
lowing conditions apply.
The event's main purpose is to benefit a 
qualified charitable organization.
The entire net proceeds go to the charity.
The event uses volunteers to perform sub-
stantially all the event's work.
The 50% limit on entertainment doesn’t 
apply to any expense for a package 
deal that includes a ticket to such a 
charitable sports event.
Example 1. You purchase tickets to a golf 
tournament organized by the local volunteer fire 
company. All net proceeds will be used to buy 
new fire equipment. The volunteers will run the 
tournament. You can deduct the entire cost of 
the tickets as a business expense if they other-
wise qualify as an entertainment expense.
Example 2. You purchase tickets to a col-
lege football game through a ticket broker. After 
having a business discussion, you take a client 
to the game. Net proceeds from the game go to 
colleges that qualify as charitable organizations. 
However, since the colleges also pay individu-
als to perform services, such as coaching and 
recruiting, you can only use the face value of 
the tickets in determining your business deduc-
tion.
Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes. If 
you rent a skybox or other private luxury box for 
more than one event at the same sports arena, 
you generally can’t deduct more than the price 
of a nonluxury box seat ticket.
To determine whether a skybox has been 
rented for more than one event, count each 
TIP
Page 12 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12  Chapter 2 Entertainment

game or other performance as one event. For 
example, renting a skybox for a series of playoff 
games is considered renting it for more than 
one event. All skyboxes you rent in the same 
arena, along with any rentals by related parties, 
are considered in making this determination.
Related parties include:
Family members (spouses, ancestors, and 
lineal descendants),
Parties who have made a reciprocal ar-
rangement involving the sharing of sky-
boxes,
Related corporations,
A partnership and its principal partners, 
and
A corporation and a partnership with com-
mon ownership.
Example. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seat 
skybox at Team Stadium for three baseball 
games. The cost of regular nonluxury box seats 
at each event is $30 a seat. You can deduct 
(subject to the 50% limit) $900 ((10 seats × $30 
each) × 3 events).
Food and beverages in skybox seats.  If 
expenses for food and beverages are sepa-
rately stated, you can deduct these expenses in 
addition to the amounts allowable for the sky-
box, subject to the requirements and limits that 
apply. The amounts separately stated for food 
and beverages must be reasonable. You can’t 
inflate the charges for food and beverages to 
avoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals.
What Entertainment 
Expenses Aren’t 
Deductible?
This section explains different types of enter-
tainment expenses you generally may not be 
able to deduct.
Club dues and membership fees.  You can’t 
deduct dues (including initiation fees) for mem-
bership in any club organized for:
Business,
Pleasure,
Recreation, or
Other social purpose.
This rule applies to any membership organiza-
tion if one of its principal purposes is either:
To conduct entertainment activities for 
members or their guests; or
To provide members or their guests with 
access to entertainment facilities, dis-
cussed later.
The purposes and activities of a club, not its 
name, will determine whether or not you can 
deduct the dues. You can’t deduct dues paid to:
Country clubs,
Golf and athletic clubs,
Airline clubs,
Hotel clubs, and
Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-
cumstances generally considered to be 
conducive to business discussions.
Entertainment facilities.  Generally, you can’t 
deduct any expense for the use of an entertain-
ment facility. This includes expenses for depre-
ciation and operating costs such as rent, utilit-
ies, maintenance, and protection.
An entertainment facility is any property you 
own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples 
include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, 
swimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, 
airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a 
vacation resort.
Out-of-pocket expenses. You can deduct 
out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and 
beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that 
you provided during entertainment at a facility. 
These aren’t expenses for the use of an enter-
tainment facility. However, these expenses are 
subject to the directly related  and associated 
tests and to the 50% limit, all discussed earlier.
Expenses for spouses.  You generally can’t 
deduct the cost of entertainment for your 
spouse or for the spouse of a customer. How-
ever, you can deduct these costs if you can 
show you had a clear business purpose, rather 
than a personal or social purpose, for providing 
the entertainment.
Example. You entertain a customer. The 
cost is an ordinary and necessary business ex-
pense and is allowed under the entertainment 
rules. The customer's spouse joins you be-
cause it is impractical to entertain the customer 
without the spouse. You can deduct the cost of 
entertaining the customer's spouse. If your 
spouse joins the party because the customer's 
spouse is present, the cost of the entertainment 
for your spouse is also deductible.
Gift or entertainment.  Any item that might be 
considered either a gift or entertainment gener-
ally will be considered entertainment. However, 
if you give a customer packaged food or bever-
ages that you intend the customer to use at a 
later date, treat it as a gift.
If you give a customer tickets to a theater 
performance or sporting event and you don’t go 
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. (Don’t use this chart if your home is 
your principal place of business. See Office in the home.)
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never 
de
duct
ible
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. If you don’t go directly from your /f_irst job to your second
job, you can only deduct the transportation expenses of going directly from your /f_irst
job to your second job. You can’t deduct your transportation expenses between
your home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
Page 13 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Entertainment  Page 13

with the customer to the performance or event, 
you have a choice. You can treat the tickets as 
either a gift or entertainment, whichever is to 
your advantage.
You can change your treatment of the tick-
ets at a later date by filing an amended return. 
Generally, an amended return must be filed 
within 3 years from the date the original return 
was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax 
was paid, whichever is later.
If you go with the customer to the event, you 
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
ment expense. You can’t choose, in this case, 
to treat the tickets as a gift.
3.
Gifts
If you give gifts in the course of your trade or 
business, you can deduct all or part of the cost. 
This chapter explains the limits and rules for de-
ducting the costs of gifts.
$25 limit.  You can deduct no more than $25 
for business gifts you give directly or indirectly 
to each person during your tax year. A gift to a 
company that is intended for the eventual per-
sonal use or benefit of a particular person or a 
limited class of people will be considered an in-
direct gift to that particular person or to the indi-
viduals within that class of people who receive 
the gift.
If you give a gift to a member of a custom-
er's family, the gift is generally considered to be 
an indirect gift to the customer. This rule doesn’t 
apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-
ness connection with that family member and 
the gift isn’t intended for the customer's even-
tual use.
If you and your spouse both give gifts, both 
of you are treated as one taxpayer. It doesn’t 
matter whether you have separate businesses, 
are separately employed, or whether each of 
you has an independent connection with the re-
cipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
ship and the partners are treated as one tax-
payer.
Example. Bob Jones sells products to Lo-
cal Company. He and his wife, Jan, gave Local 
Company three gourmet gift baskets to thank 
them for their business. They paid $80 for each 
gift basket, or $240 total. Three of Local Com-
pany's executives took the gift baskets home for 
their families' use. Bob and Jan have no inde-
pendent business relationship with any of the 
executives' other family members. They can de-
duct a total of $75 ($25 limit × 3) for the gift bas-
kets.
Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as en-
graving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring, and 
mailing, are generally not included in determin-
ing the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25 
limit.
A cost is incidental only if it doesn’t add sub-
stantial value to the gift. For example, the cost 
of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. However, 
the purchase of an ornamental basket for pack-
aging fruit isn’t an incidental cost if the value of 
the basket is substantial compared to the value 
of the fruit.
Exceptions. The following items aren’t consid-
ered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit.
1. An item that costs $4 or less and:
a. Has your name clearly and perma-
nently imprinted on the gift, and
b. Is one of a number of identical items 
you widely distribute. Examples in-
clude pens, desk sets, and plastic 
bags and cases.
2. Signs, display racks, or other promotional 
material to be used on the business prem-
ises of the recipient.
Gift or entertainment.  Any item that might be 
considered either a gift or entertainment gener-
ally will be considered entertainment. However, 
if you give a customer packaged food or bever-
ages you intend the customer to use at a later 
date, treat it as a gift.
If you give a customer tickets to a theater 
performance or sporting event and you don’t go 
with the customer to the performance or event, 
you have a choice. You can treat the cost of the 
tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-
ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.
You can change your treatment of the tick-
ets at a later date by filing an amended return. 
Generally, an amended return must be filed 
within 3 years from the date the original return 
was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax 
was paid, whichever is later.
If you go with the customer to the event, you 
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
ment expense. You can’t choose, in this case, 
to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.
4.
Transportation
This chapter discusses expenses you can de-
duct for business transportation when you 
aren’t traveling away from home  as defined in 
chapter 1. These expenses include the cost of 
transportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the 
cost of driving and maintaining your car.
Transportation expenses include the ordinary 
and necessary costs of all of the following.
Getting from one workplace to another in 
the course of your business or profession 
when you are traveling within the city or 
general area that is your tax home. Tax 
home is defined in chapter 1.
Visiting clients or customers.
Going to a business meeting away from 
your regular workplace.
Getting from your home to a temporary 
workplace when you have one or more 
regular places of work. These temporary 
workplaces can be either within the area of 
your tax home or outside that area.
Transportation expenses don’t include expen-
ses you have while traveling away from home 
overnight. Those expenses are travel expenses 
discussed in chapter 1 . However, if you use 
your car while traveling away from home over-
night, use the rules in this chapter to figure your 
car expense deduction. See Car Expenses , 
later.
Daily transportation expenses you incur while 
traveling from home to one or more regular pla-
ces of business are generally nondeductible 
commuting expenses. However, there may be 
exceptions to this general rule. You can deduct 
daily transportation expenses incurred going 
between your residence and a temporary work 
station outside the metropolitan area where you 
live. Also, daily transportation expenses can be 
deducted if (1) you have one or more regular 
work locations away from your residence; or (2) 
your residence is your principal place of busi-
ness and you incur expenses going between 
the residence and another work location in the 
same trade or business, regardless of whether 
the work is temporary or permanent and regard-
less of the distance.
Illustration of transportation expenses.  Fig-
ure B, earlier, illustrates the rules that apply for 
deducting transportation expenses when you 
have a regular or main job away from your 
home. You may want to refer to it when decid-
ing whether you can deduct your transportation 
expenses.
Temporary work location.  If you have one or 
more regular work locations away from your 
home and you commute to a temporary work lo-
cation in the same trade or business, you can 
deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip 
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is real-
istically expected to last (and does in fact last) 
for 1 year or less, the employment is temporary 
unless there are facts and circumstances that 
would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is real-
istically expected to last for more than 1 year or 
if there is no realistic expectation that the em-
ployment will last for 1 year or less, the employ-
ment isn’t temporary, regardless of whether it 
actually lasts for more than 1 year.
If employment at a work location initially is 
realistically expected to last for 1 year or less, 
but at some later date the employment is realis-
tically expected to last more than 1 year, that 
employment will be treated as temporary (un-
less there are facts and circumstances that 
would indicate otherwise) until your expectation 
changes. It won’t be treated as temporary after 
the date you determine it will last more than 1 
year.
If the temporary work location is beyond the 
general area of your regular place of work and 
you stay overnight, you are traveling away from 
home. You may have deductible travel expen-
ses as discussed in chapter 1.
Page 14 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14  Chapter 4 Transportation

No regular place of work.  If you have no reg-
ular place of work but ordinarily work in the met-
ropolitan area where you live, you can deduct 
daily transportation costs between home and a 
temporary work site outside that metropolitan 
area.
Generally, a metropolitan area includes the 
area within the city limits and the suburbs that 
are considered part of that metropolitan area.
You can’t deduct daily transportation costs 
between your home and temporary work sites 
within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
ductible commuting expenses.
Two places of work. If you work at two places 
in one day, whether or not for the same em-
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting 
from one workplace to the other. However, if for 
some personal reason you don’t go directly 
from one location to the other, you can’t deduct 
more than the amount it would have cost you to 
go directly from the first location to the second.
Transportation expenses you have in going 
between home and a part-time job on a day off 
from your main job are commuting expenses. 
You can’t deduct them.
Armed Forces reservists.  A meeting of an 
Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of 
business if the meeting is held on a day on 
which you work at your regular job. You can de-
duct the expense of getting from one workplace 
to the other as just discussed under Two places 
of work.
You usually can’t deduct the expense if the 
reserve meeting is held on a day on which you 
don’t work at your regular job. In this case, your 
transportation generally is a nondeductible 
commuting expense. However, you can deduct 
your transportation expenses if the location of 
the meeting is temporary and you have one or 
more regular places of work.
If you ordinarily work in a particular metro-
politan area but not at any specific location and 
the reserve meeting is held at a temporary loca-
tion outside that metropolitan area, you can de-
duct your transportation expenses.
If you travel away from home overnight to at-
tend a guard or reserve meeting, you can de-
duct your travel expenses. These expenses are 
discussed in chapter 1.
If you travel more than 100 miles away from 
home in connection with your performance of 
services as a member of the reserves, you may 
be able to deduct some of your reserve-related 
travel costs as an adjustment to gross income 
rather than as an itemized deduction. For more 
information, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav-
eling More Than 100 Miles From Home  under 
Special Rules in chapter 6.
Commuting expenses.  You can’t deduct the 
costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, or 
of driving a car between your home and your 
main or regular place of work. These costs are 
personal commuting expenses. You can’t de-
duct commuting expenses no matter how far 
your home is from your regular place of work. 
You can’t deduct commuting expenses even if 
you work during the commuting trip.
Example. You sometimes use your cell 
phone to make business calls while commuting 
to and from work. Sometimes business asso-
ciates ride with you to and from work, and you 
have a business discussion in the car. These 
activities don’t change the trip from personal to 
business. You can’t deduct your commuting ex-
penses.
Parking fees.  Fees you pay to park your 
car at your place of business are nondeductible 
commuting expenses. You can, however, de-
duct business-related parking fees when visit-
ing a customer or client.
Advertising display on car.  Putting dis-
play material that advertises your business on 
your car doesn’t change the use of your car 
from personal use to business use. If you use 
this car for commuting or other personal uses, 
you still can’t deduct your expenses for those 
uses.
Car pools. You can’t deduct the cost of us-
ing your car in a nonprofit car pool. Don’t in-
clude payments you receive from the passen-
gers in your income. These payments are 
considered reimbursements of your expenses. 
However, if you operate a car pool for a profit, 
you must include payments from passengers in 
your income. You can then deduct your car ex-
penses (using the rules in this publication).
Hauling tools or instruments.  Hauling 
tools or instruments in your car while commut-
ing to and from work doesn’t make your car ex-
penses deductible. However, you can deduct 
any additional costs you have for hauling tools 
or instruments (such as for renting a trailer you 
tow with your car).
Union members' trips from a union hall.
If you get your work assignments at a union hall 
and then go to your place of work, the costs of 
getting from the union hall to your place of work 
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-
though you need the union to get your work as-
signments, you are employed where you work, 
not where the union hall is located.
Office in the home.  If you have an office in 
your home that qualifies as a principal place of 
business, you can deduct your daily transporta-
tion costs between your home and another 
work location in the same trade or business. 
(See Pub. 587, Business Use of Your Home, for 
information on determining if your home office 
qualifies as a principal place of business.)
Examples of deductible transportation.  The 
following examples show when you can deduct 
transportation expenses based on the location 
of your work and your home.
Example 1. You regularly work in an office 
in the city where you live. Your employer sends 
you to a 1-week training session at a different 
office in the same city. You travel directly from 
your home to the training location and return 
each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily 
round-trip transportation between your home 
and the training location.
Example 2.  Your principal place of busi-
ness is in your home. You can deduct the cost 
of round-trip transportation between your quali-
fying home office and your client's or custom-
er's place of business.
Example 3. You have no regular office, and 
you don’t have an office in your home. In this 
case, the location of your first business contact 
inside the metropolitan area is considered your 
office. Transportation expenses between your 
home and this first contact are nondeductible 
commuting expenses. Transportation expenses 
between your last business contact and your 
home are also nondeductible commuting ex-
penses. While you can’t deduct the costs of 
these trips, you can deduct the costs of going 
from one client or customer to another.
Car Expenses
If you use your car for business purposes, you 
ordinarily can deduct car expenses. You gener-
ally can use one of the two following methods to 
figure your deductible expenses.
Standard mileage rate.
Actual car expenses.
If you use actual expenses to figure your de-
duction for a car you lease, there are rules that 
affect the amount of your lease payments you 
can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later.
In this publication, “car” includes a van, 
pickup, or panel truck. For the definition of “car” 
for depreciation purposes, see Car defined un-
der Actual Car Expenses, later.
Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mail car-
rier, you may be able to treat the qualified reim-
bursement you received as your allowable ex-
pense. Because the qualified reimbursement is 
treated as paid under an accountable plan, your 
employer shouldn’t include the reimbursement 
in your income.
If your vehicle expenses are more than the 
amount of your reimbursement, you can deduct 
the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-
duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You must 
complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Form 
1040, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.
A “qualified reimbursement” is the reim-
bursement you receive that meets both of the 
following conditions.
It is given as an equipment maintenance 
allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S. 
Postal Service.
It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-
lective bargaining agreement. Any later 
agreement can’t increase the qualified re-
imbursement amount by more than the 
rate of inflation.
See your employer for information on your reim-
bursement.
If you are a rural mail carrier and re-
ceived a qualified reimbursement, you 
can’t use the standard mileage rate.
Standard Mileage Rate
You may be able to use the standard mileage 
rate to figure the deductible costs of operating 
your car for business purposes. For 2017, the 
standard mileage rate for the cost of operating 
your car for business use is 53.5 cents (0.535) 
per mile.
CAUTION
!
Page 15 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Transportation  Page 15

If you use the standard mileage rate for 
a year, you can’t deduct your actual car 
expenses for that year. You can’t de-
duct depreciation, lease payments, mainte-
nance and repairs, gasoline (including gasoline 
taxes), oil, insurance, or vehicle registration 
fees. See Choosing the standard mileage rate 
and Standard mileage rate not allowed, later.
You generally can use the standard mileage 
rate whether or not you are reimbursed and 
whether or not any reimbursement is more or 
less than the amount figured using the standard 
mileage rate. See chapter 6 for more informa-
tion on reimbursements.
Choosing the standard mileage rate.  If you 
want to use the standard mileage rate for a car 
you own, you must choose to use it in the first 
year the car is available for use in your busi-
ness. Then, in later years, you can choose to 
use either the standard mileage rate or actual 
expenses.
If you want to use the standard mileage rate 
for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire 
lease period. For leases that began on or be-
fore December 31, 1997, the standard mileage 
rate must be used for the entire portion of the 
lease period (including renewals) that is after 
1997.
You must make the choice to use the stand-
ard mileage rate by the due date (including ex-
tensions) of your return. You can’t revoke the 
choice. However, in later years, you can switch 
from the standard mileage rate to the actual ex-
penses method. If you change to the actual ex-
penses method in a later year, but before your 
car is fully depreciated, you have to estimate 
the remaining useful life of the car and use 
straight line depreciation.
Example. Larry is an employee who occa-
sionally uses his own car for business purpo-
ses. He purchased the car in 2015, but he didn’t 
claim any unreimbursed employee expenses on 
his 2015 tax return. Because Larry didn’t use 
the standard mileage rate the first year the car 
was available for business use, he can’t use the 
standard mileage rate in 2017 to claim unreim-
bursed employee business expenses.
For more information about depreciation in-
cluded in the standard mileage rate, see Excep-
tion under Methods of depreciation, later.
Standard mileage rate not allowed.  You 
can’t use the standard mileage rate if you:
Use five or more cars at the same time 
(such as in fleet operations);
Claimed a depreciation deduction for the 
car using any method other than straight 
line, for example, MACRS (as discussed 
later under Depreciation Deduction);
Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis-
cussed later) on the car;
Claimed the special depreciation allow-
ance on the car;
Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 for 
a car you leased; or
Are a rural mail carrier who received a 
qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mail 
carriers, earlier.)
Note. You can elect to use the standard 
mileage rate if you used a car for hire (such as a 
CAUTION
!
taxi) unless the standard mileage rate is other-
wise not allowed, as discussed above.
Five or more cars. If you own or lease five 
or more cars that are used for business at the 
same time, you can’t use the standard mileage 
rate for the business use of any car. However, 
you may be able to deduct your actual expen-
ses for operating each of the cars in your busi-
ness. See Actual Car Expenses , later, for infor-
mation on how to figure your deduction.
You aren’t using five or more cars for busi-
ness at the same time if you alternate using 
(use at different times) the cars for business.
The following examples illustrate the rules 
for when you can and can’t use the standard 
mileage rate for five or more cars.
Example 1.  Marcia, a salesperson, owns 
three cars and two vans that she alternates us-
ing for calling on her customers. She can use 
the standard mileage rate for the business mile-
age of the three cars and the two vans because 
she doesn’t use them at the same time.
Example 2.  Tony and his employees use 
his four pickup trucks in his landscaping busi-
ness. During the year, he traded in two of his 
old trucks for two newer ones. Tony can use the 
standard mileage rate for the business mileage 
of all six of the trucks he owned during the year.
Example 3.  Chris owns a repair shop and 
an insurance business. He and his employees 
use his two pickup trucks and van for the repair 
shop. Chris alternates using his two cars for the 
insurance business. No one else uses the cars 
for business purposes. Chris can use the stand-
ard mileage rate for the business use of the 
pickup trucks, van, and the cars because he 
never has more than four vehicles used for 
business at the same time.
Example 4.  Maureen owns a car and four 
vans that are used in her housecleaning busi-
ness. Her employees use the vans, and she 
uses the car to travel to various customers. 
Maureen can’t use the standard mileage rate for 
the car or the vans. This is because all five vehi-
cles are used in Maureen's business at the 
same time. She must use actual expenses for 
all vehicles.
Interest. If you are an employee, you can’t de-
duct any interest paid on a car loan. This ap-
plies even if you use the car 100% for business 
as an employee.
However, if you are self-employed and use 
your car in your business, you can deduct that 
part of the interest expense that represents your 
business use of the car. For example, if you use 
your car 60% for business, you can deduct 60% 
of the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). You 
can’t deduct the part of the interest expense 
that represents your personal use of the car.
If you use a home equity loan to pur-
chase your car, you may be able to de-
duct the interest. See Pub. 936, Home 
Mortgage Interest Deduction, for more informa-
tion.
Personal property taxes.  If you itemize your 
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you 
can deduct on line 7 state and local personal 
TIP
property taxes on motor vehicles. You can take 
this deduction even if you use the standard 
mileage rate or if you don’t use the car for busi-
ness.
If you are self-employed and use your car in 
your business, you can deduct the business 
part of state and local personal property taxes 
on motor vehicles on Schedule C (Form 1040), 
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), or Schedule F 
(Form 1040). If you itemize your deductions, 
you can include the remainder of your state and 
local personal property taxes on the car on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Parking fees and tolls.  In addition to using 
the standard mileage rate, you can deduct any 
business-related parking fees and tolls. (Park-
ing fees you pay to park your car at your place 
of work are nondeductible commuting expen-
ses.)
Sale, trade-in, or other disposition.  If you 
sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car, 
you may have a gain or loss on the transaction 
or an adjustment to the basis of your new car. 
See Disposition of a Car, later.
Actual Car Expenses
If you don’t use the standard mileage rate, you 
may be able to deduct your actual car expen-
ses.
If you qualify to use both methods, you 
may want to figure your deduction both 
ways to see which gives you a larger 
deduction.
Actual car expenses include:
Depreciation
Licenses
Lease 
payments
Registration 
fees
Gas Insurance Repairs
Oil Garage rent Tires
Tolls Parking fees
If you have fully depreciated a car that you 
still use in your business, you can continue to 
claim your other actual car expenses. Continue 
to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5.
Business and personal use.  If you use your 
car for both business and personal purposes, 
you must divide your expenses between busi-
ness and personal use. You can divide your ex-
pense based on the miles driven for each pur-
pose.
Example. You are a contractor and drive 
your car 20,000 miles during the year: 12,000 
miles for business use and 8,000 miles for per-
sonal use. You can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷ 
20,000) of the cost of operating your car as a 
business expense.
Employer-provided vehicle.  If you use a ve-
hicle provided by your employer for business 
purposes, you can deduct your actual unreim-
bursed car expenses. You can’t use the stand-
ard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided by Your 
Employer in chapter 6.
Interest on car loans. If you are an employee, 
you can’t deduct any interest paid on a car loan. 
TIP
Page 16 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16  Chapter 4 Transportation

This interest is treated as personal interest and 
isn’t deductible. If you are self-employed and 
use your car in that business, see Interest, ear-
lier, under Standard Mileage Rate.
Taxes paid on your car.  If you are an em-
ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes 
paid on your car if you itemize deductions. En-
ter the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A 
(Form 1040).
Sales taxes.  Generally, sales taxes on 
your car are part of your car's basis and are re-
covered through depreciation, discussed later.
Fines and collateral.  You can’t deduct fines 
you pay or collateral you forfeit for traffic viola-
tions.
Casualty and theft losses. If your car is dam-
aged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able to 
deduct part of the loss not covered by insur-
ance. See Pub. 547, Casualties, Disasters, and 
Thefts, for information on deducting a loss on 
your car.
Depreciation and section 179 deductions.
Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and 
improvements, is a capital expense. Because 
the benefits last longer than 1 year, you gener-
ally can’t deduct a capital expense. However, 
you can recover this cost through the section 
179 deduction (the deduction allowed by sec-
tion 179 of the Internal Revenue Code), special 
depreciation allowance, and depreciation de-
ductions. Depreciation allows you to recover 
the cost over more than 1 year by deducting 
part of it each year. The section 179 deduction, 
special depreciation allowance , and deprecia-
tion deductions are discussed later.
Generally, there are limits on these deduc-
tions. Special rules apply if you use your car 
50% or less in your work or business.
You can claim a section 179 deduction and 
use a depreciation method other than straight 
line only if you don’t use the standard mileage 
rate to figure your business-related car expen-
ses in the year you first place a car in service.
If, in the year you first place a car in service, 
you claim either a section 179 deduction or use 
a depreciation method other than straight line 
for its estimated useful life, you can’t use the 
standard mileage rate on that car in any future 
year.
Car defined. For depreciation purposes, a car 
is any four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck or 
van) made primarily for use on public streets, 
roads, and highways. Its unloaded gross vehi-
cle weight must not be more than 6,000 
pounds. A car includes any part, component, or 
other item physically attached to it or usually in-
cluded in the purchase price.
A car doesn’t include:
An ambulance, hearse, or combination 
ambulance-hearse used directly in a busi-
ness;
A vehicle used directly in the business of 
transporting persons or property for pay or 
hire; or
A truck or van that is a qualified nonperso-
nal use vehicle.
Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles. 
These are vehicles that by their nature aren’t 
likely to be used more than a minimal amount 
for personal purposes. They include trucks and 
vans that have been specially modified so that 
they aren’t likely to be used more than a mini-
mal amount for personal purposes, such as by 
installation of permanent shelving and painting 
the vehicle to display advertising or the compa-
ny's name. Delivery trucks with seating only for 
the driver, or only for the driver plus a folding 
jump seat, are qualified nonpersonal use vehi-
cles.
More information.  See Depreciation De-
duction, later, for more information on how to 
depreciate your vehicle.
Section 179 Deduction
The section 179 deduction allows you to treat a 
portion or all of the cost of a car as a current ex-
pense. If you choose to deduct all or part of the 
cost as a current expense, you must reduce 
your depreciable basis in the car by the amount 
of the section 179 deduction.
There is a limit on the total section 179 
deduction, special depreciation allow-
ance, and depreciation deduction for 
cars, trucks, and vans that may reduce or elimi-
nate any benefit from claiming the section 179 
deduction. See Depreciation Limits, later.
You can claim the section 179 deduction 
only in the year you place the car in service. For 
this purpose, a car is placed in service when it 
is ready and available for a specifically as-
signed use, whether in a trade or business, a 
tax-exempt activity, a personal activity, or for 
the production of income. Even if you aren’t us-
ing the property, it is in service when it is ready 
and available for its specifically assigned use.
A car first used for personal purposes can’t 
qualify for the deduction in a later year when its 
use changes to business.
Example. In 2016, you bought a new car 
and used it for personal purposes. In 2017, you 
began to use it for business. Changing its use to 
business use doesn’t qualify the cost of your car 
for a section 179 deduction in 2017. However, 
you can claim a depreciation deduction for the 
business use of the car starting in 2017. See 
Depreciation Deduction, later.
More than 50% business use requirement. 
You must use the property more than 50% for 
business to claim any section 179 deduction. If 
you used the property more than 50% for busi-
ness, multiply the cost of the property by the 
percentage of business use. The result is the 
cost of the property that can qualify for the sec-
tion 179 deduction.
Example. Peter purchased a car in April 
2017 for $24,500 and used it 60% for business. 
Based on his business usage, the total cost of 
Peter's car that qualifies for the section 179 de-
duction is $14,700 ($24,500 cost × 60% (0.60) 
business use). But see Limit on total section 
179, special depreciation allowance, and de-
preciation deduction, discussed later.
TIP
Limits. There are limits on:
The amount of the section 179 deduction;
The section 179 deduction for sport utility 
and certain other vehicles; and
The total amount of the section 179 deduc-
tion, special depreciation allowance, and 
depreciation deduction (discussed later) 
you can claim for a qualified property.
Limit on the amount of the section 179 
deduction. For 2017, the total amount you can 
choose to deduct under section 179 generally 
can’t be more than $510,000.
If the cost of your section 179 property 
placed in service in 2017 is over $2,030,000, 
you must reduce the $510,000 dollar limit (but 
not below zero) by the amount of cost over 
$2,030,000. If the cost of your section 179 prop-
erty placed in service during 2017 is $2,540,000 
or more, you can’t take a section 179 deduc-
tion.
The total amount you can deduct under sec-
tion 179 each year after you apply the limits lis-
ted above cannot be more than the taxable in-
come from the active conduct of any trade or 
business during the year.
If you are married and file a joint return, you 
and your spouse are treated as one taxpayer in 
determining any reduction to the dollar limit, re-
gardless of which of you purchased the prop-
erty or placed it in service.
If you and your spouse file separate returns, 
you are treated as one taxpayer for the dollar 
limit. You must allocate the dollar limit (after any 
reduction) between you.
For more information on the above section 
179 deduction limits, see Pub. 946.
Limit for sport utility and certain other 
vehicles. For sport utility and certain other ve-
hicles placed in service in 2017, the portion of 
the vehicle's cost taken into account in figuring 
your section 179 deduction is limited to 
$25,000. This rule applies to any four-wheeled 
vehicle primarily designed or used to carry pas-
sengers over public streets, roads, or highways, 
that isn’t subject to any of the passenger auto-
mobile limits explained under Depreciation Lim-
its, later, and that is rated at no more than 
14,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. However, 
the $25,000 limit doesn’t apply to any vehicle:
Designed to have a seating capacity of 
more than nine persons behind the driver's 
seat;
Equipped with a cargo area of at least 6 
feet in interior length that is an open area 
or is designed for use as an open area but 
is enclosed by a cap and isn’t readily ac-
cessible directly from the passenger com-
partment; or
That has an integral enclosure, fully en-
closing the driver compartment and load 
carrying device, doesn’t have seating rear-
ward of the driver's seat, and has no body 
section protruding more than 30 inches 
ahead of the leading edge of the wind-
shield.
Limit on total section 179 deduction, 
special depreciation allowance, and depre-
ciation deduction. Generally, the total amount 
of section 179 deduction, special depreciation 
allowance, and depreciation deduction you can 
claim for a car that is qualified property and that 
you placed in service in 2017 is $11,160. The 
Page 17 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Transportation  Page 17

limit is reduced if your business use of the car is 
less than 100%. See Depreciation Limits, later, 
for more information.
Example. In the earlier example  under 
More than 50% business use requirement,  Pe-
ter had a car with a cost (for purposes of the 
section 179 deduction) of $14,700. However, 
based on Peter's business usage of his car, the 
total of his section 179, special depreciation al-
lowance, and depreciation deductions is limited 
to $6,696 ($11,160 limit x 60% (0.60) business 
use).
Cost of car.  For purposes of the section 179 
deduction, the cost of the car doesn’t include 
any amount figured by reference to any other 
property held by you at any time. For example, 
if you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car to 
use in your business, your cost for purposes of 
the section 179 deduction doesn’t include your 
adjusted basis in the car you trade in for the 
new car. Your cost includes only the cash you 
paid.
Basis of car for depreciation.  The 
amount of the section 179 deduction reduces 
your basis in your car. If you choose the section 
179 deduction, you must subtract the amount of 
the deduction from the cost of your car. The re-
sulting amount is the basis in your car you use 
to figure your depreciation deduction.
When to choose.  If you want to take the sec-
tion 179 deduction, you must make the choice 
in the tax year you place the car in service for 
business or work.
How to choose. Employees use Form 2106 to 
make this choice and report the section 179 de-
duction. All others use Form 4562.
File the appropriate form with either of the 
following.
Your original tax return filed for the year the 
property was placed in service (whether or 
not you file it timely).
An amended return filed within the time 
prescribed by law. An election made on an 
amended return must specify the item of 
section 179 property to which the election 
applies and the part of the cost of each 
such item to be taken into account. The 
amended return must also include any re-
sulting adjustments to taxable income.
You must keep records that show the 
specific identification of each piece of 
qualifying section 179 property. These 
records must show how you acquired the prop-
erty, the person you acquired it from, and when 
you placed it in service.
Revoking an election.  An election (or any 
specification made in the election) to take a 
section 179 deduction for 2017 can only be re-
voked with the Commissioner's approval.
Recapture of section 179 deduction.  To be 
eligible to claim the section 179 deduction, you 
must use your car more than 50% for business 
or work in the year you acquired it. If your busi-
ness use of the car is 50% or less in a later tax 
year during the recovery period, you have to re-
capture (include in income) in that later year 
any excess depreciation. Any section 179 de-
CAUTION
!
duction claimed on the car is included in figur-
ing the excess depreciation. For information on 
this calculation, see Excess depreciation , later 
in this chapter under Car Used 50% or Less for 
Business.
Dispositions. If you dispose of a car on which 
you had claimed the section 179 deduction, the 
amount of that deduction is treated as a depre-
ciation deduction for recapture purposes. You 
treat any gain on the disposition of the property 
as ordinary income up to the amount of the sec-
tion 179 deduction and any allowable deprecia-
tion (unless you establish the amount actually 
allowed). For information on the disposition of a 
car, see Disposition of a Car, later.
Special Depreciation Allowance
You may be able to claim the special deprecia-
tion allowance for your car, truck, or van, if it is 
qualified property and was placed in service in 
2017. The allowance is an additional deprecia-
tion deduction for 50% of the car's depreciable 
basis (after any section 179 deduction, but be-
fore figuring your regular depreciation deduc-
tion under MACRS). This allowance is in-
creased to 100% if the vehicle was purchased 
and placed in service after September 27, 
2017. The special depreciation allowance ap-
plies only for the first year the car is placed in 
service. Further, while it applies to a new vehi-
cle regardless of the date in 2017 when it was 
placed in service, it applies to a used vehicle 
only if the vehicle was purchased and placed in 
service after September 27, 2017. To qualify for 
the allowance, more than 50% of the use of the 
car must be in a qualified business use (as de-
fined under Depreciation Deduction, later).
Combined depreciation. Your combined sec-
tion 179 depreciation, special depreciation al-
lowance, and regular MACRS depreciation de-
duction is limited to the maximum allowable 
depreciation deduction for cars of $11,160 
($3,160 if you elect not to claim the special de-
preciation allowance). For trucks and vans, the 
first-year limit is $11,560 ($3,560 if you elect not 
to claim the special depreciation allowance). 
See Depreciation Limits, later in this chapter.
Qualified car. To be a qualified car (including 
trucks and vans) the car must meet all of the fol-
lowing tests.
You purchased the car new on or after 
January 1, 2008, but only if no binding writ-
ten contract to acquire the car existed be-
fore January 1, 2008.
You placed the car in service in your trade 
or business before January 1, 2020.
You used the car more than 50% in a quali-
fied business use.
Election not to claim the special deprecia-
tion allowance. You can elect not to claim the 
special depreciation allowance for your car, 
truck, or van, that is qualified property. If you 
make this election, it applies to all 5-year prop-
erty placed in service during the year.
To make this election, attach a statement to 
your timely filed return (including extensions) in-
dicating the class of property (5-year for cars) 
for which you are making the election and that 
you are electing not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance for qualified property 
acquired on or after January 1, 2008.
Unless you elect not to claim the spe-
cial depreciation allowance, you must 
reduce the car's adjusted basis by the 
amount of the allowance, even if the allowance 
wasn’t claimed.
Depreciation Deduction
If you use actual car expenses to figure your de-
duction for a car you own and use in your busi-
ness, you can claim a depreciation deduction. 
This means you can deduct a certain amount 
each year as a recovery of your cost or other 
basis in your car.
You generally need to know the following 
things about the car you intend to depreciate.
Your basis in the car.
The date you place the car in service.
The method of depreciation and recovery 
period you will use.
Basis. Your basis in a car for figuring deprecia-
tion is generally its cost. This includes any 
amount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-
erty, or services.
Generally, you figure depreciation on your 
car, truck, or van using your unadjusted basis 
(see Unadjusted basis , later). However, in 
some situations you will use your adjusted basis 
(your basis reduced by depreciation allowed or 
allowable in earlier years). For one of these sit-
uations, see Exception under Methods of de-
preciation, later.
If you change the use of a car from personal 
to business, your basis for depreciation is the 
lesser of the fair market value or your adjusted 
basis in the car on the date of conversion. Addi-
tional rules concerning basis are discussed 
later in this chapter under Unadjusted basis.
Placed in service.  You generally place a car 
in service when it is available for use in your 
work or business, in an income-producing activ-
ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation begins 
when the car is placed in service for use in your 
work or business or for the production of in-
come.
For purposes of figuring depreciation, if you 
first start using the car only for personal use and 
later convert it to business use, you place the 
car in service on the date of conversion.
Car placed in service and disposed of in 
the same year.  If you place a car in service 
and dispose of it in the same tax year, you can’t 
claim any depreciation deduction for that car.
Methods of depreciation.  Generally, you fig-
ure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac-
celerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS). 
MACRS is discussed later in this chapter.
Exception. If you used the standard mile-
age rate in the first year of business use and 
change to the actual expenses method in a later 
year, you can’t depreciate your car under the 
MACRS rules. You must use straight line depre-
ciation over the estimated remaining useful life 
of the car.
CAUTION
!
Page 18 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18  Chapter 4 Transportation

To figure depreciation under the straight line 
method, you must reduce your basis in the car 
(but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for all 
miles for which you used the standard mileage 
rate. The rate per mile varies depending on the 
year(s) you used the standard mileage rate. For 
the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustment 
when you used the standard mileage rate under 
Disposition of a Car, later.
This reduction of basis is in addition to those 
basis adjustments described later under Unad-
justed basis. You must use your adjusted basis 
in your car to figure your depreciation deduc-
tion. For additional information on the straight 
line method of depreciation, see Pub. 946.
More-than-50%-use test. Generally, you must 
use your car more than 50% for qualified busi-
ness use (defined next) during the year to use 
MACRS. You must meet this 
more-than-50%-use test each year of the recov-
ery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car.
If your business use is 50% or less, you 
must use the straight line method to depreciate 
your car. This is explained later under Car Used 
50% or Less for Business.
Qualified business use.  A qualified business 
use is any use in your trade or business. It 
doesn’t include use for the production of in-
come (investment use). However, you do com-
bine your business and investment use to figure 
your depreciation deduction for the tax year.
Use of your car by another person. Don’t 
treat any use of your car by another person as 
use in your trade or business unless that use 
meets one of the following conditions.
It is directly connected with your business.
It is properly reported by you as income to 
the other person (and, if you have to, you 
withhold tax on the income).
It results in a payment of fair market rent. 
This includes any payment to you for the 
use of your car.
Business use changes.  If you used your car 
more than 50% in qualified business use in the 
year you placed it in service, but 50% or less in 
a later year (including the year of disposition), 
you have to change to the straight line method 
of depreciation. See Qualified business use 
50% or less in a later year  under Car Used 50% 
or Less for Business, later.
Property doesn’t cease to be used 
more than 50% in qualified business 
use by reason of a transfer at death.
Use for more than one purpose.  If you use 
your car for more than one purpose during the 
tax year, you must allocate the use to the vari-
ous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile-
age. Figure the percentage of qualified busi-
ness use by dividing the number of miles you 
drive your car for business purposes during the 
year by the total number of miles you drive the 
car during the year for any purpose.
Change from personal to business use.  If 
you change the use of a car from 100% per-
sonal use to business use during the tax year, 
you may not have mileage records for the time 
before the change to business use. In this case, 
TIP
you figure the percentage of business use for 
the year as follows.
1. Determine the percentage of business use 
for the period following the change. Do 
this by dividing business miles by total 
miles driven during that period.
2. Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction. 
The numerator (top number) is the number 
of months the car is used for business and 
the denominator (bottom number) is 12.
Example. You use a car only for personal 
purposes during the first 6 months of the year. 
During the last 6 months of the year, you drive 
the car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000 
miles are for business. This gives you a busi-
ness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷ 15,000) 
for that period. Your business use for the year is 
40% (80% (0.80) × 612).
Limits. The amount you can claim for section 
179, special depreciation allowance, and de-
preciation deductions may be limited. The maxi-
mum amount you can claim depends on the 
year in which you placed your car in service. 
You have to reduce the maximum amount if you 
did not use the car exclusively for business. 
See Depreciation Limits, later.
Unadjusted basis.  You use your unadjusted 
basis (often referred to as your basis or your ba-
sis for depreciation) to figure your depreciation 
using the MACRS depreciation chart, explained 
later under Modified Accelerated Cost Recov-
ery System (MACRS) . Your unadjusted basis 
for figuring depreciation is your original basis in-
creased or decreased by certain amounts.
To figure your unadjusted basis, begin with 
your car's original basis, which generally is its 
cost. Cost includes sales taxes (see Sales 
taxes, earlier), destination charges, and dealer 
preparation. Increase your basis by any sub-
stantial improvements you make to your car, 
such as adding air conditioning or a new en-
gine. Decrease your basis by any section 179 
deduction, special depreciation allowance, gas 
guzzler tax, clean-fuel vehicle deduction (for ve-
hicles placed in service before January 1, 
2006), and alternative motor vehicle credit.
See Form 8910, Alternative Motor Vehicle 
Credit, for information on the alternative motor 
vehicle credit. It is available on vehicles that 
were acquired in 2016, even if they weren’t 
place in service until 2017.
If your business use later falls to 50% 
or less, you may have to recapture (in-
clude in your income) any excess de-
preciation. See Car Used 50% or Less for Busi-
ness, later, for more information.
If you acquired the car by gift or inheritance, 
see Pub. 551, Basis of Assets, for information 
on your basis in the car.
Improvements. A major improvement to a 
car is treated as a new item of 5-year recovery 
property. It is treated as placed in service in the 
year the improvement is made. It doesn’t matter 
how old the car is when the improvement is 
added. Follow the same steps for depreciating 
the improvement as you would for depreciating 
the original cost of the car. However, you must 
CAUTION
!
treat the improvement and the car as a whole 
when applying the limits on the depreciation de-
ductions. Your car's depreciation deduction for 
the year (plus any section 179 deduction, spe-
cial depreciation allowance, and depreciation 
on any improvements) can’t be more than the 
depreciation limit that applies for that year. See 
Depreciation Limits, later.
Car trade-in.  If you traded one car (the “old 
car”) for another car (the “new car”) in 2017, 
there are two ways you can treat the transac-
tion.
1. You can elect to treat the transaction as a 
tax-free disposition of the old car and the 
purchase of the new car. If you make this 
election, you treat the old car as disposed 
of at the time of the trade-in. The deprecia-
ble basis of the new car is the adjusted ba-
sis of the old car (figured as if 100% of the 
car's use had been for business purposes) 
plus any additional amount you paid for 
the new car. You then figure your depreci-
ation deduction for the new car beginning 
with the date you placed it in service. You 
make this election by completing Form 
2106, Part II, Section D. This method is 
explained later, beginning at Effect of 
trade-in on basis.
2. If you don’t make the election described in 
(1), you must figure depreciation sepa-
rately for the remaining basis of the old car 
and for any additional amount you paid for 
the new car. You must apply two deprecia-
tion limits (see Depreciation Limits, later). 
The limit that applies to the remaining ba-
sis of the old car generally is the amount 
that would have been allowed had you not 
traded in the old car. The limit that applies 
to the additional amount you paid for the 
new car generally is the limit that applies 
for the tax year, reduced by the deprecia-
tion allowance for the remaining basis of 
the old car. You must use Form 4562 to 
figure your depreciation deduction. You 
can’t use Form 2106, Part II, Section D. 
This method is explained in Pub. 946.
If you elect to use the method described in 
(1), you must do so on a timely filed tax return 
(including extensions). Otherwise, you must 
use the method described in (2).
Effect of trade-in on basis.  The discus-
sion that follows applies to trade-ins of cars in 
2017, where the election was made to treat the 
transaction as a tax-free disposition of the old 
car and the purchase of the new car. For infor-
mation on how to figure depreciation for cars in-
volved in a like-kind exchange (trade-in) in 
2017, for which the election wasn’t made, see 
Pub. 946 and Regulations section 1.168(i)-6(d)
(3).
Traded car used only for business.  If 
you trade in a car you used only in your busi-
ness for another car that will be used only in 
your business, your original basis in the new car 
is your adjusted basis in the old car, plus any 
additional amount you pay for the new car.
Example. Paul trades in a car that has an 
adjusted basis of $5,000 for a new car. In addi-
tion, he pays cash of $20,000 for the new car. 
Page 19 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Transportation  Page 19

His original basis of the new car is $25,000 (his 
$5,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus the 
$20,000 cash paid). Paul's unadjusted basis is 
$25,000 unless he claims the section 179 de-
duction, special depreciation allowance, or has 
other increases or decreases to his original ba-
sis, discussed under Unadjusted basis, earlier.
Traded car used partly in business.  If 
you trade in a car you used partly in your busi-
ness for a new car you will use in your business, 
you must make a “trade-in” adjustment for the 
personal use of the old car. This adjustment has 
the effect of reducing your basis in your old car, 
but not below zero, for purposes of figuring your 
depreciation deduction for the new car. (This 
adjustment isn’t used, however, when you de-
termine the gain or loss on the later disposition 
of the new car. See Pub. 544, Sales and Other 
Dispositions of Assets, for information on how 
to report the disposition of your car.)
To figure the unadjusted basis of your new 
car for depreciation, first add to your adjusted 
basis in the old car any additional amount you 
pay for the new car. Then subtract from that to-
tal the excess, if any, of:
1. The total of the amounts that would have 
been allowable as depreciation during the 
tax years before the trade if 100% of the 
use of the car had been business and in-
vestment use, over
2. The total of the amounts actually allowed 
as depreciation during those years.
For information about figuring depreciation, see 
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System 
(MACRS) next.
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys-
tem (MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System (MACRS) is the name given 
to the tax rules for getting back (recovering) 
through depreciation deductions the cost of 
property used in a trade or business or to pro-
duce income.
The maximum amount you can deduct is 
limited, depending on the year you placed your 
car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later.
Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars are 
classified as 5-year property. You actually de-
preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over a 
period of 6 calendar years. This is because your 
car is generally treated as placed in service in 
the middle of the year, and you claim deprecia-
tion for one-half of both the first year and the 
sixth year.
For more information on the qualifications 
for this shorter recovery period and the percen-
tages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc-
tion, see chapter 4 of Pub. 946.
Depreciation methods.  You can use one 
of the following methods to depreciate your car.
The 200% declining balance method 
(200% DB) over a 5-year recovery period 
that switches to the straight line method 
when that method provides an equal or 
greater deduction.
The 150% declining balance method 
(150% DB) over a 5-year recovery period 
that switches to the straight line method 
when that method provides an equal or 
greater deduction.
The straight line method (SL) over a 5-year 
recovery period.
If you use Table 4-1  (discussed later) 
to determine your depreciation rate for 
2017, you don’t need to determine in 
what year using the straight line method pro-
vides an equal or greater deduction. This is be-
cause the chart has the switch to the straight 
line method built into its rates.
Before choosing a method, you may wish to 
consider the following facts.
Using the straight line method provides 
equal yearly deductions throughout the re-
covery period.
Using the declining balance methods pro-
vides greater deductions during the earlier 
recovery years with the deductions gener-
ally getting smaller each year.
MACRS depreciation chart.  A 2017 MACRS 
Depreciation Chart  and instructions are inclu-
ded in this chapter as Table 4-1. Using this ta-
ble will make it easy for you to figure the 2017 
depreciation deduction for your car. A similar 
chart appears in the Instructions for Form 2106.
You may have to use the tables in Pub. 
946 instead of using this MACRS De-
preciation Chart.
You must use the Depreciation Tables  in 
Pub. 946 rather than the 2017 MACRS Depreci-
ation Chart  in this publication if any one of the 
following four conditions applies to you.
1. You file your return on a fiscal year basis.
2. You file your return for a short tax year 
(less than 12 months).
3. During the year, all of the following condi-
tions apply.
a. You placed some property in service 
from January through September.
b. You placed some property in service 
from October through December.
c. Your basis in the property you placed 
in service from October through De-
cember (excluding nonresidential real 
property, residential rental property, 
and property placed in service and 
disposed of in the same year) was 
more than 40% of your total bases in 
all property you placed in service dur-
ing the year.
4. You placed qualified property in service on 
an Indian reservation.
Depreciation in future years.  If you use 
the percentages from the chart, you generally 
must continue to use them for the entire recov-
ery period of your car. However, you can’t con-
tinue to use the chart if your basis in your car is 
adjusted because of a casualty. In that case, for 
the year of the adjustment and the remaining re-
covery period, figure the depreciation without 
the chart using your adjusted basis in the car at 
the end of the year of the adjustment and over 
the remaining recovery period. See Figuring the 
Deduction Without Using the Tables  in chap-
ter 4 of Pub. 946.
TIP
CAUTION
!
In future years, don’t use the chart in 
this edition of the publication. Instead, 
use the chart in the publication or the 
form instructions for those future years.
Disposition of car during recovery pe-
riod. If you dispose of the car before the end of 
the recovery period, you are generally allowed a 
half year of depreciation in the year of disposi-
tion unless you purchased the car during the 
last quarter of a year. See Depreciation deduc-
tion for the year of disposition  under Disposition 
of a Car, later, for information on how to figure 
the depreciation allowed in the year of disposi-
tion.
How to use the 2017 chart.  To figure your 
depreciation deduction for 2017, find the per-
centage in the column of Table 4-1  based on 
the date that you first placed the car in service 
and the depreciation method that you are using. 
Multiply the unadjusted basis  of your car (de-
fined earlier) by that percentage to determine 
the amount of your depreciation deduction. If 
you prefer to figure your depreciation deduction 
without the help of the chart, see Pub. 946.
Your deduction can’t be more than the 
maximum depreciation limit for cars. 
See Depreciation Limits, later.
Example. Phil bought a used truck in Feb-
ruary 2016 to use exclusively in his landscape 
business. He paid $9,200 for the truck with no 
trade-in. Phil didn’t claim any section 179 de-
duction, the truck didn’t qualify for the special 
depreciation allowance, and he chose to use 
the 200% DB method to get the largest depreci-
ation deduction in the early years.
Phil used the MACRS Depreciation Chart in 
2016 to find his percentage. The unadjusted ba-
sis of his truck equals its cost because Phil 
used it exclusively for business. He multiplied 
the unadjusted basis of his truck, $9,200, by the 
percentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2016 
depreciation deduction of $1,840.
In 2017, Phil used the truck for personal pur-
poses when he repaired his father's cabin. His 
records show that the business use of his truck 
was 90% in 2017. Phil used Table 4-1 to find his 
percentage. Reading down the first column for 
the date placed in service and across to the 
200% DB column, he locates his percentage, 
32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis of his 
truck, $8,280 ($9,200 cost × 90% (0.90) busi-
ness use), by 32% (0.32) to figure his 2017 de-
preciation deduction of $2,650.
Depreciation Limits
There are limits on the amount you can deduct 
for depreciation of your car, truck, or van. The 
section 179 deduction and special depreciation 
allowance are treated as depreciation for pur-
poses of the limits. The maximum amount you 
can deduct each year depends on the year you 
place the car in service. These limits are shown 
in the following tables.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Page 20 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20  Chapter 4 Transportation

Maximum
Depreciation Deduction
for Cars
Date 4th &
Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later
In Service Year Year Year Years
2012–2017 $11,1601 $5,100 $3,050 $1,875
2010–2011  11,0602 4,900 2,950 1,775
2008–2009  10,9603  4,800  2,850  1,775
2007 3,060 4,900 2,850 1,775
2006 2,960 4,800 2,850 1,775
2005 2,960 4,700 2,850 1,675
2004 10,6103 4,800 2,850 1,675
5/06/2003–
12/31/2003
10,7104 4,900 2,950 1,775
1/01/2003–
5/05/2003
7,6605 4,900 2,950 1,775
1$3,160 if the car isn’t qualified property or if you elect 
not to claim the special depreciation allowance.
2$3,060 if the car isn’t qualified property or if you elect 
not to claim the special depreciation allowance.
3$2,960 if the car isn’t qualified property or if you elect 
not to claim the special depreciation allowance.
4$7,660 if you acquired the car before 5/06/2003. 
$3,060 if the car isn’t qualified property or if you 
elect not to claim any special depreciation 
allowance.
5$3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the 
car isn’t qualified property, or you elect not to claim 
the special depreciation allowance.
Trucks and vans.  For 2017, the maximum 
depreciation deductions for trucks and vans are 
generally higher than those for cars. A truck or 
van is a passenger automobile that is classified 
by the manufacturer as a truck or van and rated 
at 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less.
Maximum
Depreciation Deduction
for Trucks and Vans
Date 4th &
 Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later
In Service Year Year Year Years
2017 $11,5601 $5,700 $3,450 $2,075
2016 11,5601 5,700 3,350 2,075
2015 11,4601 5,600 3,350 1,975
2014 11,4601 5,500 3,350 1,975
2013  11,3601 5,400 3,250 1,975
2012  11,3601 5,300 3,150 1,875
2011  11,2601 5,200 3,150 1,875
2010 11,1601 5,100 3,050 1,875
2009 11,0601  4,900 2,950 1,775
2008 11,1601 5,100 3,050 1,875
2007 3,260 5,200 3,050 1,875
2005–2006 3,260 5,200 3,150 1,875
2004 10,9101 5,300 3,150 1,875
2003  11,0101,2 5,400 3,250 1,975
1If the special depreciation allowance doesn’t apply 
or you make the election not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance, the first-year limit is $3,560 
for 2017 and 2016, $3,460 for 2015 and 2014, 
$3,360 for 2013 and 2012, $3,260 for 2011, $3,160 
for 2010, $3,060 for 2009, $3,160 for 2008, $3,260 
for 2004, and $3,360 for 2003.
2If the truck or van was acquired before 5/06/2003, 
the truck or van is qualified property, and you claim 
the special depreciation allowance for the truck or 
van, the maximum deduction is $7,960.
Car used less than full year. The depreci-
ation limits aren’t reduced if you use a car for 
less than a full year. This means that you don’t 
reduce the limit when you either place a car in 
service or dispose of a car during the year. 
However, the depreciation limits are reduced if 
you don’t use the car exclusively for business 
and investment purposes. See Reduction for 
personal use next.
Reduction for personal use.  The deprecia-
tion limits are reduced based on your percent-
age of personal use. If you use a car less than 
100% in your business or work, you must deter-
mine the depreciation deduction limit by multi-
plying the limit amount by the percentage of 
business and investment use during the tax 
year.
Section 179 deduction.  The section 179 de-
duction is treated as a depreciation deduction. 
If you place a car that isn’t a truck or van in 
service in 2017, use it only for business, and 
choose the section 179 deduction, the special 
depreciation allowance and the depreciation 
deduction for that car for 2017 is limited to 
$11,160.
Example. On September 4, 2017, Jack 
bought a used car for $10,000 and placed it in 
service. He used it 80% for his business, and 
he chooses to take a section 179 deduction for 
the car. The car isn’t qualified property for pur-
poses of the special depreciation allowance.
Before applying the limit, Jack figures his 
maximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000. 
This is the cost of his qualifying property (up to 
the maximum $510,000 amount) multiplied by 
his business use ($10,000 × 80% (0.80)).
Jack then figures that his section 179 de-
duction for 2017 is limited to $2,528 (80% of 
$3,160). He then figures his unadjusted basis of 
$5,472 (($10,000 × 80% (0.80)) − $2,528) for 
determining his depreciation deduction. Jack 
has reached his maximum depreciation deduc-
tion for 2017. For 2018, Jack will use his unad-
justed basis of $5,472 to figure his depreciation 
deduction.
Deductions in years after the recovery pe-
riod. If the depreciation deductions for your car 
are reduced under the passenger automobile 
limits (discussed earlier), you will have unrecov-
ered basis in your car at the end of the recovery 
period. If you continue to use your car for busi-
ness, you can deduct that unrecovered basis 
(subject to depreciation limits) after the recov-
ery period ends.
Unrecovered basis.  This is your cost or 
other basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuel 
vehicle deduction (for vehicles placed in service 
before January 1, 2006), alternative motor vehi-
cle credit, electric vehicle credit, gas guzzler 
tax, and depreciation (including any special de-
preciation allowance , discussed earlier, unless 
you elect not to claim it) and section 179 deduc-
tions that would have been allowable if you had 
used the car 100% for business and investment 
use.
The recovery period.  For 5-year property, 
your recovery period is 6 calendar years. A part 
year's depreciation is allowed in the first calen-
dar year, a full year's depreciation is allowed in 
each of the next 4 calendar years, and a part 
year's depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen-
dar year.
Under MACRS, your recovery period is the 
same whether you use declining balance or 
straight line depreciation. You determine your 
unrecovered basis in the 7th year after you 
placed the car in service.
How to treat unrecovered basis.  If you 
continue to use your car for business after the 
recovery period, you can claim a depreciation 
deduction in each succeeding tax year until you 
recover your basis in the car. The maximum 
amount you can deduct each year is deter-
mined by the date you placed the car in service 
and your business-use percentage. For exam-
ple, no deduction is allowed for a year you use 
your car 100% for personal purposes.
Example. In April 2011, Bob bought and 
placed in service a car he used exclusively in 
his business. The car cost $31,500. Bob didn’t 
claim a section 179 deduction or the special de-
preciation allowance for the car. He continued 
to use the car 100% in his business throughout 
the recovery period (2011 through 2016). For 
those years, Bob used the MACRS Deprecia-
tion Chart (200% declining balance method) 
and the Maximum Depreciation Deduction for 
Cars table, earlier, for the applicable tax year to 
figure his depreciation deductions during the re-
covery period. Bob's depreciation deductions 
were subject to the depreciation limits so he will 
Page 21 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Transportation  Page 21

have unrecovered basis at the end of the recov-
ery period as shown in the following table.
MACRS Deprec.
Year % Amount Limit Allowed
2011 20.00 $6,300 $3,060 $3,060
2012 32.00 10,080 4,900 4,900
2013 19.20 6,048 2,950 2,950
2014 11.52 3,629 1,775 1,775
2015 11.52 3,629 1,775 1,775
2016 5.76 1,814 1,775 1,775
Total $31,500 $16,235
For the correct limit, see Maximum Depreci-
ation Deduction for Cars  under Depreciation 
Limits, earlier, for the maximum amount of de-
preciation allowed each year.
At the end of 2016, Bob had an unrecovered 
basis in the car of $15,265 ($31,500 – $16,235). 
If Bob continued to use the car 100% for busi-
ness in 2017 and later years, he can claim a de-
preciation deduction equal to the lesser of 
$1,775 or his remaining unrecovered basis.
If Bob's business use of the car was less 
than 100% during any year, his depreciation de-
duction would be less than the maximum 
amount allowable for that year. However, in de-
termining his unrecovered basis in the car, he 
would still reduce his original basis by the maxi-
mum amount allowable as if the business use 
had been 100%. For example, if Bob had used 
his car 60% for business instead of 100%, his 
allowable depreciation deductions would have 
been $9,741 ($16,235 × 60% (0.60)), but he still 
would have to reduce his basis by $16,235 to 
determine his unrecovered basis.
Car Used 50% or Less
for Business
If you use your car 50% or less for qualified 
business use  (defined earlier under Deprecia-
tion Deduction ) either in the year the car is 
placed in service or in a later year, special rules 
apply. The rules that apply in these two situa-
tions are explained in the following paragraphs. 
(For this purpose, “car” was defined earlier un-
der Actual Car Expenses  and includes certain 
trucks and vans.)
Qualified business use 50% or less in year 
placed in service.  If you use your car 50% or 
less for qualified business use, the following 
rules apply.
You can’t take the section 179 deduction.
You can’t take the special depreciation al-
lowance.
You must figure depreciation using the 
straight line method over a 5-year recovery 
period. You must continue to use the 
straight line method even if your percent-
age of business use increases to more 
than 50% in a later year.
Instead of making the computation yourself, 
you can use column (c) of Table 4-1 to find the 
percentage to use.
Example. In May 2017, Dan bought a car 
for $17,500. He used it 40% for his consulting 
business. Because he didn’t use the car more 
than 50% for business, Dan can’t take any sec-
tion 179 deduction or special depreciation al-
lowance, and he must use the straight line 
method over a 5-year recovery period to re-
cover the cost of his car.
Dan deducts $700 in 2017. This is the lesser 
of:
Table 4-1. 2017 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2017.)
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below to find the depreciation method 
and percentage to use for your 2017 return for cars placed in service in 2017.
 
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the car in service in 2017. Then select 
the depreciation method and percentage from column (a), (b), or (c) following the rules 
explained in this chapter.
For cars placed in service before 2017, you must use the same method you used on last 
year's return unless a decline in your business use requires you to change to the straight 
line method. Refer back to the MACRS Depreciation Chart for the year you placed the 
car in service. (See Car Used 50% or Less for Business, later.)
 
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use percentage. Multiply the 
result by the percentage you found in the chart to find the amount of your depreciation 
deduction for 2017. (Also see Depreciation Limits, earlier.)
CAUTION
!
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the same year, you may have to use the Jan. 
1–Sept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1–Dec. 31 percentage for your car.
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of that year, and 2) the basis of all business property you placed in 
service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in service after September isn’t more than 40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in 
service for the entire year, use the percentage for Jan. 1–Sept. 30 for figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of Pub. 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2017 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2017, both used 100% in your business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1–
Sept. 30, 2017, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the $20,000 basis of the property (van) placed in service after September isn’t more than 40% of the basis of all 
property placed in service during the year (40%(0.40) × ($32,000 + 20,000) = $20,800).
(a) (b) (c)
Date Placed In Service 200% Declining 
Balance (200% DB)1
150% Declining 
Balance (150% DB)1
Straight Line 
(SL)
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2017 200 DB  5.0% 150 DB  3.75% SL  2.5%
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2017 200 DB 20.0 150 DB 15.0 SL 10.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2016 200 DB 38.0 150 DB 28.88 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2016 200 DB 32.0 150 DB 25.5 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2015 200 DB 22.8 150 DB 20.21 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2015 200 DB 19.2 150 DB 17.85 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2014 200 DB 13.68 150 DB 16.4 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2014 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2013 200 DB 10.94 150 DB 16.41 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2013 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2012 200 DB  9.58 150 DB 14.35 SL 17.5
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2012 200 DB  5.76 150 DB  8.33 SL 10.0
 Prior to 20122
1 You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
2 If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to claim depreciation. See 
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits, earlier.
Page 22 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22  Chapter 4 Transportation

1. $700 (($17,500 cost × 40% (0.40) busi-
ness use) × 10% recovery percentage 
(from column (c), Table 4-1), or
2. $1,264 ($3,160 maximum limit × 40% 
(0.40) business use).
Qualified business use 50% or less in a 
later year. If you use your car more than 50% 
in qualified business use in the tax year it is 
placed in service but the business use drops to 
50% or less in a later year, you can no longer 
use an accelerated depreciation method for that 
car.
For the year the business use drops to 50% 
or less and all later years in the recovery period, 
you must use the straight line depreciation 
method over a 5-year recovery period. In addi-
tion, for the year your business use drops to 
50% or less, you must recapture (include in 
your gross income) any excess depreciation 
(discussed later). You also increase the adjus-
ted basis of your car by the same amount.
Example. In June 2014, you purchased a 
car for exclusive use in your business. You met 
the more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 years 
of the recovery period (2014 through 2016) but 
failed to meet it in the fourth year (2017). You 
determine your depreciation for 2017 using 
20% (from column (c) of Table 4-1 ). You also 
will have to determine and include in your gross 
income any excess depreciation, discussed 
next.
Excess depreciation.  You must include 
any excess depreciation in your gross income 
and add it to your car's adjusted basis for the 
first tax year in which you don’t use the car 
more than 50% in qualified business use. Use 
Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig-
ure and report the excess depreciation in your 
gross income.
Excess depreciation is:
1. The amount of the depreciation deduc-
tions allowable for the car (including any 
section 179 deduction claimed and any 
special depreciation allowance claimed) 
for tax years in which you used the car 
more than 50% in qualified business use, 
minus
2. The amount of the depreciation deduc-
tions that would have been allowable for 
those years if you hadn’t used the car 
more than 50% in qualified business use 
for the year you placed it in service. This 
means the amount of depreciation figured 
using the straight line method.
Example. In September 2013, you bought 
a car for $20,500 and placed it in service. You 
didn’t claim the section 179 deduction or the 
special depreciation allowance. You used the 
car exclusively in qualified business use for 
2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016. For those years, 
you used the appropriate MACRS Depreciation 
Chart to figure depreciation deductions totaling 
$13,185 ($3,160 for 2013, $5,100 for 2014, 
$3,050 for 2015, and $1,875 for 2016) under 
the 200% DB method.
During 2017, you used the car 30% for busi-
ness and 70% for personal purposes. Since you 
didn’t meet the more-than-50%-use test, you 
must switch from the 200% DB depreciation 
method to the straight line depreciation method 
for 2017, and include in gross income for 2017 
your excess depreciation determined as fol-
lows.
Total depreciation claimed: 
(MACRS 200% DB method) $13,185
Minus total depreciation allowable: 
(Straight line method) 
2013—10% of $20,500 $2,050
(Limit: $3,160)
2014—20% of $20,500 4,100
(Limit: $5,100)
2015—20% of $20,500 3,050
(Limit: $3,050)
2016—20% of $20,500 1,875 -11,075
(Limit: $1,875)
Excess depreciation $2,110
For the correct limit, see Maximum Depreci-
ation Deduction for Cars  under Depreciation 
Limits, earlier, for the maximum amount of de-
preciation allowed each year.
In 2017, using Form 4797, you figure and re-
port the $2,110 excess depreciation you must 
include in your gross income. Your adjusted ba-
sis in the car is also increased by $2,110. Your 
2017 depreciation is $1,230 ($20,500 (unadjus-
ted basis) × 30% (0.30) (business use percent-
age) × 20% (0.20) (from column (c) of Table 4-1 
on the line for Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2012)). How-
ever, your depreciation deduction is limited to 
$563 ($1,875 x 30% (0.30) business use).
Leasing a Car
If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in 
your business, you can use the standard mile-
age rate or actual expenses to figure your de-
ductible expense. This section explains how to 
figure actual expenses for a leased car, truck, 
or van.
Deductible payments.  If you choose to use 
actual expenses, you can deduct the part of 
each lease payment that is for the use of the ve-
hicle in your business. You can’t deduct any 
part of a lease payment that is for personal use 
of the vehicle, such as commuting.
You must spread any advance payments 
over the entire lease period. You can’t deduct 
any payments you make to buy a car, truck, or 
van even if the payments are called lease pay-
ments.
If you lease a car, truck, or van for 30 days 
or more, you may have to reduce your lease 
payment deduction by an “inclusion amount,” 
explained next.
Inclusion Amounts
If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in 
your business for a lease term of 30 days or 
more, you may have to include an inclusion 
amount in your income for each tax year you 
lease the vehicle. To do this, you don’t add an 
amount to income. Instead, you reduce your de-
duction for your lease payment. (This reduction 
has an effect similar to the limit on the deprecia-
tion deduction you would have on the vehicle if 
you owned it.)
The inclusion amount is a percentage of part 
of the fair market value of the leased vehicle 
multiplied by the percentage of business and in-
vestment use of the vehicle for the tax year. It is 
prorated for the number of days of the lease 
term in the tax year.
The inclusion amount applies to each tax 
year that you lease the vehicle if the fair market 
value (defined next) when the lease began was 
more than the amounts shown in the following 
tables.
Cars
(Except for Trucks and Vans)
Year Lease Began Fair Market Value
2013–2017 $19,000
2010–2012 18,500
Trucks and Vans
Year Lease Began Fair Market Value
. 
2014–2017 $19,500
2010–2013 19,000
Fair market value.  Fair market value is the 
price at which the property would change hands 
between a willing buyer and seller, neither hav-
ing to buy or sell, and both having reasonable 
knowledge of all the necessary facts. Sales of 
similar property around the same date may be 
helpful in figuring the fair market value of the 
property.
Figure the fair market value on the first day 
of the lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car 
is specified in the lease agreement, use that 
amount as the fair market value.
Figuring the inclusion amount.  Inclusion 
amounts are listed in Appendices A-1 through 
A-5 for cars and in Appendices B-1 through B-5 
for trucks and vans. If the fair market value of 
the vehicle is $100,000 or less, use the appro-
priate appendix (depending on the year you first 
placed the vehicle in service) to determine the 
inclusion amount. If the fair market value is 
more than $100,000, see the Revenue Proce-
dure(s) identified in the footnote of the appendi-
ces for the inclusion amount.
For each tax year during which you lease 
the car for business, determine your inclusion 
amount by following these three steps.
1. Locate the appendix that applies to you. 
To find the inclusion amount, do the fol-
lowing.
a. Find the line that includes the fair mar-
ket value of the car on the first day of 
the lease term.
b. Go across the line to the column for 
the tax year in which the car is used 
under the lease to find the dollar 
amount. For the last tax year of the 
lease, use the dollar amount for the 
preceding year.
2. Prorate the dollar amount from (1b) for the 
number of days of the lease term included 
in the tax year.
Page 23 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Transportation  Page 23

3. Multiply the prorated amount from (2) by 
the percentage of business and invest-
ment use for the tax year. This is your in-
clusion amount.
Example. On January 17, 2017, you leased 
a car for 3 years and placed it in service for use 
in your business. The car had a fair market 
value of $32,250 on the first day of the lease 
term. You use the car 75% for business and 
25% for personal purposes during each year of 
the lease. Assuming you continue to use the car 
75% for business, you use Appendix A-5 to ar-
rive at the following inclusion amounts for each 
year of the lease. For the last tax year of the 
lease, 2020, you use the amount for the preced-
ing year.
Tax 
year
Dollar 
amount Proration
Business 
use
Inclusion 
amount
2017 $30 348/365 75% $21
2018  67 365/365 75% 50
2019  99 365/365 75% 74
2020  989 16/366 75% 3
Note. 2020 is a leap year, and includes an 
extra calendar day, February 29, 2020.
For each year of the lease that you deduct 
lease payments, you must reduce your deduc-
tion by the inclusion amount figured for that 
year.
Leased car changed from business to per-
sonal use. If you lease a car for business use 
and, in a later year, change it to personal use, 
follow the rules explained earlier under Figuring 
the inclusion amount . For the tax year in which 
you stop using the car for business, use the dol-
lar amount for the previous tax year. Prorate the 
dollar amount for the number of days in the 
lease term that fall within the tax year.
Example. On August 16, 2016, Will leased 
a car with a fair market value of $38,500 for 3 
years. He used the car exclusively in his own 
data processing business. On November 5, 
2017, Will closed his business and went to work 
for a company where he isn’t required to use a 
car for business. Using Appendix A-4 , Will fig-
ured his inclusion amount for 2016 and 2017 as 
shown in the following table and reduced his 
deductions for lease payments by those 
amounts.
Tax 
year
Dollar 
amount Proration
Business 
use
Inclusion 
amount
2016 $41 138/366 100%  $15
2017  89 309/365 100%   75
Leased car changed from personal to busi-
ness use.  If you lease a car for personal use 
and, in a later year, change it to business use, 
you must determine the car's fair market value 
on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-
sion amount using the rules explained earlier 
under Figuring the inclusion amount . Use the 
fair market value on the date of conversion.
Example. In March 2015, Janice leased a 
car for 4 years for personal use. On June 1, 
2017, she started working as a self-employed 
advertising consultant and started using the 
leased car for business purposes. Her records 
show that her business use for June 1 through 
December 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusion 
amount for 2017, Janice obtained an appraisal 
from an independent car leasing company that 
showed the fair market value of her 2015 car on 
June 1, 2017, was $21,650. Using Appendix 
A-5, Janice figured her inclusion amount for 
2017 as shown in the following table.
Tax 
year
Dollar 
amount Proration
Business 
use
Inclusion 
amount
2017 $11 214/365 60% $4
Reporting inclusion amounts.  For informa-
tion on reporting inclusion amounts, employees 
should see Car rentals  under Completing 
Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6. Sole 
proprietors should see the Instructions for 
Schedule C (Form 1040) and farmers should 
see the Instructions for Schedule F (Form 
1040).
Disposition of a Car
If you dispose of your car, you may have a taxa-
ble gain or a deductible loss. The portion of any 
gain that is due to depreciation (including any 
section 179 deduction, clean-fuel vehicle de-
duction (for vehicles placed in service before 
January 1, 2006), and special depreciation al-
lowance) that you claimed on the car will be 
treated as ordinary income. However, you may 
not have to recognize a gain or loss if you dis-
pose of the car because of a casualty, theft, or 
trade-in.
This section gives some general information 
about dispositions of cars. For information on 
how to report the disposition of your car, see 
Pub. 544.
Casualty or theft.  For a casualty or theft, a 
gain results when you receive insurance or 
other reimbursement that is more than your ad-
justed basis in your car. If you then spend all of 
the proceeds to acquire replacement property 
(a new car or repairs to the old car) within a 
specified period of time, you don’t recognize 
any gain. Your basis in the replacement prop-
erty is its cost minus any gain that isn’t recog-
nized. See Pub. 547 for more information.
Trade-in. When you trade in an old car for a 
new one, the transaction is considered a 
like-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is 
recognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of 
Pub. 544.) In a trade-in situation, your basis in 
the new property is generally your adjusted ba-
sis in the old property plus any additional 
amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis , ear-
lier.)
Depreciation adjustment when you used 
the standard mileage rate.  If you used the 
standard mileage rate for the business use of 
your car, depreciation was included in that rate. 
The rate of depreciation that was allowed in the 
standard mileage rate is shown in the Rate of 
Depreciation Allowed in Standard Mileage Rate 
table, later. You must reduce your basis in your 
car (but not below zero) by the amount of this 
depreciation.
If your basis is reduced to zero (but not be-
low zero) through the use of the standard mile-
age rate, and you continue to use your car for 
business, no adjustment (reduction) to the 
standard mileage rate is necessary. Use the full 
standard mileage rate (53.5 cents (0.535) per 
mile for 2017) for business miles driven.
These rates don’t apply for any year in 
which the actual expenses method was 
used.
Rate of Depreciation Allowed in 
Standard Mileage Rate
Year(s) Depreciation
. 
Rate per Mile
2017 $0.25
2015–2016 0.24
2014 0.22
2012–2013 0.23
2011 0.22
2010 0.23
2008–2009 0.21
2007 0.19
2005–2006 0.17
2003–2004 0.16
2001–2002 0.15
2000 0.14
Example. In 2012, you bought a car for ex-
clusive use in your business. The car cost 
$22,500. From 2012 through 2017, you used 
the standard mileage rate to figure your car ex-
pense deduction. You drove your car 14,100 
miles in 2012, 16,300 miles in 2013, 15,600 
miles in 2014, 16,700 miles in 2015, 15,100 
miles in 2016, and 14,900 miles in 2017. The 
depreciation portion of your car expense de-
duction is figured as follows.
Year Miles x 
Rate
Depreciation
2012 14,100 × $0.23 $3,243
2013 16,300 × 0.23  3,749
2014 15,600 × 0.22  3,432
2015 16,700 × 0.24  4,008
2016 15,100 × 0.24  3,744
2017 14,900 × 0.25  3,725
Total depreciation $21,901
At the end of 2017, your adjusted basis in the 
car is $599 ($22,500 − $21,901).
Depreciation deduction for the year of dis-
position. If you deduct actual car expenses 
and you dispose of your car before the end of 
its recovery period, you are allowed a reduced 
depreciation deduction for the year of disposi-
tion.
To figure the reduced depreciation deduc-
tion for a car disposed of in 2017, first deter-
mine the depreciation deduction for the full year 
using Table 4-1.
TIP
Page 24 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 24  Chapter 4 Transportation

If you used a Date Placed in Service line for 
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, you can deduct one-half of the 
depreciation amount figured for the full year. 
Figure your depreciation deduction for the full 
year using the rules explained in this chapter 
and deduct 50% of that amount with your other 
actual car expenses.
If you used a Date Placed in Service line for 
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, you can deduct a percentage of 
the depreciation amount figured for the full year. 
The percentage you use is determined by the 
month you disposed of the car. Figure your de-
preciation deduction for the full year using the 
rules explained in this chapter and multiply the 
result by the percentage from the following ta-
ble for the month that you disposed of the car.
Month Percentage
Jan., Feb., March ............. 12.5%
April, May, June ............... 37.5%
July, Aug., Sept. .............. 62.5%
Oct., Nov., Dec. ............... 87.5%
Don’t use this table if you are a fiscal 
year filer. See Sale or Other Disposi-
tion Before the Recovery Period Ends 
in chapter 4 of Pub. 946.
5.
Recordkeeping
If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-
portation expenses, you must be able to prove 
(substantiate) certain elements of expense. 
This chapter discusses the records you need to 
keep to prove these expenses.
If you keep timely and accurate re-
cords, you will have support to show 
the IRS if your tax return is ever exam-
ined. You will also have proof of expenses that 
your employer may require if you are reim-
bursed under an accountable plan. These plans 
are discussed in chapter 6 under Reimburse-
ments.
How To Prove Expenses
Table 5-1 is a summary of records you need to 
prove each expense discussed in this publica-
tion. You must be able to prove the elements 
listed across the top portion of the chart. You 
prove them by having the information and re-
ceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed 
in the first column.
You can’t deduct amounts that you ap-
proximate or estimate.
You should keep adequate records to prove 
your expenses or have sufficient evidence that 
will support your own statement. You must gen-
erally prepare a written record for it to be 
CAUTION
!
RECORDS
CAUTION
!
considered adequate. This is because written 
evidence is more reliable than oral evidence 
alone. However, if you prepare a record on a 
computer, it is considered an adequate record.
What Are Adequate 
Records?
You should keep the proof you need in an ac-
count book, diary, log, statement of expense, 
trip sheets, or similar record. You should also 
keep documentary evidence that, together with 
your record, will support each element of an ex-
pense.
Documentary evidence.  You generally must 
have documentary evidence, such as receipts, 
canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-
penses.
Exception. Documentary evidence isn’t 
needed if any of the following conditions apply.
You have meals or lodging expenses while 
traveling away from home for which you 
account to your employer under an ac-
countable plan, and you use a per diem al-
lowance method that includes meals 
and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and 
per diem allowances are discussed in 
chapter 6.)
Your expense, other than lodging, is less 
than $75.
You have a transportation expense for 
which a receipt isn’t readily available.
Adequate evidence.  Documentary evi-
dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if 
it shows the amount, date, place, and essential 
character of the expense.
For example, a hotel receipt is enough to 
support expenses for business travel if it has all 
of the following information.
The name and location of the hotel.
The dates you stayed there.
Separate amounts for charges such as 
lodging, meals, and telephone calls.
A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an 
expense for a business meal if it has all of the 
following information.
The name and location of the restaurant.
The number of people served.
The date and amount of the expense.
If a charge is made for items other than food 
and beverages, the receipt must show that this 
is the case.
Canceled check.  A canceled check, to-
gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-
tablishes the cost. However, a canceled check 
by itself doesn’t prove a business expense with-
out other evidence to show that it was for a 
business purpose.
Duplicate information.  You don‘t have to re-
cord information in your account book or other 
record that duplicates information shown on a 
receipt as long as your records and receipts 
complement each other in an orderly manner.
You don’t have to record amounts your em-
ployer pays directly for any ticket or other travel 
item. However, if you charge these items to 
your employer, through a credit card or other-
wise, you must keep a record of the amounts 
you spend.
Timely kept records.  You should record the 
elements of an expense or of a business use at 
or near the time of the expense or use and sup-
port it with sufficient documentary evidence. A 
timely kept record has more value than a state-
ment prepared later when generally there is a 
lack of accurate recall.
You don’t need to write down the elements 
of every expense on the day of the expense. If 
you maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac-
counts for use during the week, the log is con-
sidered a timely kept record.
If you give your employer, client, or cus-
tomer an expense account statement, it can 
also be considered a timely kept record. This is 
true if you copy it from your account book, diary, 
log, statement of expense, trip sheets, or similar 
record.
Proving business purpose.  You must gener-
ally provide a written statement of the business 
purpose of an expense. However, the degree of 
proof varies according to the circumstances in 
each case. If the business purpose of an ex-
pense is clear from the surrounding circumstan-
ces, then you don’t need to give a written ex-
planation.
Example. If you are a sales representative 
who calls on customers on an established sales 
route, you don’t have to give a written explana-
tion of the business purpose for traveling that 
route. You can satisfy the requirements by re-
cording the length of the delivery route once, 
the date of each trip at or near the time of the 
trips, and the total miles you drove the car dur-
ing the tax year. You could also establish the 
date of each trip with a receipt, record of deliv-
ery, or other documentary evidence.
Confidential information.  You don’t need to 
put confidential information relating to an ele-
ment of a deductible expense (such as the 
place, business purpose, or business relation-
ship) in your account book, diary, or other re-
cord. However, you do have to record the infor-
mation elsewhere at or near the time of the 
expense and have it available to fully prove that 
element of the expense.
What if I Have Incomplete 
Records?
If you don’t have complete records to prove an 
element of an expense, then you must prove 
the element with:
Your own written or oral statement contain-
ing specific information about the element, 
and
Other supporting evidence that is sufficient 
to establish the element.
If the element is the description of a gift, or 
the cost, time, place, or date of an expense, the 
supporting evidence must be either direct evi-
dence or documentary evidence. Direct evi-
dence can be written statements or the oral tes-
timony of your guests or other witnesses setting 
forth detailed information about the element. 
Page 25 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping  Page 25

Documentary evidence can be receipts, paid 
bills, or similar evidence.
If the element is either the business relation-
ship of your guests or the business purpose of 
the amount spent, the supporting evidence can 
be circumstantial rather than direct. For exam-
ple, the nature of your work, such as making de-
liveries, provides circumstantial evidence of the 
use of your car for business purposes. Invoices 
of deliveries establish when you used the car 
for business.
Sampling. You can keep an adequate record 
for parts of a tax year and use that record to 
prove the amount of business or investment use 
for the entire year. You must demonstrate by 
other evidence that the periods for which an ad-
equate record is kept are representative of the 
use throughout the tax year.
Example. You use your car to visit the offi-
ces of clients, meet with suppliers and other 
subcontractors, and pick up and deliver items to 
clients. There is no other business use of the 
car, but you and your family use the car for 
personal purposes. You keep adequate records 
during the first week of each month that show 
that 75% of the use of the car is for business. 
Invoices and bills show that your business use 
continues at the same rate during the later 
weeks of each month. Your weekly records are 
representative of the use of the car each month 
and are sufficient evidence to support the per-
centage of business use for the year.
Exceptional circumstances.  You can satisfy 
the substantiation requirements with other evi-
dence if, because of the nature of the situation 
in which an expense is made, you can’t get a 
receipt. This applies if all the following are true.
You were unable to obtain evidence for an 
element of the expense or use that com-
pletely satisfies the requirements ex-
plained earlier under What Are Adequate 
Records.
You are unable to obtain evidence for an 
element that completely satisfies the two 
rules listed earlier under What if I Have In-
complete Records.
You have presented other evidence for the 
element that is the best proof possible un-
der the circumstances.
Destroyed records. If you can’t produce a re-
ceipt because of reasons beyond your control, 
you can prove a deduction by reconstructing 
your records or expenses. Reasons beyond 
your control include fire, flood, and other casu-
alties.
Separating and Combining 
Expenses
This section explains when expenses must be 
kept separate and when expenses can be com-
bined.
Separating expenses.  Each separate pay-
ment is generally considered a separate ex-
pense. For example, if you entertain a customer 
or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the 
dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-
ets are two separate expenses. You must re-
cord them separately in your records.
Table 5-1. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have 
expenses for . .
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements . . .
Amount Time Place or 
Description
Business Purpose
Business Relationship
Travel Cost of each separate 
expense for travel, 
lodging, and meals. 
Incidental expenses 
may be totaled in 
reasonable categories 
such as taxis, fees and 
tips, etc.
Dates you left 
and returned 
for each trip 
and number 
of days spent 
on business.
Destination or area of 
your travel (name of 
city, town, or other 
designation).
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the 
business benefit gained or expected to be gained.
 
Relationship: N/A
Entertainment Cost of each separate 
expense. Incidental 
expenses such as taxis, 
telephones, etc., may be 
totaled on a daily basis.
Date of 
entertainment.
 (Also see 
Business 
Purpose.)
Name and address or 
location of place of 
entertainment. Type 
of entertainment if not 
otherwise apparent. 
(Also see Business 
Purpose.)
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the 
business benefit gained or expected to be gained. 
For entertainment, the nature of the business 
discussion or activity. If the entertainment was directly 
before or after a business discussion: the date, place, 
nature, and duration of the business discussion, and 
the identities of the persons who took part in both the 
business discussion and the entertainment activity.
 
Relationship: Occupations or other information (such 
as names, titles, or other designations) about the 
recipients that shows their business relationship to you. 
For entertainment, you must also prove that you or your 
employee was present if the entertainment was a 
business meal.
Gifts Cost of the gift. Date of the 
gift.
Description of the gift.
Transportation Cost of each separate 
expense. For car 
expenses, the cost of 
the car and any 
improvements, the date 
you started using it for 
business, the mileage 
for each business use, 
and the total miles for 
the year.
Date of the 
expense. For 
car 
expenses, 
the date of 
the use of the 
car.
Your business 
destination.
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
 
Relationship: N/A
Page 26 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 26  Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Season or series tickets.  If you buy sea-
son or series tickets for business use, you must 
treat each ticket in the series as a separate 
item. To determine the cost of individual tickets, 
divide the total cost (but not more than face 
value) by the number of games or performan-
ces in the series. You must keep records to 
show whether you use each ticket as a gift or 
entertainment. Also, you must be able to prove 
the cost of nonluxury box seat tickets if you rent 
a skybox or other private luxury box for more 
than one event. See Entertainment tickets  in 
chapter 2.
Combining items.  You can make one daily 
entry in your record for reasonable categories of 
expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephone 
calls, or other incidental travel costs. Meals 
should be in a separate category. You can in-
clude tips for meal-related services with the 
costs of the meals.
Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-
ing the course of a single event are considered 
a single expense. For example, if during enter-
tainment at a cocktail lounge, you pay sepa-
rately for each serving of refreshments, the total 
expense for the refreshments is treated as a 
single expense.
Car expenses.  You can account for sev-
eral uses of your car that can be considered 
part of a single use, such as a round trip or un-
interrupted business use, with a single record. 
Minimal personal use, such as a stop for lunch 
on the way between two business stops, isn’t 
an interruption of business use.
Example. You make deliveries at several 
different locations on a route that begins and 
ends at your employer's business premises and 
that includes a stop at the business premises 
between two deliveries. You can account for 
these using a single record of miles driven.
Gift expenses.  You don’t always have to 
record the name of each recipient of a gift. A 
general listing will be enough if it is evident that 
you aren’t trying to avoid the $25 annual limit on 
the amount you can deduct for gifts to any one 
person. For example, if you buy a large number 
of tickets to local high school basketball games 
and give one or two tickets to each of many 
customers, it is usually enough to record a gen-
eral description of the recipients.
Allocating total cost.  If you can prove the to-
tal cost of travel or entertainment but you can’t 
prove how much it cost for each person who 
participated in the event, you may have to allo-
cate the total cost among you and your guests 
on a pro rata basis. To do so, you must estab-
lish the number of persons who participated in 
the event.
An allocation would be needed, for example, 
if you didn’t have a business relationship with all 
of your guests. See Allocating between busi-
ness and nonbusiness in chapter 2.
If your return is examined.  If your return is 
examined, you may have to provide additional 
information to the IRS. This information could 
be needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy 
or reliability of information contained in your re-
cords, statements, testimony, or documentary 
evidence before a deduction is allowed.
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts
You must keep records as long as they may be 
needed for the administration of any provision 
of the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this 
means you must keep records that support your 
deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years 
from the date you file the income tax return on 
which the deduction is claimed. A return filed 
early is considered filed on the due date. For a 
more complete explanation of how long to keep 
records, see Pub. 583, Starting a Business and 
Keeping Records.
You must keep records of the business use 
of your car for each year of the recovery period. 
See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 under 
Depreciation Deduction.
Reimbursed for expenses.  Employees who 
give their records and documentation to their 
employers and are reimbursed for their expen-
ses generally don’t have to keep copies of this 
information. However, you may have to prove 
your expenses if any of the following conditions 
apply.
You claim deductions for expenses that 
are more than reimbursements.
Your expenses are reimbursed under a 
nonaccountable plan.
Your employer doesn’t use adequate ac-
counting procedures to verify expense ac-
counts.
You are related to your employer as de-
fined under Per Diem and Car Allowances 
in chapter 6.
Reimbursements, adequate accounting , and 
nonaccountable plans  are discussed in chap-
ter 6.
Examples of Records
Table 5-2 and Table 5-3 are examples of work-
sheets which can be used for tracking business 
expenses.
6.
How To Report
This chapter explains where and how to report 
the expenses discussed in this publication. It 
discusses reimbursements and how to treat 
them under accountable and nonaccountable 
plans. It also explains rules for independent 
contractors and clients, fee-basis officials, cer-
tain performing artists, Armed Forces reserv-
ists, and certain disabled employees. The chap-
ter ends with illustrations of how to report travel, 
entertainment, gift, and car expenses on Forms 
2106 and 2106-EZ.
Where To Report
This section provides general information on 
where to report the expenses discussed in this 
publication.
Self-employed. You must report your income 
and expenses on Schedule C (Form 1040) or 
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) if you are a sole 
proprietor, or on Schedule F (Form 1040) if you 
are a farmer. You don’t use Form 2106 or 
2106-EZ.
Table 5-2. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log      Name: 
Odometer Readings Expenses
Date
Destination
 (City, Town, or Area) Business Purpose  Start  Stop
Miles
 this trip
 Type
(Gas, oil, tolls, etc.) Amount
        
Weekly 
Total
Total
Year-to-Date
Page 27 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 How To Report  Page 27

THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
Table 5-3. Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
From:         To:       Name:  
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
1. Travel Expenses:
Airlines
Excess Baggage
Bus – Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
2.  Meals and Lodging:
Breakfast
 Lunch
 Dinner
 Hotel and Motel 
(Detail in Schedule B)
3.  Entertainment
(Detail in Schedule C)
4. Other Expenses: 
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room
Advertising
Assistant(s)
Trade Shows
5. Car Expenses: (List all car expenses—the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls
6. Other (Identify)
Total
Note: Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A—Car
Mileage: End
Start
Total
Business Mileage
Schedule B—Lodging
Hotel or Motel
Name
City
Schedule C—Entertainment
Date Item Place Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Travel and transportation expenses ........  
Other reimbursements ..................  
TOTAL ...............................  
Page 28 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 28  Chapter 6 How To Report

If you claim car or truck expenses, you must 
provide certain information on the use of your 
vehicle. You provide this information on Sched-
ule C (Form 1040), Schedule C-EZ (Form 
1040), or Form 4562.
If you file Schedule C (Form 1040):
Report your travel expenses, except 
meals, on line 24a;
Report your deductible meals (actual cost 
or standard meal allowance) and entertain-
ment on line 24b;
Report your gift expenses and transporta-
tion expenses, other than car expenses, 
on line 27a; and
Report your car expenses on line 9. Com-
plete Part IV of the form unless you have to 
file Form 4562 for depreciation or amorti-
zation.
If you file Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), re-
port the total of all business expenses on Part II, 
line 2. You can include only 50% of your meals 
and entertainment in that total. If you include car 
expenses, you must also complete Part III of the 
form.
If you file Schedule F (Form 1040), do the 
following.
Report your car expenses on line 10. At-
tach Form 4562 and provide information 
on the use of your car in Part V of Form 
4562.
Report all other business expenses dis-
cussed in this publication on line 32. You 
can only include 50% of your meals and 
entertainment on that line.
See your form instructions for more information 
on how to complete your tax return.
Both self-employed and an employee. If you 
are both self-employed and an employee, you 
must keep separate records for each business 
activity. Report your business expenses for 
self-employment on Schedule C (Form 1040), 
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), or Schedule F 
(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your 
business expenses for your work as an em-
ployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed 
next.
Employees. If you are an employee, you gen-
erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your 
travel, transportation, and entertainment expen-
ses. However, you can use the shorter Form 
2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all of 
the following conditions.
You are an employee deducting expenses 
attributable to your job.
You weren’t reimbursed by your employer 
for your expenses (amounts included in 
box 1 of your Form W-2 aren’t considered 
reimbursements).
If you claim car expenses, you use the 
standard mileage rate.
For more information on how to report your 
expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see 
Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later.
Gifts. If you didn’t receive any reimburse-
ments (or the reimbursements were all included 
in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only business 
expense you are claiming is for gifts, and the 
special rules discussed later don’t apply to you, 
don’t complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Instead, 
claim the amount of your deductible gifts di-
rectly on line 21 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
Statutory employees.  If you received a 
Form W-2 and the “Statutory employee” box in 
box 13 was checked, report your income and 
expenses related to that income on Schedule C 
(Form 1040) or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). 
Don’t complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ.
Statutory employees include full-time life in-
surance salespersons, certain agent or com-
mission drivers, traveling salespersons, and 
certain homeworkers.
If you are entitled to a reimbursement 
from your employer but you don’t claim 
it, you can’t claim a deduction for the 
expenses to which that unclaimed reimburse-
ment applies.
Reimbursement for personal expenses.  If 
your employer reimburses you for nondeducti-
ble personal expenses, such as for vacation 
trips, your employer must report the reimburse-
ment as wage income in box 1 of your Form 
W-2. You can’t deduct personal expenses.
Income-producing property.  If you have 
travel or transportation expenses related to in-
come-producing property, report your deducti-
ble expenses on the form appropriate for that 
activity.
For example, if you have rental real estate 
income and expenses, report your expenses on 
Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income 
and Loss. See Pub. 527, Residential Rental 
Property, for more information on the rental of 
real estate. If you have deductible invest-
ment-related transportation expenses, report 
them on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.
Vehicle Provided by
Your Employer
If your employer provides you with a car, you 
may be able to deduct the actual expenses of 
operating that car for business purposes. The 
amount you can deduct depends on the amount 
that your employer included in your income and 
the business and personal miles you drove dur-
ing the year. You can’t use the standard mile-
age rate.
Value reported on Form W-2.  Your employer 
can figure and report either the actual value of 
your personal use of the car or the value of the 
car as if you used it only for personal purposes 
(100% income inclusion). Your employer must 
separately state the amount if 100% of the an-
nual lease value was included in your income. If 
you are unsure of the amount included on your 
Form W-2, ask your employer.
Full value included in your income. You can 
deduct the value of the business use of an em-
ployer-provided car if your employer reported 
100% of the value of the car in your income. On 
your 2017 Form W-2, the amount of the value 
will be included in box 1, Wages, tips, other 
compensation; and box 14.
CAUTION
!
To claim your expenses, complete Form 
2106, Part II, Sections A and C. Enter your ac-
tual expenses on line 23 of Section C and in-
clude the entire value of the employer-provided 
car on line 25. Complete the rest of the form.
Less than full value included in your in-
come. If less than the full annual lease value of 
the car was included on your Form W-2, this 
means that your Form W-2 only includes the 
value of your personal use of the car. Don’t en-
ter this value on your Form 2106 because it isn’t 
deductible.
If you paid any actual costs (that your em-
ployer didn’t provide or reimburse you for) to 
operate the car, you can deduct the business 
portion of those costs. Examples of costs that 
you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com-
plete Form 2106, Part II, Sections A and C. En-
ter your actual costs on line 23 of Section C and 
leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of the 
form.
Reimbursements
This section explains what to do when you re-
ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any of 
the employee business expenses discussed in 
this publication.
If you received an advance, allowance, or 
reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-
port this amount and your expenses depends 
on whether your employer reimbursed you un-
der an accountable plan or a nonaccountable 
plan.
This section explains the two types of plans, 
how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-
ing the amount of your expenses, and the tax 
treatment of your reimbursements and expen-
ses. It also covers rules for independent con-
tractors.
No reimbursement. You aren’t reimbursed or 
given an allowance for your expenses if you are 
paid a salary or commission with the under-
standing that you will pay your own expenses. 
In this situation, you have no reimbursement or 
allowance arrangement, and you don’t have to 
read this section on reimbursements. Instead, 
see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ , 
later, for information on completing your tax re-
turn.
Reimbursement, allowance, or advance.  A 
reimbursement or other expense allowance ar-
rangement is a system or plan that an employer 
uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-
penses, advances, reimbursements, and 
amounts charged to the employer for employee 
business expenses. Arrangements include per 
diem and car allowances.
A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of 
daily reimbursement your employer gives you 
for your lodging, meals, and incidental expen-
ses when you are away from home on busi-
ness. (The term “incidental expenses”  is de-
fined in chapter 1 under Standard Meal 
Allowance.) A car allowance is an amount your 
employer gives you for the business use of your 
car.
Page 29 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 How To Report  Page 29

Your employer should tell you what method 
of reimbursement is used and what records you 
must provide.
Employers. If you are an employer and you re-
imburse employee business expenses, how 
you treat this reimbursement on your employ-
ee's Form W-2 depends in part on whether you 
have an accountable plan. Reimbursements 
treated as paid under an accountable plan, as 
explained next, aren’t reported as pay. Reim-
bursements treated as paid under nonaccount-
able plans , as explained later, are reported as 
pay. See Pub. 15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax 
Guide, for information on employee pay.
Accountable Plans
To be an accountable plan, your employer's re-
imbursement or allowance arrangement must 
include all of the following rules.
1. Your expenses must have a business con-
nection—that is, you must have paid or in-
curred deductible expenses while per-
forming services as an employee of your 
employer.
2. You must adequately account to your em-
ployer for these expenses within a reason-
able period of time.
3. You must return any excess reimburse-
ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-
riod of time.
Adequate accounting  and returning excess 
reimbursements are discussed later.
An excess reimbursement or allowance is 
any amount you are paid that is more than the 
business-related expenses that you adequately 
accounted for to your employer.
Reasonable period of time. The definition 
of reasonable period of time depends on the 
facts and circumstances of your situation. How-
ever, regardless of the facts and circumstances 
of your situation, actions that take place within 
the times specified in the following list will be 
treated as taking place within a reasonable pe-
riod of time.
You receive an advance within 30 days of 
the time you have an expense.
You adequately account for your expenses 
within 60 days after they were paid or in-
curred.
You return any excess reimbursement 
within 120 days after the expense was paid 
or incurred.
You are given a periodic statement (at 
least quarterly) that asks you to either re-
turn or adequately account for outstanding 
advances and you comply within 120 days 
of the statement.
Employee meets accountable plan rules.  If 
you meet the three rules for accountable plans, 
your employer shouldn’t include any reimburse-
ments in your income in box 1 of your Form 
W-2. If your expenses equal your reimburse-
ments, you don’t complete Form 2106. You 
have no deduction since your expenses and re-
imbursement are equal.
If your employer included reimburse-
ments in box 1 of your Form W-2 and 
you meet all the rules for accountable 
plans, ask your employer for a corrected Form 
W-2.
Accountable plan rules not met.  Even 
though you are reimbursed under an accounta-
ble plan, some of your expenses may not meet 
all three rules. All reimbursements that fail to 
meet all three rules for accountable plans are 
generally treated as having been reimbursed 
under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
Failure to return excess reimburse-
ments. If you are reimbursed under an ac-
countable plan, but you fail to return, within a 
reasonable time, any amounts in excess of the 
substantiated amounts, the amounts paid in ex-
cess of the substantiated expenses are treated 
as paid under a nonaccountable plan. See Rea-
sonable period of time , earlier, and Returning 
Excess Reimbursements, later.
Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses. You may be reimbursed under your 
employer's accountable plan for expenses rela-
ted to that employer's business, some of which 
are deductible as employee business expenses 
and some of which aren’t deductible. The reim-
bursements you receive for the nondeductible 
expenses don’t meet rule (1) for accountable 
plans, and they are treated as paid under a non-
accountable plan.
Example. Your employer's plan reimburses 
you for travel expenses while away from home 
on business and also for meals when you work 
late at the office, even though you aren’t away 
from home. The part of the arrangement that re-
imburses you for the nondeductible meals when 
you work late at the office is treated as paid un-
der a nonaccountable plan.
The employer makes the decision 
whether to reimburse employees under 
an accountable plan or a nonaccounta-
ble plan. If you are an employee who receives 
payments under a nonaccountable plan, you 
can’t convert these amounts to payments under 
an accountable plan by voluntarily accounting 
to your employer for the expenses and voluntar-
ily returning excess reimbursements to the em-
ployer.
Adequate Accounting
One of the rules for an accountable plan is that 
you must adequately account to your employer 
for your expenses. You adequately account by 
giving your employer a statement of expense, 
an account book, a diary, or a similar record in 
which you entered each expense at or near the 
time you had it, along with documentary evi-
dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mile-
age, and other employee business expenses. 
(See Table 5-1 in chapter 5 for details you need 
to enter in your record and documents you 
need to prove certain expenses.) A per diem or 
car allowance satisfies the adequate account-
ing requirement under certain conditions. See 
Per Diem and Car Allowances, later.
TIP
TIP
You must account for all amounts you re-
ceived from your employer during the year as 
advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This 
includes amounts you charged to your em-
ployer by credit card or other method. You must 
give your employer the same type of records 
and supporting information that you would have 
to give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a de-
duction on your return. You must pay back the 
amount of any reimbursement or other expense 
allowance for which you don’t adequately ac-
count or that is more than the amount for which 
you accounted.
Per Diem and Car Allowances
If your employer reimburses you for your expen-
ses using a per diem or a car allowance, you 
can generally use the allowance as proof for the 
amount of your expenses. A per diem or car al-
lowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-
quirements for the amount of your expenses 
only if all the following conditions apply.
Your employer reasonably limits payments 
of your expenses to those that are ordinary 
and necessary in the conduct of the trade 
or business.
The allowance is similar in form to and not 
more than the federal rate (defined later).
You prove the time (dates), place, and 
business purpose of your expenses to your 
employer (as explained in Table 5-1) within 
a reasonable period of time.
You aren’t related to your employer (as de-
fined next). If you are related to your em-
ployer, you must be able to prove your ex-
penses to the IRS even if you have already 
adequately accounted to your employer 
and returned any excess reimbursement.
If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allow-
ance practices are not based on reasonably ac-
curate estimates of travel costs (including rec-
ognition of cost differences in different areas for 
per diem amounts), you won’t be considered to 
have accounted to your employer. In this case, 
you must be able to prove your expenses to the 
IRS.
Related to employer.  You are related to your 
employer if:
1. Your employer is your brother or sister, 
half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-
tor, or lineal descendant;
2. Your employer is a corporation in which 
you own, directly or indirectly, more than 
10% in value of the outstanding stock; or
3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-
duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you, 
a trust, and your employer.
You may be considered to indirectly own stock, 
for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in a 
corporation, partnership, estate, or trust that 
owns the stock or if a member of your family or 
your partner owns the stock.
The federal rate.  The federal rate can be fig-
ured using any one of the following methods.
1. For per diem amounts:
a. The regular federal per diem rate.
b. The standard meal allowance.
Page 30 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 30  Chapter 6 How To Report

c. The high-low rate.
2. For car expenses:
a. The standard mileage rate.
b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
For per diem amounts, use the rate in 
effect for the area where you stop for 
sleep or rest.
Regular federal per diem rate.  The regu-
lar federal per diem rate is the highest amount 
that the federal government will pay to its em-
ployees for lodging, meals, and incidental ex-
penses (or meals and incidental expenses only) 
while they are traveling away from home in a 
particular area. The rates are different for differ-
ent locations. Your employer should have these 
rates available. You can also find federal per 
diem rates at GSA.gov/Perdiem.
The standard meal allowance.  The 
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE 
rate. For travel in 2017, the rate for most small 
localities in the United States is $51 a day. Most 
major cities and many other localities qualify for 
higher rates. You can find this information at 
GSA.gov/Perdiem.
You receive an allowance only for meals 
and incidental expenses when your employer 
does one of the following.
Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in 
kind).
Reimburses you, based on your receipts, 
for the actual cost of your lodging.
Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your 
lodging.
Doesn’t have a reasonable belief that you 
had (or will have) lodging expenses, such 
as when you stay with friends or relatives 
or sleep in the cab of your truck.
Figures the allowance on a basis similar to 
that used in figuring your compensation, 
such as number of hours worked or miles 
traveled.
High-low rate.  This is a simplified method 
of figuring the federal per diem rate for travel 
within the continental United States. It elimi-
nates the need to keep a current list of the per 
diem rates for each city.
Under the high-low method, the per diem 
amount for travel during January through Sep-
tember of 2017 is $282 (including $68 for M&IE) 
for certain high-cost locations. All other areas 
have a per diem amount of $189 (including $57 
for M&IE). For more information, see Notice 
2016-58, which can be found at IRS.gov/irb/
2016-41_IRB/ar06.html.
Effective October 1, 2017, the per diem 
rate for certain high-cost locations in-
creased to $284 (including $68 for 
M&IE). The rate for all other locations increased 
to $191 (including $57 for M&IE). Employers 
who didn’t use the high-low method during the 
first 9 months of 2017 can’t begin to use it be-
fore 2018. For more information, see Notice 
2017-54, which can be found at IRS.gov/irb/
2017-42_IRB/ar06.html, and Rev. Proc. 
2011-47 at IRS.gov/irb/2011-42_IRB/ar12.html.
Prorating the standard meal allowance 
on partial days of travel.  The standard meal 
allowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If 
TIP
CAUTION
!
you travel for part of a day, such as on the days 
you depart and return, you must prorate the 
full-day M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your 
employer uses the regular federal per diem rate 
or the high-low rate.
You can use either of the following methods 
to figure the federal M&IE for that day.
1. Method 1:
a. For the day you depart, add 34 of the 
standard meal allowance amount for 
that day.
b. For the day you return, add 34 of the 
standard meal allowance amount for 
the preceding day.
2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-
lowance using any method you consis-
tently apply in accordance with reasonable 
business practice. For example, an em-
ployer can treat 2 full days of per diem 
(that includes M&IE) paid for travel away 
from home from 9 a.m. of one day to 5 
p.m. of the next day as being no more than 
the federal rate. This is true even though a 
federal employee would be limited to a re-
imbursement of M&IE for only 112 days of 
the federal M&IE rate.
The standard mileage rate.  This is a set 
rate per mile that you can use to figure your de-
ductible car expenses. For 2017, the standard 
mileage rate for the cost of operating your car 
for business use is 53.5 cents (0.535) per mile.
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR).  This is 
an allowance your employer may use to reim-
burse your car expenses. Under this method, 
your employer pays an allowance that includes 
a combination of payments covering fixed and 
variable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to 
cover your variable operating costs (such as 
gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your 
fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-
ments), insurance, etc.). If your employer choo-
ses to use this method, your employer will re-
quest the necessary records from you.
Reporting your expenses with a per diem or 
car allowance. If your reimbursement is in the 
form of an allowance received under an ac-
countable plan, the following facts affect your 
reporting.
The federal rate.
Whether the allowance or your actual ex-
penses were more than the federal rate.
The following discussions explain where to re-
port your expenses depending upon how the 
amount of your allowance compares to the fed-
eral rate.
Allowance less than or equal to the fed-
eral rate.  If your allowance is less than or 
equal to the federal rate, the allowance won’t be 
included in box 1 of your Form W-2. You don’t 
need to report the related expenses or the al-
lowance on your return if your expenses are 
equal to or less than the allowance.
However, if your actual expenses are more 
than your allowance, you can complete Form 
2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-
penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS 
the total amount of your expenses and reim-
bursements for the entire year. If you are using 
the standard meal allowance or the standard 
mileage rate, you don’t have to prove that 
amount.
Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-day 
business trip to Denver. The federal rate for 
Denver is $247 ($178 lodging + $69 M&IE) per 
day. As required by his employer's accountable 
plan, he accounts for the time (dates), place, 
and business purpose of the trip. His employer 
reimburses him $247 a day ($494 total) for liv-
ing expenses. Jeremy's living expenses in Den-
ver aren’t more than $247 a day.
Jeremy's employer doesn’t include any of 
the reimbursement on his Form W-2 and 
Jeremy doesn’t deduct the expenses on his re-
turn.
Example 2.  In June, Matt takes a 2-day 
business trip to Boston. Matt's employer uses 
the high-low method to reimburse employees. 
Since Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is given 
an advance of $282 ($214 lodging + $68 M&IE) 
a day ($564 total) for his lodging, meals, and in-
cidental expenses. Matt's actual expenses to-
taled $700.
Since Matt's $700 of expenses are more 
than his $564 advance, he includes the excess 
expenses when he itemizes his deductions. 
Matt completes Form 2106 (showing all of his 
expenses and reimbursements). He must also 
allocate his reimbursement between his meals 
and other expenses as discussed later under 
Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.
Example 3.  Nicole drives 10,000 miles in 
2017 for business. Under her employer's ac-
countable plan, she accounts for the time 
(dates), place, and business purpose of each 
trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allow-
ance of 40 cents (0.40) a mile.
Since Nicole's $5,350 expense figured un-
der the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles x 
53.5 cents (0.535)) is more than her $4,000 re-
imbursement (10,000 miles × 40 cents (0.40)), 
she itemizes her deductions to claim the excess 
expense. Nicole completes Form 2106 (show-
ing all her expenses and reimbursements) and 
enters $1,350 ($5,350 − $4,000) as an itemized 
deduction.
Allowance more than the federal rate.  If 
your allowance is more than the federal rate, 
your employer must include the allowance 
amount up to the federal rate under code L in 
box 12 of your Form W-2. This amount isn’t tax-
able. However, the excess allowance will be in-
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You must re-
port this part of your allowance as if it were 
wage income.
If your actual expenses are less than or 
equal to the federal rate, you don’t complete 
Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses on 
your return.
However, if your actual expenses are more 
than the federal rate, you can complete Form 
2106 and deduct those excess expenses. You 
must report on Form 2106 your reimbursements 
up to the federal rate (as shown under code L in 
box 12 of your Form W-2) and all your expen-
ses. You should be able to prove these 
amounts to the IRS.
Example 1.  Laura lives and works in Aus-
tin. In July, her employer sent her to 
Page 31 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 How To Report  Page 31

Albuquerque for 4 days on business. Laura's 
employer paid the hotel directly for her lodging 
and reimbursed Laura $65 a day ($260 total) for 
meals and incidental expenses. Laura's actual 
meal expenses weren’t more than the federal 
rate for Albuquerque, which is $51 per day.
Her employer included the $56 that was 
more than the federal rate (($65 − $51) × 4) in 
box 1 of Laura's Form W-2. Her employer 
shows $204 ($51 a day × 4) under code L in 
box 12 of her Form W-2. This amount isn’t inclu-
ded in Laura's income. Laura doesn’t have to 
complete Form 2106; however, she must in-
clude the $56 in her gross income as wages (by 
reporting the total amount shown in box 1 of her 
Form W-2).
Example 2.  Joe also lives in Austin and 
works for the same employer as Laura. In May, 
the employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 days 
and paid the hotel directly for Joe's hotel bill. 
The employer reimbursed Joe $75 a day for his 
meals and incidental expenses. The federal 
rate for San Diego is $64 a day.
Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses 
totaled $380. His employer's accountable plan 
won’t pay more than $75 a day for travel to San 
Diego, so Joe doesn’t give his employer the re-
cords that prove that he actually spent $380. 
However, he does account for the time, place, 
and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe's 
only business trip this year.
Joe was reimbursed $300 ($75 × 4 days), 
which is $44 more than the federal rate of $256 
($64 × 4 days). The employer includes the $44 
as income on Joe's Form W-2 in box 1. The em-
ployer also enters $256 under code L in box 12 
of Joe's Form W-2.
Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-
ductible expenses. He enters the total of his 
actual expenses for the year ($380) on Form 
2106. He also enters the reimbursements that 
weren’t included in his income ($256). His total 
deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is 
$124. After he figures the 50% limit on his unre-
imbursed meals and entertainment, he will in-
clude the balance, $62, as an itemized deduc-
tion.
Example 3.  Debbie drives 10,000 miles in 
2017 for business. Under her employer's ac-
countable plan, she gets reimbursed 60 cents 
(0.60) a mile, which is more than the standard 
mileage rate. Her total reimbursement is 
$6,000.
Debbie's employer must include the reim-
bursement amount up to the standard mileage 
rate, $5,350 (10,000 × 53.5 cents (0.535)), un-
der code L in box 12 of her Form W-2. That 
amount isn’t taxable. Her employer must also 
include $650 ($6,000 − $5,350) in box 1 of her 
Form W-2. This is the reimbursement that is 
more than the standard mileage rate.
If Debbie's expenses are equal to or less 
than the standard mileage rate, she wouldn’t 
complete Form 2106. If her expenses are more 
than the standard mileage rate, she would com-
plete Form 2106 and report her total expenses 
and reimbursement (shown under code L in 
box 12 of her Form W-2). She would then claim 
the excess expenses as an itemized deduction.
Returning Excess 
Reimbursements
Under an accountable plan, you are required to 
return any excess reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowances for your business expenses 
to the person paying the reimbursement or al-
lowance. Excess reimbursement means any 
amount for which you didn’t adequately account 
within a reasonable period of time. For exam-
ple, if you received a travel advance and you 
didn’t spend all the money on business-related 
expenses or you don’t have proof of all your ex-
penses, you have an excess reimbursement.
Adequate accounting and reasonable period 
of time were discussed earlier in this chapter.
Travel advance. You receive a travel advance 
if your employer provides you with an expense 
allowance before you actually have the ex-
pense, and the allowance is reasonably expec-
ted to be no more than your expense. Under an 
accountable plan, you are required to ade-
quately account to your employer for this ad-
vance and to return any excess within a reason-
able period of time.
If you don’t adequately account for or don't 
return any excess advance within a reasonable 
period of time, the amount you don’t account for 
or return will be treated as having been paid un-
der a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
Unproven amounts. If you don’t prove that 
you actually traveled on each day for which you 
received a per diem or car allowance (proving 
the elements described in Table 5-1), you must 
return this unproven amount of the travel ad-
vance within a reasonable period of time. If you 
don’t do this, the unproven amount will be con-
sidered paid under a nonaccountable plan (dis-
cussed later).
Per diem allowance more than federal 
rate. If your employer's accountable plan pays 
you an allowance that is higher than the federal 
rate, you don’t have to return the difference be-
tween the two rates for the period you can 
prove business-related travel expenses. How-
ever, the difference will be reported as wages 
on your Form W-2. This excess amount is con-
sidered paid under a nonaccountable plan (dis-
cussed later).
Example. Your employer sends you on a 
5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2017 
and gives you a $400 ($80 × 5 days) advance 
to cover your meals and incidental expenses. 
The federal per diem for meals and incidental 
expenses for Phoenix is $59. Your trip lasts only 
3 days. Under your employer's accountable 
plan, you must return the $160 ($80 × 2 days) 
advance for the 2 days you didn’t travel. For the 
3 days you did travel, you don’t have to return 
the $63 difference between the allowance you 
received and the federal rate for Phoenix (($80 
− $59) × 3 days). However, the $63 will be re-
ported on your Form W-2 as wages.
Nonaccountable Plans
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or 
expense allowance arrangement that doesn’t 
meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier 
under Accountable Plans.
In addition, even if your employer has an ac-
countable plan, the following payments will be 
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable 
plan.
Excess reimbursements you fail to return 
to your employer. 
Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements
IF the type of reimbursement (or 
other expense allowance)
 arrangement is under:
THEN the employer reports on 
Form W-2:
AND the employee
reports on
 Form 2106: *
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: Adequate 
accounting made and excess returned.
No amount. No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement: Adequate 
accounting and return of excess both required 
but excess not returned.
The excess amount as wages in 
box 1.
No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the 
federal rate: Adequate accounting made and 
excess returned.
No amount. All expenses and reimbursements 
only if excess expenses are 
claimed. Otherwise, form is not 
filed.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the 
federal rate: Adequate accounting and return 
of excess both required but excess not 
returned.
The excess amount as wages in 
box 1. The amount up to the 
federal rate is reported only under 
code L in box 12 of Form W-2—it 
isn’t reported in box 1.
No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the 
federal rate: Adequate accounting up to the 
federal rate only and excess not returned.
The excess amount as wages in 
box 1. The amount up to the 
federal rate is reported only under 
code L in box 12 of Form W-2—it 
isn’t reported in box 1.
All expenses (and reimbursements 
reported under code L in box 12 of 
Form W-2) only if expenses in 
excess of the federal rate are 
claimed. Otherwise, form isn’t filed.
A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of 
excess, or both, not required by plan.
The entire amount as wages in 
box 1.
All expenses.
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount as wages in 
box 1.
All expenses.
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later.
Table 6-1. 
Page 32 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 32  Chapter 6 How To Report

Reimbursement of nondeductible expen-
ses related to your employer's business. 
See Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses, earlier, under Accountable Plans.
An arrangement that repays you for business 
expenses by reducing the amount reported as 
your wages, salary, or other pay will be treated 
as a nonaccountable plan. This is because you 
are entitled to receive the full amount of your 
pay whether or not you have any business ex-
penses.
If you aren’t sure if the reimbursement or ex-
pense allowance arrangement is an accounta-
ble or nonaccountable plan, ask your employer.
Reporting your expenses under a nonac-
countable plan.  Your employer will combine 
the amount of any reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowance paid to you under a nonac-
countable plan with your wages, salary, or other 
pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 
of your Form W-2.
You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ 
and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-
penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-
tertainment. Your meal and entertainment ex-
penses will be subject to the 50% limit 
discussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expen-
ses will be subject to the 2%-of-adjus-
ted-gross-income limit that applies to most mis-
cellaneous itemized deductions.
Example 1.  Kim's employer gives her 
$1,000 a month ($12,000 total for the year) for 
her business expenses. Kim doesn’t have to 
provide any proof of her expenses to her em-
ployer, and Kim can keep any funds that she 
doesn’t spend.
Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-
countable plan. Her employer will include the 
$12,000 on Kim's Form W-2 as if it were wages. 
If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses, 
she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and 
itemize her deductions.
Example 2.  Kevin is paid $2,000 a month 
by his employer. On days that he travels away 
from home on business, his employer designa-
tes $50 a day of his salary as paid to reimburse 
his travel expenses. Because his employer 
would pay Kevin his monthly salary whether or 
not he was traveling away from home, the ar-
rangement is a nonaccountable plan. No part of 
the $50 a day designated by his employer is 
treated as paid under an accountable plan.
Rules for Independent 
Contractors and Clients
This section provides rules for independent 
contractors who incur expenses on behalf of a 
client or customer. The rules cover the reporting 
and substantiation of certain expenses dis-
cussed in this publication, and they affect both 
independent contractors and their clients or 
customers.
You are considered an independent con-
tractor if you are self-employed and you per-
form services for a customer or client.
Accounting to Your Client
If you received a reimbursement or an allow-
ance for travel, entertainment, or gift expenses 
that you incurred on behalf of a client, you 
should provide an adequate accounting of 
these expenses to your client. If you don’t ac-
count to your client for these expenses, you 
must include any reimbursements or allowan-
ces in income. You must keep adequate re-
cords of these expenses whether or not you ac-
count to your client for these expenses.
If you don’t separately account for and seek 
reimbursement for meals and entertainment in 
connection with providing services for a client, 
you are subject to the 50% limit on those ex-
penses. See 50% limit in chapter 2.
Adequate accounting.  As a self-employed 
person, you adequately account by reporting 
your actual expenses. You should follow the re-
cordkeeping rules in chapter 5.
How to report.  For information on how to 
report expenses on your tax return, see 
Self-employed at the beginning of this chapter.
Required Records for
Clients or Customers
If you are a client or customer, you generally 
don’t have to keep records to prove the reim-
bursements or allowances you give, in the 
course of your business, to an independent 
contractor for travel or gift expenses incurred on 
your behalf. However, you must keep records if:
You reimburse the contractor for entertain-
ment expenses incurred on your behalf, 
and
The contractor adequately accounts to you 
for these expenses.
Contractor adequately accounts.  If the con-
tractor adequately accounts to you for entertain-
ment expenses, you (the client or customer) 
must keep records documenting each element 
of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. Use 
your records as proof for a deduction on your 
tax return. If entertainment expenses are ac-
counted for separately, you are subject to the 
50% limit on entertainment. If the contractor ad-
equately accounts to you for reimbursed 
amounts, you don’t have to report the amounts 
on an information return.
Contractor doesn’t adequately account.  If 
the contractor doesn’t adequately account to 
you for allowances or reimbursements of enter-
tainment expenses, you don’t have to keep re-
cords of these items. You aren’t subject to the 
50% limit on entertainment in this case. You can 
deduct the reimbursements or allowances as 
payment for services if they are ordinary and 
necessary business expenses. However, you 
must file Form 1099-MISC to report amounts 
paid to the independent contractor if the total of 
the reimbursements and any other fees is $600 
or more during the calendar year.
How To Use Per Diem
Rate Tables
This section contains information about the per 
diem rate substantiation methods available and 
the choice of rates you must make for the last 3 
months of the year.
The Two Substantiation 
Methods
High-low method.  IRS notices list the locali-
ties that are treated under the high-low substan-
tiation method as high-cost localities for all or 
part of the year. Notice 2016-58, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2016-41_IRB/ar06.html, lists the lo-
calities that are eligible for $282 ($68 meals and 
incidental expenses (M&IE)) per diem, effective 
October 1, 2017. For travel on or after October 
1, 2017, all other localities within the continental 
United States (CONUS) are eligible for $189 
($57 M&IE) per diem under the high-low 
method.
Notice 2017-54, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2017-42_IRB/ar06.html, lists the localities that 
are eligible for $284 ($68 M&IE) per diem, ef-
fective October 1, 2017. For travel on or after 
October 1, 2017, the per diem for all other local-
ities increased to $191 ($57 M&IE).
Regular federal per diem rate method.  Reg-
ular federal per diem rates are published by the 
General Services Administration (GSA). Both 
tables include the separate rate for M&IE for 
each locality. The rates listed for FY2017 at 
GSA.gov/Perdiem are effective October 1, 
2016, and those listed for FY2018 are effective 
October 1, 2017. The standard rate for all loca-
tions within CONUS not specifically listed for 
FY2017 is $142 ($91 for lodging and $51 for 
M&IE). For FY2018, this rate increases to $144 
($93 for lodging and $51 for M&IE).
Transition Rules
The transition period covers the last 3 months 
of the calendar year, from the time that new 
rates are effective (generally October 1) 
through December 31. During this period, you 
generally may change to the new rates or finish 
out the year with the rates you had been using.
High-low method. If you use the high-low sub-
stantiation method, when new rates become ef-
fective (generally October 1) you can either 
continue with the rates you used for the first part 
of the year or change to the new rates. How-
ever, you must continue using the high-low 
method for the rest of the calendar year 
(through December 31). If you are an employer, 
you must use the same rates for all employees 
reimbursed under the high-low method during 
that calendar year. 
The new rates and localities for the high-low 
method are included each year in a notice that 
is generally published in mid to late September. 
You can find the notice in the weekly Internal 
Revenue Bulletin (IRB) at IRS.gov/IRB, or visit 
IRS.gov and enter “Special Per Diem Rates” in 
the search box.
Page 33 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 How To Report  Page 33

Federal per diem rate method.  New CONUS 
per diem rates become effective on October 1 
of each year and remain in effect through Sep-
tember 30 of the following year. Employees be-
ing reimbursed under the per diem rate method 
during the first 9 months of a year (January 1–
September 30) must continue under the same 
method through the end of that calendar year 
(December 31). However, for travel by these 
employees from October 1 through December 
31, you can choose to continue using the same 
per diem rates or use the new rates.
The new federal CONUS per diem rates are 
published each year, generally early in Septem-
ber. Go to GSA.gov/Perdiem.
Per diem rates for localities listed for 
FY2018 may change at any time. To be 
sure you have the most current rate, 
check GSA.gov/Perdiem.
Completing Forms
2106 and 2106-EZ
This section briefly describes how employees 
complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 6-1 
explains what the employer reports on Form 
W-2 and what the employee reports on Form 
2106. The instructions for the forms have more 
information on completing them.
If you are self-employed, don’t file 
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report your 
expenses on Schedule C (Form 1040), 
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), or Schedule F 
(Form 1040). See the instructions for the form 
that you must file.
Form 2106-EZ.  You may be able to use the 
shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employee 
business expenses. You can use this form if 
you meet all the following conditions.
You are an employee deducting ordinary 
and necessary expenses attributable to 
your job.
You weren’t reimbursed by your employer 
for your expenses (amounts included in 
box 1 of your Form W-2 aren’t considered 
reimbursements).
If you are claiming car expenses, you are 
using the standard mileage rate.
Car expenses.  If you used a car to perform 
your job as an employee, you may be able to 
deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-
ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and then 
claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A. 
Car expenses using the standard mileage rate 
can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com-
pleting Part II, and Part I, line 1.
Information on use of cars.  If you claim 
any deduction for the business use of a car, you 
must answer certain questions and provide in-
formation about the use of the car. The informa-
tion relates to the following items.
Date placed in service.
Mileage (total, business, commuting, and 
other personal mileage).
Percentage of business use.
After-work use.
Use of other vehicles.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Whether you have evidence to support the 
deduction.
Whether or not the evidence is written.
Employees must complete Form 2106, Part II, 
Section A, or Form 2106-EZ, Part II, to provide 
this information.
Standard mileage rate.  If you claim a de-
duction based on the standard mileage rate in-
stead of your actual expenses, you must com-
plete Form 2106, Part II, Section B. The amount 
on line 22 (Section B) is carried to Form 2106, 
Part I, line 1. In addition, on Part I, line 2, you 
can deduct parking fees and tolls that apply to 
the business use of the car. If you file Form 
2106-EZ, complete Part I, line 1, for the stand-
ard mileage rate and line 2 for parking fees and 
tolls. See Standard Mileage Rate  in chapter 4 
for information on using this rate.
Actual expenses. If you claim a deduction 
based on actual car expenses, you can’t use 
Form 2106-EZ. You must complete Form 2106, 
Part II, Section C. In addition, unless you lease 
your car, you must complete Section D to show 
your depreciation deduction and any section 
179 deduction you claim.
If you are still using a car that is fully depre-
ciated, continue to complete Section C. Since 
you have no depreciation deduction, enter zero 
on line 28. In this case, don’t complete Sec-
tion D.
Car rentals.  If you claim car rental expen-
ses on Form 2106, line 24a, you may have to 
reduce that expense by an inclusion amount as 
described in chapter 4. If so, you can show your 
car expenses and any inclusion amount as fol-
lows.
1. Figure the inclusion amount without taking 
into account your business use percent-
age for the tax year.
2. Report the inclusion amount from (1) on 
Form 2106, Part II, line 24b.
3. Report on line 24c the net amount of car 
rental expenses (total car rental expenses 
minus the inclusion amount figured in (1)).
The net amount of car rental expenses will be 
adjusted on Form 2106, Part II, line 27, to reflect 
the percentage of business use for the tax year.
Transportation expenses.  Show your trans-
portation expenses that didn’t involve overnight 
travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or on 
Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on 
this line business expenses you have for park-
ing fees and tolls. Don’t include expenses of op-
erating your car or expenses of commuting be-
tween your home and work.
Employee business expenses other than 
meals and entertainment.  Show your other 
employee business expenses on Form 2106, 
lines 3 and 4, Column A, or Form 2106-EZ, 
lines 3 and 4. Don’t include expenses for meals 
and entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for 
expenses such as gifts, educational expenses 
(tuition and books), office-in-the-home expen-
ses, and trade and professional publications.
If line 4 expenses are the only ones 
you are claiming, you received no reim-
bursements (or the reimbursements 
TIP
were all included in box 1 of your Form W-2), 
and the Special Rules discussed later don’t ap-
ply to you, don’t complete Form 2106 or 
2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. List the type 
and amount of each expense on the dotted 
lines and include the total on line 21.
Meal and entertainment expenses.  Show 
the full amount of your expenses for busi-
ness-related meals and entertainment on Form 
2106, line 5, Column B. Include meals while 
away from your tax home overnight and other 
business meals and entertainment. Enter 50% 
of the line 8, Column B, meal and entertainment 
expenses on line 9, Column B.
If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the full 
amount of your meals and entertainment on the 
line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by 
50% (0.50). Enter the result on line 5.
“Hours of service” limits.  If you are sub-
ject to the Department of Transportation's 
“hours of service” limits (as explained earlier un-
der Individuals subject to “hours of service” lim-
its in chapter 2), use 80% instead of 50% for 
meals while away from your tax home.
Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 7 
(you can’t use Form 2106-EZ) the amounts your 
employer (or third party) reimbursed you that 
weren’t reported to you in box 1 of your Form 
W-2. This includes any amount reported under 
code L in box 12 of Form W-2.
Allocating your reimbursement.  If you 
were reimbursed under an accountable plan 
and want to deduct excess expenses that 
weren’t reimbursed, you may have to allocate 
your reimbursement. This is necessary when 
your employer pays your reimbursement in the 
following manner.
Pays you a single amount that covers 
meals and/or entertainment, as well as 
other business expenses.
Doesn’t clearly identify how much is for de-
ductible meals and/or entertainment.
You must allocate that single payment so that 
you know how much to enter on Form 2106, 
line 7, Column A and Column B.
Example. Rob's employer paid him an ex-
pense allowance of $12,000 this year under an 
accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con-
sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for 
meals, entertainment, and car expenses. The 
employer didn’t clearly show how much of the 
$7,000 was for the cost of deductible meals and 
entertainment. Rob actually spent $14,000 dur-
ing the year ($5,500 for airfare, $4,500 for 
meals and entertainment, and $4,000 for car 
expenses).
Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-
tified, Rob knows that $5,000 of the payment 
goes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. To allo-
cate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses the work-
sheet from the Instructions for Form 2106. His 
completed worksheet follows.
Page 34 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 34  Chapter 6 How To Report

Reimbursement Allocation Work-
sheet
(Keep for your records)
1. Enter the total amount of 
reimbursements your 
employer gave you that 
weren’t reported to you in 
box 1 of Form W-2 ......... $7,000
2. Enter the total amount of your 
expenses for the periods 
covered by this 
reimbursement ............ 8,500
3. Of the amount on line 2, enter 
your total expense for meals 
and entertainment ......... 4,500
4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter 
the result as a decimal 
(rounded to at least three 
places) .................. 0.529 
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter 
the result here and in Column 
B, line 7 ................. 3,703
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. 
Enter the result here and in 
Column A, line 7 ........... $3,297
On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297 
($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) in 
Column A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in Col-
umn B.
After you complete the form.  After you have 
completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, follow 
the directions on that form to deduct your ex-
penses on the appropriate line of your tax re-
turn. For most taxpayers, this is line 21 of 
Schedule A (Form 1040). However, if you are a 
government official paid on a fee basis, a per-
forming artist, an Armed Forces reservist, or a 
disabled employee with impairment-related 
work expenses, see Special Rules, later.
Limits on employee business expenses. 
Your employee business expenses may be 
subject to either of the limits described next. 
They are figured in the following order on the 
specified form.
1. Limit on meals and entertainment. 
Certain meal and entertainment expenses are 
subject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, 
you figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or 
line 5 of Form 2106-EZ. (See 50% Limit  in 
chapter 2.)
2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions. If you are an employee, deduct your 
employee business expenses (as figured on 
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 21 of Sched-
ule A (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous item-
ized deductions, including employee business 
expenses, are subject to a 2%-of-adjus-
ted-gross-income limit. This limit is figured on 
line 26 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
3. Limit on total itemized deductions. 
Total itemized deductions may be limited if your 
adjusted gross income is over: $313,800 if filing 
as marred filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); 
$287,650 if head of household; $261,500 if sin-
gle; or $156,900 if married filing separately. 
This limit is figured on the Itemized Deductions 
Worksheet found in the Instructions for Sched-
ule A (Form 1040).
Special Rules
This section discusses special rules that apply 
only to Armed Forces reservists, government 
officials who are paid on a fee basis, performing 
artists, and disabled employees with impair-
ment-related work expenses.
Armed Forces Reservists 
Traveling More Than 100 Miles 
From Home
If you are a member of a reserve component of 
the Armed Forces of the United States and you 
travel more than 100 miles away from home in 
connection with your performance of services 
as a member of the reserves, you can deduct 
your travel expenses as an adjustment to gross 
income rather than as a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction. The amount of expenses you can 
deduct as an adjustment to gross income is 
limited to the regular federal per diem rate (for 
lodging, meals, and incidental expenses) and 
the standard mileage rate (for car expenses) 
plus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. See 
Per Diem and Car Allowances , earlier, for more 
information. Any expenses in excess of these 
amounts can be claimed only as a miscellane-
ous itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit.
Member of a reserve component.  You are a 
member of a reserve component of the Armed 
Forces of the United States if you are in the 
Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast 
Guard Reserve; the Army National Guard of the 
United States; the Air National Guard of the Uni-
ted States; or the Reserve Corps of the Public 
Health Service.
How to report.  If you have reserve-related 
travel that takes you more than 100 miles from 
home, you should first complete Form 2106 or 
Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses for 
reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to 
the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or 
Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040, 
line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on 
Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, 
and deduct the balance as an itemized deduc-
tion on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21.
You can’t deduct expenses of travel that 
doesn’t take you more than 100 miles from 
home as an adjustment to gross income. In-
stead, you must complete Form 2106 or 
2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an 
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 21.
Officials Paid on a Fee Basis
Certain fee-basis officials can claim their em-
ployee business expenses whether or not they 
itemize their other deductions on Schedule A 
(Form 1040).
Fee-basis officials are persons who are em-
ployed by a state or local government and who 
are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They 
can deduct their business expenses in perform-
ing services in that job as an adjustment to 
gross income rather than as a miscellaneous 
itemized deduction.
If you are a fee-basis official, include your 
employee business expenses from Form 2106, 
line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on 
Form 1040, line 24.
Expenses of Certain
Performing Artists
If you are a performing artist, you may qualify to 
deduct your employee business expenses as 
an adjustment to gross income rather than as a 
miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify, 
you must meet all of the following requirements.
1. During the tax year, you perform services 
in the performing arts as an employee for 
at least two employers.
2. You receive at least $200 each from any 
two of these employers.
3. Your related performing-arts business ex-
penses are more than 10% of your gross 
income from the performance of those 
services.
4. Your adjusted gross income isn’t more 
than $16,000 before deducting these busi-
ness expenses.
Special rules for married persons. If you are 
married, you must file a joint return unless you 
lived apart from your spouse at all times during 
the tax year. If you file a joint return, you must 
figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separately 
for both you and your spouse. However, re-
quirement (4) applies to your and your spouse's 
combined adjusted gross income.
Where to report.  If you meet all of the above 
requirements, you should first complete Form 
2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your per-
forming-arts-related expenses from Form 2106, 
line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on 
Form 1040, line 24.
If you don’t meet all of the above require-
ments, you don’t qualify to deduct your expen-
ses as an adjustment to gross income. Instead, 
you must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and 
deduct your employee business expenses as 
an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 21.
Impairment-Related Work 
Expenses of Disabled Employees
If you are an employee with a physical or men-
tal disability, your impairment-related work ex-
penses aren’t subject to the 2%-of-adjus-
ted-gross-income limit that applies to most 
other employee business expenses. After you 
complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, enter your im-
pairment-related work expenses from Form 
2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28, and identify 
the type and amount of this expense on the line 
next to line 28. Enter your employee business 
expenses that are unrelated to your disability 
from Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, 
line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21.
Impairment-related work expenses are your 
allowable expenses for attendant care at your 
workplace and other expenses in connection 
with your workplace that are necessary for you 
to be able to work.
Page 35 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 How To Report  Page 35

You are disabled if you have:
A physical or mental disability (for exam-
ple, blindness or deafness) that function-
ally limits your being employed; or
A physical or mental impairment (for exam-
ple, a sight or hearing impairment) that 
substantially limits one or more of your ma-
jor life activities, such as performing man-
ual tasks, walking, speaking, breathing, 
learning, or working.
You can deduct impairment-related expen-
ses as business expenses if they are:
Necessary for you to do your work satis-
factorily;
For goods and services not required or 
used, other than incidentally, in your per-
sonal activities; and
Not specifically covered under other in-
come tax laws.
Example 1. You are blind. You must use a 
reader to do your work. You use the reader both 
during your regular working hours at your place 
of work and outside your regular working hours 
away from your place of work. The reader's 
services are only for your work. You can deduct 
your expenses for the reader as business ex-
penses.
Example 2. You are deaf. You must use a 
sign language interpreter during meetings while 
you are at work. The interpreter's services are 
used only for your work. You can deduct your 
expenses for the interpreter as business expen-
ses.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue, need 
help preparing your tax return, or want to down-
load free publications, forms, or instructions, go 
to IRS.gov and find resources that can help you 
right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  Find 
free options to prepare and file your return on 
IRS.gov or in your local community if you qual-
ify.
The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance 
(VITA) program offers free tax help to people 
who generally make $54,000 or less, persons 
with disabilities, and limited-English-speaking 
taxpayers who need help preparing their own 
tax returns. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) program offers free tax help for all tax-
payers, particularly those who are 60 years of 
age and older. TCE volunteers specialize in an-
swering questions about pensions and retire-
ment-related issues unique to seniors.
You can go to IRS.gov to see your options 
for preparing and filing your return which in-
clude the following.
Free File. Go to IRS.gov/FreeFile. See if 
you qualify to use brand-name software to 
prepare and e-file your federal tax return 
for free.
VITA. Go to IRS.gov/VITA, download the 
free IRS2Go app, or call 1-800-906-9887 
to find the nearest VITA location for free 
tax preparation.
TCE. Go to IRS.gov/TCE, download the 
free IRS2Go app, or call 1-888-227-7669 
to find the nearest TCE location for free tax 
preparation.
Getting answers to your tax ques-
tions. On IRS.gov get answers to your 
tax questions anytime, anywhere.
Go to IRS.gov/Help or IRS.gov/LetUsHelp 
pages for a variety of tools that will help 
you get answers to some of the most com-
mon tax questions.
Go to IRS.gov/ITA for the Interactive Tax 
Assistant, a tool that will ask you questions 
on a number of tax law topics and provide 
answers. You can print the entire interview 
and the final response for your records.
Go to IRS.gov/Pub17 to get Pub. 17, Your 
Federal Income Tax for Individuals, which 
features details on tax-saving opportuni-
ties, 2017 tax changes, and thousands of 
interactive links to help you find answers to 
your questions. View it online in HTML, as 
a PDF, or download it to your mobile de-
vice as an eBook.
You may also be able to access tax law in-
formation in your electronic filing software.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Forms to view, download, or print all of 
the forms and publications you may need. You 
can also download and view popular tax publi-
cations and instructions (including the 1040 in-
structions) on mobile devices as an eBook at no 
charge. Or, you can go to IRS.gov/OrderForms 
to place an order and have forms mailed to you 
within 10 business days.
Access your online account (Individual tax-
payers only).  Go to IRS.gov/Account to se-
curely access information about your federal tax 
account.
View the amount you owe, pay online or 
set up an online payment agreement.
Access your tax records online.
Review the past 18 months of your pay-
ment history.
Go to IRS.gov/SecureAccess to review the 
required identity authentication process.
Using direct deposit.  The fastest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to combine direct deposit 
and IRS e-file. Direct deposit securely and elec-
tronically transfers your refund directly into your 
financial account. Eight in 10 taxpayers use di-
rect deposit to receive their refund. IRS issues 
more than 90% of refunds in less than 21 days.
Delayed refund for returns claiming certain 
credits. Due to changes in the law, the IRS 
can’t issue refunds before mid-February 2018, 
for returns that properly claimed the earned in-
come credit (EIC) or the additional child tax 
credit (ACTC). This applies to the entire refund, 
not just the portion associated with these cred-
its.
Getting a transcript or copy of a return. The 
quickest way to get a copy of your tax transcript 
is to go to IRS.gov/Transcripts. Click on either 
"Get Transcript Online" or "Get Transcript by 
Mail" to order a copy of your transcript. If you 
prefer, you can:
Order your transcript by calling 
1-800-908-9946.
Mail Form 4506-T or Form 4506T-EZ (both 
available on IRS.gov).
Using online tools to help prepare your re-
turn. Go to IRS.gov/Tools for the following.
The Earned Income Tax Credit Assistant 
(IRS.gov/EIC) determines if you’re eligible 
for the EIC.
The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) 
helps you get an employer identification 
number.
The IRS Withholding Calculator (IRS.gov/
W4App) estimates the amount you should 
have withheld from your paycheck for fed-
eral income tax purposes.
The First Time Homebuyer Credit Account 
Look-up (IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool pro-
vides information on your repayments and 
account balance.
The Sales Tax Deduction Calculator 
(IRS.gov/SalesTax) figures the amount you 
can claim if you itemize deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), choose not to 
claim state and local income taxes, and 
you didn’t save your receipts showing the 
sales tax you paid.
Resolving tax-related identity theft issues.
The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with tax-
payers by email or telephone to request 
personal or financial information. This in-
cludes any type of electronic communica-
tion, such as text messages and social me-
dia channels.
Go to IRS.gov/IDProtection for information 
and videos.
If your SSN has been lost or stolen or you 
suspect you’re a victim of tax-related iden-
tity theft, visit IRS.gov/ID to learn what 
steps you should take.
Checking on the status of your refund. 
Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
Due to changes in the law, the IRS can’t is-
sue refunds before mid-February 2018, for 
returns that properly claimed the EIC or the 
ACTC. This applies to the entire refund, 
not just the portion associated with these 
credits.
Download the official IRS2Go app to your 
mobile device to check your refund status.
Call the automated refund hotline at 
1-800-829-1954.
Making a tax payment.  The IRS uses the lat-
est encryption technology to ensure your elec-
tronic payments are safe and secure. You can 
make electronic payments online, by phone, 
and from a mobile device using the IRS2Go 
app. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and 
faster than mailing in a check or money order. 
Go to IRS.gov/Payments to make a payment 
using any of the following options.
IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill 
or estimated tax payment directly from 
your checking or savings account at no 
cost to you.
Debit or credit card: Choose an ap-
proved payment processor to pay online, 
by phone, and by mobile device.
Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Offered 
only when filing your federal taxes using 
tax preparation software or through a tax 
professional.
Page 36 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 36 Publication 463 (2017)

Electronic Federal Tax Payment Sys-
tem: Best option for businesses. Enroll-
ment is required.
Check or money order: Mail your pay-
ment to the address listed on the notice or 
instructions.
Cash: You may be able to pay your taxes 
with cash at a participating retail store.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for more information about your op-
tions.
Apply for an online payment agreement 
(IRS.gov/OPA) to meet your tax obligation 
in monthly installments if you can’t pay 
your taxes in full today. Once you complete 
the online process, you will receive imme-
diate notification of whether your agree-
ment has been approved.
Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier 
(IRS.gov/OIC) to see if you can settle your 
tax debt for less than the full amount you 
owe.
Checking the status of an amended return. 
Go to IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status of 
Form 1040X amended returns. Please note that 
it can take up to 3 weeks from the date you 
mailed your amended return for it to show up in 
our system and processing it can take up to 16 
weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter. Go to 
IRS.gov/Notices to find additional information 
about responding to an IRS notice or letter.
Contacting your local IRS office.  Keep in 
mind, many questions can be answered on 
IRS.gov without visiting an IRS Tax Assistance 
Center (TAC). Go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp for the 
topics people ask about most. If you still need 
help, IRS TACs provide tax help when a tax is-
sue can’t be handled online or by phone. All 
TACs now provide service by appointment so 
you’ll know in advance that you can get the 
service you need without long wait times. Be-
fore you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to find 
the nearest TAC, check hours, available serv-
ices, and appointment options. Or, on the 
IRS2Go app, under the Stay Connected tab, 
choose the Contact Us option and click on “Lo-
cal Offices”.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSvideos.gov) contains video and audio pre-
sentations for individuals, small businesses, 
and tax professionals.
Getting tax information in other languages. 
For taxpayers whose native language isn’t Eng-
lish, we have the following resources available. 
Taxpayers can find information on IRS.gov in 
the following languages.
Spanish (IRS.gov/Spanish).
Chinese (IRS.gov/Chinese).
Vietnamese (IRS.gov/Vietnamese).
Korean (IRS.gov/Korean).
Russian (IRS.gov/Russian).
The IRS TACs provide over-the-phone inter-
preter service in over 170 languages, and the 
service is available free to taxpayers.
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service Is Here To Help You
What is the Taxpayer Advocate 
Service?
The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an in-
dependent organization within the IRS that 
helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer rights. 
Their job is to ensure that every taxpayer is 
treated fairly and that you know and understand 
your rights under the Taxpayer Bill of Rights.
What Can the Taxpayer Advocate 
Service Do For You?
They can help you resolve problems that you 
can’t resolve with the IRS. And their service is 
free. If you qualify for their assistance, you will 
be assigned to one advocate who will work with 
you throughout the process and will do every-
thing possible to resolve your issue. TAS can 
help you if:
Your problem is causing financial difficulty 
for you, your family, or your business,
You face (or your business is facing) an 
immediate threat of adverse action, or
You’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn’t responded by the date promised.
How Can You Reach Them?
They have offices in every state, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico . Your local advo-
cate’s number is in your local directory and at 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-Us. You 
can also call them at 1-877-777-4778.
How Can You Learn About Your 
Taxpayer Rights?
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic 
rights that all taxpayers have when dealing with 
the IRS. Our Tax Toolkit at 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov can help you un-
derstand what these rights mean to you  and 
how they apply. These are your rights. Know 
them. Use them.
How Else Does the Taxpayer 
Advocate Service Help Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large-scale problems that 
affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of 
these broad issues, please report it to them at 
IRS.gov/SAMS.
Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinics
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are inde-
pendent from the IRS. LITCs represent individu-
als whose income is below a certain level and 
need to resolve tax problems with the IRS, such 
as audits, appeals, and tax collection disputes. 
In addition, clinics can provide information 
about taxpayer rights and responsibilities in dif-
ferent languages for individuals who speak 
English as a second language. Services are of-
fered for free or a small fee. To find a clinic near 
you, visit TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/LITCmap 
or see IRS Publication 4134, Low Income 
Taxpayer Clinic List.
Page 37 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 (2017)   Page 37

Page 38 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendices
Appendices A-1 through A-5 show 
the lease inclusion amounts that 
you may need to report if you 
leased a car (other than a truck or 
van, or an electric car) for 30 days 
or more. The tables are numbered.
Appendices B-1 through B-5 
show the lease inclusion amounts 
that you may need to report if you 
leased a truck or van.
If any of these apply to you, use 
the appendix for the year you first 
leased the car. (See Leasing a Car 
in chapter 4.)
Page 38 Publication 463 (2017)

Page 39 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2013
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
19,000$ 19,500$ 2$ 4$ 6$ 7$ 8$
19,500 20,000 2 5 6 9 9
20,000 20,500 2 5 8 9 11
20,500 21,000 3 6 8 10 12
21,000 21,500 3 6 10 11 13
21,500 22,000 3 7 10 13 14
22,000 23,000 4 8 11 14 16
23,000 24,000 4 9 14 16 18
24,000 25,000 5 10 15 18 21
25,000 26,000 5 12 16 21 23
26,000 27,000 6 12 19 23 25
27,000 28,000 6 14 20 25 28
28,000 29,000 7 15 22 27 30
29,000 30,000 7 16 24 29 33
30,000 31,000 8 17 26 31 35
31,000 32,000 8 19 27 33 38
32,000 33,000 9 20 29 35 40
33,000 34,000 10 21 31 37 43
34,000 35,000 10 22 33 39 45
35,000 36,000 11 23 35 41 48
36,000 37,000 11 25 36 43 50
37,000 38,000 12 26 38 45 53
38,000 39,000 12 27 40 47 55
39,000 40,000 13 28 42 49 58
40,000 41,000 13 29 44 52 59
41,000 42,000 14 30 45 54 63
42,000 43,000 14 32 47 56 64
43,000 44,000 15 33 48 59 67
44,000 45,000 15 34 51 60 69
45,000 46,000 16 35 52 63 72
46,000 47,000 17 36 54 65 74
47,000 48,000 17 38 55 67 77
48,000 49,000 18 39 57 69 79
49,000 50,000 18 40 59 71 82
50,000 51,000 19 41 61 73 84
51,000 52,000 19 42 63 75 87
52,000 53,000 20 43 65 77 89
53,000 54,000 20 45 66 79 92
54,000 55,000 21 46 68 81 94
55,000 56,000 21 47 70 84 96
56,000 57,000 22 48 72 85 99
57,000 58,000 22 50 73 88 101
58,000 59,000 23 51 75 90 103
59,000 60,000 24 52 76 92 106
60,000 62,000 24 54 79 95 110
62,000 64,000 25 56 83 99 115
64,000 66,000 27 58 87 103 120
66,000 68,000 28 60 90 108 125
68,000 70,000 29 63 93 112 130
70,000 72,000 30 65 97 117 134
72,000 74,000 31 68 100 121 139
74,000 76,000 32 70 104 125 144
76,000 78,000 33 73 107 129 149
78,000 80,000 34 75 111 133 154
80,000 85,000 36 79 117 141 162
85,000 90,000 39 85 126 151 174
90,000 95,000 41 91 135 162 186
95,000 100,0002 44 97 144 172 199
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2013-21 (2013-12 I.R.B. 660), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2013-12_IRB/ar07.html.'
Publication 463 (2017) Page 39

Page 40 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2014
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
19,000$ 19,500$ 3$ 6$ 10$ 11$ 13$
19,500 20,000 3 8 11 13 14
20,000 20,500 4 8 13 14 17
20,500 21,000 4 9 14 17 18
21,000 21,500 5 10 15 18 21
21,500 22,000 5 11 17 20 22
22,000 23,000 6 13 18 23 25
23,000 24,000 7 14 22 26 29
24,000 25,000 8 16 25 29 33
25,000 26,000 8 19 27 32 38
26,000 27,000 9 20 31 35 42
27,000 28,000 10 22 33 40 45
28,000 29,000 11 24 36 43 49
29,000 30,000 12 26 39 46 53
30,000 31,000 13 28 41 50 57
31,000 32,000 14 30 44 53 61
32,000 33,000 14 32 47 56 65
33,000 34,000 15 34 50 59 69
34,000 35,000 16 36 52 64 72
35,000 36,000 17 38 55 67 76
36,000 37,000 18 39 59 70 80
37,000 38,000 19 41 61 74 84
38,000 39,000 20 43 64 77 88
39,000 40,000 21 45 67 80 92
40,000 41,000 21 47 70 84 96
41,000 42,000 22 49 73 87 100
42,000 43,000 23 51 75 91 104
43,000 44,000 24 53 78 94 108
44,000 45,000 25 55 81 97 112
45,000 46,000 26 56 84 101 116
46,000 47,000 27 58 87 104 120
47,000 48,000 28 60 90 107 124
48,000 49,000 28 62 93 111 127
49,000 50,000 29 64 96 114 131
50,000 51,000 30 66 98 118 135
51,000 52,000 31 68 101 121 139
52,000 53,000 32 70 104 124 143
53,000 54,000 33 72 106 128 147
54,000 55,000 34 74 109 131 151
55,000 56,000 34 76 112 135 155
56,000 57,000 35 78 115 138 159
57,000 58,000 36 80 118 141 163
58,000 59,000 37 81 121 145 167
59,000 60,000 38 83 124 148 171
60,000 62,000 39 86 128 153 177
62,000 64,000 41 90 134 159 185
64,000 66,000 43 94 139 167 192
66,000 68,000 44 98 145 173 201
68,000 70,000 46 102 150 180 209
70,000 72,000 48 105 156 188 216
72,000 74,000 50 109 162 194 224
74,000 76,000 51 113 168 200 232
76,000 78,000 53 117 173 208 239
78,000 80,000 55 120 179 215 247
80,000 85,000 58 127 189 226 261
85,000 90,000 62 137 203 243 281
90,000 95,000 67 146 217 260 301
95,000 100,0002 71 156 231 277 320
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2014-21 (2014-11 I.R.B. 641), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2014-11_IRB/ar09.html.
Page 40 Publication 463 (2017)

Page 41 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2015
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
19,000$ 19,500$ 5$ 11$ 15$ 19$ 21$
19,500 20,000 6 12 18 22 24
20,000 20,500 6 14 20 25 27
20,500 21,000 7 15 23 27 31
21,000 21,500 8 17 25 30 34
21,500 22,000 9 18 28 32 38
22,000 23,000 10 21 31 37 42
23,000 24,000 11 24 36 42 49
24,000 25,000 12 27 41 48 55
25,000 26,000 14 30 45 54 62
26,000 27,000 15 34 49 60 68
27,000 28,000 17 37 54 65 75
28,000 29,000 18 40 59 71 81
29,000 30,000 20 43 64 76 87
30,000 31,000 21 46 69 81 95
31,000 32,000 23 49 73 88 100
32,000 33,000 24 52 78 93 107
33,000 34,000 25 56 82 99 114
34,000 35,000 27 59 87 104 120
35,000 36,000 28 62 92 110 126
36,000 37,000 30 65 96 116 133
37,000 38,000 31 68 102 121 139
38,000 39,000 33 71 106 127 146
39,000 40,000 34 75 110 132 153
40,000 41,000 35 78 115 138 159
41,000 42,000 37 81 120 143 166
42,000 43,000 38 84 125 149 172
43,000 44,000 40 87 129 155 179
44,000 45,000 41 90 134 161 185
45,000 46,000 43 93 139 166 191
46,000 47,000 44 97 143 172 198
47,000 48,000 45 100 148 177 205
48,000 49,000 47 103 153 183 210
49,000 50,000 48 106 158 188 218
50,000 51,000 50 109 162 194 224
51,000 52,000 51 112 167 200 230
52,000 53,000 53 115 172 205 237
53,000 54,000 54 119 176 211 243
54,000 55,000 56 122 180 217 250
55,000 56,000 57 125 186 222 256
56,000 57,000 58 128 191 227 263
57,000 58,000 60 131 195 234 269
58,000 59,000 61 135 199 239 276
59,000 60,000 63 137 205 244 283
60,000 62,000 65 142 212 253 292
62,000 64,000 68 149 220 265 304
64,000 66,000 71 155 230 275 318
66,000 68,000 73 162 239 287 331
68,000 70,000 76 168 249 298 343
70,000 72,000 79 174 258 309 357
72,000 74,000 82 180 268 320 370
74,000 76,000 85 186 277 332 383
76,000 78,000 88 193 286 343 396
78,000 80,000 91 199 296 354 408
80,000 85,000 96 210 312 374 431
85,000 90,000 103 226 335 402 464
90,000 95,000 110 242 359 430 496
95,000 100,0002 117 258 382 458 529
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2015-19 (2015-8 I.R.B. 656), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2015-8_IRB/ar10.html.
Publication 463 (2017) Page 41

Page 42 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2016
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
19,000$ 19,500$ 6$ 13$ 20$ 23$ 27$
19,500 20,000 7 15 23 27 30
20,000 20,500 8 17 26 30 35
20,500 21,000 8 19 29 33 39
21,000 21,500 10 21 31 38 42
21,500 22,000 11 23 34 41 47
22,000 23,000 12 26 39 46 53
23,000 24,000 14 30 44 54 60
24,000 25,000 16 34 50 60 69
25,000 26,000 17 38 56 67 78
26,000 27,000 19 42 62 74 85
27,000 28,000 21 46 68 81 93
28,000 29,000 23 50 73 89 101
29,000 30,000 25 53 80 95 110
30,000 31,000 26 58 85 102 118
31,000 32,000 28 62 91 109 126
32,000 33,000 30 65 98 116 134
33,000 34,000 32 69 103 123 142
34,000 35,000 34 73 109 130 150
35,000 36,000 35 77 115 137 158
36,000 37,000 37 81 121 144 166
37,000 38,000 39 85 127 151 174
38,000 39,000 41 89 132 158 183
39,000 40,000 42 93 138 166 190
40,000 41,000 44 97 144 172 199
41,000 42,000 46 101 150 179 207
42,000 43,000 48 105 155 187 215
43,000 44,000 50 109 161 193 223
44,000 45,000 51 113 167 201 231
45,000 46,000 53 117 173 207 239
46,000 47,000 55 121 179 214 247
47,000 48,000 57 124 185 222 255
48,000 49,000 59 128 191 228 264
49,000 50,000 60 133 196 236 271
50,000 51,000 62 136 203 242 280
51,000 52,000 64 140 209 249 288
52,000 53,000 66 144 214 257 295
53,000 54,000 68 148 220 263 304
54,000 55,000 69 152 226 271 312
55,000 56,000 71 156 232 277 320
56,000 57,000 73 160 238 284 328
57,000 58,000 75 164 243 292 336
58,000 59,000 77 168 249 298 345
59,000 60,000 78 172 255 306 352
60,000 62,000 81 178 264 316 364
62,000 64,000 85 185 276 330 381
64,000 66,000 88 194 287 344 397
66,000 68,000 92 201 299 358 413
68,000 70,000 95 209 311 372 430
70,000 72,000 99 217 322 387 445
72,000 74,000 102 225 334 400 462
74,000 76,000 106 233 346 414 478
76,000 78,000 110 241 357 428 494
78,000 80,000 113 249 369 442 510
80,000 85,000 120 262 390 467 538
85,000 90,000 128 282 419 502 579
90,000 95,000 137 302 448 537 620
95,000 100,0002 146 322 477 572 660
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2016-23 (2016-16 I.R.B. 581) available at www.irs.gov/irb/2016-16_IRB/ar06.html.
Page 42 Publication 463 (2017)

Page 43 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5.Inclusion Amounts for Cars ( Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2017
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$19,000 $19,500 $6 $14 $20 $23 $27
19,500 20,000 7 16 23 27 31
20,000 20,500 8 18 26 30 35
20,500 21,000 9 20 28 35 39
21,000 21,500 10 21 32 38 44
21,500 22,000 11 23 35 42 47
22,000 23,000 12 27 39 47 53
23,000 24,000 14 31 45 54 62
24,000 25,000 16 34 52 61 70
25,000 26,000 18 38 58 68 78
26,000 27,000 19 43 63 75 87
27,000 28,000 21 47 69 82 95
28,000 29,000 23 51 75 89 103
29,000 30,000 25 55 80 97 112
30,000 31,000 27 58 87 104 120
31,000 32,000 29 62 93 111 128
32,000 33,000 30 67 99 118 136
33,000 34,000 32 71 104 126 144
34,000 35,000 34 75 110 133 152
35,000 36,000 36 79 116 140 160
36,000 37,000 38 82 123 147 169
37,000 38,000 40 86 129 154 177
38,000 39,000 41 91 134 161 186
39,000 40,000 43 95 140 168 194
40,000 41,000 45 99 146 175 202
41,000 42,000 47 103 152 182 210
42,000 43,000 49 106 159 189 218
43,000 44,000 50 111 164 197 226
44,000 45,000 52 115 170 204 234
45,000 46,000 54 119 176 211 243
46,000 47,000 56 123 182 218 251
47,000 48,000 58 127 187 225 260
48,000 49,000 60 130 194 232 268
49,000 50,000 61 135 200 239 276
50,000 51,000 63 139 206 246 284
51,000 52,000 65 143 211 254 292
52,000 53,000 67 147 217 261 301
53,000 54,000 69 151 223 268 309
54,000 55,000 70 155 229 275 318
55,000 56,000 72 159 235 282 326
56,000 57,000 74 163 241 289 334
57,000 58,000 76 167 247 296 342
58,000 59,000 78 171 253 303 350
59,000 60,000 80 174 260 310 359
60,000 62,000 82 181 268 321 371
62,000 64,000 86 189 280 335 387
64,000 66,000 90 197 292 349 404
66,000 68,000 93 205 304 364 420
68,000 70,000 97 213 315 379 436
70,000 72,000 101 221 327 393 453
72,000 74,000 104 229 339 407 470
74,000 76,000 108 237 351 421 486
76,000 78,000 111 245 363 436 502
78,000 80,000 115 253 375 450 518
80,000 85,000 122 267 396 474 548
85,000 90,000 131 287 425 511 588
90,000 95,000 140 307 455 546 630
95,000 100,0002 149 327 485 581 671
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2017-29 (2017-14 I.R.B. 1065) available at IRS.gov/irb/2017–14_IRB/ar10.html.
Publication 463 (2017) Page 43

Page 44 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2013
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
19,000$ 19,500$ 1$ 3$ 4$ 5$ 6$
19,500 20,000 2 3 5 6 7
20,000 20,500 2 4 6 7 8
20,500 21,000 2 5 7 8 9
21,000 21,500 2 5 8 9 11
21,500 22,000 3 6 8 10 12
22,000 23,000 3 7 10 11 14
23,000 24,000 4 8 11 14 16
24,000 25,000 4 9 14 16 18
25,000 26,000 5 10 15 18 21
26,000 27,000 5 12 17 20 23
27,000 28,000 6 13 18 23 25
28,000 29,000 6 14 20 25 28
29,000 30,000 7 15 22 27 30
30,000 31,000 7 16 24 29 33
31,000 32,000 8 17 26 31 35
32,000 33,000 8 19 27 33 38
33,000 34,000 9 20 29 35 41
34,000 35,000 10 21 31 37 43
35,000 36,000 10 22 33 39 46
36,000 37,000 11 23 35 41 48
37,000 38,000 11 25 36 43 51
38,000 39,000 12 26 38 45 53
39,000 40,000 12 27 40 48 55
40,000 41,000 13 28 42 49 58
41,000 42,000 13 29 44 52 60
42,000 43,000 14 30 46 54 62
43,000 44,000 14 32 47 56 65
44,000 45,000 15 33 48 59 67
45,000 46,000 15 34 51 60 70
46,000 47,000 16 35 52 63 72
47,000 48,000 17 36 54 65 74
48,000 49,000 17 38 55 67 77
49,000 50,000 18 39 57 69 79
50,000 51,000 18 40 59 71 82
51,000 52,000 19 41 61 73 84
52,000 53,000 19 42 63 75 87
53,000 54,000 20 43 65 77 89
54,000 55,000 20 45 66 80 91
55,000 56,000 21 46 68 81 94
56,000 57,000 21 47 70 84 96
57,000 58,000 22 48 72 86 98
58,000 59,000 22 50 73 88 101
59,000 60,000 23 51 75 90 103
60,000 62,000 24 52 78 93 108
62,000 64,000 25 55 81 97 113
64,000 66,000 26 57 85 101 118
66,000 68,000 27 60 88 106 122
68,000 70,000 28 62 92 110 127
70,000 72,000 29 64 96 114 132
72,000 74,000 30 67 99 118 137
74,000 76,000 31 69 103 122 142
76,000 78,000 32 72 105 127 147
78,000 80,000 34 73 110 131 151
80,000 85,000 35 78 116 138 160
85,000 90,000 38 84 124 149 172
90,000 95,000 41 90 133 160 184
95,000 100,0002 44 95 142 171 196
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2013-21 (2013-12 I.R.B. 660), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2013-12_IRB/ar07.html.
Page 44 Publication 463 (2017)

Page 45 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2014
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
19,500$ 20,000$ 2$ 5$ 7$ 8$ 10$
20,000 20,500 3 6 8 10 12
20,500 21,000 3 7 10 11 14
21,000 21,500 3 8 11 14 15
21,500 22,000 4 9 12 15 18
22,000 23,000 5 10 15 17 21
23,000 24,000 5 12 18 21 24
24,000 25,000 6 14 20 25 28
25,000 26,000 7 16 23 28 32
26,000 27,000 8 18 26 31 36
27,000 28,000 9 20 28 35 40
28,000 29,000 10 21 32 38 44
29,000 30,000 11 23 35 41 48
30,000 31,000 11 26 37 45 52
31,000 32,000 12 27 41 48 56
32,000 33,000 13 29 43 52 60
33,000 34,000 14 31 46 55 64
34,000 35,000 15 33 49 58 68
35,000 36,000 16 35 51 62 72
36,000 37,000 17 37 54 65 76
37,000 38,000 18 38 58 69 79
38,000 39,000 18 41 60 72 83
39,000 40,000 19 43 63 75 87
40,000 41,000 20 44 66 79 91
41,000 42,000 21 46 69 82 95
42,000 43,000 22 48 72 85 99
43,000 44,000 23 50 74 89 103
44,000 45,000 24 52 77 93 106
45,000 46,000 24 54 80 96 111
46,000 47,000 25 56 83 99 115
47,000 48,000 26 58 86 102 119
48,000 49,000 27 60 88 106 123
49,000 50,000 28 62 91 109 127
50,000 51,000 29 63 95 113 130
51,000 52,000 30 65 97 117 134
52,000 53,000 31 67 100 120 138
53,000 54,000 31 69 103 123 142
54,000 55,000 32 71 106 126 146
55,000 56,000 33 73 108 130 150
56,000 57,000 34 75 111 133 154
57,000 58,000 35 77 114 137 157
58,000 59,000 36 79 116 141 161
59,000 60,000 37 80 120 144 165
60,000 62,000 38 84 123 149 172
62,000 64,000 40 87 130 155 180
64,000 66,000 41 91 136 162 187
66,000 68,000 43 95 141 169 195
68,000 70,000 45 99 146 176 203
70,000 72,000 47 102 153 182 211
72,000 74,000 48 107 158 189 219
74,000 76,000 50 110 164 196 227
76,000 78,000 52 114 169 203 235
78,000 80,000 54 118 175 209 243
80,000 85,000 57 124 185 222 256
85,000 90,000 61 134 199 239 276
90,000 95,000 65 144 213 256 295
95,000 100,0002 70 153 227 273 315
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2014-21 (2014-11 I.R.B. 641), available at .www.irs.gov/irb/2014-11_IRB/ar09.html.
Publication 463 (2017) Page 45

Page 46 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-3. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2015
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
19,500$ 20,000$ 4$ 7$ 11$ 13$ 16$
20,000 20,500 4 9 13 16 19
20,500 21,000 5 11 15 19 22
21,000 21,500 6 12 18 22 25
21,500 22,000 6 14 20 25 28
22,000 23,000 7 16 24 29 33
23,000 24,000 9 19 29 34 40
24,000 25,000 10 23 33 40 46
25,000 26,000 12 25 38 46 53
26,000 27,000 13 29 42 51 60
27,000 28,000 15 32 47 57 65
28,000 29,000 16 35 52 62 73
29,000 30,000 18 38 56 68 79
30,000 31,000 19 41 61 74 85
31,000 32,000 20 45 66 79 91
32,000 33,000 22 48 70 85 98
33,000 34,000 23 51 75 91 104
34,000 35,000 25 54 80 96 111
35,000 36,000 26 57 85 101 118
36,000 37,000 28 60 89 108 124
37,000 38,000 29 63 94 113 131
38,000 39,000 30 67 98 119 137
39,000 40,000 32 70 103 124 144
40,000 41,000 33 73 108 130 150
41,000 42,000 35 76 113 135 157
42,000 43,000 36 79 118 141 163
43,000 44,000 38 82 122 147 169
44,000 45,000 39 85 127 153 176
45,000 46,000 40 89 131 158 183
46,000 47,000 42 92 136 163 189
47,000 48,000 43 95 141 169 195
48,000 49,000 45 98 145 175 202
49,000 50,000 46 101 151 180 208
50,000 51,000 48 104 155 186 215
51,000 52,000 49 108 159 192 221
52,000 53,000 51 110 165 197 228
53,000 54,000 52 114 169 203 234
54,000 55,000 53 117 174 208 241
55,000 56,000 55 120 178 214 248
56,000 57,000 56 123 183 220 254
57,000 58,000 58 126 188 225 261
58,000 59,000 59 130 192 231 267
59,000 60,000 61 133 197 236 273
60,000 62,000 63 137 204 245 283
62,000 64,000 66 144 213 256 296
64,000 66,000 68 150 223 268 308
66,000 68,000 71 157 232 278 322
68,000 70,000 74 163 241 290 335
70,000 72,000 77 169 251 301 348
72,000 74,000 80 175 261 312 361
74,000 76,000 83 182 269 324 374
76,000 78,000 86 188 279 335 386
78,000 80,000 89 194 288 346 400
80,000 85,000 94 205 305 366 422
85,000 90,000 101 221 328 394 455
90,000 95,000 108 237 351 422 488
95,000 100,0002 115 253 375 450 519
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2015-19 (2015-8 I.R.B. 656), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2015-8_IRB/ar10.html.
Page 46 Publication 463 (2017)

Page 47 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-4. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2016
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
19,500$ 20,000$ 3$ 8$ 12$ 14$ 16$
20,000 20,500 4 10 15 17 20
20,500 21,000 5 12 17 21 25
21,000 21,500 6 14 20 25 28
21,500 22,000 7 16 23 28 32
22,000 23,000 8 19 28 33 38
23,000 24,000 10 23 33 41 46
24,000 25,000 12 26 40 47 55
25,000 26,000 14 30 46 54 63
26,000 27,000 16 34 51 62 70
27,000 28,000 17 38 58 68 79
28,000 29,000 19 42 63 76 86
29,000 30,000 21 46 69 82 95
30,000 31,000 23 50 75 89 103
31,000 32,000 25 54 80 97 111
32,000 33,000 26 58 86 104 119
33,000 34,000 28 62 92 111 127
34,000 35,000 30 66 98 117 136
35,000 36,000 32 70 104 124 143
36,000 37,000 34 73 110 132 151
37,000 38,000 35 78 115 139 160
38,000 39,000 37 82 121 146 167
39,000 40,000 39 85 128 152 176
40,000 41,000 41 89 133 160 184
41,000 42,000 42 94 139 166 192
42,000 43,000 44 97 145 174 200
43,000 44,000 46 101 151 181 208
44,000 45,000 48 105 157 187 217
45,000 46,000 50 109 162 195 224
46,000 47,000 51 113 169 201 233
47,000 48,000 53 117 174 209 240
48,000 49,000 55 121 180 216 248
49,000 50,000 57 125 186 222 257
50,000 51,000 59 129 191 230 265
51,000 52,000 60 133 197 237 273
52,000 53,000 62 137 203 244 281
53,000 54,000 64 141 209 250 290
54,000 55,000 66 144 216 257 298
55,000 56,000 68 148 221 265 305
56,000 57,000 69 153 226 272 314
57,000 58,000 71 156 233 279 321
58,000 59,000 73 160 239 285 330
59,000 60,000 75 164 244 293 338
60,000 62,000 77 170 253 304 350
62,000 64,000 81 178 265 317 366
64,000 66,000 85 186 276 331 383
66,000 68,000 88 194 288 345 399
68,000 70,000 92 202 299 360 414
70,000 72,000 95 210 311 374 431
72,000 74,000 99 217 324 387 447
74,000 76,000 102 226 335 401 463
76,000 78,000 106 233 347 415 480
78,000 80,000 110 241 358 430 495
80,000 85,000 116 255 379 454 524
85,000 90,000 125 274 409 489 564
90,000 95,000 134 284 437 525 605
95,000 100,0002 156 314 466 560 645
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2016-23 (2016-16 I.R.B. 581), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2016-16_IRB/ar06.html. 
Publication 463 (2017) Page 47

Page 48 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-5. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2017
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$19,500 $20,000 $4 $8 $11 $13 $16
20,000 20,500 4 10 14 17 20
20,500 21,000 5 12 17 21 23
21,000 21,500 6 14 20 24 28
21,500 22,000 7 16 23 28 32
22,000 23,000 9 19 27 33 38
23,000 24,000 10 23 34 40 46
24,000 25,000 12 27 39 48 54
25,000 26,000 14 31 45 55 62
26,000 27,000 16 35 51 62 71
27,000 28,000 18 39 57 69 79
28,000 29,000 19 43 63 76 88
29,000 30,000 21 47 69 83 96
30,000 31,000 23 51 75 90 104
31,000 32,000 25 55 81 97 112
32,000 33,000 27 59 87 104 120
33,000 34,000 29 63 93 111 129
34,000 35,000 30 67 99 119 136
35,000 36,000 32 71 105 126 145
36,000 37,000 34 75 111 133 153
37,000 38,000 36 79 117 140 161
38,000 39,000 38 83 122 148 169
39,000 40,000 40 87 128 155 177
40,000 41,000 41 91 135 161 186
41,000 42,000 43 95 141 168 194
42,000 43,000 45 99 146 176 203
43,000 44,000 47 103 152 183 211
44,000 45,000 49 107 158 190 219
45,000 46,000 50 111 165 196 228
46,000 47,000 52 115 170 204 236
47,000 48,000 54 119 176 211 244
48,000 49,000 56 123 182 218 252
49,000 50,000 58 127 188 225 261
50,000 51,000 60 131 194 232 269
51,000 52,000 61 135 200 240 277
52,000 53,000 63 139 206 247 285
53,000 54,000 65 143 212 254 293
54,000 55,000 67 147 218 261 301
55,000 56,000 69 151 224 268 309
56,000 57,000 70 155 230 275 318
57,000 58,000 72 159 236 282 326
58,000 59,000 74 163 242 289 335
59,000 60,000 76 167 248 296 343
60,000 62,000 79 173 256 308 355
62,000 64,000 82 181 269 321 372
64,000 66,000 86 189 280 336 388
66,000 68,000 90 197 292 350 404
68,000 70,000 93 205 304 365 420
70,000 72,000 97 213 316 379 437
72,000 74,000 101 221 328 393 453
74,000 76,000 104 229 340 407 470
76,000 78,000 108 237 352 421 487
78,000 80,000 111 245 364 436 503
80,000 85,000 118 259 384 461 532
85,000 90,000 127 279 414 497 573
90,000 95,000 136 299 444 532 614
95,000 100,0002 145 319 474 567 656
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2017-29 (2017-14 I.R.B. 1065), available at IRS.gov/irb/2017-14_IRB/ar10.html.
Page 48 Publication 463 (2017)

Page 49 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
"Hours of service" limits 12
Form 2106 34
50% limit on meals 5
A
Accountable plans 30–32
Accounting to employer 30
Adequate accounting 30
Independent contractors 33
Adequate records 25
Advertising:
Car display 15
Expenses 12
Signs, display racks, or other 
promotional material to be 
used on recipient's business 
premises 14
Airline clubs 13
Allocating costs 4, 12, 27
Allowance (See Reimbursements)
Armed forces:
Assigned overseas 3
Assistance (See Tax help)
Associated entertainment 10
Athletic clubs 13
B
Basis of car 18
 (See also Depreciation of car)
Bona fide business purpose 5
Box seats at entertainment 
events 12
Business travel 6
Outside U.S. 7
Business use of car 16
More-than-50%-use test. 19
Qualified business use 19
C
Canceled checks:
As evidence of business 
expenses 25
Car, defined 17
Car, truck, or van rentals 23, 24
Car expenses 15–24
Actual expenses 16
Allowances for 30–32
Business and personal use 16
Combining expenses 27
Disposition of car 24
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) 
allowance 31
Form 2106 34
Leasing a car, truck, or 
van 23, 24
Mileage rate (See Standard 
mileage rate)
Taxes paid on car 17
Traffic tickets 17
Car pools 15
Car rentals 24
Form 2106 34
Casualty and theft losses:
Cars 17
Depreciation 24
Charitable organizations:
Benefit events for 12
Sports events to benefit 12
Club dues 13
Commuting expenses 15
Conventions 9, 10
Country clubs 13
Cruise ships 9
D
Daily business mileage and 
expense log (Table 6-2) 27
Depreciation of car 17
 (See also Section 179 deductions)
Depreciation of Car:
Adjustment for using standard 
mileage rate 24
Basis:
Sales taxes 17
Unrecovered basis 21
Casualty or theft, effect 24
Deduction 17, 24
Excess depreciation 23
Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System 
(MACRS) 20
Section 179 deduction 21
Trade-in, effect 19, 24
Trucks and vans 21
Directly-related 
entertainment 10
Disabled employees:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 35
Documentary evidence 25
E
Employer-provided vehicles 16
Reporting requirements 29
Entertainment 
expenses 10–12, 14
50% limit 11
Determination of 
applicability (Figure 
A) 11
Associated test 10
Deductible 12, 13
Summary (Table 2-1) 12
Directly-related test 10
Entertainment, defined 12
Form 2106 34
Tickets (See Tickets)
Entertainment facilities:
Expenses for use of 13
Estimates of expenses 25
Exceptions to the 50% Limit 11
Excess 
reimbursements (See Reimbu
rsements)
Extravagant expenses 5, 12
F
Fair market value of car 23
Farmers:
Form 1040, Schedule F 27
Federal crime investigations or 
prosecutions:
Federal employees engaged 
in 4
Federal rate for per diem 6, 30
Fee-basis officials 35
Fees you pay 15
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) 
allowance 31
Form 1040, Schedule C 27
Form 1040, Schedule F 27, 29
Form 2106 18, 29, 33, 34
Form 2106-EZ 34
Form 4562 29
Form 4797 23
Form W-2:
Employer-provided 
vehicles 29
Reimbursement of personal 
expenses 29
Statutory employees 29
G
Gifts 13, 14
$25 limit 14
Combining for recordkeeping 
purposes 27
Reporting requirements 29
Golf clubs 13
H
Hauling tools 15
High-low method:
Introduction 33
Transition rules 33
High-low rate method 31
Home office 15
Hotel clubs 13
I
Identity theft 36
Impairment-related work 
expenses 35
Incidental expenses:
Defined 5
Gifts 14
No meals, incidentals only 5
Income-producing property 29
Incomplete records 25
Indefinite job assignment 4
Independent contractors 33
Interest on car loans 16
Itinerants 3
L
Lavish or extravagant 
expenses 5, 12
Leasing a car, truck, or van 23, 
24
Luxury private boxes at 
entertainment events 12
Luxury water travel 8
M
MACRS (Modified Accelerated 
Cost Recovery System) 20
2016 chart (Table 4-1) 22
Main place of business or 
work 3
Married taxpayers:
Performing artists 35
Meal expenses 5
50% limit 11
Determination of 
applicability (Figure 
A) 11
Exceptions 11
Actual cost method 5
Form 2106 34
Major cities with higher 
allowances 6
Standard meal allowance 5, 6, 
31
Meals, 
entertainment-related 12
Mileage rate (See Standard 
mileage rate)
Military (See Armed forces)
Missing children, photographs 
of 2
Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System 
(MACRS) 20
2016 chart (Table 4-1) 22
N
Nonaccountable plans 32
O
Office in the home 15
Officials paid on fee basis 35
Overseas travel:
Conventions 9
Meal allowance 6
Part of trip outside U.S. 6
P
Parking fees 15, 16
Per diem allowances 30–32
Defined 29
Federal rate for 30
Per diem rates:
High-cost localities 33
High-low method 33
Regular federal method 33
Standard rate for unlisted 
localities 33
Transition rules 33, 34
Performing artists 35
Personal property taxes 16, 17
Personal trips 6
Outside U.S. 8
Placed in service, cars 18
Probationary work period 4
Proving business purpose 25
Publications (See Tax help)
Public transportation:
Outside of U.S. travel 7
Publication 463 (2017) Page 49

Page 50 of 50  Fileid: … tions/P463/2017/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:59 - 16-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
R
Recordkeeping 
requirements 25–27
Adequate records 25
Daily business mileage and 
expense log (Table 6-2) 27
Destroyed records 26
How to prove expenses 
(Table 5-1) 26
Incomplete records 25
Reimbursed expenses 27
Sampling to prove 
expenses 26
Separating and combining 
expenses 26, 27
Three-year period of 
retention 27
Weekly travel expense and 
entertainment record 
(Table 6-3) 28
Regular federal method:
Introduction 33
Transition rules 34
Reimbursements 29–33
Accountable plans 30
Excess 32
Form 2106 34
Nonaccountable plans 32
Nondeductible expenses 30
Personal expenses 29
Recordkeeping 27
Reporting (Table 6-1) 32
Unclaimed 29
Reporting requirements 27
Per diem or car allowance 31
Reimbursements 29–33
Reservists:
Transportation expenses 15
Traveling more than 100 miles 
from home 35
Returning excess 
reimbursements 32
Rural mail carriers 15
S
Section 179 deduction:
Amended return 18
Deduction 17
Limits 17
Self-employed persons 11
Reporting requirements 27
Skyboxes 12
Spouse, expenses for 4, 13
Standard meal allowance 5, 6, 
31
Standard mileage rate 2, 15, 31
Depreciation adjustment for 
using 24
Form 2106 34
Statutory employees 29
T
Tables and figures:
50% limit determination (Figure 
A) 11
Daily business mileage and 
expense log (Table 6-2) 27
Entertainment expenses, 
determination of 
deductibility (Table 2-1) 10
Maximum depreciation 
deduction for cars table 21
Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System (MACRS) 
2016 chart (Table 4-1) 22
Proving expenses 
(Table 5-1) 26
Reporting reimbursements 
(Table 6-1) 32
Transportation expenses, 
determination of 
deductibility (Figure B) 14
Travel expenses, determination 
of deductibility 
(Table 1-1) 5
Weekly travel expense and 
entertainment record 
(Table 6-3) 28
Tax help 36
Tax home, determination of 3
Temporary job assignments 4
Temporary work location 14
Tickets 12, 14
Season or series tickets 27
Traffic violations 17
Tools:
Hauling tools 15
Trade association meetings 12
Trade-in of car 19, 24
Traffic tickets 17
Transients 3
Transition rules 33
Example:
High-low method 33
High-low method 33
Regular federal method 34
Transportation expenses 14–25
Car expenses 15–24
Deductible (Figure B) 14
five or more cars 16
Form 2106 34
Transportation workers 6, 12
Travel advance 29, 32
 (See also Reimbursements)
Travel expenses 3–9
Another individual 
accompanying taxpayer 4
Away from home 3
Deductible 4, 9
Summary of (Table 1-1) 5
Defined 3
Going home on days off 4
In U.S. 6
Lodging 6
Luxury water travel 8
Outside U.S. 7
Travel to family home 3
Trucks and vans:
Depreciation 21
Transportation workers 12
Transportation workers' 
expenses 6
Two places of work 15
U
Unclaimed reimbursements 29
Unions:
Trips from union hall to place of 
work 15
Unrecovered basis of car 21
V
Volunteers 2
W
Weekly travel expense and 
entertainment record 
(Table 6-3) 28
Page 50 Publication 463 (2017)