Contents
Introduction .................. 1
What's New for 2015 ............. 2
What's New for 2016 ............. 2
Reminders ................... 2
Chapter 1. Deducting Business 
Expenses ................. 2
Chapter 2. Employees' Pay ........ 6
Chapter 3. Rent Expense ......... 8
Chapter 4. Interest ............ 11
Chapter 5. Taxes ............. 16
Chapter 6. Insurance ........... 18
Chapter 7. Costs You Can Deduct 
or Capitalize .............. 22
Chapter 8. Amortization ......... 26
Chapter 9. Depletion ........... 33
Chapter 10. Business Bad Debts .... 38
Chapter 11. Other Expenses ...... 41
Chapter 12. How To Get Tax Help ... 47
Index ..................... 52
Introduction
This publication discusses common business 
expenses and explains what is and is not de­
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi­
ness expenses are discussed in the opening 
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific 
expenses and list other publications and forms 
you may need.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and your 
suggestions for future editions.
You can send us comments from 
www.irs.gov/formspubs. Click on “More Infor­
mation” and then on “Give us feedback.”
Or you can write to:
Internal Revenue Service
Tax Forms and Publications
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR­6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone. 
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in­
clude your daytime phone number, including 
the area code, in your correspondence.
Although we cannot respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments as 
we revise our tax products.
Ordering forms and publications.  You 
can order forms, instructions, and publications 
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 535
Cat. No. 15065Z
Business 
Expenses
For use in preparing
2015 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (TiếngViệt) 
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 53  10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jan 07, 2016

online at www.irs.gov/orderforms. You can also 
visit www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms, 
instructions, and publications.
Tax questions. If you have a tax question, 
check the information available on IRS.gov or 
call 1­800­829­4933. We cannot answer tax 
questions sent to the above address.
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments 
related to Publication 535, such as legislation 
enacted after it was published, go to
www.irs.gov/pub535.
What's New for 2015
The following items highlight some changes in 
the tax law for 2015.
Premium tax credit. You may have to use the 
worksheets in Publication 974 instead of the 
worksheet in chapter 6. For more information, 
see chapter 6.
Film and television production costs. Legis­
lation signed into law on December 18, 2015, 
has renewed the provision regarding the elec­
tion to expense film and television production 
costs. For more information, see chapter 7.
Standard mileage rate.  Beginning in 2015, 
the standard mileage rate for the cost of operat­
ing your car , van, pickup, or panel truck for 
each mile of business use is 57.5 cents per 
mile. For more information, see chapter 11.
What's New for 2016
The following items highlight a change in the tax 
law for 2016.
Form 1099–MISC new filing date.  New filing 
date.Public Law 114­113, Division Q, section 
201, requires Form 1099­MISC to be filed on or 
before January 31, 2017, when you are report­
ing nonemployee compensation payments in 
box 7. Otherwise, file by February 28, 2017, if 
you file on paper, or by March 31, 2017, if you 
file electronically. The due dates for furnishing 
payee statements remain the same.
Standard mileage rate.  Beginning in 2016, 
the standard mileage rate for the cost of operat­
ing your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for 
each mile of business use is 54 cents per mile.
Reminders
The following reminders and other items may 
help you file your tax return.
IRS e-file (Electronic Filing)
You can file your tax returns electronically 
using an IRS e-file option. The benefits of IRS 
e-file include faster refunds, increased 
accuracy, and acknowledgment of IRS receipt 
of your return. You can use one of the following 
IRS e-file options.
Use an authorized IRS e-file provider.
Use a personal computer.
Visit a Volunteer Income Tax Assistance 
(VITA) or Tax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) site.
For details on these fast filing methods, see 
your income tax package.
Form 1099-MISC. File Form 1099­MISC, Mis­
cellaneous Income, for each person to whom 
you have paid during the year in the course of 
your trade or business at least $600 in rents, 
services (including parts and materials), prizes 
and awards, other income payments, medical 
and health care payments, and crop insurance 
proceeds. See the Instructions for Form 
1099­MISC for more information and additional 
reporting requirements.
Photographs of missing children.  The Inter­
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing  & Exploited 
Children. Photographs of missing children se­
lected by the Center may appear in this publica­
tion on pages that would otherwise be blank. 
You can help bring these children home by 
looking at the photographs and calling 
1­800­THE­LOST (1­800­843­5678) (24 hours 
a day, 7 days a week) if you recognize a child.
Preventing slavery and human trafficking. 
Human trafficking is a form of modern­day slav­
ery, and involves the use of force, fraud, or co­
ercion to exploit human beings for some type of 
labor or commercial sex purpose. The United 
States is a source, transit, and destination 
country for men, women, and children, both 
U.S. citizens and foreign nationals, who are 
subjected to the injustices of slavery and hu­
man trafficking, including forced labor, debt 
bondage, involuntary servitude, and sex traf­
ficking. Trafficking in persons can occur in both 
lawful and illicit industries or markets, including 
in hotel services, hospitality, agriculture, manu­
facturing, janitorial services, construction, 
health and elder care, domestic service, broth­
els, massage parlors, and street prostitution, 
among others.
Many U.S. government and non­govern­
mental entities are involved in combating hu­
man trafficking. Online resources for recogniz­
ing and reporting trafficking activities, and 
assisting victims include the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) Blue Campaign at 
http://www.dhs.gov/blue-campaign, the Depart­
ment of State Office to Monitor and Combat 
Trafficking in Persons at http://www.state.gov/j/
tip/, and the National Human Trafficking Re­
source Center (NHTRC) at http://
traffickingresourcecenter.org/. You can also call 
the DHS domestic 24­hour toll­free number at 
1­866­DHS­2­ICE (1­866­347­2423) or 
1­802­872­6199 (non­toll­free international), or 
the NHTRC toll free at 1­888­3737­888.
1.
Deducting 
Business 
Expenses
Introduction
This chapter covers the general rules for de­
ducting business expenses. Business expen­
ses are the costs of carrying on a trade or busi­
ness, and they are usually deductible if the 
business is operated to make a profit.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
What you can deduct
How much you can deduct
When you can deduct
Not­for­profit activities
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Tax Guide for Small Business
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car 
Expenses
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Miscellaneous Deductions
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for 
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Accounting Periods and Methods
Corporations
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Starting a Business and Keeping 
Records
Business Use of Your Home
Passive Activity and At­Risk Rules
Home Mortgage Interest
Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
Itemized Deductions
Election To Postpone
Determination as To Whether the 
Presumption Applies That an
Activity Is Engaged in for Profit
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
  334
  463
  525
  529
  536
  538
  542
  547
  583
  587
  925
  936
  946
  Sch A (Form 1040)
  5213
Page 2 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2  Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

What Can I Deduct?
To be deductible, a business expense must be 
both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex­
pense is one that is common and accepted in 
your industry. A necessary expense is one that 
is helpful and appropriate for your trade or busi­
ness. An expense does not have to be indis­
pensable to be considered necessary.
Even though an expense may be ordinary 
and necessary, you may not be allowed to de­
duct the expense in the year you paid or incur­
red it. In some cases you may not be allowed to 
deduct the expense at all. Therefore, it is impor­
tant to distinguish usual business expenses 
from expenses that include the following.
The expenses used to figure cost of goods 
sold.
Capital expenses.
Personal expenses.
Cost of Goods Sold
If your business manufactures products or pur­
chases them for resale, you generally must 
value inventory at the beginning and end of 
each tax year to determine your cost of goods 
sold. Some of your business expenses may be 
included in figuring cost of goods sold. Cost of 
goods sold is deducted from your gross re­
ceipts to figure your gross profit for the year. If 
you include an expense in the cost of goods 
sold, you cannot deduct it again as a business 
expense.
The following are types of expenses that go 
into figuring cost of goods sold.
The cost of products or raw materials, in­
cluding freight.
Storage.
Direct labor (including contributions to pen­
sion or annuity plans) for workers who pro­
duce the products.
Factory overhead.
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you 
must capitalize the direct costs and part of the 
indirect costs for certain production or resale 
activities. Indirect costs include rent, interest, 
taxes, storage, purchasing, processing, repack­
aging, handling, and administrative costs.
This rule does not apply to personal prop­
erty you acquire for resale if your average an­
nual gross receipts (or those of your predeces­
sor) for the preceding 3 tax years are not more 
than $10 million.
For more information, see the following 
sources.
Cost of goods sold—chapter 6 of Pub. 
334.
Inventories—Pub. 538.
Uniform capitalization rules—Pub. 538 and 
section 263A of the Internal Revenue Code 
and the related regulations.
Capital Expenses
You must capitalize, rather than deduct, some 
costs. These costs are a part of your investment 
in your business and are called “capital expen­
ses.” Capital expenses are considered assets 
in your business. In general, you capitalize 
three types of costs.
Business start­up costs (See Tip below).
Business assets.
Improvements.
You can elect to deduct or amortize 
certain business start-up costs. See 
chapters 7 and 8.
Cost recovery. Although you generally cannot 
take a current deduction for a capital expense, 
you may be able to recover the amount you 
spend through depreciation, amortization, or 
depletion. These recovery methods allow you to 
deduct part of your cost each year. In this way, 
you are able to recover your capital expense. 
See Amortization (chapter 8) and Depletion 
(chapter 9) in this publication. A taxpayer can 
elect to deduct a portion of the costs of certain 
depreciable property as a section 179 deduc­
tion. A greater portion of these costs can be de­
ducted if the property is qualified disaster assis­
tance property. See Pub. 946 for details.
Going Into Business
The costs of getting started in business, before 
you actually begin business operations, are 
capital expenses. These costs may include ex­
penses for advertising, travel, or wages for 
training employees.
If you go into business.  When you go into 
business, treat all costs you had to get your 
business started as capital expenses.
Usually you recover costs for a particular as­
set through depreciation. Generally, you cannot 
recover other costs until you sell the business 
or otherwise go out of business. However, you 
can choose to amortize certain costs for setting 
up your business. See Starting a Business  in 
chapter 8  for more information on business 
start­up costs.
If your attempt to go into business is un-
successful. If you are an individual and your 
attempt to go into business is not successful, 
the expenses you had in trying to establish 
yourself in business fall into two categories.
1. The costs you had before making a deci­
sion to acquire or begin a specific busi­
ness. These costs are personal and non­
deductible. They include any costs 
incurred during a general search for, or 
preliminary investigation of, a business or 
investment possibility.
2. The costs you had in your attempt to ac­
quire or begin a specific business. These 
costs are capital expenses and you can 
deduct them as a capital loss.
If you are a corporation and your attempt to 
go into a new trade or business is not success­
ful, you may be able to deduct all investigatory 
costs as a loss.
The costs of any assets acquired during 
your unsuccessful attempt to go into business 
are a part of your basis in the assets. You can­
not take a deduction for these costs. You will 
TIP
recover the costs of these assets when you dis­
pose of them.
Business Assets
There are many different kinds of business as­
sets; for example, land, buildings, machinery, 
furniture, trucks, patents, and franchise rights. 
You must fully capitalize the cost of these as­
sets, including freight and installation charges.
Certain property you produce for use in your 
trade or business must be capitalized under the 
uniform capitalization rules. See Regulations 
section 1.263A­2 for information on these rules.
Improvements
Improvements are generally major expendi­
tures. Some examples are new electric wiring, a 
new roof, a new floor, new plumbing, bricking 
up windows to strengthen a wall, and lighting 
improvements.
Generally, you must capitalize the costs of 
making improvements to a business asset if the 
improvements result in a betterment to the unit 
of property, restore the unit of property, or adapt 
the unit of property to a new or different use.
However, you can currently deduct repairs 
that keep your property in a normal efficient op­
erating condition as a business expense. Treat 
as repairs amounts paid to replace parts of a 
machine that only keep it in a normal operating 
condition.
Restoration plan. Capitalize the cost of recon­
ditioning, improving, or altering your property as 
part of a general restoration plan to make it suit­
able for your business. This applies even if 
some of the work would by itself be classified as 
repairs.
Capital Versus Deductible 
Expenses
To help you distinguish between capital and de­
ductible expenses, different examples are given 
below.
Motor vehicles.  You usually capitalize the 
cost of a motor vehicle you use in your busi­
ness. You can recover its cost through annual 
deductions for depreciation.
There are dollar limits on the depreciation 
you can claim each year on passenger automo­
biles used in your business. See Pub. 463.
Generally, repairs you make to your busi­
ness vehicle are currently deductible. However, 
amounts you pay to recondition and overhaul a 
business vehicle are capital expenses and are 
recovered through depreciation.
Roads and driveways.  The cost of building a 
private road on your business property and the 
cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con­
crete one are capital expenses you may be able 
to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a private 
road on your business property is a deductible 
expense.
Page 3 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses  Page 3

Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rules 
apply, amounts spent for tools used in your 
business are deductible expenses if the tools 
have a life expectancy of less than 1 year or 
their cost is minor.
Machinery parts.  Unless the uniform capitali­
zation rules apply, the cost of replacing 
short­lived parts of a machine to keep it in good 
working condition, but not add to its life, is a de­
ductible expense.
Heating equipment.  The cost of changing 
from one heating system to another is a capital 
expense.
Personal Versus Business 
Expenses
Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, 
or family expenses. However, if you have an ex­
pense for something that is used partly for busi­
ness and partly for personal purposes, divide 
the total cost between the business and per­
sonal parts. You can deduct the business part.
For example, if you borrow money and use 
70% of it for business and the other 30% for a 
family vacation, you generally can deduct 70% 
of the interest as a business expense. The re­
maining 30% is personal interest and generally 
is not deductible. See chapter 4 for information 
on deducting interest and the allocation rules.
Business use of your home.  If you use part 
of your home for business, you may be able to 
deduct expenses for the business use of your 
home. These expenses may include mortgage 
interest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre­
ciation.
To qualify to claim expenses for the busi­
ness use of your home, you must meet both of 
the following tests.
1. The business part of your home must be 
used exclusively and regularly for your 
trade or business.
2. The business part of your home must be:
a. Your principal place of business; or
b. A place where you meet or deal with 
patients, clients, or customers in the 
normal course of your trade or busi­
ness; or
c. A separate structure (not attached to 
your home) used in connection with 
your trade or business.
You generally do not have to meet the ex­
clusive use test for the part of your home that 
you regularly use either for the storage of inven­
tory or product samples, or as a daycare facility.
Your home office qualifies as your principal 
place of business if you meet the following re­
quirements.
You use the office exclusively and regu­
larly for administrative or management ac­
tivities of your trade or business.
You have no other fixed location where 
you conduct substantial administrative or 
management activities of your trade or 
business.
If you have more than one business loca­
tion, determine your principal place of business 
based on the following factors.
The relative importance of the activities 
performed at each location.
If the relative importance factor does not 
determine your principal place of business, 
consider the time spent at each location.
Optional safe harbor method.  Individual 
taxpayers can use the optional safe harbor 
method to determine the amount of deductible 
expenses attributable to certain business use of 
a residence during the tax year. This method is 
an alternative to the calculation, allocation, and 
substantiation of actual expenses.
The deduction under the optional method is 
limited to $1,500 per year based on $5 a square 
foot for up to 300 square feet. Under this 
method, you claim your allowable mortgage in­
terest, real estate taxes, and casualty losses on 
the home as itemized deductions on Sched­
ule A (Form 1040). You are not required to allo­
cate these deductions between personal and 
business use, as is required under the regular 
method. If you use the optional method, you 
cannot depreciate the portion of your home 
used in a trade or business.
Business expenses unrelated to the home, 
such as advertising, supplies, and wages paid 
to employees, are still fully deductible. All of the 
requirements discussed earlier under Business 
use of your home still apply.
For more information on the deduction for 
business use of your home, including the op­
tional safe harbor method, see Pub. 587.
If you were entitled to deduct depreci-
ation on the part of your home used for 
business, you cannot exclude the part 
of the gain from the sale of your home that 
equals any depreciation you deducted (or could 
have deducted) for periods after May 6, 1997.
Business use of your car.  If you use your car 
exclusively in your business, you can deduct 
car expenses. If you use your car for both busi­
ness and personal purposes, you must divide 
your expenses based on actual mileage. Gen­
erally, commuting expenses between your 
home and your business location, within the 
area of your tax home, are not deductible.
You can deduct actual car expenses, which 
include depreciation (or lease payments), gas 
and oil, tires, repairs, tune­ups, insurance, and 
registration fees. Or, instead of figuring the 
business part of these actual expenses, you 
may be able to use the standard mileage rate to 
figure your deduction. Beginning in 2015, the 
standard mileage rate is 57.5 cents per mile.
If you are self­employed, you can also de­
duct the business part of interest on your car 
loan, state and local personal property tax on 
the car, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not 
you claim the standard mileage rate.
For more information on car expenses and 
the rules for using the standard mileage rate, 
see Pub. 463.
CAUTION
!
How Much Can I 
Deduct?
Generally, you can deduct the full amount of a 
business expense if it meets the criteria of ordi­
nary and necessary and it is not a capital ex­
pense.
Recovery of amount deducted (tax benefit 
rule). If you recover part of an expense in the 
same tax year in which you would have claimed 
a deduction, reduce your current year expense 
by the amount of the recovery. If you have a re­
covery in a later year, include the recovered 
amount in income in that year. However, if part 
of the deduction for the expense did not reduce 
your tax, you do not have to include that part of 
the recovered amount in income.
For more information on recoveries and the 
tax benefit rule, see Pub. 525.
Payments in kind.  If you provide services to 
pay a business expense, the amount you can 
deduct is limited to your out­of­pocket costs. 
You cannot deduct the cost of your own labor.
Similarly, if you pay a business expense in 
goods or other property, you can deduct only 
what the property costs you. If these costs are 
included in the cost of goods sold, do not de­
duct them again as a business expense.
Limits on losses.  If your deductions for an in­
vestment or business activity are more than the 
income it brings in, you have a loss. There may 
be limits on how much of the loss you can de­
duct.
Not-for-profit limits.  If you carry on your 
business activity without the intention of making 
a profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offset 
other income. See Not-for-Profit Activities, later.
At-risk limits. Generally, a deductible loss 
from a trade or business or other income­pro­
ducing activity is limited to the investment you 
have “at risk” in the activity. You are at risk in 
any activity for the following.
1. The money and adjusted basis of property 
you contribute to the activity.
2. Amounts you borrow for use in the activity 
if:
a. You are personally liable for repay­
ment, or
b. You pledge property (other than prop­
erty used in the activity) as security for 
the loan.
For more information, see Pub. 925.
Passive activities. Generally, you are in a 
passive activity if you have a trade or business 
activity in which you do not materially partici­
pate, or a rental activity. In general, deductions 
for losses from passive activities only offset in­
come from passive activities. You cannot use 
any excess deductions to offset other income. 
In addition, passive activity credits can only off­
set the tax on net passive income. Any excess 
loss or credits are carried over to later years. 
Suspended passive losses are fully deductible 
Page 4 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4  Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

in the year you completely dispose of the activ­
ity. For more information, see Pub. 925.
Net operating loss.  If your deductions are 
more than your income for the year, you may 
have a “net operating loss.” You can use a net 
operating loss to lower your taxes in other 
years. See Pub. 536 for more information.
See Pub. 542 for information about net oper­
ating losses of corporations.
When Can I
Deduct an Expense?
When you can deduct an expense depends on 
your accounting method. An accounting 
method is a set of rules used to determine when 
and how income and expenses are reported. 
The two basic methods are the cash method 
and the accrual method. Whichever method 
you choose must clearly reflect income.
For more information on accounting meth­
ods, see Pub. 538.
Cash method.  Under the cash method of ac­
counting, you generally deduct business expen­
ses in the tax year you pay them.
Accrual method. Under an accrual method of 
accounting, you generally deduct business ex­
penses when both of the following apply.
1. The all­events test has been met. The test 
is met when:
a. All events have occurred that fix the 
fact of liability, and
b. The liability can be determined with 
reasonable accuracy.
2. Economic performance has occurred.
Economic performance.  You generally 
cannot deduct or capitalize a business expense 
until economic performance occurs. If your ex­
pense is for property or services provided to 
you, or for your use of property, economic per­
formance occurs as the property or services are 
provided, or the property is used. If your ex­
pense is for property or services you provide to 
others, economic performance occurs as you 
provide the property or services.
Example. Your tax year is the calendar 
year. In December 2015, the Field Plumbing 
Company did some repair work at your place of 
business and sent you a bill for $600. You paid 
it by check in January 2016. If you use the ac­
crual method of accounting, deduct the $600 on 
your tax return for 2015 because all events 
have occurred to “fix” the fact of liability (in this 
case, the work was completed), the liability can 
be determined, and economic performance oc­
curred in that year.
If you use the cash method of accounting, 
deduct the expense on your 2016 return.
Prepayment. You generally cannot deduct ex­
penses in advance, even if you pay them in ad­
vance. This rule applies to both the cash and 
accrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest, 
prepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex­
pense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, 
create an asset with a useful life extending sub­
stantially beyond the end of the current tax 
year.
Example. In 2015, you sign a 10­year lease 
and immediately pay your rent for the first 3 
years. Even though you paid the rent for 2015, 
2016, and 2017, you can only deduct the rent 
for 2015 on your 2015 tax return. You can de­
duct the rent for 2016 and 2017 on your tax re­
turns for those years.
Contested liability.  Under the cash method, 
you can deduct a contested liability only in the 
year you pay the liability. Under the accrual 
method, you can deduct contested liabilities 
such as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses­
sion income, war profits, and excess profits 
taxes) either in the tax year you pay the liability 
(or transfer money or other property to satisfy 
the obligation) or in the tax year you settle the 
contest. However, to take the deduction in the 
year of payment or transfer, you must meet cer­
tain conditions. See Regulations section 
1.461­2.
Related person.  Under an accrual method of 
accounting, you generally deduct expenses 
when you incur them, even if you have not yet 
paid them. However, if you and the person you 
owe are related and that person uses the cash 
method of accounting, you must pay the ex­
pense before you can deduct it. Your deduction 
is allowed when the amount is includible in in­
come by the related cash method payee. See 
Related Persons in Pub. 538.
Not-for-Profit Activities
If you do not carry on your business or invest­
ment activity to make a profit, you cannot use a 
loss from the activity to offset other income. Ac­
tivities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or 
recreation, are often not entered into for profit.
The limit on not­for­profit losses applies to 
individuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and S 
corporations. It does not apply to corporations 
other than S corporations.
In determining whether you are carrying on 
an activity for profit, several factors are taken 
into account. No one factor alone is decisive. 
Among the factors to consider are whether:
You carry on the activity in a businesslike 
manner,
The time and effort you put into the activity 
indicate you intend to make it profitable,
You depend on the income for your liveli­
hood,
Your losses are due to circumstances be­
yond your control (or are normal in the 
start­up phase of your type of business),
You change your methods of operation in 
an attempt to improve profitability,
You (or your advisors) have the knowledge 
needed to carry on the activity as a suc­
cessful business,
You were successful in making a profit in 
similar activities in the past,
The activity makes a profit in some years, 
and
You can expect to make a future profit from 
the appreciation of the assets used in the 
activity.
Presumption of profit.  An activity is pre­
sumed carried on for profit if it produced a profit 
in at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including the 
current year. Activities that consist primarily of 
breeding, training, showing, or racing horses 
are presumed carried on for profit if they pro­
duced a profit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax 
years, including the current year. The activity 
must be substantially the same for each year 
within this period. You have a profit when the 
gross income from an activity exceeds the de­
ductions.
If a taxpayer dies before the end of the 
5­year (or 7­year) period, the “test” period ends 
on the date of the taxpayer's death.
If your business or investment activity 
passes this 3­ (or 2­) years­of­profit test, the 
IRS will presume it is carried on for profit. This 
means the limits discussed here will not apply. 
You can take all your business deductions from 
the activity, even for the years that you have a 
loss. You can rely on this presumption unless 
the IRS later shows it to be invalid.
Using the presumption later.  If you are start­
ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) years 
showing a profit, you can elect to have the pre­
sumption made after you have the 5 (or 7) years 
of experience allowed by the test.
You can elect to do this by filing Form 5213. 
Filing this form postpones any determination 
that your activity is not carried on for profit until 
5 (or 7) years have passed since you started 
the activity.
The benefit gained by making this election is 
that the IRS will not immediately question 
whether your activity is engaged in for profit. 
Accordingly, it will not restrict your deductions. 
Rather, you will gain time to earn a profit in the 
required number of years. If you show 3 (or 2) 
years of profit at the end of this period, your de­
ductions are not limited under these rules. If you 
do not have 3 (or 2) years of profit, the limit can 
be applied retroactively to any year with a loss 
in the 5­year (or 7­year) period.
Filing Form 5213 automatically extends the 
period of limitations on any year in the 5­year 
(or 7­year) period to 2 years after the due date 
of the return for the last year of the period. The 
period is extended only for deductions of the 
activity and any related deductions that might 
be affected.
You must file Form 5213 within 3 
years after the due date of your return 
(determined without extensions) for 
the year in which you first carried on the activity, 
or, if earlier, within 60 days after receiving writ-
ten notice from the IRS proposing to disallow 
deductions attributable to the activity.
Gross Income
Gross income from a not­for­profit activity in­
cludes the total of all gains from the sale, ex­
change, or other disposition of property, and all 
other gross receipts derived from the activity. 
Gross income from the activity also includes 
capital gains and rents received for the use of 
TIP
Page 5 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses  Page 5

property which is held in connection with the ac­
tivity.
You can determine gross income from any 
not­for­profit activity by subtracting the cost of 
goods sold from your gross receipts. However, 
if you determine gross income by subtracting 
cost of goods sold from gross receipts, you 
must do so consistently, and in a manner that 
follows generally accepted methods of account­
ing.
Limit on Deductions
If your activity is not carried on for profit, take 
deductions in the following order and only to the 
extent stated in the three categories. If you are 
an individual, these deductions may be taken 
only if you itemize. These deductions may be 
taken on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Category 1. Deductions you can take for per­
sonal as well as for business activities are al­
lowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusiness 
deductions, such as those for home mortgage 
interest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong in 
this category. Deduct them on the appropriate 
lines of Schedule A (Form 1040).
You can deduct a casualty loss on property 
you own for personal use only to the extent 
each casualty loss is more than $100, and the 
total of all casualty losses exceeds 10% of your 
adjusted gross income (AGI). See Pub. 547 for 
more information on casualty losses.
For the limits that apply to home mortgage 
interest, see Pub. 936.
Category 2. Deductions that do not result in an 
adjustment to the basis of property are allowed 
next, but only to the extent your gross income 
from the activity is more than your deductions 
under the first category. Most business deduc­
tions, such as those for advertising, insurance 
premiums, interest, utilities, and wages, belong 
in this category.
Category 3.  Business deductions that de­
crease the basis of property are allowed last, 
but only to the extent the gross income from the 
activity exceeds the deductions you take under 
the first two categories. Deductions for depreci­
ation, amortization, and the part of a casualty 
loss an individual could not deduct in category 
(1) belong in this category. Where more than 
one asset is involved, allocate depreciation and 
these other deductions proportionally.
Individuals must claim the amounts in 
categories (2) and (3) as miscellane-
ous deductions on Schedule A (Form 
1040). They are subject to the 2%-of-adjus-
ted-gross-income limit. See Pub. 529 for infor-
mation on this limit.
Example. Adriana is engaged in a 
not­for­profit activity. The income and expenses 
of the activity are as follows.
TIP
Gross income ...................... $3,200
Subtract:
Real estate taxes ............. $700
Home mortgage interest ........ 900
Insurance .................. 400
Utilities .................... 700
Maintenance ................ 200
Depreciation on an automobile ... 600
Depreciation on a machine ...... 200 3,700
Loss ..................... $(500)
Adriana must limit her deductions to $3,200, 
the gross income she earned from the activity. 
The limit is reached in category (3), as follows.
Limit on deduction .................... $3,200
Category 1: Taxes and interest ... $1,600
Category 2: Insurance, utilities, and 
maintenance ................ 1,300 2,900
Available for Category 3 .......... $ 300
The $800 of depreciation is allocated be­
tween the automobile and machine as follows.
$600 
$800 x $300 = $225 depreciation for the 
automobile
$200 
$800 x  $300 = $75 depreciation for the 
machine
The basis of each asset is reduced accord­
ingly.
Adriana includes the $3,200 of gross in­
come on line 21 (other income) of Form 1040. 
The $1,600 for category (1) is deductible in full 
on the appropriate lines for taxes and interest 
on Schedule A (Form 1040). Adriana deducts 
the remaining $1,600 ($1,300 for category (2) 
and $300 for category (3)) as other miscellane­
ous deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) 
subject to the 2%­of­adjusted­gross­income 
limit.
Partnerships and S corporations.  If a part­
nership or S corporation carries on a 
not­for­profit activity, these limits apply at the 
partnership or S corporation level. They are re­
flected in the individual shareholder's or part­
ner's distributive shares.
More than one activity.  If you have several 
undertakings, each may be a separate activity 
or several undertakings may be combined. The 
following are the most significant facts and cir­
cumstances in making this determination.
The degree of organizational and eco­
nomic interrelationship of various under­
takings.
The business purpose that is (or might be) 
served by carrying on the various under­
takings separately or together in a busi­
ness or investment setting.
The similarity of the undertakings.
The IRS will generally accept your charac­
terization if it is supported by facts and circum­
stances.
If you are carrying on two or more dif-
ferent activities, keep the deductions 
and income from each one separate. 
Figure separately whether each is a 
not-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on de-
ductions and losses separately for each activity 
that is not for profit.
2.
Employees' Pay
Introduction
You can generally deduct the amount you pay 
your employees for the services they perform. 
The pay may be in cash, property, or services. It 
may include wages, salaries, bonuses, commis­
sions, or other non­cash compensation such as 
vacation allowances and fringe benefits. For in­
formation about deducting employment taxes, 
see chapter 5.
You can claim employment credits, 
such as the following, if you hire indi-
viduals who meet certain require-
ments.
Empowerment zone employment credit 
(Form 8844).
Indian employment credit (Form 8845).
Work opportunity credit (Form 5884).
Credit for employer differential wage pay-
ments (Form 8932).
Reduce your deduction for employee wages by 
the amount of employment credits you claim. 
For more information about these credits, see 
the form on which the credit is claimed.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
Tests for deducting pay
Kinds of pay
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Employer's Tax Guide
Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide
Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe 
Benefits
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Tests for Deducting Pay
To be deductible, your employees' pay must be 
an ordinary and necessary business expense 
TIP
TIP
  15
  15-A
  15-B
Page 6 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6  Chapter 2 Employees' Pay

and you must pay or incur it. These and other 
requirements that apply to all business expen­
ses are explained in chapter 1.
In addition, the pay must meet both of the 
following tests.
Test 1. It must be reasonable.
Test 2. It must be for services performed.
The form or method of figuring the pay doesn't 
affect its deductibility. For example, bonuses 
and commissions based on sales or earnings, 
and paid under an agreement made before the 
services were performed, are both deductible.
Test 1—Reasonableness
You must be able to prove that the pay is rea­
sonable. Whether the pay is reasonable de­
pends on the circumstances that existed when 
you contracted for the services, not those that 
exist when reasonableness is questioned. If the 
pay is excessive, the excess pay is disallowed 
as a deduction.
Factors to consider.  Determine the reasona­
bleness of pay by the facts and circumstances. 
Generally, reasonable pay is the amount that a 
similar business would pay for the same or simi­
lar services.
To determine if pay is reasonable, also con­
sider the following items and any other pertinent 
facts.
The duties performed by the employee.
The volume of business handled.
The character and amount of responsibil­
ity.
The complexities of your business.
The amount of time required.
The cost of living in the locality.
The ability and achievements of the indi­
vidual employee performing the service.
The pay compared with the gross and net 
income of the business, as well as with dis­
tributions to shareholders if the business is 
a corporation.
Your policy regarding pay for all your em­
ployees.
The history of pay for each employee.
Test 2—For Services 
Performed
You must be able to prove the payment was 
made for services actually performed.
Employee-shareholder salaries.  If a corpo­
ration pays an employee who is also a share­
holder a salary that is unreasonably high con­
sidering the services actually performed, the 
excessive part of the salary may be treated as a 
constructive dividend to the employee­share­
holder. The excessive part of the salary 
wouldn't be allowed as a salary deduction by 
the corporation. For more information on corpo­
rate distributions to shareholders, see Pub. 542.
Kinds of Pay
Some of the ways you may provide pay to your 
employees in addition to regular wages or salar­
ies are discussed next. For specialized and de­
tailed information on employees' pay and the 
employment tax treatment of employees' pay, 
see Pubs. 15, 15­A, and 15­B.
Awards
You can generally deduct amounts you pay to 
your employees as awards, whether paid in 
cash or property. If you give property to an em­
ployee as an employee achievement award, 
your deduction may be limited.
Achievement awards. An achievement award 
is an item of tangible personal property that 
meets all the following requirements.
It is given to an employee for length of 
service or safety achievement.
It is awarded as part of a meaningful pre­
sentation.
It is awarded under conditions and circum­
stances that don't create a significant likeli­
hood of disguised pay.
Length-of-service award.  An award will 
qualify as a length­of­service award only if ei­
ther of the following applies.
The employee receives the award after his 
or her first 5 years of employment.
The employee didn't receive another 
length­of­service award (other than one of 
very small value) during the same year or 
in any of the prior 4 years.
Safety achievement award.  An award for 
safety achievement will qualify as an achieve­
ment award unless one of the following applies.
1. It is given to a manager, administrator, 
clerical employee, or other professional 
employee.
2. During the tax year, more than 10% of 
your employees, excluding those listed in 
(1), have already received a safety ach­
ievement award (other than one of very 
small value).
Deduction limit.  Your deduction for the 
cost of employee achievement awards given to 
any one employee during the tax year is limited 
to the following.
$400 for awards that aren't qualified plan 
awards.
$1,600 for all awards, whether or not quali­
fied plan awards.
A qualified plan award is an achievement 
award given as part of an established written 
plan or program that doesn't favor highly com­
pensated employees as to eligibility or benefits.
A highly compensated employee is an em­
ployee who meets either of the following tests.
1. The employee was a 5% owner at any 
time during the year or the preceding year.
2. The employee received more than 
$115,000 in pay for 2014.
You can choose to ignore test (2) if the em­
ployee wasn't also in the top 20% of employees 
ranked by pay for the preceding year.
An award isn't a qualified plan award if the 
average cost of all the employee achievement 
awards given during the tax year (that would be 
qualified plan awards except for this limit) is 
more than $400. To figure this average cost, ig­
nore awards of nominal value.
Deduct achievement awards as a nonwage 
business expense on your return or business 
schedule.
You may not owe employment taxes 
on the value of some achievement 
awards you provide to an employee. 
See Pub. 15-B.
Bonuses
You can generally deduct a bonus paid to an 
employee if you intended the bonus as addi­
tional pay for services, not as a gift, and the 
services were performed. However, the total 
bonuses, salaries, and other pay must be rea­
sonable for the services performed. If the bonus 
is paid in property, see Property, later.
Gifts of nominal value.  If, to promote em­
ployee goodwill, you distribute food or mer­
chandise of nominal value to your employees at 
holidays, you can deduct the cost of these 
items as a nonwage business expense. Your 
deduction for de minimis gifts of food or drink 
aren't subject to the 50% deduction limit that 
generally applies to meals. For more informa­
tion on this deduction limit, see Meals and lodg-
ing, later.
Education Expenses
If you pay or reimburse education expenses for 
an employee, you can deduct the payments if 
they are part of a qualified educational assis­
tance program. Deduct them on the “Employee 
benefit programs” or other appropriate line of 
your tax return. For information on educational 
assistance programs, see Educational Assis-
tance in section 2 of Pub. 15­B.
Fringe Benefits
A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the perform­
ance of services. You can generally deduct the 
cost of fringe benefits.
You may be able to exclude all or part of the 
value of some fringe benefits from your employ­
ees' pay. You also may not owe employment 
taxes on the value of the fringe benefits. See 
Table 2­1 in Pub. 15­B for details.
Your deduction for the cost of fringe benefits 
for activities generally considered entertain­
ment, amusement, or recreation, or for a facility 
used in connection with such an activity (for ex­
ample, a company aircraft) for certain officers, 
directors, and more­than­10% shareholders is 
limited.
Certain fringe benefits are discussed next. 
See Pub. 15­B for more details on these and 
other fringe benefits.
TIP
Page 7 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Employees' Pay  Page 7

Meals and lodging.  You can usually deduct 
the cost of furnishing meals and lodging to your 
employees. Deduct the cost in whatever cate­
gory the expense falls. For example, if you op­
erate a restaurant, deduct the cost of the meals 
you furnish to employees as part of the cost of 
goods sold. If you operate a nursing home, mo­
tel, or rental property, deduct the cost of furnish­
ing lodging to an employee as expenses for util­
ities, linen service, salaries, depreciation, etc.
Deduction limit on meals. You can gener­
ally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishing 
meals to your employees. However, you can 
deduct the full cost of the following meals.
Meals whose value you include in an em­
ployee's wages.
Meals that qualify as a de minimis fringe 
benefit as discussed in section 2 of Pub. 
15­B. This generally includes meals you 
furnish to employees at your place of busi­
ness if more than half of these employees 
are provided the meals for your conven­
ience.
Meals you furnish to your employees at the 
work site when you operate a restaurant or 
catering service.
Meals you furnish to your employees as 
part of the expense of providing recrea­
tional or social activities, such as a com­
pany picnic.
Meals you are required by federal law to 
furnish to crew members of certain com­
mercial vessels (or would be required to 
furnish if the vessels were operated at 
sea). This doesn't include meals you fur­
nish on vessels primarily providing luxury 
water transportation.
Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platform 
or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska. 
This includes meals you furnish at a sup­
port camp that is near and integral to an oil 
or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.
Employee benefit programs.  Employee ben­
efit programs include the following.
Accident and health plans.
Adoption assistance.
Cafeteria plans.
Dependent care assistance.
Education assistance.
Life insurance coverage.
Welfare benefit funds.
You can generally deduct amounts you 
spend on employee benefit programs on the 
applicable line of your tax return. For example, 
if you provide dependent care by operating a 
dependent care facility for your employees, de­
duct your costs in whatever categories they fall 
(utilities, salaries, etc.).
Life insurance coverage.  You can't de­
duct the cost of life insurance coverage for you, 
an employee, or any person with a financial in­
terest in your business, if you are directly or in­
directly the beneficiary of the policy. See Regu­
lations section 1.264­1 for more information.
Welfare benefit funds.  A welfare benefit 
fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangement 
having the effect of a plan) that provides welfare 
benefits to your employees, independent 
contractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare ben­
efits are any benefits other than deferred com­
pensation or transfers of restricted property.
Your deduction for contributions to a welfare 
benefit fund is limited to the fund's qualified cost 
for the tax year. If your contributions to the fund 
are more than its qualified cost, carry the ex­
cess over to the next tax year.
Generally, the fund's “qualified cost” is the 
total of the following amounts, reduced by the 
after­tax income of the fund.
The cost you would have been able to de­
duct using the cash method of accounting 
if you had paid for the benefits directly.
The contributions added to a reserve ac­
count that are needed to fund claims incur­
red but not paid as of the end of the year. 
These claims can be for supplemental un­
employment benefits, severance pay, or 
disability, medical, or life insurance bene­
fits.
For more information, see sections 419(c) 
and 419A of the Internal Revenue Code and the 
related regulations.
Loans or Advances
You generally can deduct as wages an advance 
you make to an employee for services per­
formed if you don't expect the employee to re­
pay the advance. However, if the employee per­
forms no services, treat the amount you 
advanced as a loan. If the employee doesn't re­
pay the loan, treat it as income to the employee.
Below-market interest rate loans. On certain 
loans you make to an employee or shareholder, 
you are treated as having received interest in­
come and as having paid compensation or divi­
dends equal to that interest. See Below-Market 
Loans in chapter 4.
Property
If you transfer property (including your compa­
ny's stock) to an employee as payment for serv­
ices, you can generally deduct it as wages. The 
amount you can deduct is the property's fair 
market value on the date of the transfer less any 
amount the employee paid for the property.
You can claim the deduction only for the tax 
year in which your employee includes the prop­
erty's value in income. Your employee is 
deemed to have included the value in income if 
you report it on Form W­2, Wage and Tax 
Statement, in a timely manner.
You treat the deductible amount as received 
in exchange for the property, and you must rec­
ognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer, 
unless it is the company's stock transferred as 
payment for services. Your gain or loss is the 
difference between the fair market value of the 
property and its adjusted basis on the date of 
transfer.
These rules also apply to property transfer­
red to an independent contractor for services, 
generally reported on Form 1099­MISC, Miscel­
laneous Income.
Restricted property. If the property you trans­
fer for services is subject to restrictions that af­
fect its value, you generally can't deduct it and 
don't report gain or loss until it is substantially 
vested in the recipient. However, if the recipient 
pays for the property, you must report any gain 
at the time of the transfer up to the amount paid.
“Substantially vested” means the property 
isn't subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. 
This means that the recipient isn't likely to have 
to give up his or her rights in the property in the 
future.
Reimbursements for 
Business Expenses
You can generally deduct the amount you pay 
or reimburse employees for business expenses 
incurred for your business. However, your de­
duction may be limited.
If you make the payment under an account­
able plan, deduct it in the category of the ex­
pense paid. For example, if you pay an em­
ployee for travel expenses incurred on your 
behalf, deduct this payment as a travel ex­
pense. If you make the payment under a nonac­
countable plan, deduct it as wages and include 
it in the employee's Form W­2.
See Reimbursement of Travel, Meals, and 
Entertainment, in chapter 11, for more informa­
tion about deducting reimbursements and an 
explanation of accountable and nonaccounta­
ble plans.
Sick and Vacation Pay
Sick pay. You can deduct amounts you pay to 
your employees for sickness and injury, includ­
ing lump­sum amounts, as wages. However, 
your deduction is limited to amounts not com­
pensated by insurance or other means.
Vacation pay.  Vacation pay is an employee 
benefit. It includes amounts paid for unused va­
cation leave. You can deduct vacation pay only 
in the tax year in which the employee actually 
receives it. This rule applies regardless of 
whether you use the cash or accrual method of 
accounting.
3.
Rent Expense
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of rent 
or lease payments you make for property you 
use in your business but do not own. It also dis­
cusses how to treat other kinds of payments 
you make that are related to your use of this 
property. These include payments you make for 
taxes on the property.
Page 8 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8  Chapter 3 Rent Expense

Topics
This chapter discusses:
The definition of rent
Taxes on leased property
The cost of getting a lease
Improvements by the lessee
Capitalizing rent expenses
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Accounting Periods and Methods
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
How To Depreciate Property
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Rent
Rent is any amount you pay for the use of prop­
erty you do not own. In general, you can deduct 
rent as an expense only if the rent is for prop­
erty you use in your trade or business. If you 
have or will receive equity in or title to the prop­
erty, the rent is not deductible.
Unreasonable rent.  You cannot take a rental 
deduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, the 
issue of reasonableness arises only if you and 
the lessor are related. Rent paid to a related 
person is reasonable if it is the same amount 
you would pay to a stranger for use of the same 
property. Rent is not unreasonable just because 
it is figured as a percentage of gross sales. For 
examples of related persons, see Related per-
sons in chapter 2, Publication 544.
Rent on your home.  If you rent your home 
and use part of it as your place of business, you 
may be able to deduct the rent you pay for that 
part. You must meet the requirements for busi­
ness use of your home. For more information, 
see Business use of your home in chapter 1.
Rent paid in advance.  Generally, rent paid in 
your trade or business is deductible in the year 
paid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, you 
can deduct only the amount that applies to your 
use of the rented property during the tax year. 
You can deduct the rest of your payment only 
over the period to which it applies.
Example 1.  You are a calendar year tax­
payer and you leased a building for 5 years be­
ginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 per year. 
You paid the first year's rent ($12,000) on June 
30. You can deduct only $6,000 ( 612 × $12,000) 
for the rent that applies to the first year.
Example 2.  You are a calendar year tax­
payer. Last January you leased property for 3 
years for $6,000 a year. You paid the full 
$18,000 (3 × $6,000) during the first year of the 
lease. Each year you can deduct only $6,000, 
the part of the lease that applies to that year.
  538
  544
  946
Canceling a lease.  You generally can deduct 
as rent an amount you pay to cancel a business 
lease.
Lease or purchase.  There may be instances 
in which you must determine whether your pay­
ments are for rent or for the purchase of the 
property. You must first determine whether your 
agreement is a lease or a conditional sales con­
tract. Payments made under a conditional sales 
contract are not deductible as rent expense.
Conditional sales contract.  Whether an 
agreement is a conditional sales contract de­
pends on the intent of the parties. Determine in­
tent based on the provisions of the agreement 
and the facts and circumstances that exist 
when you make the agreement. No single test, 
or special combination of tests, always applies. 
However, in general, an agreement may be 
considered a conditional sales contract rather 
than a lease if any of the following is true.
The agreement applies part of each pay­
ment toward an equity interest you will re­
ceive.
You get title to the property after you make 
a stated amount of required payments.
The amount you must pay to use the prop­
erty for a short time is a large part of the 
amount you would pay to get title to the 
property.
You pay much more than the current fair 
rental value of the property.
You have an option to buy the property at a 
nominal price compared to the value of the 
property when you may exercise the op­
tion. Determine this value when you make 
the agreement.
You have an option to buy the property at a 
nominal price compared to the total 
amount you have to pay under the agree­
ment.
The agreement designates part of the pay­
ments as interest, or that part is easy to 
recognize as interest.
Leveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans­
actions may not be considered leases. Lever­
aged leases generally involve three parties: a 
lessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor. 
Usually the lease term covers a large part of the 
useful life of the leased property, and the les­
see's payments to the lessor are enough to 
cover the lessor's payments to the lender.
If you plan to take part in what appears to be 
a leveraged lease, you may want to get an ad­
vance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001­28 on 
page 1156 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001­19 
contains the guidelines the IRS will use to de­
termine if a leveraged lease is a lease for fed­
eral income tax purposes. Revenue Procedure 
2001­29 on page 1160 of the same Internal 
Revenue Bulletin provides the information re­
quired to be furnished in a request for an ad­
vance ruling on a leveraged lease transaction. 
Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001­19 is available 
at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-19.pdf.
In general, Revenue Procedure 2001­28 
provides that, for advance ruling purposes only, 
the IRS will consider the lessor in a leveraged 
lease transaction to be the owner of the prop­
erty and the transaction to be a valid lease if all 
the factors in the revenue procedure are met, 
including the following.
The lessor must maintain a minimum un­
conditional “at risk” equity investment in 
the property (at least 20% of the cost of the 
property) during the entire lease term.
The lessee may not have a contractual 
right to buy the property from the lessor at 
less than fair market value when the right is 
exercised.
The lessee may not invest in the property, 
except as provided by Revenue Procedure 
2001­28.
The lessee may not lend any money to the 
lessor to buy the property or guarantee the 
loan used by the lessor to buy the prop­
erty.
The lessor must show that it expects to re­
ceive a profit apart from the tax deduc­
tions, allowances, credits, and other tax at­
tributes.
The IRS may charge you a user fee for issu­
ing a tax ruling. For more information, see Rev­
enue Procedure 2015­1 available at
www.irs.gov/irb/2015-1_IRB/ar07.html.
Leveraged leases of limited-use prop-
erty. The IRS will not issue advance rulings on 
leveraged leases of so­called limited­use prop­
erty. Limited­use property is property not ex­
pected to be either useful to or usable by a les­
sor at the end of the lease term except for 
continued leasing or transfer to a lessee. See 
Revenue Procedure 2001­28 for examples of 
limited­use property and property that is not 
limited­use property.
Leases over $250,000.  Special rules are pro­
vided for certain leases of tangible property. 
The rules apply if the lease calls for total pay­
ments of more than $250,000 and any of the fol­
lowing apply.
Rents increase during the lease.
Rents decrease during the lease.
Rents are deferred (rent is payable after 
the end of the calendar year following the 
calendar year in which the use occurs and 
the rent is allocated).
Rents are prepaid (rent is payable before 
the end of the calendar year preceding the 
calendar year in which the use occurs and 
the rent is allocated).
These rules do not apply if your lease specifies 
equal amounts of rent for each month in the 
lease term and all rent payments are due in the 
calendar year to which the rent relates (or in the 
preceding or following calendar year).
Generally, if the special rules apply, you 
must use an accrual method of accounting (and 
time value of money principles) for your rental 
expenses, regardless of your overall method of 
accounting. In addition, in certain cases in 
which the IRS has determined that a lease was 
designed to achieve tax avoidance, you must 
take rent and stated or imputed interest into ac­
count under a constant rental accrual method in 
which the rent is treated as accruing ratably 
over the entire lease term. For details, see sec­
tion 467 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Page 9 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Rent Expense  Page 9

Taxes on
Leased Property
If you lease business property, you can deduct 
as additional rent any taxes you have to pay to 
or for the lessor. When you can deduct these 
taxes as additional rent depends on your ac­
counting method.
Cash method.  If you use the cash method of 
accounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi­
tional rent only for the tax year in which you pay 
them.
Accrual method. If you use an accrual method 
of accounting, you can deduct taxes as addi­
tional rent for the tax year in which you can de­
termine all the following.
That you have a liability for taxes on the 
leased property.
How much the liability is.
That economic performance occurred.
The liability and amount of taxes are deter­
mined by state or local law and the lease agree­
ment. Economic performance occurs as you 
use the property.
Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calendar 
year taxpayer that uses an accrual method of 
accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi­
ness. Under state law, owners of real property 
become liable (incur a lien on the property) for 
real estate taxes for the year on January 1 of 
that year. However, they do not have to pay 
these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18 
months later) when tax bills are issued. Under 
the terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable for 
the real estate taxes in the later year when the 
tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before the 
tax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable for 
the taxes for that year.
Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes as 
rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when 
Oak's liability under the lease becomes fixed.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1  except that, according to the terms 
of the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real es­
tate taxes when the owner of the property be­
comes liable for them. As a result, Oak will de­
duct the real estate taxes as rent on its tax 
return for the earlier year. This is the year in 
which Oak's liability under the lease becomes 
fixed.
Cost of Getting a Lease
You may either enter into a new lease with the 
lessor of the property or get an existing lease 
from another lessee. Very often when you get 
an existing lease from another lessee, you must 
pay the previous lessee money to get the lease, 
besides having to pay the rent on the lease.
If you get an existing lease on property or 
equipment for your business, you generally 
must amortize any amount you pay to get that 
lease over the remaining term of the lease. For 
example, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease and 
there are 10 years remaining on the lease with 
no option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 
each year.
The cost of getting an existing lease of tan­
gible property is not subject to the amortization 
rules for section 197 intangibles discussed in 
chapter 8.
Option to renew.  The term of the lease for 
amortization includes all renewal options plus 
any other period for which you and the lessor 
reasonably expect the lease to be renewed. 
However, this applies only if less than 75% of 
the cost of getting the lease is for the term re­
maining on the purchase date (not including 
any period for which you may choose to renew, 
extend, or continue the lease). Allocate the 
lease cost to the original term and any option 
term based on the facts and circumstances. In 
some cases, it may be appropriate to make the 
allocation using a present value computation. 
For more information, see Regulations section 
1.178­1(b)(5).
Example 1.  You paid $10,000 to get a 
lease with 20 years remaining on it and two op­
tions to renew for 5 years each. Of this cost, 
you paid $7,000 for the original lease and 
$3,000 for the renewal options. Because 
$7,000 is less than 75% of the total $10,000 
cost of the lease (or $7,500), you must amortize 
the $10,000 over 30 years. That is the remain­
ing life of your present lease plus the periods for 
renewal.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that you paid $8,000 for the 
original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op­
tions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 over 
the 20­year remaining life of the original lease. 
The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease 
was not less than 75% of the total cost of the 
lease (or $7,500).
Cost of a modification agreement.  You may 
have to pay an additional “rent” amount over 
part of the lease period to change certain provi­
sions in your lease. You must capitalize these 
payments and amortize them over the remain­
ing period of the lease. You cannot deduct the 
payments as additional rent, even if they are 
described as rent in the agreement.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer 
and sign a 20­year lease to rent part of a build­
ing starting on January 1. However, before you 
occupy it, you decide that you really need less 
space. The lessor agrees to reduce your rent 
from $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to release 
the excess space from the original lease. In ex­
change, you agree to pay an additional rent 
amount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install­
ments of $50 each.
You must capitalize the $3,000 and amortize 
it over the 20­year term of the lease. Your amor­
tization deduction each year will be $150 
($3,000 ÷ 20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 
× $50) that you will pay during each of the first 5 
years as rent.
Commissions, bonuses, and fees.  Commis­
sions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts you 
pay to get a lease on property you use in your 
business are capital costs. You must amortize 
these costs over the term of the lease.
Loss on merchandise and fixtures.  If you 
sell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that you 
bought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost of 
getting the lease. You must capitalize the loss 
and amortize it over the remaining term of the 
lease.
Improvements
by Lessee
If you add buildings or make other permanent 
improvements to leased property, depreciate 
the cost of the improvements using the modified 
accelerated cost recovery system (MACRS). 
Depreciate the property over its appropriate re­
covery period. You cannot amortize the cost 
over the remaining term of the lease.
If you do not keep the improvements when 
you end the lease, figure your gain or loss 
based on your adjusted basis in the improve­
ments at that time.
For more information, see the discussion of 
MACRS in Publication 946, How To Depreciate 
Property.
Assignment of a lease.  If a long­term lessee 
who makes permanent improvements to land 
later assigns all lease rights to you for money 
and you pay the rent required by the lease, the 
amount you pay for the assignment is a capital 
investment. If the rental value of the leased land 
increased since the lease began, part of your 
capital investment is for that increase in the 
rental value. The rest is for your investment in 
the permanent improvements.
The part that is for the increased rental value 
of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and you 
amortize it over the remaining term of the lease. 
You can depreciate the part that is for your in­
vestment in the improvements over the recov­
ery period of the property as discussed earlier, 
without regard to the lease term.
Capitalizing
Rent Expenses
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must 
capitalize the direct costs and part of the indi­
rect costs for certain production or resale activi­
ties. Include these costs in the basis of property 
you produce or acquire for resale, rather than 
claiming them as a current deduction. You re­
cover the costs through depreciation, amortiza­
tion, or cost of goods sold when you use, sell, 
or otherwise dispose of the property.
Indirect costs include amounts incurred for 
renting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.
Uniform capitalization rules.  You may be 
subject to the uniform capitalization rules if you 
do any of the following, unless the property is 
produced for your use other than in a business 
or an activity carried on for profit.
1. Produce real property or tangible personal 
property. For this purpose, tangible per­
sonal property includes a film, sound re­
cording, video tape, book, or similar 
property.
Page 10 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10  Chapter 3 Rent Expense

2. Acquire property for resale.
However, these rules do not apply to the follow­
ing property.
1. Personal property you acquire for resale if 
your average annual gross receipts are 
$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.
2. Property you produce if you meet either of 
the following conditions.
a. Your indirect costs of producing the 
property are $200,000 or less.
b. You use the cash method of account­
ing and do not account for inventories.
Example 1.  You rent construction equip­
ment to build a storage facility. If you are sub­
ject to the uniform capitalization rules, you must 
capitalize as part of the cost of the building the 
rent you paid for the equipment. You recover 
your cost by claiming a deduction for deprecia­
tion on the building.
Example 2.  You rent space in a facility to 
conduct your business of manufacturing tools. If 
you are subject to the uniform capitalization 
rules, you must include the rent you paid to oc­
cupy the facility in the cost of the tools you pro­
duce.
More information.  For more information on 
these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in 
Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter­
nal Revenue Code section 263A.
4.
Interest
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of 
business interest expense. Business interest 
expense is an amount charged for the use of 
money you borrowed for business activities.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
Allocation of interest
Interest you can deduct
Interest you cannot deduct
Capitalization of interest
When to deduct interest
Below­market loans
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Installment Sales  537
Investment Income and Expenses
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
Form (and Instructions)
Itemized Deductions
Supplemental 
Income and Loss
Partner's Share of 
Income, Deductions, Credits, etc.
Shareholder's 
Share of Income, Deductions, 
Credits, etc.
Mortgage Interest Statement
Application for Change in 
Accounting Method
Investment Interest Expense 
Deduction
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Allocation of Interest
The rules for deducting interest vary, depending 
on whether the loan proceeds are used for busi­
ness, personal, or investment activities. If you 
use the proceeds of a loan for more than one 
type of expense, you must allocate the interest 
based on the use of the loan's proceeds.
Allocate your interest expense to the follow­
ing categories.
Nonpassive trade or business activity inter­
est.
Passive trade or business activity interest.
Investment interest.
Portfolio interest.
Personal interest.
In general, you allocate interest on a loan the 
same way you allocate the loan proceeds. You 
allocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse­
ments to specific uses.
The easiest way to trace disburse-
ments to specific uses is to keep the 
proceeds of a particular loan separate 
from any other funds.
Secured loan. The allocation of loan proceeds 
and the related interest is not generally affected 
by the use of property that secures the loan.
Example. You secure a loan with property 
used in your business. You use the loan pro­
ceeds to buy an automobile for personal use. 
You must allocate interest expense on the loan 
to personal use (purchase of the automobile) 
even though the loan is secured by business 
property.
If the property that secures the loan is 
your home, you generally do not allo-
cate the loan proceeds or the related 
interest. The interest is usually deductible as 
qualified home mortgage interest, regardless of 
how the loan proceeds are used. For more in-
formation, see Pub. 936.
  550
  936
  Sch A (Form 1040)
  Sch E (Form 1040)
  Sch K-1 (Form 1065)
  Sch K-1 (Form 1120S)
  1098
  3115
  4952
  8582
TIP
TIP
Allocation period. The period for which a loan 
is allocated to a particular use begins on the 
date the proceeds are used and ends on the 
earlier of the following dates.
The date the loan is repaid.
The date the loan is reallocated to another 
use.
Proceeds not disbursed to borrower.  Even 
if the lender disburses the loan proceeds to a 
third party, the allocation of the loan is still 
based on your use of the funds. This applies 
whether you pay for property, services, or any­
thing else by incurring a loan, or you take prop­
erty subject to a debt.
Proceeds deposited in borrower's account. 
Treat loan proceeds deposited in an account as 
property held for investment. It does not matter 
whether the account pays interest. Any interest 
you pay on the loan is investment interest ex­
pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan, 
you must reallocate the loan based on the use 
of the funds.
Example. Celina, a calendar­year taxpayer, 
borrows $100,000 on January 4 and immedi­
ately uses the proceeds to open a checking ac­
count. No other amounts are deposited in the 
account during the year and no part of the loan 
principal is repaid during the year. On April 2, 
Celina uses $20,000 from the checking account 
for a passive activity expenditure. On Septem­
ber 4, Celina uses an additional $40,000 from 
the account for personal purposes.
Under the interest allocation rules, the entire 
$100,000 loan is treated as property held for in­
vestment for the period from January 4 through 
April 1. From April 2 through September 3, Cel­
ina must treat $20,000 of the loan as used in the 
passive activity and $80,000 of the loan as 
property held for investment. From September 
4 through December 31, she must treat 
$40,000 of the loan as used for personal purpo­
ses, $20,000 as used in the passive activity, 
and $40,000 as property held for investment.
Order of funds spent. Generally, you treat 
loan proceeds deposited in an account as used 
(spent) before either of the following amounts.
Any unborrowed amounts held in the same 
account.
Any amounts deposited after these loan 
proceeds.
Example. On January 9, Olena opened a 
checking account, depositing $500 of the pro­
ceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowed 
funds. The following table shows the transac­
tions in her account during the tax year.
Page 11 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Interest  Page 11

Date Transaction
January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan A and 
$1,000 unborrowed funds 
deposited
January 14 $500 proceeds of Loan B 
deposited
February 19 $800 used for personal purposes
February 27 $700 used for passive activity
June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan C 
deposited
November 20 $800 used for an investment
December 18 $600 used for personal purposes
Olena treats the $800 used for personal pur­
poses as made from the $500 proceeds of Loan 
A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. She 
treats the $700 used for a passive activity as 
made from the remaining $200 proceeds of 
Loan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. She 
treats the $800 used for an investment as made 
entirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treats 
the $600 used for personal purposes as made 
from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan C 
and $400 of unborrowed funds.
For the periods during which loan proceeds 
are held in the account, Olena treats them as 
property held for investment.
Payments from checking accounts. 
Generally, you treat a payment from a checking 
or similar account as made at the time the 
check is written if you mail or deliver it to the 
payee within a reasonable period after you write 
it. You can treat checks written on the same day 
as written in any order.
Amounts paid within 30 days.  If you re­
ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro­
ceeds are deposited in an account, you can 
treat any payment (up to the amount of the pro­
ceeds) made from any account you own, or 
from cash, as made from those proceeds. This 
applies to any payment made within 30 days 
before or after the proceeds are received in 
cash or deposited in your account.
If the loan proceeds are deposited in an ac­
count, you can apply this rule even if the rules 
stated earlier under Order of funds spent  would 
otherwise require you to treat the proceeds as 
used for other purposes. If you apply this rule to 
any payments, disregard those payments (and 
the proceeds from which they are made) when 
applying the rules stated under Order of funds 
spent.
If you received the loan proceeds in cash, 
you can treat the payment as made on the date 
you received the cash instead of the date you 
actually made the payment.
Example. Giovanni gets a loan of $1,000 
on August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash. 
Giovanni deposits $1,500 in an account on Au­
gust 18 and on August 28 writes a check on the 
account for a passive activity expense. Also, 
Giovanni deposits his paycheck, deposits other 
loan proceeds, and pays his bills during the 
same period. Regardless of these other trans­
actions, Giovanni can treat $1,000 of the de­
posit he made on August 18 as being paid on 
August 4 from the loan proceeds. In addition, 
Giovanni can treat the passive activity expense 
he paid on August 28 as made from the $1,000 
loan proceeds treated as deposited in the ac­
count.
Optional method for determining date of 
reallocation. You can use the following 
method to determine the date loan proceeds 
are reallocated to another use. You can treat all 
payments from loan proceeds in the account 
during any month as taking place on the later of 
the following dates.
The first day of that month.
The date the loan proceeds are deposited 
in the account.
However, you can use this optional method only 
if you treat all payments from the account dur­
ing the same calendar month in the same way.
Interest on a segregated account.  If you 
have an account that contains only loan pro­
ceeds and interest earned on the account, you 
can treat any payment from that account as be­
ing made first from the interest. When the inter­
est earned is used up, any remaining payments 
are from loan proceeds.
Example. You borrowed $20,000 and used 
the proceeds of this loan to open a new savings 
account. When the account had earned interest 
of $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur­
poses. You can treat the withdrawal as coming 
first from the interest earned on the account, 
$867, and then from the loan proceeds, 
$19,133 ($20,000 − $867). All the interest 
charged on the loan from the time it was depos­
ited in the account until the time of the with­
drawal is investment interest expense. The in­
terest charged on the part of the proceeds used 
for personal purposes ($19,133) from the time 
you withdrew it until you either repay it or reallo­
cate it to another use is personal interest ex­
pense. The interest charged on the loan pro­
ceeds you left in the account ($867) continues 
to be investment interest expense until you ei­
ther repay it or reallocate it to another use.
Loan repayment. When you repay any part of 
a loan allocated to more than one use, treat it as 
being repaid in the following order.
1. Personal use.
2. Investments and passive activities (other 
than those included in (3)).
3. Passive activities in connection with a 
rental real estate activity in which you ac­
tively participate.
4. Former passive activities.
5. Trade or business use and expenses for 
certain low­income housing projects.
Line of credit (continuous borrowings). The 
following rules apply if you have a line of credit 
or similar arrangement.
1. Treat all borrowed funds on which interest 
accrues at the same fixed or variable rate 
as a single loan.
2. Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowed 
funds on which interest accrues at differ­
ent fixed or variable rates as different 
loans. Treat these loans as repaid in the 
order shown on the loan agreement.
Loan refinancing.  Allocate the replacement 
loan to the same uses to which the repaid loan 
was allocated. Make the allocation only to the 
extent you use the proceeds of the new loan to 
repay any part of the original loan.
Debt-financed distribution.  A debt­financed 
distribution occurs when a partnership or S cor­
poration borrows funds and allocates those 
funds to distributions made to partners or 
shareholders. The manner in which you report 
the interest expense associated with the distrib­
uted debt proceeds depends on your use of 
those proceeds.
How to report.  If the proceeds were used 
in a nonpassive trade or business activity, re­
port the interest on Schedule E (Form 1040), 
line 28; enter “interest expense” and the name 
of the partnership or S corporation in column (a) 
and the amount in column (h). If the proceeds 
were used in a passive activity, follow the In­
structions for Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss 
Limitations, to determine the amount of interest 
expense that can be reported on Schedule E 
(Form 1040), line 28; enter “interest expense” 
and the name of the partnership in column (a) 
and the amount in column (f). If the proceeds 
were used in an investment activity, enter the 
interest on Form 4952. If the proceeds are used 
for personal purposes, the interest is generally 
not deductible.
Interest You
Can Deduct
You can generally deduct as a business ex­
pense all interest you pay or accrue during the 
tax year on debts related to your trade or busi­
ness. Interest relates to your trade or business if 
you use the proceeds of the loan for a trade or 
business expense. It does not matter what type 
of property secures the loan. You can deduct in­
terest on a debt only if you meet all the following 
requirements.
You are legally liable for that debt.
Both you and the lender intend that the 
debt be repaid.
You and the lender have a true 
debtor­creditor relationship.
Partial liability.  If you are liable for part of a 
business debt, you can deduct only your share 
of the total interest paid or accrued.
Example. You and your brother borrow 
money. You are liable for 50% of the note. You 
use your half of the loan in your business, and 
you make one­half of the loan payments. You 
can deduct your half of the total interest pay­
ments as a business deduction.
Mortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paid 
or accrued on real estate you own legally or 
equitably is deductible. However, rather than 
deducting the interest currently, you may have 
to add it to the cost basis of the property as ex­
plained later under Capitalization of Interest.
Statement. If you paid $600 or more of 
mortgage interest (including certain points) dur­
ing the year on any one mortgage, you 
Page 12 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12  Chapter 4 Interest

generally will receive a Form 1098 or a similar 
statement. You will receive the statement if you 
pay interest to a person (including a financial in­
stitution or a cooperative housing corporation) 
in the course of that person's trade or business. 
A governmental unit is a person for purposes of 
furnishing the statement.
If you receive a refund of interest you over­
paid in an earlier year, this amount will be repor­
ted in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannot deduct 
this amount. For information on how to report 
this refund, see Refunds of interest, later in this 
chapter.
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgage 
cannot be deducted as interest. These expen­
ses, which include mortgage commissions, ab­
stract fees, and recording fees, are capital ex­
penses. If the property mortgaged is business 
or income­producing property, you can amor­
tize the costs over the life of the mortgage.
Prepayment penalty.  If you pay off your 
mortgage early and pay the lender a penalty for 
doing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter­
est.
Interest on employment tax deficiency.  In­
terest charged on employment taxes assessed 
on your business is deductible.
Original issue discount (OID).  OID is a form 
of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen­
erally has OID when its proceeds are less than 
its principal amount. The OID is the difference 
between the stated redemption price at maturity 
and the issue price of the loan.
A loan's stated redemption price at maturity 
is the sum of all amounts (principal and interest) 
payable on it other than qualified stated inter­
est. Qualified stated interest is stated interest 
that is unconditionally payable in cash or prop­
erty (other than another loan of the issuer) at 
least annually over the term of the loan at a sin­
gle fixed rate.
You generally deduct OID over the term of 
the loan. Figure the amount to deduct each year 
using the constant­yield method, unless the 
OID on the loan is de minimis.
De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it 
is less than one­fourth of 1% (.0025) of the sta­
ted redemption price of the loan at maturity mul­
tiplied by the number of full years from the date 
of original issue to maturity (the term of the 
loan).
If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one 
of the following ways to figure the amount you 
can deduct each year.
On a constant­yield basis over the term of 
the loan.
On a straight­line basis over the term of the 
loan.
In proportion to stated interest payments.
In its entirety at maturity of the loan.
You make this choice by deducting the OID in a 
manner consistent with the method chosen on 
your timely filed tax return for the tax year in 
which the loan is issued.
Example. On January 1, 2015, you took out 
a $100,000 discounted loan and received 
$98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature on 
January 1, 2025 (a 10­year term), and the 
$100,000 principal is payable on that date. In­
terest of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of 
each year, beginning January 1, 2016. The 
$1,500 OID on the loan is de minimis because it 
is less than $2,500 ($100,000 × .0025 × 10). 
You choose to deduct the OID on a straight­line 
basis over the term of the loan. Beginning in 
2015, you can deduct $150 each year for 10 
years.
Constant-yield method.  If the OID is not 
de minimis, you must use the constant­yield 
method to figure how much you can deduct 
each year. You figure your deduction for the first 
year using the following steps.
1. Determine the issue price of the loan. 
Generally, this equals the proceeds of the 
loan. If you paid points on the loan (as dis­
cussed later), the issue price generally is 
the difference between the proceeds and 
the points.
2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to ma­
turity.
3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay­
ments from the result in (2). This is the 
OID you can deduct in the first year.
To figure your deduction in any subsequent 
year, follow the above steps, except determine 
the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get the 
adjusted issue price, add to the issue price any 
OID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2) 
and (3) above.
The yield to maturity is generally shown in 
the literature you receive from your lender. If 
you do not have this information, consult your 
lender or tax advisor. In general, the yield to 
maturity is the discount rate that, when used in 
computing the present value of all principal and 
interest payments, produces an amount equal 
to the principal amount of the loan.
Example. The facts are the same as in the 
previous example, except that you deduct the 
OID on a constant­yield basis over the term of 
the loan. The yield to maturity on your loan is 
10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2015, 
you can deduct $93 [($98,500 × .102467) − 
$10,000]. For 2016, you can deduct $103 
[($98,593 × .102467) − $10,000].
Loan or mortgage ends.  If your loan or 
mortgage ends, you may be able to deduct any 
remaining OID in the tax year in which the loan 
or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may end 
due to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure, 
or similar event.
If you refinance with the original 
lender, you generally cannot deduct 
the remaining OID in the year in which 
the refinancing occurs, but you may be able to 
deduct it over the term of the new mortgage or 
loan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed 
from original lender  under Interest You Cannot 
Deduct, later.
Points. The term “points” is used to describe 
certain charges paid, or treated as paid, by a 
borrower to obtain a loan or a mortgage. These 
charges are also called loan origination fees, 
CAUTION
!
maximum loan charges, discount points, or pre­
mium charges. If any of these charges (points) 
are solely for the use of money, they are inter­
est.
Because points are prepaid interest, you 
generally cannot deduct the full amount in the 
year paid. However, you can choose to fully de­
duct points in the year paid if you meet certain 
tests. For exceptions to the general rule, see 
Pub. 936.
The points reduce the issue price of the loan 
and result in original issue discount (OID), de­
ductible as explained in the preceding discus­
sion.
Partial payments on a nontax debt.  If you 
make partial payments on a debt (other than a 
debt owed the IRS), the payments are applied, 
in general, first to interest and any remainder to 
principal. You can deduct only the interest. This 
rule does not apply when it can be inferred that 
the borrower and lender understood that a dif­
ferent allocation of the payments would be 
made.
Installment purchase. If you make an install­
ment purchase of business property, the con­
tract between you and the seller generally pro­
vides for the payment of interest. If no interest 
or a low rate of interest is charged under the 
contract, a portion of the stated principal 
amount payable under the contract may be re­
characterized as interest (unstated interest). 
The amount recharacterized as interest reduces 
your basis in the property and increases your 
interest expense. For more information on in­
stallment sales and unstated interest, see Pub. 
537.
Interest You
Cannot Deduct
Certain interest payments cannot be deducted. 
In addition, certain other expenses that may 
seem to be interest but are not, cannot be de­
ducted as interest.
You cannot currently deduct interest that 
must be capitalized, and you generally cannot 
deduct personal interest.
Interest paid with funds borrowed from 
original lender. If you use the cash method of 
accounting, you cannot deduct interest you pay 
with funds borrowed from the original lender 
through a second loan, an advance, or any 
other arrangement similar to a loan. You can 
deduct the interest expense once you start 
making payments on the new loan.
When you make a payment on the new loan, 
you first apply the payment to interest and then 
to the principal. All amounts you apply to the in­
terest on the first loan are deductible, along with 
any interest you pay on the second loan, sub­
ject to any limits that apply.
Capitalized interest. You cannot currently de­
duct interest you are required to capitalize un­
der the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-
talization of Interest, later. In addition, if you buy 
property and pay interest owed by the seller (for 
example, by assuming the debt and any interest 
Page 13 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Interest  Page 13

accrued on the property), you cannot deduct 
the interest. Add this interest to the basis of the 
property.
Commitment fees or standby charges. Fees 
you incur to have business funds available on a 
standby basis, but not for the actual use of the 
funds, are not deductible as interest payments. 
You may be able to deduct them as business 
expenses.
If the funds are for inventory or certain prop­
erty used in your business, the fees are indirect 
costs and you generally must capitalize them 
under the uniform capitalization rules. See Cap-
italization of Interest, later.
Interest on income tax.  Interest charged on 
income tax assessed on your individual income 
tax return is not a business deduction even 
though the tax due is related to income from 
your trade or business. Treat this interest as a 
business deduction only in figuring a net operat­
ing loss deduction.
Penalties. Penalties on underpaid deficien­
cies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter­
est. You cannot deduct them. Generally, you 
cannot deduct any fines or penalties.
Interest on loans with respect to life insur-
ance policies.  You generally cannot deduct 
interest on a debt incurred with respect to any 
life insurance, annuity, or endowment contract 
that covers any individual unless that individual 
is a key person.
If the policy or contract covers a key person, 
you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 of 
debt for that person. However, the deduction for 
any month cannot be more than the interest fig­
ured using Moody's Composite Yield on Seas­
oned Corporate Bonds (formerly known as 
Moody's Corporate Bond Yield Aver­
age­Monthly Average Corporates) (Moody's 
rate) for that month.
Who is a key person?  A key person is an 
officer or 20% owner. However, the number of 
individuals you can treat as key persons is limi­
ted to the greater of the following.
Five individuals.
The lesser of 5% of the total officers and 
employees of the company or 20 individu­
als.
Exceptions for pre-June 1997 contracts. 
You can generally deduct the interest if the con­
tract was issued before June 9, 1997, and the 
covered individual is someone other than an 
employee, officer, or someone financially inter­
ested in your business. If the contract was pur­
chased before June 21, 1986, you can gener­
ally deduct the interest no matter who is 
covered by the contract.
Interest allocated to unborrowed policy 
cash value.  Corporations and partnerships 
generally cannot deduct any interest expense 
allocable to unborrowed cash values of life in­
surance, annuity, or endowment contracts. This 
rule applies to contracts issued after June 8, 
1997, that cover someone other than an officer, 
director, employee, or 20% owner. For more in­
formation, see section 264(f) of the Internal 
Revenue Code.
Capitalization
of Interest
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you gen­
erally must capitalize interest on debt equal to 
your expenditures to produce real property or 
certain tangible personal property. The property 
must be produced by you for use in your trade 
or business or for sale to customers. You can­
not capitalize interest related to property that 
you acquire in any other manner.
Interest you paid or incurred during the pro­
duction period must be capitalized if the prop­
erty produced is designated property. Designa­
ted property is any of the following.
Real property.
Tangible personal property with a class life 
of 20 years or more.
Tangible personal property with an estima­
ted production period of more than 2 
years.
Tangible personal property with an estima­
ted production period of more than 1 year if 
the estimated cost of production is more 
than $1 million.
Property you produce. You produce property 
if you construct, build, install, manufacture, de­
velop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treat 
property produced for you under a contract as 
produced by you up to the amount you pay or 
incur for the property.
Carrying charges.  Carrying charges include 
taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or 
to carry, transport, or install personal property. 
You can choose to capitalize carrying charges 
not subject to the uniform capitalization rules if 
they are otherwise deductible. For more infor­
mation, see chapter 7.
Capitalized interest. Treat capitalized interest 
as a cost of the property produced. You recover 
your interest when you sell or use the property. 
If the property is inventory, recover capitalized 
interest through cost of goods sold. If the prop­
erty is used in your trade or business, recover 
capitalized interest through an adjustment to 
basis, depreciation, amortization, or other 
method.
Partnerships and S corporations.  The inter­
est capitalization rules are applied first at the 
partnership or S corporation level. The rules are 
then applied at the partners' or shareholders' 
level to the extent the partnership or S corpora­
tion has insufficient debt to support the produc­
tion or construction costs.
If you are a partner or a shareholder, you 
may have to capitalize interest you incur during 
the tax year for the production costs of the part­
nership or S corporation. You may also have to 
capitalize interest incurred by the partnership or 
S corporation for your own production costs. To 
properly capitalize interest under these rules, 
you must be given the required information in 
an attachment to the Schedule K­1 you receive 
from the partnership or S corporation.
Additional information.  The procedures for 
applying the uniform capitalization rules are be­
yond the scope of this publication. For more in­
formation, see sections 1.263A­8 through 
1.263A­15 of the regulations and Notice 88­99. 
Notice 88­99 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1988­2.
When To
Deduct Interest
If the uniform capitalization rules, discussed un­
der Capitalization of Interest,  earlier, do not ap­
ply to you, deduct interest as follows.
Cash method.  Under the cash method, you 
can generally deduct only the interest you ac­
tually paid during the tax year. You cannot de­
duct a promissory note you gave as payment 
because it is a promise to pay and not an actual 
payment.
Prepaid interest. You generally cannot de­
duct any interest paid before the year it is due. 
Interest paid in advance can be deducted only 
in the tax year in which it is due.
Discounted loan.  If interest or a discount 
is subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a 
payment of interest and you cannot deduct it 
when you get the loan. For more information, 
see Original issue discount (OID) under Interest 
You Can Deduct, earlier.
Refunds of interest.  If you pay interest 
and then receive a refund in the same tax year 
of any part of the interest, reduce your interest 
deduction by the refund. If you receive the re­
fund in a later tax year, include the refund in 
your income to the extent the deduction for the 
interest reduced your tax.
Accrual method.  Under an accrual method, 
you can deduct only interest that has accrued 
during the tax year.
Prepaid interest.  See Prepaid interest , 
earlier.
Discounted loan.  See Discounted loan , 
earlier.
Tax deficiency. If you contest a federal in­
come tax deficiency, interest does not accrue 
until the tax year the final determination of liabil­
ity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency, 
then the interest accrues in the year the tax was 
asserted and agreed to by you.
However, if you contest but pay the pro­
posed tax deficiency and interest, and you do 
not designate the payment as a cash bond, 
then the interest is deductible in the year paid.
Related person.  If you use an accrual 
method, you cannot deduct interest owed to a 
related person who uses the cash method until 
payment is made and the interest is includible in 
the gross income of that person. The relation­
ship is determined as of the end of the tax year 
for which the interest would otherwise be de­
ductible. See section 267 of the Internal Reve­
nue Code for more information.
Page 14 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14  Chapter 4 Interest

Below-Market Loans
If you receive a below­market gift or demand 
loan and use the proceeds in your trade or busi­
ness, you may be able to deduct the forgone in­
terest. See Treatment of gift and demand loans, 
later, in this discussion.
A below­market loan is a loan on which no 
interest is charged or on which interest is 
charged at a rate below the applicable federal 
rate. A gift or demand loan that is a below­mar­
ket loan generally is considered an arm's­length 
transaction in which you, the borrower, are con­
sidered as having received both the following.
A loan in exchange for a note that requires 
the payment of interest at the applicable 
federal rate.
An additional payment in an amount equal 
to the forgone interest.
The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi­
dend, contribution to capital, payment of com­
pensation, or other payment, depending on the 
substance of the transaction.
Forgone interest. For any period, forgone in­
terest is:
1. The interest that would be payable for that 
period if interest accrued on the loan at the 
applicable federal rate and was payable 
annually on December 31,
minus
2. Any interest actually payable on the loan 
for the period.
Applicable federal rates are published 
by the IRS each month in the Internal 
Revenue Bulletin. Internal Revenue 
Bulletins are available on the IRS web site at 
www.irs.gov/irb. You can also contact an IRS 
office to get these rates.
Loans subject to the rules.  The rules for be­
low­market loans apply to the following.
1. Gift loans (below­market loans where the 
forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).
2. Compensation­related loans (below­mar­
ket loans between an employer and an 
employee or between an independent 
contractor and a person for whom the con­
tractor provides services).
3. Corporation­shareholder loans.
4. Tax avoidance loans (below­market loans 
where the avoidance of federal tax is one 
of the main purposes of the interest ar­
rangement).
5. Loans to qualified continuing care facilities 
under a continuing care contract (made af­
ter October 11, 1985).
Except as noted in (5) above, these rules 
apply to demand loans (loans payable in full at 
any time upon the lender's demand) outstand­
ing after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans 
that are not demand loans) made after that 
date.
Treatment of gift and demand loans.  If you 
receive a below­market gift loan or demand 
TIP
loan, you are treated as receiving an additional 
payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to the 
forgone interest on the loan. You are then 
treated as transferring this amount back to the 
lender as interest. These transfers are consid­
ered to occur annually, generally on December 
31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade or 
business, you can deduct the forgone interest 
each year as a business interest expense. The 
lender must report it as interest income.
Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of 
$100,000 or less.  For gift loans between indi­
viduals, forgone interest treated as transferred 
back to the lender is limited to the borrower's 
net investment income for the year. This limit 
applies if the outstanding loans between the 
lender and borrower total $100,000 or less. If 
the borrower's net investment income is $1,000 
or less, it is treated as zero. This limit does not 
apply to a loan if the avoidance of any federal 
tax is one of the main purposes of the interest 
arrangement.
Treatment of term loans.  If you receive a be­
low­market term loan other than a gift or de­
mand loan, you are treated as receiving an ad­
ditional cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on 
the date the loan is made. This payment is 
equal to the loan amount minus the present 
value, at the applicable federal rate, of all pay­
ments due under the loan. The same amount is 
treated as original issue discount on the loan. 
See Original issue discount (OID) under Interest 
You Can Deduct, earlier.
Exceptions for loans of $10,000 or less. 
The rules for below­market loans do not apply 
to any day on which the total outstanding loans 
between the borrower and lender is $10,000 or 
less. This exception applies only to the follow­
ing.
1. Gift loans between individuals if the loan is 
not directly used to buy or carry in­
come­producing assets.
2. Compensation­related loans or corpora­
tion­shareholder loans if the avoidance of 
any federal tax is not a principal purpose 
of the interest arrangement.
This exception does not apply to a term loan 
described in (2) above that was previously sub­
ject to the below­market loan rules. Those rules 
will continue to apply even if the outstanding 
balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.
Exceptions for loans without significant tax 
effect. The following loans are specifically ex­
empted from the rules for below­market loans 
because their interest arrangements do not 
have a significant effect on the federal tax liabil­
ity of the borrower or the lender.
1. Loans made available by lenders to the 
general public on the same terms and 
conditions that are consistent with the 
lender's customary business practices.
2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or 
municipal government that are made avail­
able under a program of general applica­
tion to the public.
3. Certain employee­relocation loans.
4. Certain loans to or from a foreign person, 
unless the interest income would be effec­
tively connected with the conduct of a U.S. 
trade or business and not exempt from 
U.S. tax under an income tax treaty.
5. Any other loan if the taxpayer can show 
that the interest arrangement has no sig­
nificant effect on the federal tax liability of 
the lender or the borrower. Whether an in­
terest arrangement has a significant effect 
on the federal tax liability of the lender or 
the borrower will be determined by all the 
facts and circumstances. Consider all the 
following factors.
a. Whether items of income and deduc­
tion generated by the loan offset each 
other.
b. The amount of the items.
c. The cost of complying with the be­
low­market loan provisions if they 
were to apply.
d. Any reasons, other than taxes, for 
structuring the transaction as a be­
low­market loan.
Exception for loans to qualified continuing 
care facilities.  The below­market interest 
rules do not apply to a loan owed by a qualified 
continuing care facility under a continuing care 
contract if the lender or lender's spouse is age 
62 or older by the end of the calendar year.
A qualified continuing care facility is one or 
more facilities (excluding nursing homes) meet­
ing the requirements listed below.
1. Designed to provide services under con­
tinuing care contracts (defined below).
2. Includes an independent living unit, and 
either an assisted living or nursing facility, 
or both.
3. Substantially all of the independent living 
unit residents are covered by continuing 
care contracts.
A continuing care contract is a written con­
tract between an individual and a qualified con­
tinuing care facility that includes all of the fol­
lowing conditions.
1. The individual or individual's spouse must 
be entitled to use the facility for the rest of 
their life or lives.
2. The individual or individual's spouse will 
be provided with housing, as appropriate 
for the health of the individual or individu­
al's spouse in an:
a. independent living unit (which has ad­
ditional available facilities outside the 
unit for the provision of meals and 
other personal care), and
b. assisted living or nursing facility avail­
able in the continuing care facility.
3. The individual or individual's spouse will 
be provided with assisted living or nursing 
care available in the continuing care fa­
cility, as required for the health of the indi­
vidual or the individual's spouse.
Page 15 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Interest  Page 15

For more information, see section 7872(h) of 
the Internal Revenue Code.
Sale or exchange of property.  Different rules 
generally apply to a loan connected with the 
sale or exchange of property. If the loan does 
not provide adequate stated interest, part of the 
principal payment may be considered interest. 
However, there are exceptions that may require 
you to apply the below­market interest rate 
rules to these loans. See Unstated Interest and 
Original Issue Discount (OID) in Pub. 537.
More information.  For more information on 
below­market loans, see section 7872 of the In­
ternal Revenue Code and section 1.7872­5 of 
the regulations.
5.
Taxes
Introduction
You can deduct various federal, state, local, 
and foreign taxes directly attributable to your 
trade or business as business expenses.
You cannot deduct federal income 
taxes, estate and gift taxes, or state in-
heritance, legacy, and succession 
taxes.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
When to deduct taxes
Real estate taxes
Income taxes
Employment taxes
Other taxes
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
(Circular E), Employer's Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business
Excise Taxes
Accounting Periods and Methods
Basis of Assets
Form (and Instructions)
Itemized Deductions
Self­Employment 
Tax
Application for Change in 
Accounting Method
CAUTION
!
  15
  334
  510
  538
  551
  Sch A (Form 1040)
  Sch SE (Form 1040)
  3115
Additional Medicare Tax
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
When To
Deduct Taxes
Generally, you can only deduct taxes in the 
year you pay them. This applies whether you 
use the cash method or an accrual method of 
accounting.
Under an accrual method, you can deduct a 
tax before you pay it if you meet the exception 
for recurring items discussed under Economic 
Performance in Publication 538. You can also 
elect to ratably accrue real estate taxes as dis­
cussed later under Real Estate Taxes.
Limit on accrual of taxes.  A taxing jurisdic­
tion can require the use of a date for accruing 
taxes that is earlier than the date it originally re­
quired. However, if you use an accrual method, 
and can deduct the tax before you pay it, use 
the original accrual date for the year of change 
and all future years to determine when you can 
deduct the tax.
Example. Your state imposes a tax on per­
sonal property used in a trade or business con­
ducted in the state. This tax is assessed and 
becomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). In 
2015, the state changed the assessment and 
lien dates from July 1, 2016, to December 31, 
2015, for property tax year 2016. Use the origi­
nal accrual date (July 1, 2016) to determine 
when you can deduct the tax. You must also 
use the July 1 accrual date for all future years to 
determine when you can deduct the tax.
Uniform capitalization rules. Uniform capital­
ization rules apply to certain taxpayers who pro­
duce real property or tangible personal property 
for use in a trade or business or for sale to cus­
tomers. They also apply to certain taxpayers 
who acquire property for resale. Under these 
rules, you either include certain costs in inven­
tory or capitalize certain expenses related to the 
property, such as taxes. For more information, 
see chapter 1.
Carrying charges.  Carrying charges include 
taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or 
to carry, transport, or install personal property. 
You can elect to capitalize carrying charges not 
subject to the uniform capitalization rules if they 
are otherwise deductible. For more information, 
see chapter 7.
Refunds of taxes.  If you receive a refund for 
any taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in­
clude the refund in income to the extent the de­
duction reduced your federal income tax in the 
earlier year. For more information, see Recov-
ery of amount deducted (tax benefit rule)  in 
chapter 1.
You must include in income any inter-
est you receive on tax refunds.
  8959
TIP
Real Estate Taxes
Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local, 
or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the 
general public welfare. The taxing authority 
must base the taxes on the assessed value of 
the real estate and charge them uniformly 
against all property under its jurisdiction. De­
ductible real estate taxes generally do not in­
clude taxes charged for local benefits and im­
provements that increase the value of the 
property. See Taxes for local benefits, later.
If you use an accrual method, you generally 
cannot accrue real estate taxes until you pay 
them to the government authority. However, 
you can elect to ratably accrue the taxes during 
the year. See Electing to ratably accrue, later.
Taxes for local benefits.  Generally, you can­
not deduct taxes charged for local benefits and 
improvements that tend to increase the value of 
your property. These include assessments for 
streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, 
and public parking facilities. You should in­
crease the basis of your property by the amount 
of the assessment.
You can deduct taxes for these local bene­
fits only if the taxes are for maintenance, re­
pairs, or interest charges related to those bene­
fits. If part of the tax is for maintenance, repairs, 
or interest, you must be able to show how much 
of the tax is for these expenses to claim a de­
duction for that part of the tax.
Example. To improve downtown commer­
cial business, Waterfront City converted a 
downtown business area street into an en­
closed pedestrian mall. The city assessed the 
full cost of construction, financed with 10­year 
bonds, against the affected properties. The city 
is paying the principal and interest with the an­
nual payments made by the property owners.
The assessments for construction costs are 
not deductible as taxes or as business expen­
ses, but are depreciable capital expenses. The 
part of the payments used to pay the interest 
charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes.
Charges for services.  Water bills, sewerage, 
and other service charges assessed against 
your business property are not real estate 
taxes, but are deductible as business expen­
ses.
Purchase or sale of real estate.  If real estate 
is sold, the real estate taxes must be allocated 
between the buyer and the seller.
The buyer and seller must allocate the real 
estate taxes according to the number of days in 
the real property tax year (the period to which 
the tax imposed relates) that each owned the 
property. Treat the seller as paying the taxes up 
to but not including the date of sale. Treat the 
buyer as paying the taxes beginning with the 
date of sale. You can usually find this informa­
tion on the settlement statement you received at 
closing.
If you (the seller) use an accrual method and 
have not elected to ratably accrue real estate 
taxes, you are considered to have accrued your 
part of the tax on the date you sell the property.
Page 16 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16  Chapter 5 Taxes

Example. Alberto Verde, a calendar year 
accrual method taxpayer, owns real estate in 
Olmo County. He has not elected to ratably ac­
crue property taxes. November 30 of each year 
is the assessment and lien date for the current 
real property tax year, which is the calendar 
year. He sold the property on June 30, 2015. 
Under his accounting method he would not be 
able to claim a deduction for the taxes because 
the sale occurred before November 30. He is 
treated as having accrued his part of the tax, 
180365  (January 1–June 29), on June 30, and he 
can deduct it for 2015.
Electing to ratably accrue.  If you use an ac­
crual method, you can elect to accrue real es­
tate tax related to a definite period ratably over 
that period.
Example. Juan Sanchez is a calendar year 
taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His real 
estate taxes for the real property tax year, July 
1, 2015, to June 30, 2016, are $1,200. July 1 is 
the assessment and lien date.
If Juan elects to ratably accrue the taxes, 
$600 will accrue in 2015 ($1,200 × 612, July 1–
December 31) and the balance will accrue in 
2016.
Separate elections. You can elect to rata­
bly accrue the taxes for each separate trade or 
business and for nonbusiness activities if you 
account for them separately. Once you elect to 
ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must use 
that method unless you get permission from the 
IRS to change. See Form 3115, later.
Making the election. If you elect to ratably 
accrue the taxes for the first year in which you 
incur real estate taxes, attach a statement to 
your income tax return for that year. The state­
ment should show all the following items.
The trades or businesses to which the 
election applies and the accounting 
method or methods used.
The period to which the taxes relate.
The computation of the real estate tax de­
duction for that first year.
Generally, you must file your return by the 
due date (including extensions). However, if 
you timely filed your return for the year without 
electing to ratably accrue, you can still make the 
election by filing an amended return within 6 
months after the due date of the return (exclud­
ing extensions). Attach the statement to the 
amended return and write “Filed pursuant to 
section 301.9100­2” on the statement. File the 
amended return at the same address where you 
filed the original return.
Form 3115.  If you elect to ratably accrue 
real estate taxes for a year after the first year in 
which you incur real estate taxes, or if you want 
to revoke your election to ratably accrue real 
estate taxes, file Form 3115. For more informa­
tion, including applicable time frames for filing, 
see the Instructions for Form 3115.
Income Taxes
This section discusses federal, state, local, and 
foreign income taxes.
Federal income taxes.  You cannot deduct 
federal income taxes.
State and local income taxes.  A corporation 
or partnership can deduct state and local in­
come taxes imposed on the corporation or part­
nership as business expenses. An individual 
can deduct state and local income taxes only as 
an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 
1040).
However, an individual can deduct a state 
tax on gross income (as distinguished from net 
income) directly attributable to a trade or busi­
ness as a business expense.
Accrual of contested income taxes.  If 
you use an accrual method, and you contest a 
state or local income tax liability, you must ac­
crue and deduct any contested amount in the 
tax year in which the liability is finally deter­
mined.
If additional state or local income taxes for a 
prior year are assessed in a later year, you can 
deduct the taxes in the year in which they were 
originally imposed (the prior year) if the tax lia­
bility is not contested. You cannot deduct them 
in the year in which the liability is finally deter­
mined.
The filing of an income tax return is not 
considered a contest and, in the ab-
sence of an overt act of protest, you 
can deduct the tax in the prior year. Also, you 
can deduct any additional taxes in the prior year 
if you do not show some affirmative evidence of 
denial of the liability.
However, if you consistently deduct addi­
tional assessments in the year they are paid or 
finally determined (including those for which 
there was no contest), you must continue to do 
so. You cannot take a deduction in the earlier 
year unless you receive permission to change 
your method of accounting. For more informa­
tion on accounting methods, see When Can I 
Deduct an Expense in chapter 1.
Foreign income taxes.  Generally, you can 
take either a deduction or a credit for income 
taxes imposed on you by a foreign country or a 
U.S. possession. However, an individual cannot 
take a deduction or credit for foreign income 
taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S. 
tax under the foreign earned income exclusion 
or the foreign housing exclusion. For informa­
tion on these exclusions, see Publication 54, 
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens 
Abroad. For information on the foreign tax 
credit, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit 
for Individuals.
Employment Taxes
If you have employees, you must withhold vari­
ous taxes from your employees' pay. Most em­
ployers must withhold their employees' share of 
social security, Medicare taxes, and Additional 
Medicare Tax (if applicable) along with state 
and federal income taxes. You may also need 
to pay certain employment taxes from your own 
funds. These include your share of social secur­
ity and Medicare taxes as an employer, along 
with unemployment taxes.
TIP
Your deduction for wages paid is not re­
duced by the social security and Medicare 
taxes, Additional Medicare Tax, and income 
taxes you withhold from your employees. You 
can deduct the employment taxes you must pay 
from your own funds as taxes.
Example. You pay your employee $18,000 
a year. However, after you withhold various 
taxes, your employee receives $14,500. You 
also pay an additional $1,500 in employment 
taxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as 
wages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay 
from your own funds as taxes.
Additional Medicare Tax.  You must withhold 
a 0.9% Additional Medicare Tax from wages 
you pay to an employee in excess of $200,000 
in a calendar year. The Additional Medicare Tax 
is only imposed on the employee. There is no 
employer share of Additional Medicare Tax.
For more information on the Additional Med­
icare Tax see Form 8959, Additional Medicare 
Tax, and its instructions.
For more information on employment 
taxes, see Publication 15 (Circular E).
Unemployment fund taxes.  As an employer, 
you may have to make payments to a state un­
employment compensation fund or to a state 
disability benefit fund. Deduct these payments 
as taxes.
Self-employment tax. You can deduct part of 
your self­employment tax as a business ex­
pense in figuring your adjusted gross income. 
This deduction only affects your income tax. It 
does not affect your net earnings from self­em­
ployment or your self­employment tax.
To deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, 
line 27, the amount shown on the Deduction for 
one­half of self­employment tax line of Sched­
ule SE (Form 1040).
For more information on self­employment 
tax, see Publication 334.
Additional Medicare Tax.  You may be re­
quired to pay Additional Medicare Tax on 
self­employment income. See Form 8959 and 
the Instructions for Form 8959 for more informa­
tion on the Additional Medicare Tax.
Other Taxes
The following are other taxes you can deduct if 
you incur them in the ordinary course of your 
trade or business.
Excise taxes. Generally, you can deduct as a 
business expense all excise taxes that are ordi­
nary and necessary expenses of carrying on 
your trade or business. However, see Fuel 
taxes, later.
For more information on excise taxes, see 
Publication 510.
Franchise taxes.  You can deduct corporate 
franchise taxes as a business expense.
Fuel taxes. Generally, taxes on gasoline, die­
sel fuel, and other motor fuels that you use in 
your business are included as part of the cost of 
TIP
Page 17 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Taxes  Page 17

the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa­
rate item.
You may be entitled to a credit or refund for 
federal excise tax you paid on fuels used for 
certain purposes. For more information, see 
Publication 510.
Occupational taxes.  You can deduct as a 
business expense an occupational tax charged 
at a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of 
working or conducting a business in the locality.
Personal property tax.  You can deduct any 
tax imposed by a state or local government on 
personal property used in your trade or busi­
ness.
Sales tax. Any sales tax you pay on a service 
for your business, or on the purchase or use of 
property in your business is treated as part of 
the cost of the service or property. If the service 
or the cost or use of the property is a deductible 
business expense, you can deduct the tax as 
part of that service or cost. If the property is 
merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is 
part of the cost of the merchandise. If the prop­
erty is depreciable, add the sales tax to the ba­
sis for depreciation. For more information on 
basis, see Publication 551.
Do not deduct state and local sales 
taxes imposed on the buyer that you 
must collect and pay over to the state 
or local government. Also, do not include these 
taxes in gross receipts or sales.
6.
Insurance
What's New
Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) exten-
ded. The HCTC, which expired at the end of 
2013, has been reinstated retroactive to the be­
ginning of 2014. You can take the HCTC for 
2015 if you were an eligible trade adjustment 
assistance (TAA) recipient, alternative TAA re­
cipient, reemployment TAA recipient, Pension 
Benefit Guaranty Corporation pension payee, or 
qualifying family member.
Eligibility for the HCTC is generally the same 
as in 2013 with the following changes.
The HCTC is now an election. Once you 
elect to take the HCTC for a month, the 
election applies for all subsequent months 
during your tax year unless you no longer 
qualify to take the HCTC.
For 2015, you can take the HCTC for a 
qualified health plan purchased through a 
Health Insurance Marketplace. This insur­
ance coverage also qualifies for the pre­
mium tax credit taken on Form 8962, Pre­
mium Tax Credit (PTC). The HCTC and 
CAUTION
!
PTC are different tax credits that have dif­
ferent eligibility rules. You cannot take 
both the HCTC and PTC for the same 
month for the same coverage. For more in­
formation, see Form 8885 and its instruc­
tions.
Reminder
Premium tax credit. You may have to use the 
worksheets in Publication 974 instead of the 
worksheet in this chapter if the insurance plan 
established, or considered to be established, 
under your business was obtained through the 
Health Insurance Marketplace and you are 
claiming the premium tax credit. See Publica­
tion 974 for details.
Introduction
You generally can deduct the ordinary and nec­
essary cost of insurance as a business expense 
if it is for your trade, business, or profession. 
However, you may have to capitalize certain in­
surance costs under the uniform capitalization 
rules. For more information, see Capitalized 
Premiums, later.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
Deductible premiums
Nondeductible premiums
Capitalized premiums
When to deduct premiums
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe 
Benefits
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Accounting Periods and Methods
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Form (and Instructions)
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Deductible Premiums
You generally can deduct premiums you pay for 
the following kinds of insurance related to your 
trade or business.
1. Insurance that covers fire, storm, theft, ac­
cident, or similar losses.
2. Credit insurance that covers losses from 
business bad debts.
3. Group hospitalization and medical insur­
ance for employees, including long­term 
care insurance.
  15-B
  525
  538
  547
  1040
a. If a partnership pays accident and 
health insurance premiums for its 
partners, it generally can deduct them 
as guaranteed payments to partners.
b. If an S corporation pays accident and 
health insurance premiums for its 
more­than­2% shareholder­employ­
ees, it generally can deduct them, but 
must also include them in the share­
holder's wages subject to federal in­
come tax withholding. See Publication 
15­B.
4. Liability insurance.
5. Malpractice insurance that covers your 
personal liability for professional negli­
gence resulting in injury or damage to pa­
tients or clients.
6. Workers' compensation insurance set by 
state law that covers any claims for bodily 
injuries or job­related diseases suffered by 
employees in your business, regardless of 
fault.
a. If a partnership pays workers' com­
pensation premiums for its partners, it 
generally can deduct them as guaran­
teed payments to partners.
b. If an S corporation pays workers' 
compensation premiums for its 
more­than­2% shareholder­employ­
ees, it generally can deduct them, but 
must also include them in the share­
holder's wages.
7. Contributions to a state unemployment in­
surance fund are deductible as taxes if 
they are considered taxes under state law.
8. Overhead insurance that pays for busi­
ness overhead expenses you have during 
long periods of disability caused by your 
injury or sickness.
9. Car and other vehicle insurance that cov­
ers vehicles used in your business for lia­
bility, damages, and other losses. If you 
operate a vehicle partly for personal use, 
deduct only the part of the insurance pre­
mium that applies to the business use of 
the vehicle. If you use the standard mile­
age rate to figure your car expenses, you 
cannot deduct any car insurance premi­
ums.
10. Life insurance covering your officers and 
employees if you are not directly or indi­
rectly a beneficiary under the contract.
11. Business interruption insurance that pays 
for lost profits if your business is shut 
down due to a fire or other cause.
Self-Employed Health 
Insurance Deduction
You may be able to deduct the amount you paid 
for medical and dental insurance and qualified 
long­term care insurance for yourself, your 
spouse, and your dependents. The insurance 
can also cover your child who was under age 
27 at the end of 2015, even if the child was not 
your dependent. A child includes your son, 
daughter, stepchild, adopted child, or foster 
child. A foster child is any child placed with you 
Page 18 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18  Chapter 6 Insurance

by an authorized placement agency or by judg­
ment, decree, or other order of any court of 
competent jurisdiction.
One of the following statements must be 
true.
You were self­employed and had a net 
profit for the year reported on Schedule C 
(Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Busi­
ness; Schedule C­EZ (Form 1040), Net 
Profit From Business; or Schedule F (Form 
1040), Profit or Loss From Farming.
You were a partner with net earnings from 
self­employment for the year reported on 
Schedule K­1 (Form 1065), Partner's 
Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, 
etc., box 14, code A.
You used one of the optional methods to 
figure your net earnings from self­employ­
ment on Schedule SE.
You received wages in 2015 from an S cor­
poration in which you were a 
more­than­2% shareholder. Health insur­
ance premiums paid or reimbursed by the 
S corporation are shown as wages on 
Form W­2, Wage and Tax Statement.
The insurance plan must be established, or 
considered to be established as discussed in 
the following bullets, under your business.
For self­employed individuals filing a 
Schedule C, C­EZ, or F, a policy can be ei­
ther in the name of the business or in the 
name of the individual.
For partners, a policy can be either in the 
name of the partnership or in the name of 
the partner. You can either pay the premi­
ums yourself or the partnership can pay 
them and report the premium amounts on 
Schedule K­1 (Form 1065) as guaranteed 
payments to be included in your gross in­
come. However, if the policy is in your 
name and you pay the premiums yourself, 
the partnership must reimburse you and 
report the premium amounts on Sched­
ule K­1 (Form 1065) as guaranteed pay­
ments to be included in your gross income. 
Otherwise, the insurance plan will not be 
considered to be established under your 
business.
For more­than­2% shareholders, a policy 
can be either in the name of the S corpora­
tion or in the name of the shareholder. You 
can either pay the premiums yourself or 
the S corporation can pay them and report 
the premium amounts on Form W­2 as wa­
ges to be included in your gross income. 
However, if the policy is in your name and 
you pay the premiums yourself, the S cor­
poration must reimburse you and report 
the premium amounts on Form W­2 in 
box 1 as wages to be included in your 
gross income. Otherwise, the insurance 
plan will not be considered to be estab­
lished under your business.
Medicare premiums you voluntarily pay to 
obtain insurance in your name that is similar to 
qualifying private health insurance can be used 
to figure the deduction. Amounts paid for health 
insurance coverage from retirement plan distri­
butions that were nontaxable because you are a 
retired public safety officer cannot be used to 
figure the deduction.
Take the deduction on Form 1040, line 29.
Qualified long-term care insurance.  You 
can include premiums paid on a qualified 
long­term care insurance contract when figuring 
your deduction. But, for each person covered, 
you can include only the smaller of the following 
amounts.
1. The amount paid for that person.
2. The amount shown below. Use the per­
son's age at the end of the tax year.
a. Age 40 or younger–$380
b. Age 41 to 50–$710
c. Age 51 to 60–$1,430
d. Age 61 to 70–$3,800
e. Age 71 or older–$4,750
Qualified long-term care insurance con-
tract. A qualified long­term care insurance 
contract is an insurance contract that only pro­
vides coverage of qualified long­term care serv­
ices. The contract must meet all the following 
requirements.
It must be guaranteed renewable.
It must provide that refunds, other than re­
funds on the death of the insured or com­
plete surrender or cancellation of the con­
tract, and dividends under the contract 
may be used only to reduce future premi­
ums or increase future benefits.
It must not provide for a cash surrender 
value or other money that can be paid, as­
signed, pledged, or borrowed.
It generally must not pay or reimburse ex­
penses incurred for services or items that 
would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex­
cept where Medicare is a secondary payer 
or the contract makes per diem or other 
periodic payments without regard to ex­
penses.
Qualified long-term care services.  Quali­
fied long­term care services are:
Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera­
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re­
habilitative services; and
Maintenance or personal care services.
The services must be required by a chronically 
ill individual and prescribed by a licensed health 
care practitioner.
Page 19 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 Insurance  Page 19

Worksheet 6­A. Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Caution. You may have to use the worksheets in Publication 974 instead of this worksheet if the insurance plan 
established, or considered to be established, under your business was obtained through the Health Insurance 
Marketplace and you are claiming the premium tax credit. See Publication 974 for details.
Note. Use a separate worksheet for each trade or business under which an insurance plan is established.
1. Enter the total amount paid in 2015 for health insurance coverage established under your 
business (or the S corporation in which you were a more­than­2% shareholder) for 2015 for you, 
your spouse, and your dependents. Your insurance can also cover your child who was under age 
27 at the end of 2015, even if the child was not your dependent. But do not include the following.
Amounts for any month you were eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your or 
your spouse's employer or the employer of either your dependent or your child who was 
under the age of 27 at the end of 2015. 
Any amounts paid from retirement plan distributions that were nontaxable because you are a 
retired public safety officer.
Any amounts you included on Form 8885, line 4.
Any payments for qualified long­term care insurance (see line 2) ........... ........... 1.  
2. For coverage under a qualified long­term care insurance contract, enter for each person covered 
the smaller of the following amounts.
a) Total payments made for that person during the year.
b) The amount shown below. Use the person's age at the end of the tax year.
 $380— if that person is age 40 or younger 
$710— if age 41 to 50
$1,430— if age 51 to 60
$3,800— if age 61 to 70
$4,750— if age 71 or older
Do not include payments for any month you were eligible to participate in a long­term care 
insurance plan subsidized by your or your spouse’s employer or the employer of either your 
dependent or your child who was under the age of 27 at the end of 2015. If more than one 
person is covered, figure separately the amount to enter for each person. Then enter the 
total of those amounts ......................................................... 2.  
3. Add lines 1 and 2 ................................................................. 3.  
4. Enter your net profit* and any other earned income** from the trade or business under which the 
insurance plan is established. Do not include Conservation Reserve Program payments exempt 
from self­employment tax. If the business is an S corporation, skip to line 11 ................ 4.  
5. Enter the total of all net profits* from: Schedule C (Form 1040), line 31; Schedule C­EZ (Form 
1040), line 3; Schedule F (Form 1040), line 34; or Schedule K­1 (Form 1065), box 14, code A; 
plus any other income allocable to the profitable businesses. Do not include Conservation 
Reserve Program payments exempt from self­employment tax. See the Instructions for 
Schedule SE (Form 1040). Do not include any net losses shown on these schedules ......... 5.  
6. Divide line 4 by line 5 .............................................................. 6.  
7. Multiply Form 1040 (or Form 1040NR), line 27, by the percentage on line 6 ................. 7.  
8. Subtract line 7 from line 4 .......................................................... 8.  
9. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040 (or Form 1040NR), line 28, attributable to the same 
trade or business in which the insurance plan is established .............................. 9.  
10. Subtract line 9 from line 8 .......................................................... 10.  
11. Enter your Medicare wages (Form W­2, box 5) from an S corporation in which you are a 
more­than­2% shareholder and in which the insurance plan is established .................. 11.  
12. Enter any amount from Form 2555, line 45, attributable to the amount entered on line 4 or 11 
above, or any amount from Form 2555­EZ, line 18, attributable to the amount entered on line 11 
above .......................................................................... 12.  
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10 or 11, whichever applies ................................... 13.  
14. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 13 here and on Form 1040 (or Form 1040NR), line 29. Do not 
include this amount when figuring any medical expense deduction on Schedule A (Form 
1040) ........................................................................... 14.  
* If you used either optional method to figure your net earnings from self­employment from any business, do not enter your net profit from the 
business. Instead, enter the amount attributable to that business from Schedule SE (Form 1040), Section B, line 4b.
* * Earned Income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you created. However, it does not include 
capital gain income.
Chronically ill individual.  A chronically ill 
individual is a person who has been certified as 
one of the following.
An individual who has been unable, due to 
loss of functional capacity for at least 90 
days, to perform at least two activities of 
daily living without substantial assistance 
from another individual. Activities of daily 
living are eating, toileting, transferring 
(general mobility), bathing, dressing, and 
continence.
An individual who requires substantial su­
pervision to be protected from threats to 
health and safety due to severe cognitive 
impairment.
The certification must have been made by a li­
censed health care practitioner within the previ­
ous 12 months.
Benefits received.  For information on ex­
cluding benefits you receive from a long­term 
care contract from gross income, see Publica­
tion 525.
Other coverage.  You cannot take the deduc­
tion for any month you were eligible to partici­
pate in any employer (including your spouse's) 
subsidized health plan at any time during that 
Page 20 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20  Chapter 6 Insurance

month, even if you did not actually participate. 
In addition, if you were eligible for any month or 
part of a month to participate in any subsidized 
health plan maintained by the employer of ei­
ther your dependent or your child who was un­
der age 27 at the end of 2015, do not use 
amounts paid for coverage for that month to fig­
ure the deduction.
These rules are applied separately to plans 
that provide long­term care insurance and plans 
that do not provide long­term care insurance. 
However, any medical insurance payments not 
deductible on Form 1040, line 29, can be inclu­
ded as medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 
1040), Itemized Deductions, if you itemize de­
ductions.
Effect on itemized deductions.  Subtract the 
health insurance deduction from your medical 
insurance when figuring medical expenses on 
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc­
tions.
Effect on self-employment tax. For tax years 
beginning before or after 2010, you cannot sub­
tract the self­employed health insurance deduc­
tion when figuring net earnings for your self­em­
ployment tax from the business under which the 
insurance plan is established, or considered to 
be established as discussed earlier. For more 
information, see Schedule SE (Form 1040).
How to figure the deduction.  Generally, you 
can use the worksheet in the Form 1040 in­
structions to figure your deduction. However, if 
any of the following apply, you must use Work­
sheet 6­A in this chapter.
You had more than one source of income 
subject to self­employment tax.
You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In­
come, or Form 2555­EZ, Foreign Earned 
Income Exclusion.
You are using amounts paid for qualified 
long­term care insurance to figure the de­
duction.
If you are claiming the health coverage tax 
credit, complete Form 8885 before you figure 
this deduction.
Health coverage tax credit.  You elect to 
take this credit only if you were an eligible trade 
adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, alterna­
tive TAA (ATAA) recipient, reemployment trade 
adjustment assistance (RTAA) recipient, or 
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) 
pension recipient. Use Form 8885 to figure the 
amount, if any, of this credit. When figuring the 
amount to enter on line 1 of Worksheet 6­A, do 
not include any amounts you included on Form 
8885, line 4.
More than one health plan and business. 
If you have more than one health plan during 
the year and each plan is established under a 
different business, you must use separate work­
sheets (Worksheet 6­A) to figure each plan's 
net earnings limit. Include the premium you paid 
under each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa­
rate worksheet and your net profit (or wages) 
from that business on line 4 (or line 11). For a 
plan that provides long­term care insurance, the 
total of the amounts entered for each person on 
line 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than the 
appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that 
person.
Nondeductible 
Premiums
You cannot deduct premiums on the following 
kinds of insurance.
1. Self­insurance reserve funds. You cannot 
deduct amounts credited to a reserve set 
up for self­insurance. This applies even if 
you cannot get business insurance cover­
age for certain business risks. However, 
your actual losses may be deductible. See 
Publication 547.
2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre­
miums for a policy that pays for lost earn­
ings due to sickness or disability. How­
ever, see the discussion on overhead 
insurance, item (8), under Deductible Pre-
miums, earlier.
3. Certain life insurance and annuities.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, 
1997, you cannot deduct the premi­
ums on a life insurance policy cover­
ing you, an employee, or any person 
with a financial interest in your busi­
ness if you are directly or indirectly a 
beneficiary of the policy. You are in­
cluded among possible beneficiaries 
of the policy if the policy owner is obli­
gated to repay a loan from you using 
the proceeds of the policy. A person 
has a financial interest in your busi­
ness if the person is an owner or part 
owner of the business or has lent 
money to the business.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 
1997, you generally cannot deduct 
the premiums on any life insurance 
policy, endowment contract, or annu­
ity contract if you are directly or indi­
rectly a beneficiary. The disallowance 
applies without regard to whom the 
policy covers.
c. Partners. If, as a partner in a partner­
ship, you take out an insurance policy 
on your own life and name your part­
ners as beneficiaries to induce them 
to retain their investments in the part­
nership, you are considered a benefi­
ciary. You cannot deduct the insur­
ance premiums.
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out 
a policy on your life or on the life of an­
other person with a financial interest in 
your business to get or protect a business 
loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as 
a business expense. Nor can you deduct 
the premiums as interest on business 
loans or as an expense of financing loans. 
In the event of death, the proceeds of the 
policy are generally not taxed as income 
even if they are used to liquidate the debt.
Capitalized Premiums
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must 
capitalize the direct costs and part of the indi­
rect costs for certain production or resale activi­
ties. Include these costs in the basis of property 
you produce or acquire for resale, rather than 
claiming them as a current deduction. You re­
cover the costs through depreciation, amortiza­
tion, or cost of goods sold when you use, sell, 
or otherwise dispose of the property.
Indirect costs include premiums for insur­
ance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip­
ment, materials, property produced, or property 
acquired for resale.
Uniform capitalization rules.  You may be 
subject to the uniform capitalization rules if you 
do any of the following, unless the property is 
produced for your use other than in a business 
or an activity carried on for profit.
1. Produce real property or tangible personal 
property. For this purpose, tangible per­
sonal property includes a film, sound re­
cording, video tape, book, or similar prop­
erty.
2. Acquire property for resale.
However, these rules do not apply to the follow­
ing property.
1. Personal property you acquire for resale if 
your average annual gross receipts are 
$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.
2. Property you produce if you meet either of 
the following conditions.
a. Your indirect costs of producing the 
property are $200,000 or less.
b. You use the cash method of account­
ing and do not account for inventories.
More information.  For more information on 
these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in 
Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter­
nal Revenue Code section 263A.
When To Deduct 
Premiums
You can usually deduct insurance premiums in 
the tax year to which they apply.
Cash method.  If you use the cash method of 
accounting, you generally deduct insurance 
premiums in the tax year you actually paid 
them, even if you incurred them in an earlier 
year. However, see Prepayment, later.
Accrual method. If you use an accrual method 
of accounting, you cannot deduct insurance 
premiums before the tax year in which you incur 
a liability for them. In addition, you cannot de­
duct insurance premiums before the tax year in 
which you actually pay them (unless the excep­
tion for recurring items applies). For more infor­
mation about the accrual method of accounting, 
see chapter 1. For information about the excep­
tion for recurring items, see Publication 538.
Page 21 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 Insurance  Page 21

Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in 
advance, even if you pay them in advance. This 
rule applies to any expense paid far enough in 
advance to, in effect, create an asset with a 
useful life extending substantially beyond the 
end of the current tax year.
Expenses such as insurance are generally 
allocable to a period of time. You can deduct in­
surance expenses for the year to which they are 
allocable.
Example. In 2015, you signed a 3­year in­
surance contract. Even though you paid the 
premiums for 2015, 2016, and 2017 when you 
signed the contract, you can only deduct the 
premium for 2015 on your 2015 tax return. You 
can deduct in 2016 and 2017 the premium allo­
cable to those years.
Dividends received.  If you receive dividends 
from business insurance and you deducted the 
premiums in prior years, at least part of the divi­
dends generally are income. For more informa­
tion, see Recovery of amount deducted (tax 
benefit rule) in chapter 1 under How Much Can I 
Deduct.
7.
Costs You
Can Deduct
or Capitalize
What's New
Film and television production costs.  The 
election to expense qualified film and television 
production costs apply to certain costs of quali­
fied film, television, and live theatrical produc­
tions commencing before January 1, 2017 (after 
December 31, 2015, and before January 1, 
2017, for live theatrical productions). See Film 
and Television Production Costs, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses costs you can elect to 
deduct or capitalize.
You generally deduct a cost as a current 
business expense by subtracting it from your in­
come in either the year you incur it or the year 
you pay it.
If you capitalize a cost, you may be able to 
recover it over a period of years through peri­
odic deductions for amortization, depletion, or 
depreciation. When you capitalize a cost, you 
add it to the basis of property to which it relates.
A partnership, corporation, estate, or trust 
makes the election to deduct or capitalize the 
costs discussed in this chapter except for ex­
ploration costs for mineral deposits. Each 
individual partner, shareholder, or beneficiary 
elects whether to deduct or capitalize explora­
tion costs.
You may be subject to the alternative 
minimum tax (AMT) if you deduct re-
search and experimental, intangible 
drilling, exploration, development, circulation, or 
business organizational costs.
For more information on the alternative mini-
mum tax, see the instructions for the following 
forms.
Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—In-
dividuals.
Form 4626, Alternative Minimum 
Tax—Corporations.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
Carrying charges
Research and experimental costs
Intangible drilling costs
Exploration costs
Development costs
Circulation costs
Business start­up and organizational costs
Reforestation costs
Retired asset removal costs
Barrier removal costs
Film and television production costs
Repair and maintenance costs
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
Form (and Instructions)
Investment Credit
Disabled Access Credit
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Carrying Charges
Carrying charges include the taxes and interest 
you pay to carry or develop real property or to 
carry, transport, or install personal property. 
Certain carrying charges must be capitalized 
under the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor­
mation on capitalization of interest, see chap­
ter 4 .) You can elect to capitalize carrying 
charges not subject to the uniform capitalization 
rules, but only if they are otherwise deductible.
You can elect to capitalize carrying charges 
separately for each project you have and for 
each type of carrying charge. Your election is 
good for only 1 year for unimproved and unpro­
ductive real property. You must decide whether 
to capitalize carrying charges each year the 
property remains unimproved and 
CAUTION
!
  544
  3468
  8826
unproductive. For other real property, your elec­
tion to capitalize carrying charges remains in ef­
fect until construction or development is com­
pleted. For personal property, your election is 
effective until the date you install or first use it, 
whichever is later.
How to make the election.  To make the elec­
tion to capitalize a carrying charge, attach a 
statement to your original tax return for the year 
the election is to be effective indicating which 
charges you are electing to capitalize. However, 
if you timely filed your return for the year without 
making the election, you can still make the elec­
tion by filing an amended return within 6 months 
of the due date of the return (excluding exten­
sions). Attach the statement to the amended re­
turn and write “Filed pursuant to section 
301.9100­2” on the statement. File the amen­
ded return at the same address you filed the 
original return.
Research and 
Experimental Costs
The costs of research and experimentation are 
generally capital expenses. However, you can 
elect to deduct these costs as a current busi­
ness expense. Your election to deduct these 
costs is binding for the year it is made and for 
all later years unless you get IRS approval to 
make a change.
If you meet certain requirements, you may 
elect to defer and amortize research and exper­
imental costs. For information on electing to de­
fer and amortize these costs, see Research and 
Experimental Costs in chapter 8.
Research and experimental costs defined. 
Research and experimental costs are reasona­
ble costs you incur in your trade or business for 
activities intended to provide information that 
would eliminate uncertainty about the develop­
ment or improvement of a product. Uncertainty 
exists if the information available to you does 
not establish how to develop or improve a prod­
uct or the appropriate design of a product. 
Whether costs qualify as research and experi­
mental costs depends on the nature of the ac­
tivity to which the costs relate rather than on the 
nature of the product or improvement being de­
veloped or the level of technological advance­
ment.
The costs of obtaining a patent, including at­
torneys' fees paid or incurred in making and 
perfecting a patent application, are research 
and experimental costs. However, costs paid or 
incurred to obtain another's patent are not re­
search and experimental costs.
Product. The term “product” includes any 
of the following items.
Formula.
Invention.
Patent.
Pilot model.
Process.
Technique.
Property similar to the items listed above.
Page 22 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22  Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

It also includes products used by you in your 
trade or business or held for sale, lease, or li­
cense.
Costs not included. Research and experi­
mental costs do not include expenses for any of 
the following activities.
Advertising or promotions.
Consumer surveys.
Efficiency surveys.
Management studies.
Quality control testing.
Research in connection with literary, his­
torical, or similar projects.
The acquisition of another's patent, model, 
production, or process.
When and how to elect.  You make the elec­
tion to deduct research and experimental costs 
by deducting them on your tax return for the 
year in which you first pay or incur research and 
experimental costs. If you do not make the elec­
tion to deduct research and experimental costs 
in the first year in which you pay or incur the 
costs, you can deduct the costs in a later year 
only with approval from the IRS.
Research credit.  If you pay or incur qualified 
research expenses, you may be able to take the 
research credit. For more information, see Form 
6765, Credit for Increasing Research Activities, 
and the Instructions for Form 6765.
Intangible
Drilling Costs
The costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermal 
wells are ordinarily capital expenditures. You 
can usually recover them through depreciation 
or depletion. However, you can elect to deduct 
intangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a current busi­
ness expense. These are certain drilling and 
development costs for wells in the United 
States in which you hold an operating or work­
ing interest. You can deduct only costs for drill­
ing or preparing a well for the production of oil, 
gas, or geothermal steam or hot water.
You can elect to deduct only the costs of 
items with no salvage value. These include wa­
ges, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies related 
to drilling wells and preparing them for produc­
tion. Your cost for any drilling or development 
work done by contractors under any form of 
contract is also an IDC. However, see Amounts 
paid to contractor that must be capitalized , 
later.
You can also elect to deduct the cost of drill­
ing exploratory bore holes to determine the lo­
cation and delineation of offshore hydrocarbon 
deposits if the shaft is capable of conducting 
hydrocarbons to the surface on completion. It 
does not matter whether there is any intent to 
produce hydrocarbons.
If you do not elect to deduct your IDCs as a 
current business expense, you can elect to de­
duct them over the 60­month period beginning 
with the month they were paid or incurred.
Amounts paid to contractor that must be 
capitalized. Amounts paid to a contractor 
must be capitalized if they are either:
Amounts properly allocable to the cost of 
depreciable property, or
Amounts paid only out of production or 
proceeds from production if these amounts 
are depletable income to the recipient.
How to make the election.  You elect to de­
duct IDCs as a current business expense by 
taking the deduction on your income tax return 
for the first tax year you have eligible costs. No 
formal statement is required. If you file Sched­
ule C (Form 1040), enter these costs under 
“Other expenses.”
For oil and gas wells, your election is bind­
ing for the year it is made and for all later years. 
For geothermal wells, your election can be re­
voked by the filing of an amended return on 
which you do not take the deduction. You can 
file the amended return for the year up to the 
normal time of expiration for filing a claim for 
credit or refund, generally, within 3 years after 
the date you filed the original return or within 2 
years after the date you paid the tax, whichever 
is later.
Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells. 
If you capitalize the drilling and development 
costs of geothermal wells that you place in serv­
ice during the tax year, you may be able to 
claim a business energy credit. See the Instruc­
tions for Form 3468 for more information.
Nonproductive well.  If you capitalize your 
IDCs, you have another option if the well is non­
productive. You can deduct the IDCs of the 
nonproductive well as an ordinary loss. You 
must indicate and clearly state your election on 
your tax return for the year the well is comple­
ted. Once made, the election for oil and gas 
wells is binding for all later years. You can re­
voke your election for a geothermal well by filing 
an amended return that does not claim the loss.
Costs incurred outside the United States. 
You cannot deduct as a current business ex­
pense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil, 
gas, or geothermal well located outside the Uni­
ted States. However, you can elect to include 
the costs in the adjusted basis of the well to fig­
ure depletion or depreciation. If you do not 
make this election, you can deduct the costs 
over the 10­year period beginning with the tax 
year in which you paid or incurred them. These 
rules do not apply to a nonproductive well.
Exploration Costs
The costs of determining the existence, loca­
tion, extent, or quality of any mineral deposit are 
ordinarily capital expenditures if the costs lead 
to the development of a mine. You recover 
these costs through depletion as the mineral is 
removed from the ground. However, you can 
elect to deduct domestic exploration costs paid 
or incurred before the beginning of the develop­
ment stage of the mine (except those for oil and 
gas wells).
How to make the election.  You elect to de­
duct exploration costs by taking the deduction 
on your income tax return, or on an amended 
income tax return, for the first tax year for which 
you wish to deduct the costs paid or incurred 
during the tax year. Your return must ade­
quately describe and identify each property or 
mine, and clearly state how much is being de­
ducted for each one. The election applies to the 
tax year you make this election and all later tax 
years.
Partnerships and S corporations.  Each 
partner, not the partnership, elects whether to 
capitalize or to deduct that partner's share of 
exploration costs. Each shareholder, not the S 
corporation, elects whether to capitalize or to 
deduct that shareholder's share of exploration 
costs.
Reduced corporate deductions for explora-
tion costs. A corporation (other than an S cor­
poration) can deduct only 70% of its domestic 
exploration costs. It must capitalize the remain­
ing 30% of costs and amortize them over the 
60­month period starting with the month the ex­
ploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpora­
tion may also elect to capitalize and amortize 
mining exploration costs over a 10­year period. 
For more information on this method of amorti­
zation, see Internal Revenue Code section 
59(e).
The 30% the corporation capitalizes cannot 
be added to its basis in the property to figure 
cost depletion. However, the amount amortized 
is treated as additional depreciation and is sub­
ject to recapture as ordinary income on a dispo­
sition of the property. See Section 1250 Prop-
erty under Depreciation Recapture in chapter 3 
of Pub. 544.
These rules also apply to the deduction of 
development costs by corporations. See Devel-
opment Costs, later.
Recapture of exploration expenses.  When 
your mine reaches the producing stage, you 
must recapture any exploration costs you 
Deducting or Amortizing Research and Experimentation Costs
IF you . . . THEN . . .
Elect to deduct research and 
experimental costs as a current 
business expense
Deduct all research and experimental costs in the first 
year you pay or incur the costs and all later years.
Do not deduct research and 
experimental costs as a current 
business expense
If you meet the requirements, amortize them over at 
least 60 months, starting with the month you first 
receive an economic benefit from the research. See 
Research and Experimental Costs in chapter 8.
Page 23 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize  Page 23

elected to deduct. Use either of the following 
methods.
 Method 1—Include the deducted costs in 
gross income for the tax year the mine rea­
ches the producing stage. Your election 
must be clearly indicated on the return. In­
crease your adjusted basis in the mine by 
the amount included in income. Generally, 
you must elect this recapture method by 
the due date (including extensions) of your 
return. However, if you timely filed your re­
turn for the year without making the elec­
tion, you can still make the election by filing 
an amended return within 6 months of the 
due date of the return (excluding exten­
sions). Make the election on your amended 
return and write “Filed pursuant to section 
301.9100­2” on the form where you are in­
cluding the income. File the amended re­
turn at the same address you filed the origi­
nal return.
 Method 2—Do not claim any depletion de­
duction for the tax year the mine reaches 
the producing stage and any later tax years 
until the depletion you would have deduc­
ted equals the exploration costs you de­
ducted.
You also must recapture deducted explora­
tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty from 
mine property before it reaches the producing 
stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction for 
the tax year you receive the bonus or royalty 
and any later tax years until the depletion you 
would have deducted equals the exploration 
costs you deducted.
Generally, if you dispose of the mine before 
you have fully recaptured the exploration costs 
you deducted, recapture the balance by treating 
all or part of your gain as ordinary income. Un­
der these circumstances, you generally treat as 
ordinary income all of your gain if it is less than 
your adjusted exploration costs with respect to 
the mine. If your gain is more than your adjusted 
exploration costs, treat as ordinary income only 
a part of your gain, up to the amount of your ad­
justed exploration costs.
Foreign exploration costs. If you pay or incur 
exploration costs for a mine or other natural de­
posit located outside the United States, you 
cannot deduct all the costs in the current year. 
You can elect to include the costs (other than 
for an oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the adjus­
ted basis of the mineral property to figure cost 
depletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chap­
ter 9.) If you do not make this election, you must 
deduct the costs over the 10­year period begin­
ning with the tax year in which you pay or incur 
them. These rules also apply to foreign devel­
opment costs.
Development Costs
You can deduct costs paid or incurred during 
the tax year for developing a mine or any other 
natural deposit (other than an oil or gas well) lo­
cated in the United States. These costs must be 
paid or incurred after the discovery of ores or 
minerals in commercially marketable quantities. 
Development costs also include depreciation 
on improvements used in the development of 
ores or minerals and costs incurred for you by a 
contractor. Development costs do not include 
the costs for the acquisition or improvement of 
depreciable property.
Instead of deducting development costs in 
the year paid or incurred, you can elect to treat 
the costs as deferred expenses and deduct 
them ratably as the units of produced ores or 
minerals benefited by the expenses are sold. 
This election applies each tax year to expenses 
paid or incurred in that year. Once made, the 
election is binding for the year and cannot be 
revoked for any reason.
How to make the election.  The election to 
deduct development costs ratably as the ores 
or minerals are sold must be made for each 
mine or other natural deposit by a clear indica­
tion on your return or by a statement filed with 
the IRS office where you file your return. Gener­
ally, you must make the election by the due 
date of the return (including extensions). How­
ever, if you timely filed your return for the year 
without making the election, you can still make 
the election by filing an amended return within 6 
months of the due date of the return (excluding 
extensions). Clearly indicate the election on 
your amended return and write “Filed pursuant 
to section 301.9100­2.” File the amended return 
at the same address you filed the original re­
turn.
Foreign development costs.  The rules dis­
cussed earlier for foreign exploration costs ap­
ply to foreign development costs.
Reduced corporate deductions for develop-
ment costs. The rules discussed earlier for re­
duced corporate deductions for exploration 
costs also apply to corporate deductions for de­
velopment costs.
Circulation Costs
A publisher can deduct as a current business 
expense the costs of establishing, maintaining, 
or increasing the circulation of a newspaper, 
magazine, or other periodical. For example, a 
publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extra 
employees for a limited time to get new sub­
scriptions through telephone calls. Circulation 
costs may be deducted even if they normally 
would be capitalized.
This rule does not apply to the following 
costs that must be capitalized.
The purchase of land or depreciable prop­
erty.
The acquisition of circulation through the 
purchase of any part of the business of an­
other publisher of a newspaper, magazine, 
or other periodical, including the purchase 
of another publisher's list of subscribers.
Other treatment of circulation costs.  If you 
do not want to deduct circulation costs as a cur­
rent business expense, you can elect one of the 
following ways to recover these costs.
Capitalize all circulation costs that are 
properly chargeable to a capital account 
(see chapter 1).
Amortize circulation costs over the 3­year 
period beginning with the tax year they 
were paid or incurred.
How to make the election.  You elect to capi­
talize circulation costs by attaching a statement 
to your return for the first tax year the election 
applies. Your election is binding for the year it is 
made and for all later years, unless you get IRS 
approval to revoke it.
Business Start-Up and 
Organizational Costs
Business start­up and organizational costs are 
generally capital expenditures. However, you 
can elect to deduct up to $5,000 of business 
start­up and $5,000 of organizational costs paid 
or incurred after October 22, 2004. The $5,000 
deduction is reduced by the amount your total 
start­up or organizational costs exceed 
$50,000. Any remaining costs must be amor­
tized. For information about amortizing start­up 
and organizational costs, see chapter 8.
Start­up costs include any amounts paid or 
incurred in connection with creating an active 
trade or business or investigating the creation 
or acquisition of an active trade or business. Or­
ganizational costs include the costs of creating 
a corporation or partnership.
How to make the election.  You elect to de­
duct the start­up or organizational costs by 
claiming the deduction on your income tax re­
turn (filed by the due date including extensions) 
for the tax year in which the active trade or busi­
ness begins. For costs paid or incurred after 
September 8, 2008, you are not required to at­
tach a statement to your return to elect to de­
duct such costs. However, for start­up or organ­
izational costs paid or incurred before 
September 9, 2008, you may be required to at­
tach a statement to your return to elect to de­
duct such costs. If you timely filed your return 
for the year without making the election, you 
can still make the election by filing an amended 
return within 6 months of the due date of the re­
turn (excluding extensions). Clearly indicate the 
election on your amended return and write 
“Filed pursuant to section 301.9100­2.”
File the amended return at the same ad­
dress you filed the original return. The election 
applies when computing taxable income for the 
current tax year and all subsequent years. Once 
made, the election is irrevocable. For more in­
formation on start­up and organizational costs, 
see chapter 8.
Reforestation Costs
Reforestation costs are generally capital expen­
ditures. However, you can elect to deduct up to 
$10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately; $0 
for a trust) of qualifying reforestation costs paid 
or incurred after October 22, 2004, for each 
qualified timber property. The remaining costs 
can be amortized over an 84­month period. For 
information about amortizing reforestation 
costs, see chapter 8.
Qualifying reforestation costs are the direct 
costs of planting or seeding for forestation or re­
forestation. Qualified timber property is property 
that contains trees in significant commercial 
Page 24 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 24  Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

quantities. See chapter 8  for more information 
on qualifying reforestation costs and qualified 
timber property.
If you elect to deduct qualified reforestation 
costs, create and maintain separate timber ac­
counts for each qualified timber property and in­
clude all reforestation costs and the dates each 
was applied. Do not include this qualified timber 
property in any account (for example, depletion 
block) for which depletion is allowed.
How to make the election.  You elect to de­
duct qualifying reforestation costs by claiming 
the deduction on your timely filed income tax re­
turn (including extensions) for the tax year the 
expenses were paid or incurred. If Form T (Tim­
ber), Forest Activities Schedule, is required, 
complete Part IV of Form T. If Form T is not re­
quired, attach a statement containing the follow­
ing information for each qualified timber prop­
erty for which an election is being made.
The unique stand identification numbers.
The total number of acres reforested dur­
ing the tax year.
The nature of the reforestation treatments.
The total amounts of qualified reforestation 
expenditures eligible to be amortized or 
deducted.
If you timely filed your return for the year 
without making the election, you can still make 
the election by filing an amended return within 6 
months of the due date of the return (excluding 
extensions). Clearly indicate the election on 
your amended return and write “Filed pursuant 
to section 301.9100­2.” File the amended return 
at the same address you filed the original re­
turn. The election applies when computing taxa­
ble income for the current tax year and all sub­
sequent years.
For additional information on reforestation 
costs, see chapter 8.
Recapture. This deduction may have to be re­
captured as ordinary income under section 
1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of the 
property that would have received an addition 
to basis if you had not elected to deduct the ex­
penditure. For more information on recapturing 
the deduction, see Depreciation Recapture  in 
Pub. 544.
Retired Asset Removal 
Costs
If you retire and remove a depreciable asset in 
connection with the installation or production of 
a replacement asset, you can deduct the costs 
of removing the retired asset. However, if you 
replace a component (part) of a depreciable as­
set, capitalize the removal costs if the replace­
ment is an improvement and deduct the costs if 
the replacement is a repair.
Barrier Removal Costs
The cost of an improvement to a business asset 
is normally a capital expense. However, you 
can elect to deduct the costs of making a facility 
or public transportation vehicle more accessible 
to and usable by those who are disabled or eld­
erly. You must own or lease the facility or vehi­
cle for use in connection with your trade or busi­
ness.
A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc­
tures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, or 
similar real or personal property. A public trans­
portation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus or 
railroad car, that provides transportation service 
to the public (including service for your custom­
ers, even if you are not in the business of pro­
viding transportation services).
You cannot deduct any costs that you paid 
or incurred to completely renovate or build a fa­
cility or public transportation vehicle or to re­
place depreciable property in the normal course 
of business.
Deduction limit. The most you can deduct as 
a cost of removing barriers to the disabled and 
the elderly for any tax year is $15,000. How­
ever, you can add any costs over this limit to the 
basis of the property and depreciate these ex­
cess costs.
Partners and partnerships. The $15,000 limit 
applies to a partnership and also to each part­
ner in the partnership. A partner can allocate 
the $15,000 limit in any manner among the part­
ner's individually incurred costs and the part­
ner's distributive share of partnership costs. If 
the partner cannot deduct the entire share of 
partnership costs, the partnership can add any 
costs not deducted to the basis of the improved 
property.
A partnership must be able to show that any 
amount added to basis was not deducted by 
the partner and that it was over a partner's 
$15,000 limit (as determined by the partner). If 
the partnership cannot show this, it is presumed 
that the partner was able to deduct the distribu­
tive share of the partnership's costs in full.
Example. Emilio Azul's distributive share of 
ABC partnership's deductible expenses for the 
removal of architectural barriers was $14,000. 
Emilio had $12,000 of similar expenses in his 
sole proprietorship. He elected to deduct 
$7,000 of them. Emilio allocated the remaining 
$8,000 of the $15,000 limit to his share of 
ABC's expenses. Emilio can add the excess 
$5,000 of his own expenses to the basis of the 
property used in his business. Also, if ABC can 
show that Emilio could not deduct $6,000 
($14,000 – $8,000) of his share of the partner­
ship's expenses because of how Emilio applied 
the limit, ABC can add $6,000 to the basis of its 
property.
Qualification standards.  You can deduct 
your costs as a current expense only if the bar­
rier removal meets the guidelines and require­
ments issued by the Architectural and Trans­
portation Barriers Compliance Board under the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990. 
You can view the Americans with Disabilities 
Act at www.ada.gov/pubs/ada.htm.
The following is a list of some architectural 
barrier removal costs that can be deducted.
Ground and floor surfaces.
Walks.
Parking lots.
Ramps.
Entrances.
Doors and doorways.
Stairs.
Floors.
Toilet rooms.
Water fountains.
Public telephones.
Elevators.
Controls.
Signage.
Alarms.
Protruding objects.
Symbols of accessibility.
You can find the ADA guidelines and require­
ments for architectural barrier removal at 
www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/reg3a.html.
The costs for removal of transportation barri­
ers from rail facilities, buses, and rapid and light 
rail vehicles are deductible. You can find the 
guidelines and requirements for transportation 
barrier removal at www.fta.dot.gov.
Also, you can access the ADA website at 
www.ada.gov for additional information.
Other barrier removals. To be deductible, 
expenses of removing any barrier not covered 
by the above standards must meet all three of 
the following tests.
1. The removed barrier must be a substantial 
barrier to access or use of a facility or pub­
lic transportation vehicle by persons who 
have a disability or are elderly.
2. The removed barrier must have been a 
barrier for at least one major group of per­
sons who have a disability or are elderly 
(such as people who are blind, deaf, or 
wheelchair users).
3. The barrier must be removed without cre­
ating any new barrier that significantly im­
pairs access to or use of the facility or ve­
hicle by a major group of persons who 
have a disability or are elderly.
How to make the election.  If you elect to de­
duct your costs for removing barriers to the dis­
abled or the elderly, claim the deduction on 
your income tax return (partnership return for 
partnerships) for the tax year the expenses 
were paid or incurred. Identify the deduction as 
a separate item. The election applies to all the 
qualifying costs you have during the year, up to 
the $15,000 limit. If you make this election, you 
must maintain adequate records to support your 
deduction.
For your election to be valid, you generally 
must file your return by its due date, including 
extensions. However, if you timely filed your re­
turn for the year without making the election, 
you can still make the election by filing an 
amended return within 6 months of the due date 
of the return (excluding extensions). Clearly in­
dicate the election on your amended return and 
write “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100­2.” 
File the amended return at the same address 
you filed the original return. Your election is ir­
revocable after the due date, including exten­
sions, of your return.
Page 25 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize  Page 25

Disabled access credit.  If you make your 
business accessible to persons with disabilities 
and your business is an eligible small business, 
you may be able to claim the disabled access 
credit. If you choose to claim the credit, you 
must reduce the amount you deduct or capital­
ize by the amount of the credit.
For more information, see Form 8826, Disa­
bled Access Credit.
Film and Television 
Production Costs
Film and television production costs are gener­
ally capital expenses. However, you can elect 
to deduct certain costs of qualified film, televi­
sion, and live theatrical productions that begin 
before January 1, 2017 (after December 31, 
2015, and before January 1, 2017, for live the­
atrical productions). The date that a qualified 
theatrical production begins is the date of the 
first performance of the production for a paying 
audience. For more information, see section 
181 of the Internal Revenue Code and the rela­
ted Regulations.
Repair and Maintenance 
Costs
Generally, you can deduct amounts paid for re­
pairs and maintenance to tangible property if 
the amounts paid are not otherwise required to 
be capitalized. However, you may elect to capi­
talize amounts paid for repair and maintenance 
consistent with the treatment on your books and 
records. If you make this election, it applies to 
all amounts paid for repair and maintenance to 
tangible property that you treat as capital ex­
penditures on your books and records for the 
tax year.
How to make the election.  To make the elec­
tion to treat repairs and maintenance as capital 
expenditures, attach a statement titled “Section 
1.263(a)­3(n) Election” to your timely filed return 
(including extensions). For more information on 
what to include in the statement, see Regula­
tions section 1.263(a)­3(n). If you timely filed 
your return without making the election, you can 
still make the election by filing an amended re­
turn within 6 months of the due date of the re­
turn (excluding extensions). Attach the state­
ment to the amended return and write “Filed 
pursuant to section 301.9100­2” on the state­
ment. File the amended return at the same ad­
dress you filed the original return. 
8.
Amortization
Introduction
Amortization is a method of recovering (deduct­
ing) certain capital costs over a fixed period of 
time. It is similar to the straight line method of 
depreciation.
The various amortizable costs covered in 
this chapter are included in the list below. How­
ever, this chapter does not discuss amortization 
of bond premium. For information on that topic, 
see chapter 3 of Publication 550, Investment In­
come and Expenses.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
Deducting amortization
Amortizing costs of starting a business
Amortizing costs of getting a lease
Amortizing costs of section 197 intangibles
Amortizing reforestation costs
Amortizing costs of geological and 
geophysical costs
Amortizing costs of pollution control 
facilities
Amortizing costs of research and 
experimentation
Amortizing costs of certain tax preferences
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
Investment Income and Expenses
How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
Depreciation and Amortization
Alternative Minimum 
Tax—Corporations
Alternative Minimum 
Tax—Individuals
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
How To Deduct 
Amortization
To deduct amortization that begins during the 
current tax year, complete Part VI of Form 4562 
and attach it to your income tax return.
To report amortization from previous years, 
in addition to amortization that begins in the 
  544 
  550 
  946 
  4562 
  4626 
  6251 
current year, list on Form 4562 each item sepa­
rately. For example, in 2014, you began to am­
ortize a lease. In 2015, you began to amortize a 
second lease. Report amortization from the new 
lease on line 42 of your 2015 Form 4562. Re­
port amortization from the 2014 lease on line 43 
of your 2015 Form 4562.
If you do not have any new amortizable ex­
penses for the current year, you are not re­
quired to complete Form 4562 (unless you are 
claiming depreciation). Report the current 
year's deduction for amortization that began in 
a prior year directly on the “Other deduction” or 
“Other expense line” of your return.
Starting a Business
When you start a business, treat all eligible 
costs you incur before you begin operating the 
business as capital expenditures which are part 
of your basis in the business. Generally, you re­
cover costs for particular assets through depre­
ciation deductions. However, you generally 
cannot recover other costs until you sell the 
business or otherwise go out of business. For a 
discussion on how to treat these costs, see If 
your attempt to go into business is unsuccessful 
under Capital Expenses in chapter 1.
For costs paid or incurred after September 
8, 2008, you can deduct a limited amount of 
start­up and organizational costs. The costs 
that are not deducted currently can be amor­
tized ratably over a 180­month period. The am­
ortization period starts with the month you begin 
operating your active trade or business. You are 
not required to attach a statement to make this 
election. You can choose to forgo this election 
by affirmatively electing to capitalize your 
start­up costs on your income tax return filed by 
the due date (including extensions) for the tax 
year in which the active trade or business be­
gins. Once made, the election to either amortize 
or capitalize start­up costs is irrevocable and 
applies to all start­up costs that are related to 
your trade or business. See Regulations sec­
tions 1.195­1, 1.248­1, and 1.709­1.
For costs paid or incurred after October 22, 
2004, and before September 9, 2008, you can 
elect to deduct a limited amount of business 
start­up and organizational costs in the year 
your active trade or business begins. Any costs 
not deducted can be amortized ratably over a 
180­month period, beginning with the month 
you begin business. If the election is made, you 
must attach any statement required by Regula­
tions sections 1.195­1(b), 1.248­1(c), and 
1.709­1(c), as in effect before September 9, 
2008.
Note. You can apply the provisions of Reg­
ulations sections 1.195­1, 1.248­1, and 1.709­1 
to all business start­up and organizational costs 
paid or incurred after October 22, 2004, provi­
ded the period of limitations on assessment has 
not expired for the year of the election. Other­
wise, for business start­up and organizational 
costs paid or incurred after October 22, 2004, 
and before September 9, 2008, the provisions 
under Regulations sections 1.195­1(b), 
1.248­1(c), and 1.709­1(c), as in effect before 
September 9, 2008, will apply.
Page 26 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 26  Chapter 8 Amortization

For costs paid or incurred before October 
23, 2004, you can elect to amortize business 
start­up and organization costs over an amorti­
zation period of 60 months or more. See How 
To Make the Election, later.
The cost must qualify as one of the follow­
ing.
A business start­up cost.
An organizational cost for a corporation.
An organizational cost for a partnership.
Business Start-Up Costs
Start­up costs are amounts paid or incurred for: 
(a) creating an active trade or business; or (b) 
investigating the creation or acquisition of an 
active trade or business. Start­up costs include 
amounts paid or incurred in connection with an 
existing activity engaged in for profit; and for the 
production of income in anticipation of the activ­
ity becoming an active trade or business.
Qualifying costs.  A start­up cost is amortiza­
ble if it meets both of the following tests.
It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or 
incurred it to operate an existing active 
trade or business (in the same field as the 
one you entered into).
It is a cost you pay or incur before the day 
your active trade or business begins.
Start­up costs include amounts paid for the 
following:
An analysis or survey of potential markets, 
products, labor supply, transportation fa­
cilities, etc.
Advertisements for the opening of the busi­
ness.
Salaries and wages for employees who are 
being trained and their instructors.
Travel and other necessary costs for se­
curing prospective distributors, suppliers, 
or customers.
Salaries and fees for executives and con­
sultants, or for similar professional serv­
ices.
Nonqualifying costs. Start­up costs do not in­
clude deductible interest, taxes, or research 
and experimental costs. See Research and Ex-
perimental Costs, later.
Purchasing an active trade or business. 
Amortizable start­up costs for purchasing an ac­
tive trade or business include only investigative 
costs incurred in the course of a general search 
for or preliminary investigation of the business. 
These are costs that help you decide whether 
to purchase a business. Costs you incur in an 
attempt to purchase a specific business are 
capital expenses that you cannot amortize.
Example. On June 1st, you hired an ac­
counting firm and a law firm to assist you in the 
potential purchase of XYZ, Inc. They re­
searched XYZ's industry and analyzed the fi­
nancial projections of XYZ, Inc. In September, 
the law firm prepared and submitted a letter of 
intent to XYZ, Inc. The letter stated that a bind­
ing commitment would result only after a pur­
chase agreement was signed. The law firm and 
accounting firm continued to provide services 
including a review of XYZ's books and records 
and the preparation of a purchase agreement. 
On October 22nd, you signed a purchase 
agreement with XYZ, Inc.
All amounts paid or incurred to investigate 
the business before October 22nd are amortiza­
ble investigative costs. Amounts paid on or after 
that date relate to the attempt to purchase the 
business and therefore must be capitalized.
Disposition of business.  If you completely 
dispose of your business before the end of the 
amortization period, you can deduct any re­
maining deferred start­up costs. However, you 
can deduct these deferred start­up costs only to 
the extent they qualify as a loss from a busi­
ness.
Costs of Organizing
a Corporation
Amounts paid to organize a corporation are the 
direct costs of creating the corporation.
Qualifying costs.  To qualify as an organiza­
tional cost, it must be:
For the creation of the corporation,
Chargeable to a capital account (see chap­
ter 1),
Amortized over the life of the corporation if 
the corporation had a fixed life, and
Incurred before the end of the first tax year 
in which the corporation is in business.
A corporation using the cash method of ac­
counting can amortize organizational costs in­
curred within the first tax year, even if it does 
not pay them in that year.
Examples of organizational costs include:
The cost of temporary directors.
The cost of organizational meetings.
State incorporation fees.
The cost of legal services.
Nonqualifying costs. The following items are 
capital expenses that cannot be amortized:
Costs for issuing and selling stock or se­
curities, such as commissions, professio­
nal fees, and printing costs.
Costs associated with the transfer of as­
sets to the corporation.
Costs of Organizing
a Partnership
The costs to organize a partnership are the di­
rect costs of creating the partnership.
Qualifying costs.  A partnership can amortize 
an organizational cost only if it meets all the fol­
lowing tests.
It is for the creation of the partnership and 
not for starting or operating the partnership 
trade or business.
It is chargeable to a capital account (see 
chapter 1).
It could be amortized over the life of the 
partnership if the partnership had a fixed 
life.
It is incurred by the due date of the partner­
ship return (excluding extensions) for the 
first tax year in which the partnership is in 
business. However, if the partnership uses 
the cash method of accounting and pays 
the cost after the end of its first tax year, 
see Cash method partnership under How 
To Amortize, later.
It is for a type of item normally expected to 
benefit the partnership throughout its entire 
life.
Organizational costs include the following 
fees.
Legal fees for services incident to the or­
ganization of the partnership, such as ne­
gotiation and preparation of the partner­
ship agreement.
Accounting fees for services incident to the 
organization of the partnership.
Filing fees.
Nonqualifying costs.  The following costs 
cannot be amortized.
The cost of acquiring assets for the part­
nership or transferring assets to the part­
nership.
The cost of admitting or removing partners, 
other than at the time the partnership is 
first organized.
The cost of making a contract concerning 
the operation of the partnership trade or 
business including a contract between a 
partner and the partnership.
The costs for issuing and marketing inter­
ests in the partnership such as brokerage, 
registration, and legal fees and printing 
costs. These “syndication fees” are capital 
expenses that cannot be depreciated or 
amortized.
Liquidation of partnership. If a partnership is 
liquidated before the end of the amortization pe­
riod, the unamortized amount of qualifying or­
ganizational costs can be deducted in the part­
nership's final tax year. However, these costs 
can be deducted only to the extent they qualify 
as a loss from a business.
How To Amortize
Deduct start­up and organizational costs in 
equal amounts over the applicable amortization 
period (discussed earlier). You can choose an 
amortization period for start­up costs that is dif­
ferent from the period you choose for organiza­
tional costs, as long as both are not less than 
the applicable amortization period. Once you 
choose an amortization period, you cannot 
change it.
To figure your deduction, divide your total 
start­up or organizational costs by the months in 
the amortization period. The result is the 
amount you can deduct for each month.
Cash method partnership.  A partnership us­
ing the cash method of accounting can deduct 
an organizational cost only if it has been paid by 
the end of the tax year. However, any cost the 
partnership could have deducted as an organi­
zational cost in an earlier tax year (if it had been 
paid that year) can be deducted in the tax year 
of payment.
Page 27 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 8 Amortization  Page 27

How To Make the Election
To elect to amortize start­up or organizational 
costs, you must complete and attach Form 
4562 to your return for the first tax year you are 
in business. You may also be required to attach 
an accompanying statement (described later) to 
your return.
For start­up or organizational costs paid or 
incurred after September 8, 2008, an accompa­
nying statement is not required. Generally, for 
start­up or organizational costs paid or incurred 
before September 9, 2008, and after October 
22, 2004, unless you choose to apply Regula­
tions sections 1.195­1, 1.248­1, and 1.709­1, 
you must also attach an accompanying state­
ment to elect to amortize the costs.
If you have both start­up and organizational 
costs, attach a separate statement (if required) 
to your return for each type of cost. See Starting 
a Business, earlier, for more information.
Generally, you must file the return by the 
due date (including any extensions). However, 
if you timely filed your return for the year without 
making the election, you can still make the elec­
tion by filing an amended return within 6 months 
of the due date of the return (excluding exten­
sions). For more information, see the instruc­
tions for Part VI of Form 4562.
You can choose to forgo the election to am­
ortize by affirmatively electing to capitalize your 
start­up or organizational costs on your income 
tax return filed by the due date (including exten­
sions) for the tax year in which the active trade 
or business begins.
Note. The election to either amortize or 
capitalize start­up or organizational costs is ir­
revocable and applies to all start­up and organi­
zational costs that are related to the trade or 
business.
If your business is organized as a corpora­
tion or partnership, only the corporation or part­
nership can elect to amortize its start­up or or­
ganizational costs. A shareholder or partner 
cannot make this election. You, as a share­
holder or partner, cannot amortize any costs 
you incur in setting up your corporation or part­
nership. Only the corporation or partnership can 
amortize these costs.
However, you, as an individual, can elect to 
amortize costs you incur to investigate an inter­
est in an existing partnership. These costs qual­
ify as business start­up costs if you acquire the 
partnership interest.
Start-up costs election statement.  If you 
elect to amortize your start­up costs, attach a 
separate statement (if required) that contains 
the following information.
A description of the business to which the 
start­up costs relate.
A description of each start­up cost incur­
red.
The month your active business began (or 
was acquired).
The number of months in your amortization 
period (which is generally 180 months).
Filing the statement early.  You can elect 
to amortize your start­up costs by filing the 
statement with a return for any tax year before 
the year your active business begins. If you file 
the statement early, the election becomes ef­
fective in the month of the tax year your active 
business begins.
Revised statement. You can file a revised 
statement to include any start­up costs not in­
cluded in your original statement. However, you 
cannot include on the revised statement any 
cost you previously treated on your return as a 
cost other than a start­up cost. You can file the 
revised statement with a return filed after the re­
turn on which you elected to amortize your 
start­up costs.
Organizational costs election statement.  If 
you elect to amortize your corporation's or part­
nership's organizational costs, attach a sepa­
rate statement (if required) that contains the fol­
lowing information.
A description of each cost.
The amount of each cost.
The date each cost was incurred.
The month your corporation or partnership 
began active business (or acquired the 
business).
The number of months in your amortization 
period (which is generally 180 months).
Partnerships. The statement prepared for 
a cash basis partnership must also indicate the 
amount paid before the end of the year for each 
cost.
You do not need to separately list any part­
nership organizational cost that is less than 
$10. Instead, you can list the total amount of 
these costs with the dates the first and last 
costs were incurred.
After a partnership makes the election to 
amortize organizational costs, it can later file an 
amended return to include additional organiza­
tional costs not included in the partnership's 
original return and statement.
Getting a Lease
If you get a lease for business property, you 
may recover the cost of acquiring the lease by 
amortizing it over the term of the lease. The 
term of the lease for amortization purposes gen­
erally includes all renewal options (and any 
other period for which you and the lessor rea­
sonably expect the lease to be renewed). How­
ever, renewal periods are not included if 75% or 
more of the cost of acquiring the lease is for the 
term of the lease remaining on the acquisition 
date (not including any period for which you 
may choose to renew, extend, or continue the 
lease).
For more information on the costs of getting 
a lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease in
chapter 3.
How to amortize. Enter your deduction in Part 
VI of Form 4562 if you are deducting amortiza­
tion that begins during the current year, or on 
the appropriate line of your tax return if you are 
not otherwise required to file Form 4562.
Section 197 Intangibles
Generally, you may amortize the capitalized 
costs of “section 197 intangibles” (defined later) 
ratably over a 15­year period. You must amor­
tize these costs if you hold the section 197 in­
tangibles in connection with your trade or busi­
ness or in an activity engaged in for the 
production of income.
You may not be able to amortize sec-
tion 197 intangibles acquired in a 
transaction that did not result in a sig-
nificant change in ownership or use. See 
Anti­Churning Rules, later.
Your amortization deduction each year is 
the applicable part of the intangible's adjusted 
basis (for purposes of determining gain), fig­
ured by amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 
months). The 15­year period begins with the 
later of:
The month the intangible is acquired, or
The month the trade or business or activity 
engaged in for the production of income 
begins.
You cannot deduct amortization for the month 
you dispose of the intangible.
If you pay or incur an amount that increases 
the basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi­
ble after the 15­year period begins, amortize it 
over the remainder of the 15­year period begin­
ning with the month the basis increase occurs.
You are not allowed any other depreciation 
or amortization deduction for an amortizable 
section 197 intangible.
Tax-exempt use property subject to a lease. 
The amortization period for any section 197 in­
tangible leased under a lease agreement en­
tered into after March 12, 2004, to a tax­exempt 
organization, governmental unit, or foreign per­
son or entity (other than a partnership), shall not 
be less than 125 percent of the lease term.
Cost attributable to other property.  The 
rules for section 197 intangibles do not apply to 
any amount that is included in determining the 
cost of property that is not a section 197 intangi­
ble. For example, if the cost of computer soft­
ware is not separately stated from the cost of 
hardware or other tangible property and you 
consistently treat it as part of the cost of the 
hardware or other tangible property, these rules 
do not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac­
quiring real property held for the production of 
rental income is considered the cost of good­
will, going concern value, or any other section 
197 intangible.
Section 197 Intangibles 
Defined
The following assets are section 197 intangibles 
and must be amortized over 180 months:
1. Goodwill;
2. Going concern value;
3. Workforce in place;
CAUTION
!
Page 28 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 28  Chapter 8 Amortization

4. Business books and records, operating 
systems, or any other information base, in­
cluding lists or other information concern­
ing current or prospective customers;
5. A patent, copyright, formula, process, de­
sign, pattern, know­how, format, or similar 
item;
6. A customer­based intangible;
7. A supplier­based intangible;
8. Any item similar to items (3) through (7);
9. A license, permit, or other right granted by 
a governmental unit or agency (including 
issuances and renewals);
10. A covenant not to compete entered into in 
connection with the acquisition of an inter­
est in a trade or business;
11. Any franchise, trademark, or trade name; 
and
12. A contract for the use of, or a term interest 
in, any item in this list.
You cannot amortize any of the intan-
gibles listed in items (1) through (8) 
that you created rather than acquired 
unless you created them in acquiring assets 
that make up a trade or business or a substan-
tial part of a trade or business.
Goodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi­
ness based on expected continued customer 
patronage due to its name, reputation, or any 
other factor.
Going concern value.  This is the additional 
value of a trade or business that attaches to 
property because the property is an integral 
part of an ongoing business activity. It includes 
value based on the ability of a business to con­
tinue to function and generate income even 
though there is a change in ownership (but 
does not include any other section 197 intangi­
ble). It also includes value based on the imme­
diate use or availability of an acquired trade or 
business, such as the use of earnings during 
any period in which the business would not oth­
erwise be available or operational.
Workforce in place, etc.  This includes the 
composition of a workforce (for example, its ex­
perience, education, or training). It also includes 
the terms and conditions of employment, 
whether contractual or otherwise, and any other 
value placed on employees or any of their at­
tributes.
For example, you must amortize the part of 
the purchase price of a business that is for the 
existence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, 
you must amortize the cost of acquiring an ex­
isting employment contract or relationship with 
employees or consultants.
Business books and records, etc.  This in­
cludes the intangible value of technical man­
uals, training manuals or programs, data files, 
and accounting or inventory control systems. It 
also includes the cost of customer lists, sub­
scription lists, insurance expirations, patient or 
client files, and lists of newspaper, magazine, 
radio, and television advertisers.
CAUTION
!
Patents, copyrights, etc.  This includes pack­
age design, computer software, and any inter­
est in a film, sound recording, videotape, book, 
or other similar property, except as discussed 
later under Assets That Are Not Section 197 In-
tangibles.
Customer-based intangible. This is the com­
position of market, market share, and any other 
value resulting from the future provision of 
goods or services because of relationships with 
customers in the ordinary course of business. 
For example, you must amortize the part of the 
purchase price of a business that is for the exis­
tence of the following intangibles.
A customer base.
A circulation base.
An undeveloped market or market growth.
Insurance in force.
A mortgage servicing contract.
An investment management contract.
Any other relationship with customers in­
volving the future provision of goods or 
services.
Accounts receivable or other similar rights to 
income for goods or services provided to cus­
tomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi­
ness are not section 197 intangibles.
Supplier-based intangible.  A supplier­based 
intangible is the value resulting from the future 
acquisitions, (through contract or other relation­
ships with suppliers in the ordinary course of 
business) of goods or services that you will sell 
or use. The amount you pay or incur for sup­
plier­based intangibles includes, for example, 
any portion of the purchase price of an acquired 
trade or business that is attributable to the exis­
tence of a favorable relationship with persons 
providing distribution services (such as a favor­
able shelf or display space or a retail outlet), or 
the existence of favorable supply contracts. Do 
not include any amount required to be paid for 
the goods or services to honor the terms of the 
agreement or other relationship. Also, see As-
sets That Are Not Section 197 Intangibles  be­
low.
Government-granted license, permit, etc.
This is any right granted by a governmental unit 
or an agency or instrumentality of a governmen­
tal unit. For example, you must amortize the 
capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuing 
or renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal­
lion or license, or a television or radio broad­
casting license.
Covenant not to compete. Section 197 intan­
gibles include a covenant not to compete (or 
similar arrangement) entered into in connection 
with the acquisition of an interest in a trade or 
business, or a substantial portion of a trade or 
business. An interest in a trade or business in­
cludes an interest in a partnership or a corpora­
tion engaged in a trade or business.
An arrangement that requires the former 
owner to perform services (or to provide prop­
erty or the use of property) is not similar to a 
covenant not to compete to the extent the 
amount paid under the arrangement represents 
reasonable compensation for those services or 
for that property or its use.
Franchise, trademark, or trade name.  A 
franchise, trademark, or trade name is a section 
197 intangible. You must amortize its purchase 
or renewal costs, other than certain contingent 
payments that you can deduct currently. For in­
formation on currently deductible contingent 
payments, see chapter 11.
Professional sports franchise.  A fran­
chise engaged in professional sports and any 
intangible assets acquired in connection with 
acquiring the franchise (including player con­
tracts) is a section 197 intangible amortizable 
over a 15­year period.
Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, 
a section 197 intangible. Section 197 intangi­
bles include any right under a license, contract, 
or other arrangement providing for the use of 
any section 197 intangible. It also includes any 
term interest in any section 197 intangible, 
whether the interest is outright or in trust.
Assets That Are Not
Section 197 Intangibles
The following assets are not section 197 intan­
gibles.
1. Any interest in a corporation, partnership, 
trust, or estate.
2. Any interest under an existing futures con­
tract, foreign currency contract, notional 
principal contract, interest rate swap, or 
similar financial contract.
3. Any interest in land.
4. Most computer software. (See Computer 
software, later.)
5. Any of the following assets not acquired in 
connection with the acquisition of a trade 
or business or a substantial part of a trade 
or business.
a. An interest in a film, sound recording, 
video tape, book, or similar property.
b. A right to receive tangible property or 
services under a contract or from a 
governmental agency.
c. An interest in a patent or copyright.
d. Certain rights that have a fixed dura­
tion or amount. (See Rights of fixed 
duration or amount, later.)
6. An interest under either of the following.
a. An existing lease or sublease of tangi­
ble property.
b. A debt that was in existence when the 
interest was acquired.
7. A right to service residential mortgages 
unless the right is acquired in connection 
with the acquisition of a trade or business 
or a substantial part of a trade or business.
8. Certain transaction costs incurred by par­
ties to a corporate organization or reorgan­
ization in which any part of a gain or loss is 
not recognized.
Page 29 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 8 Amortization  Page 29

Intangible property that is not amortizable 
under the rules for section 197 intangibles can 
be depreciated if it meets certain requirements. 
You generally must use the straight line method 
over its useful life. For certain intangibles, the 
depreciation period is specified in the law and 
regulations. For example, the depreciation pe­
riod for computer software that is not a section 
197 intangible is generally 36 months.
For more information on depreciating intan­
gible property, see Intangible Property  under 
What Method Can You Use To Depreciate Your 
Property? in chapter 1 of Publication 946.
Computer software.  Section 197 intangibles 
do not include the following types of computer 
software.
1. Software that meets all the following re­
quirements.
a. It is, or has been, readily available for 
purchase by the general public.
b. It is subject to a nonexclusive license.
c. It has not been substantially modified. 
This requirement is considered met if 
the cost of all modifications is not 
more than the greater of 25% of the 
price of the publicly available unmodi­
fied software or $2,000.
2. Software that is not acquired in connection 
with the acquisition of a trade or business 
or a substantial part of a trade or business.
Computer software defined.  Computer 
software includes all programs designed to 
cause a computer to perform a desired function. 
It also includes any database or similar item that 
is in the public domain and is incidental to the 
operation of qualifying software.
Rights of fixed duration or amount.  Section 
197 intangibles do not include any right under a 
contract or from a governmental agency if the 
right is acquired in the ordinary course of a 
trade or business (or in an activity engaged in 
for the production of income) but not as part of a 
purchase of a trade or business and either:
Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or
Is of a fixed amount that, except for the 
rules for section 197 intangibles, would be 
recovered under a method similar to the 
unit­of­production method of cost recov­
ery.
However, this does not apply to the following in­
tangibles.
Goodwill.
Going concern value.
A covenant not to compete.
A franchise, trademark, or trade name.
A customer­related information base, cus­
tomer­based intangible, or similar item.
Safe Harbor for Creative 
Property Costs
If you are engaged in the trade or business of 
film production, you may be able to amortize the 
creative property costs for properties not set for 
production within 3 years of the first capitalized 
transaction. You may amortize these costs rata­
bly over a 15­year period beginning on the first 
day of the second half of the tax year in which 
you properly write off the costs for financial ac­
counting purposes. If, during the 15­year pe­
riod, you dispose of the creative property rights, 
you must continue to amortize the costs over 
the remainder of the 15­year period.
Creative property costs include costs paid or 
incurred to acquire and develop screenplays, 
scripts, story outlines, motion picture production 
rights to books and plays, and other similar 
properties for purposes of potential future film 
development, production, and exploitation.
Amortize these costs using the rules of Rev­
enue Procedure 2004­36. For more information, 
see Revenue Procedure 2004­36, 2004­24 
I.R.B. 1063, available at
www.irs.gov/irb/2004-24_IRB/ar16.html.
A change in the treatment of creative 
property costs is a change in method 
of accounting.
Anti-Churning Rules
Anti­churning rules prevent you from amortizing 
most section 197 intangibles if the transaction 
in which you acquired them did not result in a 
significant change in ownership or use. These 
rules apply to goodwill and going concern 
value, and to any other section 197 intangible 
that is not otherwise depreciable or amortizable.
Under the anti­churning rules, you cannot 
use 15­year amortization for the intangible if any 
of the following conditions apply.
1. You or a related person (defined later) 
held or used the intangible at any time 
from July 25, 1991, through August 10, 
1993.
2. You acquired the intangible from a person 
who held it at any time during the period in 
(1) and, as part of the transaction, the user 
did not change.
3. You granted the right to use the intangible 
to a person (or a person related to that 
person) who held or used it at any time 
during the period in (1). This applies only if 
the transaction in which you granted the 
right and the transaction in which you ac­
quired the intangible are part of a series of 
related transactions. See Related person, 
later, for more information.
Exceptions. The anti­churning rules do not ap­
ply in the following situations.
You acquired the intangible from a dece­
dent and its basis was stepped up to its fair 
market value.
The intangible was amortizable as a sec­
tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans­
feror you acquired it from. This exception 
does not apply if the transaction in which 
you acquired the intangible and the trans­
action in which the seller or transferor ac­
quired it are part of a series of related 
transactions.
The gain­recognition exception, discussed 
later, applies.
CAUTION
!
Related person.  For purposes of the 
anti­churning rules, the following are related 
persons.
An individual and his or her brothers, sis­
ters, half­brothers, half­sisters, spouse, an­
cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and 
lineal descendants (children, grandchil­
dren, etc.).
A corporation and an individual who owns, 
directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the 
value of the corporation's outstanding 
stock.
Two corporations that are members of the 
same controlled group as defined in sec­
tion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, 
except that “more than 20%” is substituted 
for “at least 80%” in that definition and the 
determination is made without regard to 
subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) of section 
1563. (For an exception, see section 
1.197­2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.)
A trust fiduciary and a corporation if more 
than 20% of the value of the corporation's 
outstanding stock is owned, directly or in­
directly, by or for the trust or grantor of the 
trust.
The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduciary 
and beneficiary, of any trust.
The fiduciaries of two different trusts, and 
the fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif­
ferent trusts, if the same person is the 
grantor of both trusts.
The executor and beneficiary of an estate.
A tax­exempt educational or charitable or­
ganization and a person who directly or in­
directly controls the organization (or whose 
family members control it).
A corporation and a partnership if the 
same persons own more than 20% of the 
value of the outstanding stock of the cor­
poration and more than 20% of the capital 
or profits interest in the partnership.
Two S corporations, and an S corporation 
and a regular corporation, if the same per­
sons own more than 20% of the value of 
the outstanding stock of each corporation.
Two partnerships if the same persons own, 
directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the 
capital or profits interests in both partner­
ships.
A partnership and a person who owns, di­
rectly or indirectly, more than 20% of the 
capital or profits interests in the partner­
ship.
Two persons who are engaged in trades or 
businesses under common control (as de­
scribed in section 41(f)(1) of the Internal 
Revenue Code).
When to determine relationship. Persons 
are treated as related if the relationship existed 
at the following time.
In the case of a single transaction, immedi­
ately before or immediately after the trans­
action in which the intangible was ac­
quired.
In the case of a series of related transac­
tions (or a series of transactions that com­
prise a qualified stock purchase under sec­
tion 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
Code), immediately before the earliest 
transaction or immediately after the last 
transaction.
Page 30 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 30  Chapter 8 Amortization

Ownership of stock.  In determining 
whether an individual directly or indirectly owns 
any of the outstanding stock of a corporation, 
the following rules apply.
Rule 1.  Stock directly or indirectly owned 
by or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or 
trust is considered owned proportionately by or 
for its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.
Rule 2. An individual is considered to own 
the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for 
his or her family. Family includes only brothers 
and sisters, half­brothers and half­sisters, 
spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.
Rule 3. An individual owning (other than by 
applying Rule 2) any stock in a corporation is 
considered to own the stock directly or indi­
rectly owned by or for his or her partner.
Rule 4. For purposes of applying Rule 1, 2, 
or 3, treat stock constructively owned by a per­
son under Rule 1 as actually owned by that per­
son. Do not treat stock constructively owned by 
an individual under Rule 2 or 3 as owned by the 
individual for reapplying Rule 2 or 3 to make an­
other person the constructive owner of the 
stock.
Gain-recognition exception.  This exception 
to the anti­churning rules applies if the person 
you acquired the intangible from (the transferor) 
meets both of the following requirements.
That person would not be related to you 
(as described under Related person, ear­
lier) if the 20% test for ownership of stock 
and partnership interests were replaced by 
a 50% test.
That person chose to recognize gain on 
the disposition of the intangible and pay in­
come tax on the gain at the highest tax 
rate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for 
information on making this choice.
If this exception applies, the anti­churning 
rules apply only to the amount of your adjusted 
basis in the intangible that is more than the gain 
recognized by the transferor.
Notification. If the person you acquired the 
intangible from chooses to recognize gain un­
der the rules for this exception, that person 
must notify you in writing by the due date of the 
return on which the choice is made.
Anti-abuse rule.  You cannot amortize any 
section 197 intangible acquired in a transaction 
for which the principal purpose was either of the 
following.
To avoid the requirement that the intangi­
ble be acquired after August 10, 1993.
To avoid any of the anti­churning rules.
More information. For more information about 
the anti­churning rules, including additional 
rules for partnerships, see Regulations section 
1.197­2(h).
Incorrect Amount of
Amortization Deducted
If you later discover that you deducted an incor­
rect amount for amortization for a section 197 
intangible in any year, you may be able to make 
a correction for that year by filing an amended 
return. See Amended Return next. If you are not 
allowed to make the correction on an amended 
return, you can change your accounting method 
to claim the correct amortization. See Changing 
Your Accounting Method, later.
Amended Return
If you deducted an incorrect amount for amorti­
zation, you can file an amended return to cor­
rect the following.
A mathematical error made in any year.
A posting error made in any year.
An amortization deduction for a section 
197 intangible for which you have not 
adopted a method of accounting.
When to file.  If an amended return is allowed, 
you must file it by the later of the following 
dates.
3 years from the date you filed your original 
return for the year in which you did not de­
duct the correct amount. (A return filed 
early is considered filed on the due date.)
2 years from the time you paid your tax for 
that year.
Changing Your
Accounting Method
Generally, you must get IRS approval to change 
your method of accounting. File Form 3115, Ap­
plication for Change in Accounting Method, to 
request a change to a permissible method of 
accounting for amortization.
The following are examples of a change in 
method of accounting for amortization.
A change in the amortization method, pe­
riod of recovery, or convention of an amor­
tizable asset.
A change in the accounting for amortizable 
assets from a single asset account to a 
multiple asset account (pooling), or vice 
versa.
A change in the accounting for amortizable 
assets from one type of multiple asset ac­
count to a different type of multiple asset 
account.
Changes in amortization that are not a 
change in method of accounting include the fol­
lowing:
A change in computing amortization in the 
tax year in which your use of the asset 
changes.
An adjustment in the useful life of an amor­
tizable asset.
Generally, the making of a late amortiza­
tion election or the revocation of a timely 
valid amortization election.
Any change in the placed­in­service date 
of an amortizable asset.
See Regulations section 1.446­1(e)(2)(ii)(a) 
for more information and examples.
Automatic approval.  In some instances, you 
may be able to get automatic approval from the 
IRS to change your method of accounting for 
amortization. For a list of automatic accounting 
method changes, see the Instructions for Form 
3115. Also, see the Instructions for Form 3115 
for more information on getting approval, auto­
matic approval procedures, and a list of excep­
tions to the automatic approval process.
For more information, see Revenue Proce­
dure 2015­13, or any successor. See Revenue 
Procedure 2015­13, 2015­5 I.R.B. 419, availa­
ble at www.irs.gov/irb/2015-5_IRB.ar12.html.
Disposition of
Section 197 Intangibles
A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia­
ble property used in your trade or business. If 
you held the intangible for more than 1 year, 
any gain on its disposition, up to the amount of 
allowable amortization, is ordinary income (sec­
tion 1245 gain). If multiple section 197 intangi­
bles are disposed of in a single transaction or a 
series of related transactions, treat all of the 
section 197 intangibles as if they were a single 
asset for purposes of determining the amount of 
gain that is ordinary income. Any remaining 
gain, or any loss, is a section 1231 gain or loss. 
If you held the intangible 1 year or less, any 
gain or loss on its disposition is an ordinary gain 
or loss. For more information on ordinary or 
capital gain or loss on business property, see 
chapter 3 in Publication 544.
Nondeductible loss.  You cannot deduct any 
loss on the disposition or worthlessness of a 
section 197 intangible that you acquired in the 
same transaction (or series of related transac­
tions) as other section 197 intangibles you still 
have. Instead, increase the adjusted basis of 
each remaining amortizable section 197 intangi­
ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductible 
loss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non­
deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi­
ble by the following fraction.
The numerator is the adjusted basis of 
each remaining intangible on the date of 
the disposition.
The denominator is the total adjusted 
bases of all remaining amortizable section 
197 intangibles on the date of the disposi­
tion.
Covenant not to compete.  A covenant not to 
compete, or similar arrangement, is not consid­
ered disposed of or worthless before you dis­
pose of your entire interest in the trade or busi­
ness for which you entered into the covenant.
Nonrecognition transfers.  If you acquire a 
section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans­
fer, you are treated as the transferor with re­
spect to the part of your adjusted basis in the in­
tangible that is not more than the transferor's 
adjusted basis. You amortize this part of the ad­
justed basis over the intangible's remaining am­
ortization period in the hands of the transferor. 
Nonrecognition transfers include transfers to a 
corporation, partnership contributions and dis­
tributions, like­kind exchanges, and involuntary 
conversions.
In a like­kind exchange or involuntary con­
version of a section 197 intangible, you must 
continue to amortize the part of your adjusted 
basis in the acquired intangible that is not more 
than your adjusted basis in the exchanged or 
Page 31 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 8 Amortization  Page 31

converted intangible over the remaining amorti­
zation period of the exchanged or converted in­
tangible. Amortize over a new 15­year period 
the part of your adjusted basis in the acquired 
intangible that is more than your adjusted basis 
in the exchanged or converted intangible.
Example. You own a section 197 intangible 
you have amortized for 4 full years. It has a re­
maining unamortized basis of $30,000. You ex­
change the asset plus $10,000 for a like­kind 
section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro­
visions of like­kind exchanges apply. You amor­
tize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of 
the acquired intangible over the 11 years re­
maining in the original 15­year amortization pe­
riod for the transferred asset. You amortize the 
other $10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 
15­year period. For more information, see Reg­
ulations section 1.197­2(g).
Reforestation Costs
You can elect to deduct a limited amount of re­
forestation costs paid or incurred during the tax 
year. See Reforestation Costs in chapter 7. You 
can elect to amortize the qualifying costs that 
are not deducted currently over an 84­month 
period. There is no limit on the amount of your 
amortization deduction for reforestation costs 
paid or incurred during the tax year.
The election to amortize reforestation costs 
incurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es­
tate must be made by the partnership, corpora­
tion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, or bene­
ficiary cannot make that election.
A partner's or shareholder's share of amor­
tizable costs is figured under the general rules 
for allocating items of income, loss, deduction, 
etc., of a partnership or S corporation. The am­
ortizable costs of an estate are divided between 
the estate and the income beneficiary based on 
the income of the estate allocable to each.
Qualifying costs.  Reforestation costs are the 
direct costs of planting or seeding for foresta­
tion or reforestation. Qualifying costs include 
only those costs you must capitalize and in­
clude in the adjusted basis of the property. 
They include costs for the following items.
Site preparation.
Seeds or seedlings.
Labor.
Tools.
Depreciation on equipment used in plant­
ing and seeding.
Qualifying costs do not include costs for 
which the government reimburses you under a 
cost­sharing program, unless you include the 
reimbursement in your income.
Qualified timber property.  Qualified timber 
property is property that contains trees in signif­
icant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlot 
or other site that you own or lease. The property 
qualifies only if it meets all of the following re­
quirements.
It is located in the United States.
It is held for the growing and cutting of tim­
ber you will either use in, or sell for use in, 
the commercial production of timber prod­
ucts.
It consists of at least one acre planted with 
tree seedlings in the manner normally used 
in forestation or reforestation.
Qualified timber property does not include 
property on which you have planted shelter 
belts or ornamental trees, such as Christmas 
trees.
Amortization period. The 84­month amortiza­
tion period starts on the first day of the first 
month of the second half of the tax year you in­
cur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax­
payer), regardless of the month you actually in­
cur the costs. You can claim amortization 
deductions for no more than 6 months of the 
first and last (eighth) tax years of the period.
Life tenant and remainderman. If one person 
holds the property for life with the remainder go­
ing to another person, the life tenant is entitled 
to the full amortization for qualifying reforesta­
tion costs incurred by the life tenant. Any re­
mainder interest in the property is ignored for 
amortization purposes.
Recapture. If you dispose of qualified timber 
property within 10 years after the tax year you 
incur qualifying reforestation expenses, report 
any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza­
tion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544 
for more information.
How to make the election.  To elect to amor­
tize qualifying reforestation costs, complete Part 
VI of Form 4562 and attach a statement that 
contains the following information.
A description of the costs and the dates 
you incurred them.
A description of the type of timber being 
grown and the purpose for which it is 
grown.
Attach a separate statement for each property 
for which you amortize reforestation costs.
Generally, you must make the election on a 
timely filed return (including extensions) for the 
tax year in which you incurred the costs. How­
ever, if you timely filed your return for the year 
without making the election, you can still make 
the election by filing an amended return within 6 
months of the due date of the return (excluding 
extensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state­
ment to the amended return and write “Filed 
pursuant to section 301.9100­2” on Form 4562. 
File the amended return at the same address 
you filed the original return.
Revoking the election.  You must get IRS ap­
proval to revoke your election to amortize quali­
fying reforestation costs. Your application to re­
voke the election must include your name, 
address, the years for which your election was 
in effect, and your reason for revoking it. Please 
provide your daytime telephone number (op­
tional), in case we need to contact you. You, or 
your duly authorized representative, must sign 
the application and file it at least 90 days before 
the due date (without extensions) for filing your 
income tax return for the first tax year for which 
your election is to end.
Send the application to:
Internal Revenue Service
Associate Chief Counsel
Passthroughs and Special Industries
CC:PSI:6
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR­5300
Washington, DC 20224
Geological and 
Geophysical Costs
You can amortize the cost of geological and ge­
ophysical expenses paid or incurred in connec­
tion with oil and gas exploration or development 
within the United States. These costs can be 
amortized ratably over a 24­month period be­
ginning on the mid­point of the tax year in which 
the expenses were paid or incurred. For major 
integrated oil companies (as defined in section 
167(h)(5)), these costs must be amortized rata­
bly over a 5­year period for costs paid or incur­
red after May 17, 2006 (a 7­year period for 
costs paid or incurred after December 19, 
2007).
If you retire or abandon the property during 
the amortization period, no amortization deduc­
tion is allowed in the year of retirement or aban­
donment.
Pollution Control 
Facilities
You can elect to amortize the cost of a certified 
pollution control facility over 60 months. How­
ever, see Atmospheric pollution control facili-
ties, later, for an exception. The cost of a pollu­
tion control facility that is not eligible for 
amortization can be depreciated under the reg­
ular rules for depreciation. Also, you can claim a 
special depreciation allowance on a certified 
pollution control facility that is qualified property 
even if you elect to amortize its cost. You must 
reduce its cost (amortizable basis) by the 
amount of any special allowance you claim. 
See chapter 3 of Publication 946.
A certified pollution control facility is a new 
identifiable treatment facility used in connection 
with a plant or other property in operation be­
fore 1976, to reduce or control water or atmos­
pheric pollution or contamination. The facility 
must do so by removing, changing, disposing, 
storing, or preventing the creation or emission 
of pollutants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. 
The facility must be certified by state and fed­
eral certifying authorities.
The facility must not significantly increase 
the output or capacity, extend the useful life, or 
reduce the total operating costs of the plant or 
other property. Also, it must not significantly 
change the nature of the manufacturing or pro­
duction process or facility.
The federal certifying authority will not certify 
your property to the extent it appears you will 
recover (over the property's useful life) all or 
part of its cost from the profit based on its 
Page 32 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 32  Chapter 8 Amortization

operation (such as through sales of recovered 
wastes). The federal certifying authority will de­
scribe the nature of the potential cost recovery. 
You must then reduce the amortizable basis of 
the facility by this potential recovery.
New identifiable treatment facility.  A 
new identifiable treatment facility is tangible de­
preciable property that is identifiable as a treat­
ment facility. It does not include a building and 
its structural components unless the building is 
exclusively a treatment facility.
Atmospheric pollution control facilities. 
Certain atmospheric pollution control facilities 
can be amortized over 84 months. To qualify, 
the following must apply.
The facility must be acquired and placed in 
service after April 11, 2005. If acquired, the 
original use must begin with you after April 
11, 2005.
The facility must be used in connection 
with an electric generation plant or other 
property placed in operation after Decem­
ber 31, 1975, that is primarily coal fired.
If you construct, reconstruct, or erect the 
facility, only the basis attributable to the 
construction, reconstruction, or erection 
completed after April 11, 2005, qualifies.
Basis reduction for corporations. A corpora­
tion must reduce the amortizable basis of a pol­
lution control facility by 20% before figuring the 
amortization deduction.
More information.  For more information on 
the amortization of pollution control facilities, 
see Code sections 169 and 291(c) and the rela­
ted regulations.
Research and
Experimental Costs
You can elect to amortize your research and ex­
perimental costs, deduct them as current busi­
ness expenses, or write them off over a 10­year 
period (see Optional write-off method below).
If you elect to amortize these costs, deduct 
them in equal amounts over 60 months or more. 
The amortization period begins the month you 
first receive an economic benefit from the costs.
For a definition of “research and experimen­
tal costs” and information on deducting them as 
current business expenses, see chapter 7.
Optional write-off method.  Rather than am­
ortize these costs or deduct them as a current 
expense, you have the option of deducting 
(writing off) research and experimental costs 
ratably over a 10­year period beginning with the 
tax year in which you incurred the costs. For 
more information, see Optional Write-off of Cer-
tain Tax Preferences, later, and section 59(e) of 
the Internal Revenue Code.
Costs you can amortize.  You can amortize 
costs chargeable to a capital account (see 
chapter 1) if you meet both of the following re­
quirements.
You paid or incurred the costs in your trade 
or business.
You are not deducting the costs currently.
How to make the election.  To elect to amor­
tize research and experimental costs, complete 
Part VI of Form 4562 and attach it to your in­
come tax return. Generally, you must file the re­
turn by the due date (including extensions). 
However, if you timely filed your return for the 
year without making the election, you can still 
make the election by filing an amended return 
within 6 months of the due date of the return 
(excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to 
the amended return and write “Filed pursuant to 
section 301.9100­2” on Form 4562. File the 
amended return at the same address you filed 
the original return.
Your election is binding for the year it is 
made and for all later years unless you obtain 
approval from the IRS to change to a different 
method.
Optional Write-off
of Certain Tax 
Preferences
You can elect to amortize certain tax preference 
items over an optional period beginning in the 
tax year in which you incurred the costs. If you 
make this election, there is no AMT adjustment. 
The applicable costs and the optional recovery 
periods are as follows:
Circulation costs — 3 years,
Intangible drilling and development 
costs — 60 months,
Mining exploration and development 
costs — 10 years, and
Research and experimental costs — 10 
years.
How to make the election.  To elect to amor­
tize qualifying costs over the optional recovery 
period, complete Part VI of Form 4562 and at­
tach a statement containing the following infor­
mation to your return for the tax year in which 
the election begins:
Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi­
cation number; and
The type of cost and the specific amount of 
the cost for which you are making the elec­
tion.
Generally, the election must be made on a 
timely filed return (including extensions) for the 
tax year in which you incurred the costs. How­
ever, if you timely filed your return for the year 
without making the election, you can still make 
the election by filing an amended return within 6 
months of the due date of the return (excluding 
extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the amended 
return and write “Filed pursuant to section 
301.9100­2” on Form 4562. File the amended 
return at the same address you filed the original 
return.
Revoking the election.  You must obtain con­
sent from the IRS to revoke your election. Your 
request to revoke the election must be submit­
ted to the IRS in the form of a letter ruling before 
the end of the tax year in which the optional re­
covery period ends. The request must contain 
all of the information necessary to demonstrate 
the rare and unusual circumstances that would 
justify granting revocation. If the request for rev­
ocation is approved, any unamortized costs are 
deductible in the year the revocation is effec­
tive.
9.
Depletion
Introduction
Depletion is the using up of natural resources 
by mining, drilling, quarrying stone, or cutting 
timber. The depletion deduction allows an 
owner or operator to account for the reduction 
of a product's reserves.
There are two ways of figuring depletion: 
cost depletion and percentage depletion. For 
mineral property, you generally must use the 
method that gives you the larger deduction. For 
standing timber, you must use cost depletion.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
Who can claim depletion
Mineral property
Timber
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
Basis of Assets
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Who Can
Claim Depletion?
If you have an economic interest in mineral 
property or standing timber, you can take a de­
duction for depletion. More than one person 
can have an economic interest in the same min­
eral deposit or timber. In the case of leased 
property, the depletion deduction is divided be­
tween the lessor and the lessee.
You have an economic interest if both the 
following apply.
You have acquired by investment any in­
terest in mineral deposits or standing tim­
ber.
You have a legal right to income from the 
extraction of the mineral or cutting of the 
timber to which you must look for a return 
of your capital investment.
  544
  551
Page 33 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 9 Depletion  Page 33

A contractual relationship that allows you an 
economic or monetary advantage from prod­
ucts of the mineral deposit or standing timber is 
not, in itself, an economic interest. A production 
payment carved out of, or retained on the sale 
of, mineral property is not an economic interest.
Individuals, corporations, estates, and 
trusts who claim depletion deductions 
may be liable for alternative minimum 
tax.
Basis adjustment for depletion.  You must 
reduce the basis of your property by the deple­
tion allowed or allowable, whichever is greater.
Mineral Property
Mineral property includes oil and gas wells, 
mines, and other natural deposits (including ge­
othermal deposits). For this purpose, the term 
“property” means each separate interest you 
own in each mineral deposit in each separate 
tract or parcel of land. You can treat two or 
more separate interests as one property or as 
separate properties. See section 614 of the In­
ternal Revenue Code and the related regula­
tions for rules on how to treat separate mineral 
interests.
There are two ways of figuring depletion on 
mineral property.
Cost depletion.
Percentage depletion.
Generally, you must use the method that gives 
you the larger deduction. However, unless you 
are an independent producer or royalty owner, 
you generally cannot use percentage depletion 
for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells , 
later.
Cost Depletion
To figure cost depletion you must first deter­
mine the following.
The property's basis for depletion.
The total recoverable units of mineral in the 
property's natural deposit.
The number of units of mineral sold during 
the tax year.
Basis for depletion.  To figure the property's 
basis for depletion, subtract all the following 
from the property's adjusted basis.
1. Amounts recoverable through:
a. Depreciation deductions,
b. Deferred expenses (including defer­
red exploration and development 
costs), and
c. Deductions other than depletion.
2. The residual value of land and improve­
ments at the end of operations.
3. The cost or value of land acquired for pur­
poses other than mineral production.
Adjusted basis.  The adjusted basis of 
your property is your original cost or other ba­
sis, plus certain additions and improvements, 
CAUTION
!
and minus certain deductions such as depletion 
allowed or allowable and casualty losses. Your 
adjusted basis can never be less than zero. See 
Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for more infor­
mation on adjusted basis.
Total recoverable units.  The total recovera­
ble units is the sum of the following.
The number of units of mineral remaining 
at the end of the year (including units re­
covered but not sold).
The number of units of mineral sold during 
the tax year (determined under your 
method of accounting, as explained next).
You must estimate or determine recoverable 
units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousands 
of cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod­
ucts using the current industry method and the 
most accurate and reliable information you can 
obtain. You must include ores and minerals that 
are developed, in sight, blocked out, or as­
sured. You must also include probable or pro­
spective ores or minerals that are believed to 
exist based on good evidence. But see Elective 
safe harbor for owners of oil and gas property , 
later.
Number of units sold.  You determine the 
number of units sold during the tax year based 
on your method of accounting. Use the follow­
ing table to make this determination.
IF you 
use ...
THEN the units sold during 
the year are ...
The cash 
method of 
accounting
The units sold for which you 
receive payment during the tax 
year (regardless of the year of 
sale).
An accrual 
method of 
accounting
The units sold based on your 
inventories and method of 
accounting for inventory.
The number of units sold during the tax year 
does not include any for which depletion deduc­
tions were allowed or allowable in earlier years.
Figuring the cost depletion deduction. 
Once you have figured your property's basis for 
depletion, the total recoverable units, and the 
number of units sold during the tax year, you 
can figure your cost depletion deduction by tak­
ing the following steps.
Step Action Result
 1 Divide your property's
basis for depletion by
total recoverable units.
Rate per unit.
 2 Multiply the rate per
unit by units sold
during the tax year.
Cost depletion 
deduction.
You must keep accounts for the depletion of 
each property and adjust these accounts each 
year for units sold and depletion claimed.
Elective safe harbor for owners of oil and 
gas property. Instead of using the method de­
scribed earlier to determine the total recovera­
ble units, you can use an elective safe harbor. If 
you choose the elective safe harbor, the total 
recoverable units equal 105% of a property's 
proven reserves (both developed and undevel­
oped). For details, see Revenue Procedure 
2004­19 on page 563 of Internal Revenue Bul­
letin 2004­10, available at www.irs.gov/irb/
2004-10_IRB/ar15.html.
To make the election, attach a statement to 
your timely filed (including extensions) original 
return for the first tax year for which the safe 
harbor is elected. The statement must indicate 
that you are electing the safe harbor provided 
by Revenue Procedure 2004­19. The election, if 
made, is effective for the tax year in which it is 
made and all later years. It cannot be revoked 
for the tax year in which it is elected, but may be 
revoked in a later year. Once revoked, it cannot 
be re­elected for the next 5 years.
Percentage Depletion
To figure percentage depletion, you multiply a 
certain percentage, specified for each mineral, 
by your gross income from the property during 
the tax year.
The rates to be used and other rules for oil 
and gas wells are discussed later under Inde-
pendent Producers and Royalty Owners  and 
under Natural Gas Wells. Rates and other rules 
for percentage depletion of other specific miner­
als are found later in Mines and Geothermal De-
posits.
Gross income. When figuring percentage de­
pletion, subtract from your gross income from 
the property the following amounts.
Any rents or royalties you paid or incurred 
for the property.
The part of any bonus you paid for a lease 
on the property allocable to the product 
sold (or that otherwise gives rise to gross 
income) for the tax year.
A bonus payment includes amounts you paid as 
a lessee to satisfy a production payment re­
tained by the lessor.
Use the following fraction to figure the part 
of the bonus you must subtract.
No. of units sold in the tax year
Recoverable units from the property × Bonus 
Payments
For oil and gas wells and geothermal depos­
its, more information about the definition of 
gross income from the property is under Oil and 
Gas Wells, later. For other property, more infor­
mation about the definition of gross income 
from the property is under Mines and Geother-
mal Deposits, later.
Taxable income limit.  The percentage deple­
tion deduction generally cannot be more than 
50% (100% for oil and gas property) of your tax­
able income from the property figured without 
the depletion deduction and the domestic pro­
duction activities deduction.
Taxable income from the property means 
gross income from the property minus all allow­
able deductions (except any deduction for de­
pletion or domestic production activities) attrib­
utable to mining processes, including mining 
transportation. These deductible items include, 
but are not limited to, the following.
Operating expenses.
Certain selling expenses.
Administrative and financial overhead.
Page 34 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 34  Chapter 9 Depletion

Depreciation.
Intangible drilling and development costs.
Exploration and development expendi­
tures.
Deductible taxes (see chapter 5), but not 
taxes that you capitalize or take as a credit.
Losses sustained.
The following rules apply when figuring your 
taxable income from the property for purposes 
of the taxable income limit.
Do not deduct any net operating loss de­
duction from the gross income from the 
property.
Corporations do not deduct charitable con­
tributions from the gross income from the 
property.
If, during the year, you dispose of an item 
of section 1245 property that was used in 
connection with mineral property, reduce 
any allowable deduction for mining expen­
ses by the part of any gain you must report 
as ordinary income that is allocable to the 
mineral property. See section 1.613­5(b)
(1) of the regulations for information on 
how to figure the ordinary gain allocable to 
the property.
Oil and Gas Wells
You cannot claim percentage depletion for an 
oil or gas well unless at least one of the follow­
ing applies.
You are either an independent producer or 
a royalty owner.
The well produces natural gas that is either 
sold under a fixed contract or produced 
from geopressured brine.
If you are an independent producer or roy­
alty owner, see Independent Producers and 
Royalty Owners next.
For information on the depletion deduction 
for wells that produce natural gas that is either 
sold under a fixed contract or produced from 
geopressured brine, see Natural Gas Wells , 
later.
Independent Producers and 
Royalty Owners
If you are an independent producer or royalty 
owner, you figure percentage depletion using a 
rate of 15% of the gross income from the prop­
erty based on your average daily production of 
domestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up to 
your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How­
ever, certain refiners, as explained next, and 
certain retailers and transferees of proven oil 
and gas properties, as explained next, cannot 
claim percentage depletion. For information on 
figuring the deduction, see Figuring percentage 
depletion, later.
Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-
pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple­
tion if you or a related person refine crude oil 
and you and the related person refined more 
than 75,000 barrels on any day during the tax 
year based on average (rather than actual) daily 
refinery runs for the tax year. The average daily 
refinery run is computed by dividing total refin­
ery runs for the tax year by the total number of 
days in the tax year.
Related person.  You and another person 
are related persons if either of you holds a sig­
nificant ownership interest in the other person 
or if a third person holds a significant ownership 
interest in both of you.
For example, a corporation, partnership, es­
tate, or trust and anyone who holds a significant 
ownership interest in it are related persons. A 
partnership and a trust are related persons if 
one person holds a significant ownership inter­
est in each of them.
For purposes of the related person rules, 
significant ownership interest means direct or 
indirect ownership of 5% or more in any one of 
the following.
The value of the outstanding stock of a 
corporation.
The interest in the profits or capital of a 
partnership.
The beneficial interests in an estate or 
trust.
Any interest owned by or for a corporation, 
partnership, trust, or estate is considered to be 
owned directly both by itself and proportionately 
by its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.
Retailers who cannot claim percentage de-
pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple­
tion if both the following apply.
1. You sell oil or natural gas or their by­prod­
ucts directly or through a related person in 
any of the following situations.
a. Through a retail outlet operated by 
you or a related person.
b. To any person who is required under 
an agreement with you or a related 
person to use a trademark, trade 
name, or service mark or name 
owned by you or a related person in 
marketing or distributing oil, natural 
gas, or their by­products.
c. To any person given authority under 
an agreement with you or a related 
person to occupy any retail outlet 
owned, leased, or controlled by you or 
a related person.
2. The combined gross receipts from sales 
(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, or 
their by­products by all retail outlets taken 
into account in (1) are more than $5 million 
for the tax year.
For the purpose of determining if this rule 
applies, do not count the following.
Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities) 
of oil or natural gas to commercial or indus­
trial users.
Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart­
ment of Defense.
Sales of oil or natural gas or their by­prod­
ucts outside the United States if none of 
your domestic production or that of a rela­
ted person is exported during the tax year 
or the prior tax year.
Related person.  To determine if you and 
another person are related persons, see Rela-
ted person  under Refiners who cannot claim 
percentage depletion, earlier.
Sales through a related person.  You are 
considered to be selling through a related per­
son if any sale by the related person produces 
gross income from which you may benefit be­
cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter­
est in the person.
You are not considered to be selling 
through a related person who is a retailer if all 
the following apply.
You do not have a significant ownership in­
terest in the retailer.
You sell your production to persons who 
are not related to either you or the retailer.
The retailer does not buy oil or natural gas 
from your customers or persons related to 
your customers.
There are no arrangements for the retailer 
to acquire oil or natural gas you produced 
for resale or made available for purchase 
by the retailer.
Neither you nor the retailer knows of or 
controls the final disposition of the oil or 
natural gas you sold or the original source 
of the petroleum products the retailer ac­
quired for resale.
Transferees who cannot claim percentage 
depletion. You cannot claim percentage de­
pletion if you received your interest in a proven 
oil or gas property by transfer after 1974 and 
before October 12, 1990. For a definition of the 
term “transfer,” see section 1.613A­7(n) of the 
regulations. For a definition of the term “interest 
in proven oil or gas property,” see section 
1.613A­7(p) of the regulations.
Figuring percentage depletion.  Generally, 
as an independent producer or royalty owner, 
you figure your percentage depletion by com­
puting your average daily production of domes­
tic oil or gas and comparing it to your depletable 
oil or gas quantity. If your average daily produc­
tion does not exceed your depletable oil or gas 
quantity, you figure your percentage depletion 
by multiplying the gross income from the oil or 
gas property (defined later) by 15%. If your 
average daily production of domestic oil or gas 
exceeds your depletable oil or gas quantity, you 
must make an allocation as explained later un­
der Average daily production.
In addition, there is a limit on the percentage 
depletion deduction. See Taxable income limit , 
later.
Average daily production.  Figure your aver­
age daily production by dividing your total do­
mestic production of oil or gas for the tax year 
by the number of days in your tax year.
Partial interest. If you have a partial inter­
est in the production from a property, figure 
your share of the production by multiplying total 
production from the property by your percent­
age of interest in the revenues from the prop­
erty.
You have a partial interest in the production 
from a property if you have a net profits interest 
in the property. To figure the share of produc­
tion for your net profits interest, you must first 
Page 35 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 9 Depletion  Page 35

determine your percentage participation (as 
measured by the net profits) in the gross reve­
nue from the property. To figure this percent­
age, you divide the income you receive for your 
net profits interest by the gross revenue from 
the property. Then multiply the total production 
from the property by your percentage participa­
tion to figure your share of the production.
Example. Javier Robles owns oil property 
in which Pablo Olmos owns a 20% net profits 
interest. During the year, the property produced 
10,000 barrels of oil, which Javier sold for 
$200,000. Javier had expenses of $90,000 at­
tributable to the property. The property gener­
ated a net profit of $110,000 ($200,000 − 
$90,000). Pablo received income of $22,000 
($110,000 × .20) for his net profits interest.
Pablo determined his percentage participa­
tion to be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income 
he received) by $200,000 (the gross revenue 
from the property). Pablo determined his share 
of the oil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 
barrels × 11%).
Depletable oil or natural gas quantity.  Gen­
erally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar­
rels. Your depletable natural gas quantity is 
6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number of 
barrels of your depletable oil quantity that you 
choose to apply. If you claim depletion on both 
oil and natural gas, you must reduce your de­
pletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num­
ber of barrels you use to figure your depletable 
natural gas quantity.
Example. You have both oil and natural 
gas production. To figure your depletable natu­
ral gas quantity, you choose to apply 360 bar­
rels of your 1000­barrel depletable oil quantity. 
Your depletable natural gas quantity is 2.16 mil­
lion cubic feet of gas (360 × 6,000). You must 
reduce your depletable oil quantity to 640 bar­
rels (1,000 − 360).
If you have production from marginal wells, 
see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue 
Code to figure your depletable oil or natural gas 
quantity. Also, see Notice 2012­50, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2012–31_IRB/ar09.html.
Business entities and family members. 
You must allocate the depletable oil or gas 
quantity among the following related persons in 
proportion to each entity's or family member's 
production of domestic oil or gas for the year.
Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% or 
more of the beneficial interest is owned by 
the same or related persons (considering 
only persons that own at least 5% of the 
beneficial interest).
You and your spouse and minor children.
A related person is anyone mentioned in the re­
lated persons discussion under Nondeductible 
loss in chapter 2 of Publication 544, except that 
for purposes of this allocation, item (1) in that 
discussion includes only an individual, his or 
her spouse, and minor children.
Controlled group of corporations.  Mem­
bers of the same controlled group of corpora­
tions are treated as one taxpayer when figuring 
the depletable oil or natural gas quantity. They 
share the depletable quantity. A controlled 
group of corporations is defined in section 
1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, except 
that, for this purpose, the stock ownership re­
quirement in that definition is “more than 50%” 
rather than “at least 80%.”
Gross income from the property.  For purpo­
ses of percentage depletion, gross income from 
the property (in the case of oil and gas wells) is 
the amount you receive from the sale of the oil 
or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well. If 
you do not sell the oil or gas on the property, 
but manufacture or convert it into a refined 
product before sale or transport it before sale, 
the gross income from the property is the repre­
sentative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil 
or gas, before conversion or transportation.
If you sold gas after you removed it from the 
premises for a price that is lower than the 
RMFP, determine gross income from the prop­
erty for percentage depletion purposes without 
regard to the RMFP.
Gross income from the property does not in­
clude lease bonuses, advance royalties, or 
other amounts payable without regard to pro­
duction from the property.
Average daily production exceeds depleta-
ble quantities.  If your average daily produc­
tion for the year is more than your depletable oil 
or natural gas quantity, figure your allowance for 
depletion for each domestic oil or natural gas 
property as follows.
1. Figure your average daily production of oil 
or natural gas for the year.
2. Figure your depletable oil or natural gas 
quantity for the year.
3. Figure depletion for all oil or natural gas 
produced from the property using a per­
centage depletion rate of 15%.
4. Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac­
tion, the numerator of which is the result 
figured in (2) and the denominator of 
which is the result figured in (1). This is 
your depletion allowance for that property 
for the year.
Taxable income limit. If you are an independ­
ent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas, 
your deduction for percentage depletion is limi­
ted to the smaller of the following.
100% of your taxable income from the 
property figured without the deduction for 
depletion and the deduction for domestic 
production activities under section 199 of 
the Internal Revenue Code. For a definition 
of taxable income from the property, see 
Taxable income limit, earlier, under Min-
eral Property.
65% of your taxable income from all sour­
ces, figured without the depletion allow­
ance, the deduction for domestic produc­
tion activities, any net operating loss 
carryback, and any capital loss carryback.
You can carry over to the following year any 
amount you cannot deduct because of the 
65%­of­taxable­income limit. Add it to your de­
pletion allowance (before applying any limits) 
for the following year.
Partnerships and S Corporations
Generally, each partner or S corporation share­
holder, and not the partnership or S corpora­
tion, figures the depletion allowance separately. 
(However, see Electing large partnerships must 
figure depletion allowance , later.) Each partner 
or shareholder must decide whether to use cost 
or percentage depletion. If a partner or share­
holder uses percentage depletion, he or she 
must apply the 65%­of­taxable­income limit us­
ing his or her taxable income from all sources.
Partner's or shareholder's adjusted basis. 
The partnership or S corporation must allocate 
to each partner or shareholder his or her share 
of the adjusted basis of each oil or gas property 
held by the partnership or S corporation. The 
partnership or S corporation makes the alloca­
tion as of the date it acquires the oil or gas 
property.
Each partner's share of the adjusted basis of 
the oil or gas property generally is figured ac­
cording to that partner's interest in partnership 
capital. However, in some cases, it is figured 
according to the partner's interest in partnership 
income.
The partnership or S corporation adjusts the 
partner's or shareholder's share of the adjusted 
basis of the oil and gas property for any capital 
expenditures made for the property and for any 
change in partnership or S corporation inter­
ests.
Recordkeeping. Each partner or 
shareholder must separately keep re­
cords of his or her share of the adjus­
ted basis in each oil and gas property of the 
partnership or S corporation. The partner or 
shareholder must reduce his or her adjusted 
basis by the depletion allowed or allowable on 
the property each year. The partner or share­
holder must use that reduced adjusted basis to 
figure cost depletion or his or her gain or loss if 
the partnership or S corporation disposes of the 
property.
Reporting the deduction.  Information that 
you, as a partner or shareholder, use to figure 
your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper­
ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora­
tion on Schedule K­1 (Form 1065) or on Sched­
ule K­1 (Form 1120S). Deduct oil and gas 
depletion for your partnership or S corporation 
interest on Schedule E (Form 1040). The deple­
tion deducted on Schedule E is included in fig­
uring income or loss from rental real estate or 
royalty properties. The instructions for Sched­
ule E explain where to report this income or loss 
and whether you need to file either of the follow­
ing forms.
Form 6198, At­Risk Limitations.
Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita­
tions.
Electing large partnerships must figure de-
pletion allowance.  An electing large partner­
ship, rather than each partner, generally must 
figure the depletion allowance. The partnership 
figures the depletion allowance without taking 
into account the 65%­of­taxable­income limit 
and the depletable oil or natural gas quantity. 
Also, the adjusted basis of a partner's interest in 
RECORDS
Page 36 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 36  Chapter 9 Depletion

the partnership is not affected by the depletion 
allowance.
An electing large partnership is one that 
meets both the following requirements.
The partnership had 100 or more partners 
in the preceding year.
The partnership chooses to be an electing 
large partnership.
Disqualified persons.  An electing large 
partnership does not figure the depletion allow­
ance of its partners that are disqualified per­
sons. Disqualified persons must figure it them­
selves, as explained earlier.
All the following are disqualified persons.
Refiners who cannot claim percentage de­
pletion (discussed under Independent Pro-
ducers and Royalty Owners, earlier).
Retailers who cannot claim percentage de­
pletion (discussed under Independent Pro-
ducers and Royalty Owners, earlier).
Any partner whose average daily produc­
tion of domestic crude oil and natural gas 
is more than 500 barrels during the tax 
year in which the partnership tax year 
ends. Average daily production is dis­
cussed earlier.
Natural Gas Wells
You can use percentage depletion for a well 
that produces natural gas that is either:
Sold under a fixed contract, or
Produced from geopressured brine.
Natural gas sold under a fixed contract. 
Natural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifies 
for a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This is 
domestic natural gas sold by the producer un­
der a contract that does not provide for a price 
increase to reflect any increase in the seller's 
tax liability because of the repeal of percentage 
depletion for gas. The contract must have been 
in effect from February 1, 1975, until the date of 
sale of the gas. Price increases after February 
1, 1975, are presumed to take the increase in 
tax liability into account unless demonstrated 
otherwise by clear and convincing evidence.
Natural gas from geopressured brine. 
Qualified natural gas from geopressured brine 
is eligible for a percentage depletion rate of 
10%. This is natural gas that is both the follow­
ing.
Produced from a well you began to drill af­
ter September 1978 and before 1984.
Determined in accordance with section 
503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978 
to be produced from geopressured brine.
Mines and Geothermal 
Deposits
Certain mines, wells, and other natural depos­
its, including geothermal deposits, qualify for 
percentage depletion.
Mines and other natural deposits. For a nat­
ural deposit, the percentage of your gross in­
come from the property that you can deduct as 
depletion depends on the type of deposit.
The following is a list of the percentage de­
pletion rates for the more common minerals. 
DEPOSITS RATE
Sulphur, uranium, and, if from deposits in 
the United States, asbestos, lead ore, 
zinc ore, nickel ore, and mica ........ 22%
Gold, silver, copper, iron ore, and certain 
oil shale, if from deposits in the United 
States ....................... 15%
Borax, granite, limestone, marble, 
mollusk shells, potash, slate, soapstone, 
and carbon dioxide produced from a 
well .......................... 14%
Coal, lignite, and sodium chloride ..... 10%
Clay and shale used or sold for use in 
making sewer pipe or bricks or used or 
sold for use as sintered or burned 
lightweight aggregates ............ 712%
Clay used or sold for use in making 
drainage and roofing tile, flower pots, 
and kindred products, and gravel, sand, 
and stone (other than stone used or sold 
for use by a mine owner or operator as 
dimension or ornamental stone) ...... 5%
You can find a complete list of minerals and 
their percentage depletion rates in section 
613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Corporate deduction for iron ore and 
coal. The percentage depletion deduction of a 
corporation for iron ore and coal (including lig­
nite) is reduced by 20% of:
The percentage depletion deduction for 
the tax year (figured without this reduc­
tion), minus
The adjusted basis of the property at the 
close of the tax year (figured without the 
depletion deduction for the tax year).
Gross income from the property.  For prop­
erty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil or 
gas well, gross income from the property 
means the gross income from mining. Mining 
includes all the following.
Extracting ores or minerals from the 
ground.
Applying certain treatment processes de­
scribed later.
Transporting ores or minerals (generally, 
not more than 50 miles) from the point of 
extraction to the plants or mills in which the 
treatment processes are applied.
Excise tax.  Gross income from mining in­
cludes the separately stated excise tax re­
ceived by a mine operator from the sale of coal 
to compensate the operator for the excise tax 
the mine operator must pay to finance black 
lung benefits.
Extraction. Extracting ores or minerals 
from the ground includes extraction by mine 
owners or operators of ores or minerals from 
the waste or residue of prior mining. This does 
not apply to extraction from waste or residue of 
prior mining by the purchaser of the waste or 
residue or the purchaser of the rights to extract 
ores or minerals from the waste or residue.
Treatment processes.  The processes in­
cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineral 
mined. To qualify as mining, the treatment 
processes must be applied by the mine owner 
or operator. For a listing of treatment processes 
considered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) of 
the Internal Revenue Code and the related reg­
ulations.
Transportation of more than 50 miles.  If 
the IRS finds that the ore or mineral must be 
transported more than 50 miles to plants or 
mills to be treated because of physical and 
other requirements, the additional authorized 
transportation is considered mining and inclu­
ded in the computation of gross income from 
mining.
If you wish to include transportation of 
more than 50 miles in the computation 
of gross income from mining, request 
an advance ruling from the IRS. Include in the 
request the facts about the physical and other 
requirements that prevented the construction 
and operation of the plant within 50 miles of the 
point of extraction. For more information about 
requesting an advance ruling, see Revenue 
Procedure 2015­1, available at www.irs.gov/irb/
2015-1_IRB/ar07.html.
Disposal of coal or iron ore. You cannot take 
a depletion deduction for coal (including lignite) 
or iron ore mined in the United States if both the 
following apply.
You disposed of it after holding it for more 
than 1 year.
You disposed of it under a contract under 
which you retain an economic interest in 
the coal or iron ore.
Treat any gain on the disposition as a capital 
gain.
Disposal to related person.  This rule 
does not apply if you dispose of the coal or iron 
ore to one of the following persons.
A related person (as listed in chapter 2 of 
Publication 544).
A person owned or controlled by the same 
interests that own or control you.
Geothermal deposits.  Geothermal deposits 
located in the United States or its possessions 
qualify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. 
A geothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir 
of natural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liq­
uid or vapor. For percentage depletion purpo­
ses, a geothermal deposit is not considered a 
gas well.
Figure gross income from the property for a 
geothermal steam well in the same way as for 
oil and gas wells. See Gross income from the 
property, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells . Per­
centage depletion on a geothermal deposit can­
not be more than 50% of your taxable income 
from the property.
Lessor's Gross Income
In the case of leased property, the depletion de­
duction is divided between the lessor and the 
lessee.
A lessor's gross income from the property 
that qualifies for percentage depletion usually is 
the total of the royalties received from the lease.
Page 37 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 9 Depletion  Page 37

Bonuses and advanced royalties.  Bonuses 
and advanced royalties are payments a lessee 
makes before production to a lessor for the 
grant of rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or 
oil to be extracted from leased property. If you 
are the lessor, your income from bonuses and 
advanced royalties received is subject to an al­
lowance for depletion, as explained in the next 
two paragraphs.
Figuring cost depletion.  To figure cost 
depletion on a bonus, multiply your adjusted ba­
sis in the property by a fraction, the numerator 
of which is the bonus and the denominator of 
which is the total bonus and royalties expected 
to be received. To figure cost depletion on ad­
vanced royalties, use the computation ex­
plained earlier under Cost Depletion , treating 
the number of units for which the advanced roy­
alty is received as the number of units sold.
Figuring percentage depletion.  In the 
case of mines, wells, and other natural deposits 
other than gas, oil, or geothermal property, you 
may use the percentage rates discussed earlier 
under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Any bo­
nus or advanced royalty payments are gener­
ally part of the gross income from the property 
to which the rates are applied in making the cal­
culation. However, for oil, gas, or geothermal 
property, gross income does not include lease 
bonuses, advanced royalties, or other amounts 
payable without regard to production from the 
property.
Ending the lease.  If you receive a bonus 
on a lease that ends or is abandoned before 
you derive any income from mineral extraction, 
include in income the depletion deduction you 
took. Do this for the year the lease ends or is 
abandoned. Also increase your adjusted basis 
in the property to restore the depletion deduc­
tion you previously subtracted.
For advanced royalties, include in income 
the depletion claimed on minerals for which the 
advanced royalties were paid if the minerals 
were not produced before the lease ended. In­
clude this amount in income for the year the 
lease ends. Increase your adjusted basis in the 
property by the amount you include in income.
Delay rentals. These are payments for defer­
ring development of the property. Since delay 
rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in­
come that is not subject to depletion. These 
rentals can be avoided by either abandoning 
the lease, beginning development operations, 
or obtaining production.
Timber
You can figure timber depletion only by the cost 
method. Percentage depletion does not apply 
to timber. Base your depletion on your cost or 
other basis in the timber. Your cost does not in­
clude the cost of land or any amounts recovera­
ble through depreciation.
Depletion takes place when you cut stand­
ing timber. You can figure your depletion de­
duction when the quantity of cut timber is first 
accurately measured in the process of exploita­
tion.
Figuring cost depletion.  To figure your cost 
depletion allowance, you multiply the number of 
timber units cut by your depletion unit.
Timber units.  When you acquire timber 
property, you must make an estimate of the 
quantity of marketable timber that exists on the 
property. You measure the timber using board 
feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you later 
determine that you have more or less units of 
timber, you must adjust the original estimate.
The term “timber property” means your eco­
nomic interest in standing timber in each tract or 
block representing a separate timber account.
Depletion unit.  You figure your depletion 
unit each year by taking the following steps.
1. Determine your cost or adjusted basis of 
the timber on hand at the beginning of the 
year. Adjusted basis is defined under Cost 
Depletion in the discussion on Mineral 
Property.
2. Add to the amount determined in (1) the 
cost of any timber units acquired during 
the year and any additions to capital.
3. Figure the number of timber units to take 
into account by adding the number of tim­
ber units acquired during the year to the 
number of timber units on hand in the ac­
count at the beginning of the year and 
then adding (or subtracting) any correction 
to the estimate of the number of timber 
units remaining in the account.
4. Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3). 
This is your depletion unit.
Example. You bought a timber tract for 
$160,000 and the land was worth as much as 
the timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000. 
Based on an estimated one million board feet 
(1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure your 
depletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷ 
1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your de­
pletion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF 
× $80).
When to claim depletion.  Claim your deple­
tion allowance as a deduction in the year of sale 
or other disposition of the products cut from the 
timber, unless you choose to treat the cutting of 
timber as a sale or exchange (explained below). 
Include allowable depletion for timber products 
not sold during the tax year the timber is cut as 
a cost item in the closing inventory of timber 
products for the year. The inventory is your ba­
sis for determining gain or loss in the tax year 
you sell the timber products.
Example. The facts are the same as in the 
previous example except that you sold only half 
of the timber products in the cutting year. You 
would deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletion 
that year. You would add the remaining $20,000 
depletion to your closing inventory of timber 
products.
Electing to treat the cutting of timber as a 
sale or exchange.  You can elect, under cer­
tain circumstances, to treat the cutting of timber 
held for more than 1 year as a sale or ex­
change. You must make the election on your in­
come tax return for the tax year to which it ap­
plies. If you make this election, subtract the 
adjusted basis for depletion from the fair market 
value of the timber on the first day of the tax 
year in which you cut it to figure the gain or loss 
on the cutting. You generally report the gain as 
long­term capital gain. The fair market value 
then becomes your basis for figuring your ordi­
nary gain or loss on the sale or other disposition 
of the products cut from the timber. For more in­
formation, see Timber in chapter 2 of Publica­
tion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of As­
sets.
You may revoke an election to treat the cut­
ting of timber as a sale or exchange without the 
IRS's consent. The prior election (and revoca­
tion) is disregarded for purposes of making a 
subsequent election. See Form T (Timber), For­
est Activities Schedule, for more information.
Form T. Complete and attach Form T (Timber) 
to your income tax return if you claim a deduc­
tion for timber depletion, choose to treat the cut­
ting of timber as a sale or exchange, or make an 
outright sale of timber.
10.
Business
Bad Debts
Introduction
You have a bad debt if you cannot collect 
money owed to you. A bad debt is either a busi­
ness bad debt or a nonbusiness bad debt. This 
chapter discusses only business bad debts.
Generally, a business bad debt is one that 
comes from operating your trade or business. 
You can deduct business bad debts on Sched­
ule C (Form 1040) or your applicable business 
income tax return.
All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad 
debts and are deductible only as short­term 
capital losses. For more information on nonbus­
iness bad debts, see Pub. 550.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
Definition of business bad debt
When a debt becomes worthless
How to claim a business bad debt
Recovery of a bad debt
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for 
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
  525
  536
Page 38 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 38  Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts

Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
Investment Income and Expenses
Examination of Returns, Appeal 
Rights, and Claims for Refund
Form (and Instructions)
Profit or Loss 
From Business
Amended U.S. Individual Income 
Tax Return
Application for Tentative Refund
Corporation Application for 
Tentative Refund
Application for Change in 
Accounting Method
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Definition of Business 
Bad Debt
A business bad debt is a loss from the worth­
lessness of a debt that was either:
Created or acquired in your trade or busi­
ness, or
Closely related to your trade or business 
when it became partly or totally worthless.
A debt is closely related to your trade or 
business if your primary motive for incurring the 
debt is business related. Bad debts of a corpo­
ration (other than an S corporation) are always 
business bad debts.
Credit sales.  Business bad debts are mainly 
the result of credit sales to customers. Goods 
that have been sold, but not yet paid for, and 
services that have been performed, but not yet 
paid for, are recorded in your books as either 
accounts receivable or notes receivable. After a 
reasonable period of time, if you have tried to 
collect the amount due, but are unable to do so, 
the uncollectible part becomes a business bad 
debt.
Accounts or notes receivable valued at fair 
market value (FMV) when received are deducti­
ble only at that value, even though the FMV 
may be less than the face value. If you pur­
chased an account receivable for less than its 
face value, and the receivable subsequently be­
comes worthless, the most you are allowed to 
deduct is the amount you paid to acquire it.
You can claim a business bad debt 
deduction only if the amount owed to 
you was previously included in gross 
income. This applies to amounts owed to you 
from all sources of taxable income, including 
sales, services, rents, and interest.
Accrual method.  If you use the accrual 
method of accounting, you generally report in­
come as you earn it. You can only claim a bad 
debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable if 
you have previously included the uncollectible 
amount in income.
  544
  550
  556
  Schedule C (Form 1040)
  1040X
  1045
  1139
  3115
CAUTION
!
If you qualify, you can use the nonac­
crual­experience method of accounting dis­
cussed later. Under this method, you do not 
have to accrue income that, based on your ex­
perience, you do not expect to collect.
Cash method. If you use the cash method 
of accounting, you generally report income 
when you receive payment. You cannot claim a 
bad debt deduction for amounts owed to you 
because you never included those amounts in 
income. For example, a cash basis architect 
cannot claim a bad debt deduction if a client 
fails to pay the bill because the architect's fee 
was never included in income.
Debts from a former business.  If you sell 
your business but retain its receivables, these 
debts are business debts because they arose 
out of your trade or business. If any of these re­
ceivables subsequently become worthless, the 
loss is still a business bad debt.
Debt acquired from a decedent.  The 
character of a loss from debts of a business ac­
quired from a decedent is determined in the 
same way as debts acquired on the purchase of 
a business. The executor of the decedent's es­
tate treats any loss from the debts as a busi­
ness bad debt if the debts were closely related 
to the decedent's trade or business when they 
became worthless. Otherwise, a loss from 
these debts becomes a nonbusiness bad debt 
for the decedent's estate.
Liquidation. If you liquidate your business 
and some of the accounts receivable that you 
retain become worthless, they are treated as 
business bad debts.
Types of Business Bad 
Debts
Business bad debts may result from the follow­
ing.
Loans to clients and suppliers.  If you loan 
money to a client, supplier, employee, or distrib­
utor for a business reason and you are unable 
to collect the loan after attempting to do so, you 
have a business bad debt.
Debts owed by political parties.  If a political 
party (or other organization that accepts contri­
butions or spends money to influence elections) 
owes you money and the debt becomes worth­
less, you can claim a bad debt deduction only if 
all of the following requirements are met.
1. You use the accrual method of account­
ing.
2. The debt arose from the sale of goods or 
services in the ordinary course of your 
trade or business.
3. More than 30% of your receivables ac­
crued in the year of the sale were from 
sales to political parties.
4. You made substantial and continuing ef­
forts to collect on the debt.
Loan or capital contribution.  You cannot 
claim a bad debt deduction for a loan you made 
to a corporation if, based on the facts and cir­
cumstances, the loan is actually a contribution 
to capital.
Debts of an insolvent partner.  If your busi­
ness partnership breaks up and one of your for­
mer partners becomes insolvent, you may have 
to pay more than your pro rata share of the part­
nership's debts. If you pay any part of the insol­
vent partner's share of the debts, you can claim 
a bad debt deduction for the amount you paid 
that is attributable to the insolvent partner's 
share.
Business loan guarantee.  If you guarantee a 
debt that subsequently becomes worthless, the 
debt can qualify as a business bad debt if all the 
following requirements are met.
You made the guarantee in the course of 
your trade or business.
You have a legal duty to pay the debt.
You made the guarantee before the debt 
became worthless. You meet this require­
ment if you reasonably expected you 
would not have to pay the debt without full 
reimbursement from the borrower.
You received reasonable consideration for 
making the guarantee. You meet this re­
quirement if you made the guarantee in ac­
cord with normal business practice or for a 
good faith business purpose.
Example. Jane Zayne owns the Zayne 
Dress Company. She guaranteed payment of a 
$20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out­
let. Elegant Fashions is one of Zayne's largest 
clients. Elegant Fashions later defaulted on the 
loan. As a result, Ms. Zayne paid the remaining 
balance of the loan in full to the bank.
She can claim a business bad debt deduc­
tion only for the amount she paid, since her 
guarantee was made in the course of her trade 
or business for a good faith business purpose. 
She was motivated by the desire to retain one 
of her better clients and keep a sales outlet.
Deductible in the year paid. If you make a 
payment on a loan you guaranteed, you can de­
duct it in the year paid, unless you have rights 
against the borrower.
Rights against a borrower.  When you 
make payment on a loan you guaranteed, you 
may have the right to take the place of the 
lender. The debt is then owed to you. If you 
have this right, or some other right to demand 
payment from the borrower, you cannot claim a 
bad debt deduction until these rights become 
partly or totally worthless.
Joint debtor.  If two or more debtors jointly 
owe you money, your inability to collect from 
one does not enable you to deduct a propor­
tionate amount as a bad debt.
Sale of mortgaged property.  If mortgaged or 
pledged property is sold for less than the debt, 
the unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is 
a bad debt.
Page 39 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts  Page 39

When a Debt Becomes 
Worthless
A debt becomes worthless when there is no 
longer any chance the amount owed will be 
paid. This may occur when the debt is due or 
prior to that date.
To demonstrate worthlessness, you must 
only show that you have taken reasonable 
steps to collect the debt but were unable to do 
so. It is not necessary to go to court if you can 
show that a judgment from the court would be 
uncollectible. Bankruptcy of your debtor is gen­
erally good evidence of the worthlessness of at 
least a part of an unsecured and unpreferred 
debt.
Property received for debt.  If you receive 
property in partial settlement of a debt, reduce 
the debt by the property's FMV, which becomes 
the property's basis. You can deduct the re­
maining debt as a bad debt if and when it be­
comes worthless.
If you later sell the property for more than its 
basis, any gain on the sale is due to the appre­
ciation of the property. It is not a recovery of a 
bad debt. For information on the sale of an as­
set, see Pub. 544.
How To Claim a 
Business Bad Debt
There are two methods to claim a business bad 
debt.
The specific charge­off method.
The nonaccrual­experience method.
Generally, you must use the specific charge­off 
method. However, you may use the nonac­
crual­experience method if you meet the re­
quirements discussed later under Nonac-
crual-Experience Method.
Specific Charge-Off Method
If you use the specific charge­off method, you 
can deduct specific business bad debts that be­
come either partly or totally worthless during the 
tax year. However, with respect to partly worth­
less bad debts, your deduction is limited to the 
amount you charged off on your books during 
the year.
Partly worthless debts.  You can deduct spe­
cific bad debts that become partly uncollectible 
during the tax year. Your tax deduction is limi­
ted to the amount you charge off on your books 
during the year. You do not have to charge off 
and deduct your partly worthless debts annu­
ally. You can delay the charge off until a later 
year. However, you cannot deduct any part of a 
debt after the year it becomes totally worthless.
Significantly modified debt. An exception 
to the charge­off rule exists for debt which has 
been significantly modified and on which the 
holder recognized gain. For more information, 
see Regulations section 1.166­3(a)(3).
Deduction disallowed. Generally, you can 
claim a partial bad debt deduction only in the 
year you make the charge­off on your books. If, 
under audit, the IRS does not allow your deduc­
tion and the debt becomes partly worthless in a 
later tax year, you can deduct the amount you 
charged off in that year plus the disallowed 
amount charged off in the earlier year. The 
charge­off in the earlier year, unless reversed 
on your books, fulfills the charge­off require­
ment for the later year.
Totally worthless debts.  If a debt becomes 
totally worthless in the current tax year, you can 
deduct the entire amount, less any amount de­
ducted in an earlier tax year when the debt was 
only partly worthless.
You do not have to make an actual 
charge­off on your books to claim a bad debt 
deduction for a totally worthless debt. However, 
you may want to do so. If you do not and the 
IRS later rules the debt is only partly worthless, 
you will not be allowed a deduction for the debt 
in that tax year because a deduction of a partly 
worthless bad debt is limited to the amount ac­
tually charged off. See Partly worthless debts, 
earlier.
Filing a claim for refund.  If you did not de­
duct a bad debt on your original return for the 
year it became worthless, you can file a claim 
for a credit or refund. If the bad debt was totally 
worthless, you must file the claim by the later of 
the following dates.
7 years from the date your original return 
was due (not including extensions).
2 years from the date you paid the tax.
If the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt, 
you must file the claim by the later of the follow­
ing dates.
3 years from the date you filed your original 
return.
2 years from the date you paid the tax.
You may have longer to file the claim if you 
were unable to manage your financial affairs 
due to a physical or mental impairment. Such 
an impairment requires proof of existence.
For details and more information about filing 
a claim, see Pub. 556. Use one of the following 
forms to file a claim. For more information, see 
the instructions for the applicable form.
Table 10­1. Forms Used To File a
Claim
IF you filed as 
a...
THEN file...
Sole proprietor 
or farmer Form 1040X
Corporation Form 1120X
S corporation Form 1120S and check 
box H(4)
Partnership Form 1065X if filing on 
paper or 
Form 1065 and check box 
G(5) if filing electronically
Nonaccrual-Experience 
Method
If you use an accrual method of accounting and 
qualify under the rules explained in this section, 
you can use the nonaccrual­experience method 
for bad debts. Under this method, you do not 
accrue service related income you expect to be 
uncollectible. Because the expected uncollecti­
ble amounts are not included in income, these 
amounts are not later deducted from income.
Generally, you can use the nonaccrual­ex­
perience method for accounts receivable for 
services you performed only if:
The services are provided in the fields of 
accounting, actuarial science, architecture, 
consulting, engineering, health, law, or the 
performing arts; or
You meet the $5 million gross receipts test 
for all prior years.
Service related income.  You can use the 
nonaccrual­experience method only for 
amounts earned by performing services. You 
cannot use this method for amounts owed to 
you from activities such as lending money, sell­
ing goods, or acquiring receivables or other 
rights to receive payment.
Gross receipts test.  To find out if you meet 
the $5 million gross receipts test for all prior 
years, you must figure the average annual 
gross receipts for each prior year. If your aver­
age annual gross receipts for any year exceeds 
$5 million, you cannot use the nonaccrual­expe­
rience method.
The average annual gross receipts for any 
year is the average of gross receipts from the 
year in question and the 2 previous years. For 
example, if you were figuring the average an­
nual gross receipts for 2015, you would aver­
age your gross receipts for 2013, 2014, and 
2015.
Interest or penalty charged.  Generally, you 
cannot use the nonaccrual­experience method 
for amounts due on which you charge interest 
or a late payment penalty. However, do not 
treat a discount offered for early payment as the 
charging of interest or a penalty if both the fol­
lowing apply.
You otherwise accrue the full amount due 
as gross income at the time you provide 
the services.
You treat the discount allowed for early 
payment as an adjustment to gross income 
in the year of payment.
Change in accounting method.  Generally, 
you must obtain consent to change to a nonac­
crual­experience method (other than one of the 
safe harbor methods) or to change from one 
method to another. See Form 3115 and the In­
structions for Form 3115 for more information 
and exceptions.
Recovery of a Bad Debt
If you claim a deduction for a bad debt on your 
income tax return and later recover (collect) all 
or part of it, you may have to include all or part 
of the recovery in gross income. The amount 
Page 40 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 40  Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts

you include is limited to the amount you actually 
deducted. However, you can exclude the 
amount deducted that did not reduce your tax. 
Report the recovery as “Other income” on the 
appropriate business form or schedule.
See Recoveries in Publication 525 for more 
information.
Net operating loss (NOL) carryover.  If a 
bad debt deduction increases an NOL carry­
over that has not expired before the beginning 
of the tax year in which the recovery takes 
place, you treat the deduction as having re­
duced your tax. A bad debt deduction that con­
tributes to an NOL helps lower taxes in the year 
to which you carry the NOL. For more informa­
tion about NOLs, see Pub. 536. Also, see the 
Instructions for Form 1045, and the Instructions 
for Form 1139.
11.
Other Expenses
What's New
Standard mileage rate.  Beginning in 2015, 
the standard mileage rate for the cost of operat­
ing your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for 
business use is 57.5 cents per mile. For more 
information, see Car and truck expenses  under 
Miscellaneous Expenses.
Introduction
This chapter covers business expenses that 
may not have been explained to you, as a busi­
ness owner, in previous chapters of this publi­
cation.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
Travel, meals, and entertainment
Bribes and kickbacks
Charitable contributions
Education expenses
Lobbying expenses
Penalties and fines
Repayments (claim of right)
Other miscellaneous expenses
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe 
Benefits
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car 
Expenses
  15-B
  463
Charitable Contributions
Miscellaneous Deductions
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
How To Depreciate Property
Tax Benefits for Education
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Reimbursement of 
Travel, Meals, and 
Entertainment
The following discussion explains how to han­
dle any reimbursements or allowances you may 
provide to your employees under a reimburse­
ment or allowance arrangement for travel, 
meals, and entertainment expenses. If you are 
self­employed and report your income and ex­
penses on Schedule C or C­EZ (Form 1040), 
see Pub. 463.
To be deductible for tax purposes, expen­
ses incurred for travel, meals, and entertain­
ment must be ordinary and necessary expen­
ses incurred while carrying on your trade or 
business. Generally, you also must show that 
entertainment expenses (including meals) are 
directly related to, or associated with, the con­
duct of your trade or business. For more infor­
mation on travel, meals, and entertainment, in­
cluding deductibility, see Pub. 463.
Reimbursements
A “reimbursement or allowance arrangement” 
provides for payment of advances, reimburse­
ments, and allowances for travel, meals, and 
entertainment expenses incurred by your em­
ployees during the ordinary course of business. 
If the expenses are substantiated, you can de­
duct the allowable amount on your tax return. 
Because of differences between accounting 
methods and tax law, the amount you can de­
duct for tax purposes may not be the same as 
the amount you deduct on your business books 
and records. For example, you can deduct 
100% of the cost of meals on your business 
books and records. However, only 50% of 
these costs are allowed by law as a tax deduc­
tion.
How you deduct a business expense under 
a reimbursement or allowance arrangement de­
pends on whether you have:
An accountable plan, or
A nonaccountable plan.
If you reimburse these expenses under an ac­
countable plan, deduct them as travel, meals, 
or entertainment expenses.
If you reimburse these expenses under a 
nonaccountable plan, report the reimburse­
ments as wages on Form W­2, Wage and Tax 
Statement, and deduct them as wages on the 
appropriate line of your tax return. If you make a 
single payment to your employees and it in­
cludes both wages and an expense 
  526
  529
  544
  946
  970
reimbursement, you must specify the amount of 
the reimbursement and report it accordingly. 
See Table 11­1. Reporting Reimbursements.
Accountable Plans
An accountable plan requires your employees 
to meet all of the following requirements. Each 
employee must:
1. Have paid or incurred deductible expen­
ses while performing services as your em­
ployee,
2. Adequately account to you for these ex­
penses within a reasonable period of time, 
and
3. Return any excess reimbursement or al­
lowance within a reasonable period of 
time.
An arrangement under which you advance 
money to employees is treated as meeting (3) 
above only if the following requirements are 
also met.
The advance is reasonably calculated not 
to exceed the amount of anticipated ex­
penses.
You make the advance within a reasonable 
period of time of your employee paying or 
incurring the expense.
If any expenses reimbursed under this ar­
rangement are not substantiated, or an excess 
reimbursement is not returned within a reasona­
ble period of time by an employee, you cannot 
treat these expenses as reimbursed under an 
accountable plan. Instead, treat the reimbursed 
expenses as paid under a nonaccountable 
plan, discussed later.
Adequate accounting.  Your employees must 
adequately account to you for their travel, 
meals, and entertainment expenses. They must 
give you documentary evidence of their travel, 
mileage, and other employee business expen­
ses. This evidence should include items such 
as receipts, along with either a statement of ex­
penses, an account book, a day­planner, or 
similar record in which the employee entered 
each expense at or near the time the expense 
was incurred.
Excess reimbursement or allowance.  An 
excess reimbursement or allowance is any 
amount you pay to an employee that is more 
than the business­related expenses for which 
the employee adequately accounted. The em­
ployee must return any excess reimbursement 
or other expense allowance to you within a rea­
sonable period of time.
Reasonable period of time. A reasonable pe­
riod of time depends on the facts and circum­
stances. Generally, actions that take place 
within the times specified in the following list will 
be treated as taking place within a reasonable 
period of time.
1. You give an advance within 30 days of the 
time the employee pays or incurs the ex­
pense.
Page 41 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses  Page 41

2. Your employees adequately account for 
their expenses within 60 days after the ex­
penses were paid or incurred.
3. Your employees return any excess reim­
bursement within 120 days after the ex­
penses were paid or incurred.
4. You give a periodic statement (at least 
quarterly) to your employees that asks 
them to either return or adequately ac­
count for outstanding advances and they 
comply within 120 days of the date of the 
statement.
How to deduct. You can claim a deduction for 
travel, meals, and entertainment expenses if 
you reimburse your employees for these expen­
ses under an accountable plan. Generally, the 
amount you can deduct for meals and entertain­
ment is subject to a 50% limit, discussed later. If 
you are a sole proprietor, or are filing as a single 
member limited liability company, deduct the 
travel reimbursement on line 24a and the de­
ductible part of the meals and entertainment re­
imbursement on line 24b, Schedule C (Form 
1040) or line 2, Schedule C­EZ (Form 1040).
If you are filing an income tax return for a 
corporation, include the reimbursement on the 
Other deductions  line of Form 1120, U.S. Cor­
poration Income Tax Return. If you are filing any 
other business income tax return, such as a 
partnership or S corporation return, deduct the 
reimbursement on the appropriate line of the re­
turn as provided in the instructions for that re­
turn.
Per Diem and Car Allowances
You can reimburse your employees under an 
accountable plan based on travel days, miles, 
or some other fixed allowance. In these cases, 
your employee is considered to have accounted 
to you for the amount of the expense that does 
not exceed the rates established by the federal 
government. Your employee must actually sub­
stantiate to you the other elements of the ex­
pense, such as time, place, and business pur­
pose.
Federal rate.  The federal rate can be figured 
using any one of the following methods.
1. For car expenses:
a. The standard mileage rate.
b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
2. For per diem amounts:
a. The regular federal per diem rate.
b. The standard meal allowance.
c. The high­low rate.
Car allowance.  Your employee is considered 
to have accounted to you for car expenses that 
do not exceed the standard mileage rate. Be­
ginning in 2015, the standard business mileage 
rate is 57.5 cents per mile.
You can choose to reimburse your employ­
ees using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) al­
lowance. This is an allowance that includes a 
combination of payments covering fixed and 
variable costs, such as a cents­per­mile rate to 
cover your employees' variable operating costs 
(such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to 
cover your employees' fixed costs (such as de­
preciation, insurance, etc.). For information on 
using a FAVR allowance, see Revenue Proce­
dure 2010­51, available at www.irs.gov/irb/
2010-51_IRB/ar14.html and Notice 2014­79, 
available at www.irs.gov/irb/2014-53_IRB/
ar08.html.
Per diem  allowance. If your employee ac­
tually substantiates to you the other elements 
(discussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursed 
using the per diem  allowance, how you report 
and deduct the allowance depends on whether 
the allowance is for lodging and meal expenses 
or for meal expenses only and whether the al­
lowance is more than the federal rate.
Regular federal per diem rate. The regu­
lar federal per diem rate is the highest amount 
the federal government will pay to its employ­
ees while away from home on travel. It has two 
components:
1. Lodging expense, and
2. Meal and incidental expense (M&IE).
The rates are different for different locations. 
See www.gsa.gov/perdiem for the per diem 
rates in the continental United States.
Standard meal allowance.  The federal 
rate for meal and incidental expenses (M&IE) is 
the standard meal allowance. You can pay only 
an M&IE allowance to employees who travel 
away from home if:
You pay the employee for actual expenses 
for lodging based on receipts submitted to 
you,
You provide for the lodging,
You pay for the actual expense of the lodg­
ing directly to the provider,
You do not have a reasonable belief that 
lodging expenses were incurred by the 
employee, or
The allowance is computed on a basis 
similar to that used in computing the em­
ployee's wages (that is, number of hours 
worked or miles traveled).
Internet access. Per diem rates are availa­
ble on the Internet. You can access per diem 
rates at www.gsa.gov/perdiemrates.
High-low method.  This is a simplified 
method of computing the federal per diem rate 
for travel within the continental United States. It 
eliminates the need to keep a current list of the 
per diem rate for each city.
Under the high­low method, the per diem 
amount for travel during January through Sep­
tember of 2015 is $259 ($65 for M&IE) for cer­
tain high­cost locations. All other areas have a 
per diem  amount of $172 ($52 for M&IE). The 
high­cost localities eligible for the higher per 
diem amount under the high­low method are lis­
ted in Notice 2015­63 available at www.irs.gov/
2015-40_IRB/ar09.html.
Effective October 1, 2015, the per diem rate 
for high­cost locations increased to $275 ($68 
for M&IE). The rate for all other locations in­
creased to $185 ($57 for M&IE). For October, 
November, and December 2015, you can either 
continue to use the rates described in the pre­
ceding paragraph or change to the new rates. 
However, you must use the same rate for all 
employees reimbursed under the high­low 
method.
For more information about the high­low 
method, see Notice 2015­63, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2015-40_IRB/ar09.html. See 
www.gsa.gov/perdiem for the current per diem 
rates for all locations.
Reporting per diem  and car allowances. 
The following discussion explains how to report 
per diem  and car allowances. The manner in 
which you report them depends on how the al­
lowance compares to the federal rate. See Ta­
ble 11­1.
Allowance less than or equal to the fed-
eral rate. If your allowance for the employee is 
less than or equal to the appropriate federal 
rate, that allowance is not included as part of 
the employee's pay in box 1 of the employee's 
Form W­2. Deduct the allowance as travel ex­
penses (including meals that may be subject to 
the 50% limit, discussed later). See How to de-
duct under Accountable Plans, earlier.
Table 11­1. Reporting Reimbursements
IF the type of reimbursement (or other expense 
allowance) arrangement is under THEN the employer reports on Form W-2
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting made and excess returned
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of excess both required 
but excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and excess returned
No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of excess both required 
but excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1. The amount up to 
the federal rate is reported only in box 12—it is not 
reported in box 1.
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made up to the federal rate only and 
excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1. The amount up to 
the federal rate is reported only in box 12—it is not 
reported in box 1.
A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of excess, or both, not 
required by plan
The entire amount as wages in box 1.
No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.
Page 42 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 42  Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Allowance more than the federal rate.  If 
your employee's allowance is more than the ap­
propriate federal rate, you must report the al­
lowance as two separate items.
Include the allowance amount up to the fed­
eral rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee's 
Form W­2. Deduct it as travel expenses (as ex­
plained above). This part of the allowance is 
treated as reimbursed under an accountable 
plan.
Include the amount that is more than the 
federal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if 
they apply) of the employee's Form W­2. De­
duct it as wages subject to income tax withhold­
ing, social security, Medicare, and federal un­
employment taxes. This part of the allowance is 
treated as reimbursed under a nonaccountable 
plan as explained later under Nonaccountable 
Plans.
Meals and Entertainment
Under an accountable plan, you can generally 
deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductible 
business­related meal and entertainment ex­
penses you reimburse your employees. The de­
duction limit applies even if you reimburse them 
for 100% of the expenses.
Application of the 50% limit.  The 50% de­
duction limit applies to reimbursements you 
make to your employees for expenses they in­
cur for meals while traveling away from home 
on business and for entertaining business cus­
tomers at your place of business, a restaurant, 
or another location. It applies to expenses in­
curred at a business convention or reception, 
business meeting, or business luncheon at a 
club. The deduction limit may also apply to 
meals you furnish on your premises to your em­
ployees.
Related expenses. Taxes and tips relating 
to a meal or entertainment activity you reim­
burse to your employee under an accountable 
plan are included in the amount subject to the 
50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex­
penses, such as cover charges for admission to 
a nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinner 
or cocktail party, or the amount you pay for 
parking at a sports arena, are all subject to the 
50% limit. However, the cost of transportation to 
and from an otherwise allowable business meal 
or a business­related entertainment activity is 
not subject to the 50% limit.
Amount subject to 50% limit.  If you provide 
your employees with a per diem allowance only 
for meal and incidental expenses, the amount 
treated as an expense for food and beverages 
is the lesser of the following.
The per diem allowance.
The federal rate for M&IE.
If you provide your employees with a per 
diem allowance that covers lodging, meals, and 
incidental expenses, you must treat an amount 
equal to the federal M&IE rate for the area of 
travel as an expense for food and beverages. If 
the per diem allowance you provide is less than 
the federal per diem rate for the area of travel, 
you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance as 
the amount for food and beverages.
Meal expenses when subject to “hours of 
service” limits.  You can deduct 80% of the 
cost of reimbursed meals your employees con­
sume while away from their tax home on busi­
ness during, or incident to, any period subject to 
the Department of Transportation's “hours of 
service” limits.
See Pub. 463 for a detailed discussion of in­
dividuals subject to the Department of Trans­
portation's “hours of service” limits.
De minimis  (minimal) fringe benefit.  The 
50% limit does not apply to an expense for food 
or beverage that is excluded from the gross in­
come of an employee because it is a de minimis 
fringe benefit. See Pub.15­B for additional infor­
mation on de minimis fringe benefits.
Company cafeteria or executive dining 
room. The cost of food and beverages you 
provide primarily to your employees on your 
business premises is deductible. This includes 
the cost of maintaining the facilities for provid­
ing the food and beverages. These expenses 
are subject to the 50% limit unless they qualify 
as a de minimis  fringe benefit, as just dis­
cussed, or unless they are compensation to 
your employees (explained later).
Employee activities.  The expense of provid­
ing recreational, social, or similar activities (in­
cluding the use of a facility) for your employees 
is deductible and is not subject to the 50% limit. 
The benefit must be primarily for your employ­
ees who are not highly compensated.
For this purpose, a highly compensated em­
ployee is an employee who meets either of the 
following requirements.
1. Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi­
ness during the year or the preceding 
year. An employee is treated as owning 
any interest owned by his or her brother, 
sister, spouse, ancestors, and lineal de­
scendants.
2. Received more than $120,000 in pay for 
the preceding year. You can choose to in­
clude only employees who were also in 
the top 20% of employees when ranked by 
pay for the preceding year.
For example, the expenses for food, bever­
ages, and entertainment for a company­wide 
picnic are not subject to the 50% limit.
Meals or entertainment treated as compen-
sation. The 50% limit does not apply to either 
of the following.
1. Expenses for meals or entertainment that 
you treat as:
a. Compensation to an employee who 
was the recipient of the meals or en­
tertainment, and
b. Wages subject to withholding of fed­
eral income tax.
2. Expenses for meals or entertainment if:
a. A recipient of the meals or entertain­
ment who is not your employee has to 
include the expenses in gross income 
as compensation for services or as a 
prize or award, and
b. You include that amount on a Form 
1099 issued to the recipient, if a Form 
1099 is required.
Sales of meals or entertainment.  You can 
deduct the cost of meals or entertainment (in­
cluding the use of facilities) you sell to the pub­
lic. For example, if you run a nightclub, your ex­
pense for the entertainment you furnish to your 
customers, such as a floor show, is a business 
expense that is fully deductible. The 50% limit 
does not apply to this expense.
Providing meals or entertainment to gen-
eral public to promote goodwill.  You can 
deduct the cost of providing meals, entertain­
ment, or recreational facilities to the general 
public as a means of advertising or promoting 
goodwill in the community. The 50% limit does 
not apply to this expense.
Director, stockholder, or employee meet-
ings. You can deduct entertainment expenses 
directly related to business meetings of your 
employees, partners, stockholders, agents, or 
directors. You can provide some minor social 
activities, but the main purpose of the meeting 
must be your company's business. These ex­
penses are subject to the 50% limit.
Trade association meetings. You can deduct 
expenses directly related to and necessary for 
attending business meetings or conventions of 
certain tax­exempt organizations. These organi­
zations include business leagues, chambers of 
commerce, real estate boards, and trade and 
professional associations.
Nonaccountable Plans
A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement that 
does not meet the requirements for an account­
able plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid, 
under a nonaccountable plan are reported as 
wages on Form W­2. The payments are subject 
to income tax withholding, social security, Medi­
care, and federal unemployment taxes. You can 
deduct the reimbursement as compensation or 
wages only to the extent it meets the deductibil­
ity tests for employees' pay in chapter 2. Deduct 
the allowable amount as compensation or wa­
ges on the appropriate line of your income tax 
return, as provided in its instructions.
Miscellaneous Expenses
In addition to travel, meal, and entertainment 
expenses, there are other expenses you can 
deduct.
Advertising expenses. You generally can de­
duct reasonable advertising expenses that are 
directly related to your business activities. Gen­
erally, you cannot deduct amounts paid to influ­
ence legislation (i.e., lobbying). See Lobbying 
expenses, later.
You can usually deduct as a business ex­
pense the cost of institutional or goodwill adver­
tising to keep your name before the public if it 
relates to business you reasonably expect to 
gain in the future. For example, the cost of ad­
vertising that encourages people to contribute 
Page 43 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses  Page 43

to the Red Cross, to buy U.S. Savings Bonds, 
or to participate in similar causes is usually de­
ductible.
Anticipated liabilities. Anticipated liabilities or 
reserves for anticipated liabilities are not deduc­
tible. For example, assume you sold 1­year TV 
service contracts this year totaling $50,000. 
From experience, you know you will have ex­
penses of about $15,000 in the coming year for 
these contracts. You cannot deduct any of the 
$15,000 this year by charging expenses to a re­
serve or liability account. You can deduct your 
expenses only when you actually pay or accrue 
them, depending on your accounting method.
Bribes and kickbacks.  Engaging in the pay­
ment of bribes or kickbacks is a serious criminal 
matter. Such activity could result in criminal 
prosecution. Any payments that appear to have 
been made, either directly or indirectly, to an of­
ficial or employee of any government or an 
agency or instrumentality of any government 
are not deductible for tax purposes and are in 
violation of the law.
Payments paid directly or indirectly to a per­
son in violation of any federal or state law (but 
only if that state law is generally enforced, de­
fined below) that provides for a criminal penalty 
or for the loss of a license or privilege to engage 
in a trade or business are also not allowed as a 
deduction for tax purposes.
Meaning of “generally enforced.” A state 
law is considered generally enforced unless it is 
never enforced or enforced only for infamous 
persons or persons whose violations are extra­
ordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law is 
generally enforced unless proper reporting of a 
violation of the law results in enforcement only 
under unusual circumstances.
Kickbacks. A kickback is a payment for re­
ferring a client, patient, or customer. The com­
mon kickback situation occurs when money or 
property is given to someone as payment for in­
fluencing a third party to purchase from, use the 
services of, or otherwise deal with the person 
who pays the kickback. In many cases, the per­
son whose business is being sought or enjoyed 
by the person who pays the kickback is not 
aware of the payment.
For example, the Yard Corporation is in the 
business of repairing ships. It returns 10% of 
the repair bills as kickbacks to the captains and 
chief officers of the vessels it repairs. Although 
this practice is considered an ordinary and nec­
essary expense of getting business, it is clearly 
a violation of a state law that is generally en­
forced. These expenditures are not deductible 
for tax purposes, whether or not the owners of 
the shipyard are subsequently prosecuted.
Form 1099-MISC.  It does not matter 
whether any kickbacks paid during the tax year 
are deductible on your income tax return in re­
gards to information reporting. See Form 
1099­MISC for more information.
Car and truck expenses. The costs of operat­
ing a car, truck, or other vehicle in your busi­
ness are deductible. For more information on 
how to figure your deduction, see Pub. 463.
Charitable contributions.  Cash payments to 
an organization, charitable or otherwise, may 
be deductible as business expenses if the pay­
ments are not charitable contributions or gifts 
and are directly related to your business. If the 
payments are charitable contributions or gifts, 
you cannot deduct them as business expenses. 
However, corporations (other than S corpora­
tions) can deduct charitable contributions on 
their income tax returns, subject to limitations. 
See the Instructions for Form 1120 for more in­
formation. Sole proprietors, partners in a part­
nership, or shareholders in an S corporation 
may be able to deduct charitable contributions 
made by their business on Schedule A (Form 
1040).
Example. You paid $15 to a local church 
for a half­page ad in a program for a concert it is 
sponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en­
courage readers to buy your products. Your 
payment is not a charitable contribution. You 
can deduct it as an advertising expense.
Example. You made a $100,000 donation 
to a committee organized by the local Chamber 
of Commerce to bring a convention to your city, 
intended to increase business activity, including 
yours. Your payment is not a charitable contri­
bution. You can deduct it as a business ex­
pense.
See Pub. 526 for a discussion of donated in­
ventory, including capital gain property.
Club dues and membership fees.  Generally, 
you cannot deduct amounts paid or incurred for 
membership in any club organized for business, 
pleasure, recreation, or any other social pur­
pose. This includes country clubs, golf and ath­
letic clubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline 
clubs, and clubs operated to provide meals un­
der circumstances generally considered to be 
conducive to business discussions.
Exception. The following organizations are 
not treated as clubs organized for business, 
pleasure, recreation, or other social purpose 
unless one of the main purposes is to conduct 
entertainment activities for members or their 
guests or to provide members or their guests 
with access to entertainment facilities.
Boards of trade.
Business leagues.
Chambers of commerce.
Civic or public service organizations.
Professional organizations such as bar as­
sociations and medical associations.
Real estate boards.
Trade associations.
Credit card convenience fees.  Credit card 
companies charge a fee to businesses who ac­
cept their cards. This fee when paid or incurred 
by the business can be deducted as a business 
expense.
Damages recovered.  Special rules apply to 
compensation you receive for damages sus­
tained as a result of patent infringement, breach 
of contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola­
tions. You must include this compensation in 
your income. However, you may be able to take 
a special deduction. The deduction applies only 
to amounts recovered for actual economic in­
jury, not any additional amount. The deduction 
is the smaller of the following.
The amount you received or accrued for 
damages in the tax year reduced by the 
amount you paid or incurred in the year to 
recover that amount.
Your losses from the injury you have not 
deducted.
Demolition expenses or losses.  Amounts 
paid or incurred to demolish a structure are not 
deductible. These amounts are added to the 
basis of the land where the demolished struc­
ture was located. Any loss for the remaining un­
depreciated basis of a demolished structure 
would not be recognized until the property is 
disposed of.
Education expenses.  Ordinary and neces­
sary expenses paid for the cost of the education 
and training of your employees are deductible. 
See Education Expenses in chapter 2.
You can also deduct the cost of your own 
education (including certain related travel) rela­
ted to your trade or business. You must be able 
to show the education maintains or improves 
skills required in your trade or business, or that 
it is required by law or regulations, for keeping 
your license to practice, status, or job. For ex­
ample, an attorney can deduct the cost of at­
tending Continuing Legal Education (CLE) 
classes that are required by the state bar asso­
ciation to maintain his or her license to practice 
law.
Education expenses you incur to meet the 
minimum requirements of your present trade or 
business, or those that qualify you for a new 
trade or business, are not deductible. This is 
true even if the education maintains or improves 
skills presently required in your business. For 
more information on education expenses, see 
Pub. 970.
Franchise, trademark, trade name.  If you 
buy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, you 
can deduct the amount you pay or incur as a 
business expense only if your payments are 
part of a series of payments that are:
1. Contingent on productivity, use, or dispo­
sition of the item,
2. Payable at least annually for the entire 
term of the transfer agreement, and
3. Substantially equal in amount (or payable 
under a fixed formula).
When determining the term of the transfer 
agreement, include all renewal options and any 
other period for which you and the transferrer 
reasonably expect the agreement to be re­
newed.
A franchise includes an agreement that 
gives one of the parties to the agreement the 
right to distribute, sell, or provide goods, serv­
ices, or facilities within a specified area.
Impairment-related expenses. If you are dis­
abled, you can deduct expenses necessary for 
you to be able to work (impairment­related ex­
penses) as a business expense, rather than as 
a medical expense.
Page 44 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 44  Chapter 11 Other Expenses

You are disabled if you have either of the fol­
lowing.
A physical or mental disability (for exam­
ple, blindness or deafness) that function­
ally limits your being employed.
A physical or mental impairment that sub­
stantially limits one or more of your major 
life activities.
The expense qualifies as a business ex­
pense if all the following apply.
Your work clearly requires the expense for 
you to satisfactorily perform that work.
The goods or services purchased are 
clearly not needed or used, other than inci­
dentally, in your personal activities.
Their treatment is not specifically provided 
for under other tax law provisions.
Example. You are blind. You must use a 
reader to do your work, both at and away from 
your place of work. The reader's services are 
only for your work. You can deduct your expen­
ses for the reader as a business expense.
Internet-related expenses.  Generally, you 
can deduct internet­related expenses including 
domain registrations fees and webmaster con­
sulting costs. If you are starting a business you 
may have to amortize these expenses as 
start­up costs. For more information about am­
ortizing start­up and organizational costs, see 
chapter 8.
Interview expense allowances.  Reimburse­
ments you make to job candidates for transpor­
tation or other expenses related to interviews 
for possible employment are not wages. You 
can deduct the reimbursements as a business 
expense. However, expenses for food, bever­
ages, and entertainment are subject to the 50% 
limit discussed earlier under Meals and Enter-
tainment.
Legal and professional fees.  Fees charged 
by accountants and attorneys that are ordinary 
and necessary expenses directly related to op­
erating your business are deductible as busi­
ness expenses. However, usually legal fees 
you pay to acquire business assets are not de­
ductible. These costs are added to the basis of 
the property.
Fees that include payments for work of a 
personal nature (such as drafting a will, or dam­
ages arising from a personal injury) are not al­
lowed as a business deduction on Schedule C 
or C­EZ. If the invoice includes both business 
and personal charges, compute the business 
portion as follows: multiply the total amount of 
the bill by a fraction, the numerator of which is 
the amount attributable to business matters, the 
denominator of which is the total amount paid. 
The result is the portion of the invoice attributa­
ble to business expenses. The portion attributa­
ble to personal matters is the difference be­
tween the total amount and the business 
portion (computed above).
Legal fees relating to personal tax advice 
may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
if you itemize deductions. However, the deduc­
tion is subject to the 2% limitation on miscella­
neous itemized deductions. For more informa­
tion, see Pub. 529.
Tax preparation fees.  The cost of hiring a 
tax professional, such as a C.P.A., to prepare 
that part of your tax return relating to your busi­
ness as a sole proprietor is deductible on 
Schedule C or Schedule C­EZ. Any remaining 
cost may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 
1040) if you itemize deductions.
You can also claim a business deduction for 
amounts paid or incurred in resolving asserted 
tax deficiencies for your business operated as a 
sole proprietor.
Licenses and regulatory fees.  Licenses and 
regulatory fees for your trade or business paid 
annually to state or local governments generally 
are deductible. Some licenses and fees may 
have to be amortized. See chapter 8  for more 
information.
Lobbying expenses.  Generally, lobbying ex­
penses are not deductible. Lobbying expenses 
include amounts paid or incurred for any of the 
following activities.
Influencing legislation.
Participating in or intervening in any politi­
cal campaign for, or against, any candidate 
for public office.
Attempting to influence the general public, 
or segments of the public, about elections, 
legislative matters, or referendums.
Communicating directly with covered ex­
ecutive branch officials (defined later) in 
any attempt to influence the official actions 
or positions of those officials.
Researching, preparing, planning, or coor­
dinating any of the preceding activities.
Your expenses for influencing legislation 
and communicating directly with a covered ex­
ecutive branch official include a portion of your 
labor costs and general and administrative 
costs of your business. For information on mak­
ing this allocation, see section 1.162­28 of the 
regulations.
You cannot claim a charitable or business 
expense deduction for amounts paid to an or­
ganization if both of the following apply.
The organization conducts lobbying activi­
ties on matters of direct financial interest to 
your business.
A principal purpose of your contribution is 
to avoid the rules discussed earlier that 
prohibit a business deduction for lobbying 
expenses.
If a tax­exempt organization, other than a 
section 501(c)(3) organization, provides you 
with a notice on the part of dues that is allocable 
to nondeductible lobbying and political expen­
ses, you cannot deduct that part of the dues.
Covered executive branch official.  For 
purposes of this discussion, a covered execu­
tive branch official is any of the following.
1. The President.
2. The Vice President.
3. Any officer or employee of the White 
House Office of the Executive Office of the 
President and the two most senior level of­
ficers of each of the other agencies in the 
Executive Office.
4. Any individual who:
a. Is serving in a position in Level I of the 
Executive Schedule under section 
5312 of title 5, United States Code,
b. Has been designated by the Presi­
dent as having Cabinet­level status, 
or
c. Is an immediate deputy of an individ­
ual listed in item (a) or (b).
Exceptions to denial of deduction.  The 
general denial of the deduction does not apply 
to the following.
Expenses of appearing before, or commu­
nicating with, any committee or member of 
any local council or similar governing body 
concerning its legislation (local legislation) 
if the legislation is of direct interest to you 
or to you and an organization of which you 
are a member. An Indian tribal government 
is treated as a local council or similar gov­
erning body.
Any in­house expenses for influencing leg­
islation and communicating directly with a 
covered executive branch official if those 
expenses for the tax year do not exceed 
$2,000 (excluding overhead expenses).
Expenses incurred by taxpayers engaged 
in the trade or business of lobbying (pro­
fessional lobbyists) on behalf of another 
person (but does apply to payments by the 
other person to the lobbyist for lobbying 
activities).
Moving machinery.  Generally, the cost of 
moving machinery from one city to another is a 
deductible expense. So is the cost of moving 
machinery from one plant to another, or from 
one part of your plant to another. You can de­
duct the cost of installing the machinery in the 
new location. However, you must capitalize the 
costs of installing or moving newly purchased 
machinery.
Outplacement services.  The costs of out­
placement services you provide to your employ­
ees to help them find new employment, such as 
career counseling, résumé assistance, skills as­
sessment, etc. are deductible.
The costs of outplacement services may 
cover more than one deduction category. For 
example, deduct as a utilities expense the cost 
of telephone calls made under this service and 
deduct as rental expense the cost of renting 
machinery and equipment for this service.
For information on whether the value of out­
placement services is includable in your em­
ployees' income, see Pub. 15­B.
Penalties and fines.  Penalties paid for late 
performance or nonperformance of a contract 
are generally deductible. For instance, you own 
and operate a construction company. Under a 
contract, you are to finish construction of a 
building by a certain date. Due to construction 
delays, the building is not completed and ready 
for occupancy on the date stipulated in the con­
tract. You are now required to pay an additional 
amount for each day that completion is delayed 
beyond the completion date stipulated in the 
contract. These additional costs are deductible 
business expenses.
Page 45 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses  Page 45

On the other hand, penalties or fines paid to 
any government agency or instrumentality be­
cause of a violation of any law are not deducti­
ble. These fines or penalties include the follow­
ing amounts.
Paid because of a conviction for a crime or 
after a plea of guilty or no contest in a crim­
inal proceeding.
Paid as a penalty imposed by federal, 
state, or local law in a civil action, including 
certain additions to tax and additional 
amounts and assessable penalties im­
posed by the Internal Revenue Code.
Paid in settlement of actual or possible lia­
bility for a fine or penalty, whether civil or 
criminal.
Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro­
ceeding that could result in a fine or pen­
alty.
Examples of nondeductible penalties and 
fines include the following.
Fines for violating city housing codes.
Fines paid by truckers for violating state 
maximum highway weight laws.
Fines for violating air quality laws.
Civil penalties for violating federal laws re­
garding mining safety standards and dis­
charges into navigable waters.
A fine or penalty does not include any of the 
following.
Legal fees and related expenses to defend 
yourself in a prosecution or civil action for a 
violation of the law imposing the fine or civil 
penalty.
Court costs or stenographic and printing 
charges.
Compensatory damages paid to a govern­
ment.
Political contributions.  Contributions or gifts 
paid to political parties or candidates are not 
deductible. In addition, expenses paid or incur­
red to take part in any political campaign of a 
candidate for public office are not deductible.
Indirect political contributions.  You can­
not deduct indirect political contributions and 
costs of taking part in political activities as busi­
ness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex­
penses include the following.
Advertising in a convention program of a 
political party, or in any other publication if 
any of the proceeds from the publication 
are for, or intended for, the use of a politi­
cal party or candidate.
Admission to a dinner or program (includ­
ing, but not limited to, galas, dances, film 
presentations, parties, and sporting 
events) if any of the proceeds from the 
function are for, or intended for, the use of 
a political party or candidate.
Admission to an inaugural ball, gala, pa­
rade, concert, or similar event if identified 
with a political party or candidate.
Repairs. The cost of repairing or improving 
property used in your trade or business is either 
a deductible or capital expense. Routine main­
tenance that keeps your property in a normal ef­
ficient operating condition, but that does not 
materially increase the value or substantially 
prolong the useful life of the property, is deduc­
tible in the year that it is incurred. Otherwise, 
the cost must be capitalized and depreciated. 
See Form 4562 and its instructions for how to 
compute and claim the depreciation deduction.
The cost of repairs includes the costs of la­
bor, supplies, and certain other items. The 
value of your own labor is not deductible. Exam­
ples of repairs include:
Reconditioning floors (but not replace­
ment),
Repainting the interior and exterior walls of 
a building,
Cleaning and repairing roofs and gutters, 
and
Fixing plumbing leaks (but not replacement 
of fixtures).
Repayments. If you had to repay an amount 
you included in your income in an earlier year, 
you may be able to deduct the amount repaid 
for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if the 
amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you 
may be able to take a credit against your tax for 
the year in which you repaid it.
Type of deduction.  The type of deduction 
you are allowed in the year of repayment de­
pends on the type of income you included in the 
earlier year. For instance, if you repay an 
amount you previously reported as a capital 
gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss on 
Form 8949. If you reported it as self­employ­
ment income, deduct it as a business deduction 
on Schedule C or Schedule C­EZ (Form 1040) 
or Schedule F (Form 1040).
If you reported the amount as wages, unem­
ployment compensation, or other nonbusiness 
ordinary income, enter it on Schedule A (Form 
1040) as a miscellaneous itemized deduction 
that is subject to the 2% limitation. However, if 
the repayment is over $3,000 and Method 1 
(discussed later) applies, deduct it on Sched­
ule A (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction that is not subject to the 2% limita­
tion.
Repayment—$3,000 or less.  If the 
amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it 
from your income in the year you repaid it.
Repayment—over $3,000.  If the amount 
you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de­
duct the repayment, as described earlier. How­
ever, you can instead choose to take a tax 
credit for the year of repayment if you included 
the income under a “claim of right.” This means 
that at the time you included the income, it ap­
peared that you had an unrestricted right to it. If 
you qualify for this choice, figure your tax under 
both methods and use the method that results 
in less tax.
Method 1.  Figure your tax for 2015 claim­
ing a deduction for the repaid amount.
Method 2.  Figure your tax for 2015 claim­
ing a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these 
steps.
1. Figure your tax for 2015 without deducting 
the repaid amount.
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year 
without including in income the amount 
you repaid in 2015.
3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown 
on your return for the earlier year. This is 
the amount of your credit.
4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for 
2015 figured without the deduction (step 
1).
If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct the 
amount repaid as discussed earlier under Type 
of deduction.
If Method 2 results in less tax, claim the 
credit on line 73 of Form 1040, and write “I.R.C. 
1341” next to line 73.
Example. For 2014, you filed a return and 
reported your income on the cash method. In 
2015, you repaid $5,000 included in your 2014 
gross income under a claim of right. Your filing 
status in 2015 and 2014 is single. Your income 
and tax for both years are as follows:
2014 
With Income
2014 
Without 
Income
Taxable
 Income $15,000 $10,000
Tax $ 1,800 $ 1,050
2015 
Without 
Deduction
2015 
With Deduction
Taxable
 Income $49,950 $44,950
Tax $8,288 $7,038
Your tax under Method 1 is $7,038. Your tax un­
der Method 2 is $7,538, figured as follows:
Tax previously determined for 
2014 ...........................
$ 1,800
Less: Tax as refigured ........... − 1,050
Decrease in 2014 tax $750
Regular tax liability for 2015 ....... $8,288
Less: Decrease in 2014 tax ....... − 750
Refigured tax for 2015 $ 7,538
Because you pay less tax under Method 1, you 
should take a deduction for the repayment in 
2015.
Repayment does not apply.  This discus­
sion does not apply to the following.
Deductions for bad debts.
Deductions from sales to customers, such 
as returns and allowances, and similar 
items.
Deductions for legal and other expenses of 
contesting the repayment.
Year of deduction (or credit).  If you use 
the cash method of accounting, you can take 
the deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the tax 
year in which you actually make the repayment. 
If you use any other accounting method, you 
can deduct the repayment or claim a credit for it 
only for the tax year in which it is a proper de­
duction under your accounting method. For ex­
ample, if you use the accrual method, you are 
entitled to the deduction or credit in the tax year 
Page 46 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 46  Chapter 11 Other Expenses

in which the obligation for the repayment ac­
crues.
Subscriptions. Subscriptions to professional, 
technical, and trade journals that deal with your 
business field are deductible.
Supplies and materials. Unless you have de­
ducted the cost in any earlier year, you gener­
ally can deduct the cost of materials and sup­
plies actually consumed and used during the 
tax year.
If you keep incidental materials and supplies 
on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inci­
dental materials and supplies you bought during 
the tax year if all the following requirements are 
met.
You do not keep a record of when they are 
used.
You do not take an inventory of the amount 
on hand at the beginning and end of the 
tax year.
This method does not distort your income.
You can also deduct the cost of books, pro­
fessional instruments, equipment, etc., if you 
normally use them within a year. However, if the 
usefulness of these items extends substantially 
beyond the year they are placed in service, you 
generally must recover their costs through de­
preciation. For more information regarding de­
preciation, see Pub. 946.
Utilities. Business expenses for heat, lights, 
power, telephone service, and water and sew­
erage are deductible. However, any part due to 
personal use is not deductible.
Telephone. You cannot deduct the cost of 
basic local telephone service (including any 
taxes) for the first telephone line you have in 
your home, even if you have an office in your 
home. However, charges for business long­dis­
tance phone calls on that line, as well as the 
cost of a second line into your home used ex­
clusively for business, are deductible business 
expenses.
12.
How To Get Tax 
Help
Do you need help with a tax issue or preparing 
your tax return, or do you need a free publica­
tion or form?
Small Business and Self-Employed (SB/SE) 
Tax Center.  SB/SE serves taxpayers who file 
Form 1040, Schedules C, E, F, or Form 2106, 
as well as small businesses with assets under 
$10 million.
A-Z Index for Business.  Find it fast ! Know 
what you're looking for and want to find it fast? 
Select business topics using our A­Z listing, or 
by business type such as sole proprietor, cor­
poration, etc. We also provide links to major 
business subjects, such as Business Expenses, 
which provides a gateway to all related informa­
tion on that subject.
Small Business Forms and Publications. 
You can download forms and publications 
for small business and self­employed indi­
viduals.
Employer ID Numbers (EINs). Find out 
about EINs or apply for one online.
e-File Form 940, 941, or 944 for Small 
Businesses. Learn your options for e-filing 
Form 940, 941, or 944 for small busi­
nesses.
Starting, Operating, or Closing a Business. 
Important tax information related to the 
various stages of owning a business.
Employment Taxes. Federal income tax, 
Social Security and Medicare taxes, FUTA, 
self­employment tax, and more.
Independent Contractor (Self-Employed) 
or Employee? It is critical that you, the em­
ployer, correctly determine whether the in­
dividuals providing services are employees 
or independent contractors.
Self-Employed Individuals Tax Center. The 
basics on self­employment, filing require­
ments, and reporting responsibilities for in­
dependent contractors.
Information Return Filing Requirements. If 
you made or received a payment as a 
small business or self­employed (individ­
ual), you are most likely required to file an 
information return to the IRS.
IRS Video Portal. Video, webinars, and au­
dio presentations for small businesses, in­
dividuals, and tax pros.
Small Business Events. Workshops and 
webinars on a variety of topics for small 
businesses.
Online Tools  & Educational Products. 
Choose from a variety of products, includ­
ing the Tax Calendar desktop tool, to help 
you learn about business taxes on your 
own time, and at your own pace.
Subscribe to e-News. A free electronic 
mail service keeping you up to date on tax 
topics.
Requirements for filing.  If you made or re­
ceived a payment during the calendar year as a 
small business or self­employed (individual), 
you are most likely required to file an informa­
tion return to the IRS. For more information, see 
Am I required to File a Form 1099 or Other 
Information Return?
Preparing and filing your tax return.  On 
IRS.gov you can find free options to prepare 
and file your return in your local community if 
you qualify.
Go to IRS.gov and click on the Filing tab to 
see your options.
Enter “Free File” in the search box to use 
brand name software to prepare and e-file 
your federal tax return for free.
Enter “VITA” in the search box, download 
the free IRS2Go app, or call toll free 
1­800­906­9887 to find the nearest Volun­
teer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) or Tax 
Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) location 
for free tax preparation.
Enter “TCE” in the search box, download 
the free IRS2Go app, or call toll free 
1­888­227­7669 to find the nearest TCE lo­
cation for free tax preparation.
People who are deaf, hard of hearing, or 
have a speech disability and who have ac­
cess to TTY/TDD equipment can call toll 
free 1­800­829­4059. Deaf or 
hard­of­hearing individuals can also con­
tact the IRS through relay services such as 
the Federal Relay Service, available at 
www.gsa.gov/fedrelay.
The VITA program offers free tax help to 
people who generally make $53,000 or less, 
persons with disabilities, the elderly, and limi­
ted­English­speaking taxpayers who need help 
preparing their own tax returns. The TCE pro­
gram offers free tax help for all taxpayers, par­
ticularly those who are 60 years of age and 
older. TCE volunteers specialize in answering 
questions about pensions and retirement­rela­
ted issues unique to seniors.
How to choose a tax return preparer.  If you 
choose to have someone prepare your tax re­
turn, choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax re­
turn preparer is primarily responsible for the 
overall substantive accuracy of your tax return 
and, by law, is required to sign the return and 
include their preparer tax identification number 
(PTIN) on it. Although the tax return preparer 
signs the return, you are ultimately responsible 
for the accuracy of every item reported on your 
return. Anyone paid to prepare tax returns for 
others should have a thorough understanding of 
tax matters and is required to have a PTIN. You 
may want to ask friends, co­workers, or your 
employer for help in selecting a competent tax 
return preparer.
For your convenience, the IRS provides an 
online database for all Authorized IRS e­file 
Providers that choose to be included in the da­
tabase. You can locate the closest Authorized 
IRS e­file Providers in your area where you can 
electronically file your tax return. For more infor­
mation on finding a tax return preparer who pro­
vides IRS e­file, see Authorized IRS e-file 
Providers for Individuals  on IRS.gov, or go to 
www.irs.gov/uac/Authorized-IRS-e-file-
Providers-for-Individuals. The inclusion in this 
database does not constitute any endorsement 
by the IRS of the e­file Providers listed in this 
database or any of the products or services that 
they provide. You should always be sure to con­
duct your own due diligence when selecting an 
e­file Provider. In addition to the Authorized IRS 
e­file Provider locator tool above, you can also 
find professional help through the IRS Tax 
Professional Partner  page at www.irs.gov/Tax-
Professionals/IRSTaxProAssociationPartners.
Choose a tax return preparer you will be 
able to contact in case the IRS examines your 
return and has questions regarding how your 
return was prepared. You can designate your 
paid tax return preparer or another third party to 
speak to the IRS concerning the preparation of 
your return, payment/refund issues, and mathe­
matical errors. The third party authorization 
checkbox on Form 1040, Form 1040A, and 
Form 1040EZ gives the designated party the 
authority to receive and inspect returns and re­
turn information for one year from the original 
due date of your return (without regard to 
Page 47 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help  Page 47

extensions). You can extend the authority to re­
ceive and inspect returns and return information 
to a third party using Form 8821, Tax 
Information Authorization.
The following points will assist you when se­
lecting a tax return preparer.
Check the preparer’s qualifications. All 
paid tax return preparers are required to 
have a PTIN.
Check the preparer’s history. You can 
check with the Better Business Bureau to 
find out if a preparer has a questionable 
history. Check for disciplinary actions and 
the license status for credentialed prepar­
ers. For Certified Public Accountants 
(CPAs), check with the State Board of Ac­
countancy. For attorneys, check with the 
State Bar Association. For Enrolled 
Agents, go to IRS.gov and search for “ver­
ify enrolled agent status.”
Ask about service fees. Avoid preparers 
who base their fee on a percentage of your 
refund or those who say they can get 
larger refunds than others can. Always 
make sure any refund due is sent directly 
to you or deposited into your bank ac­
count. You should not have your refund 
deposited into a preparer’s bank account.
Ask to e-file your return. Make sure your 
preparer offers IRS e-file. Any paid pre­
parer who prepares and files more than 10 
returns generally must e-file their clients’ 
returns. The IRS has safely processed 
more than 1.3 billion e-filed tax returns.
Make sure the preparer is available. 
You need to ensure that you can contact 
the tax preparer after you file your return. 
That’s true even after the April 15 due 
date. You may need to contact the pre­
parer if questions come up about your tax 
return at a later time.
Provide tax records. A good preparer will 
ask to see your records and receipts. They 
ask you questions to report your total in­
come and the tax benefits you’re entitled to 
claim. These may include tax deductions, 
tax credits, and other items. Do not use a 
preparer who is willing to e-file your return 
using your last pay stub instead of your 
Form W-2 . This is against IRS e-file rules.
Never sign a blank tax return. Do not 
use a tax preparer who asks you to sign a 
blank tax form.
Review your return before signing. Be­
fore you sign your tax return, review it thor­
oughly. Ask questions if something is not 
clear to you. Make sure you’re comfortable 
with the information on the return before 
you sign it.
Preparer must sign and include their 
PTIN. Paid preparers must sign returns 
and include their PTIN as required by law. 
The preparer must also give you a copy of 
the return.
Report abusive tax preparers to the 
IRS. You can report abusive tax preparers 
and suspected tax fraud to the IRS. Use 
Form 14157, Complaint: Tax Return 
Preparer. If you suspect a return preparer 
filed or changed the return without your 
consent, you should also file Form 14157-
A, Return Preparer Fraud or Misconduct 
Affidavit. You can download and print 
these forms from IRS.gov. If you need a 
paper form mailed to you, go to 
www.irs.gov/orderforms to order online. 
You can also call toll free 
1­800­TAX­FORM (1­800­829–3676) or 
1­800­829­4059 for TTY/TDD to place an 
order. For more information, go to How Do 
You Report Suspected Tax Fraud Activity? 
on IRS.gov.
Getting answers to your tax law questions.
IRS.gov and IRS2Go are ready when you 
are—24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Enter “ITA” in the search box on IRS.gov 
for the Interactive Tax Assistant, a tool that 
will ask you questions on a number of tax 
law topics and provide answers. You can 
print the entire interview and the final re­
sponse.
Enter “Tax Map” or “Tax Trails” in the 
search box for detailed information by tax 
topic.
Enter “Pub 17” in the search box to get 
Pub. 17, Your Federal Income Tax for Indi­
viduals, which features details on tax­sav­
ing opportunities, 2015 tax changes, and 
thousands of interactive links to help you 
find answers to your questions.
Access tax law information in your elec­
tronic filing software.
Go to IRS.gov and click on the Help & Re­
sources tab for more information.
Getting tax forms and publications. You can 
download or print all of the forms and publica­
tions you may need from www.irs.gov/
formspubs. Otherwise, you can:
Go to www.irs.gov/orderforms to place an 
order and have forms mailed to you; or
Call 1­800­TAX­FORM (1­800­829­3676) 
or 1­800­829­4059 toll free for TTY/TDD to 
order current­year forms, instructions, pub­
lications, and prior­year forms and instruc­
tions (limited to 5 years).
You should receive your order within 10 busi­
ness days.
Getting a transcript or copy of a return. You 
can get a transcript by mail to view your tax ac­
count transactions or line­by­line tax return in­
formation for a specific tax year. The method 
you used to file your return and whether you 
have a refund or balance due, affects your cur­
rent year transcript availability. Generally, these 
transcript types are available for the current tax 
year and three prior years. IRS transcripts are 
best and most often used to validate past in­
come and tax filing status for mortgage, stu­
dent, and small business loan applications, and 
to help with tax preparation. If you need an ac­
count transcript for an older tax year, a wage 
and income transcript or a verification of non­fil­
ing letter, you’ll need to complete Form 4506-T, 
Request for Transcript of Tax Return , and send 
it to us as instructed on the form. If you made 
estimated tax payments and/or applied your 
overpayment from a prior year tax return to your 
current year tax return, you can request a tax 
account transcript to confirm these payments or 
credits a few weeks after the beginning of the 
calendar year prior to filing your current year re­
turn. For the list of the various types of tran­
scripts available for you to order, see Transcript 
Types and Ways to Order Them  at 
www.irs.gov/Individuals/Tax-Return-Transcript-
Types-and-Ways-to-Order-Them. To order your 
transcript, you can use one of the following con­
venient options.
Go to IRS.gov and click on “Get Transcript 
of Your Tax Records” under “Tools.”
Request a return or account transcript us­
ing Get Transcript at www.irs.gov/
Individuals/Get-Transcript
Download the free IRS2Go app to your 
smart phone and use it to order transcripts 
of your tax returns or tax account.
Call the automated transcript toll­free line 
at 1­800­908­9946 to receive your tran­
script by mail.
Go to Get Transcript, at www.irs.gov/
Individuals/Get-Transcript, and click on 
“Get Transcript by Mail.” You will need 
your Social Security number (SSN) or your 
Individual Tax Identification Number (ITIN), 
date of birth, and address from your latest 
tax return. Transcripts arrive in 5 to 10 cal­
endar days at the address we have on file 
for you.
Mail Form 4506-T, Request for Transcript 
of Tax Return, or Form 4506T-EZ, Short 
Form Request for Individual Tax Return 
Transcript (both available on IRS.gov).
The IRS never sends email requesting that 
you obtain or access your transcripts. If you re­
ceive such an email, please forward it to our 
fraud group at phishing@irs.gov.
A transcript isn’t a photocopy of your return. 
If you need a copy of your original return, com­
plete and mail Form 4506, Request for Copy of 
Tax Return , available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-
pdf/f4506.pdf, along with the applicable fee.
Using online tools to help prepare your re-
turn. Go to IRS.gov and click on the Tools bar 
to use these and other self­service options.
The Earned Income Tax Credit Assistant
determines if you are eligible for the 
Earned Income Credit (EIC).
The First Time Homebuyer Credit Account 
Look-up tool provides information on your 
repayments and account balance.
The Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) 
Assistant determines whether you may be 
subject to AMT.
The Online EIN Application helps you get 
an Employer Identification Number.
The IRS Withholding Calculator estimates 
the amount you should have withheld from 
your paycheck for federal income tax pur­
poses.
The Electronic Filing PIN Request helps to 
verify your identity when you do not have 
your prior­year adjusted gross income 
(AGI) or prior­year self­selected personal 
identification number (PIN) available.
Where to file your tax return.
There are many ways to file your return 
electronically. It’s safe, quick, and easy. 
See Preparing and filing your tax return, 
earlier, for more information.
See your tax return instructions to deter­
mine where to mail your completed paper 
tax return.
Page 48 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 48  Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

Understanding identity (ID) theft issues.
Go to www.irs.gov/uac/Identity-Protection 
for information and videos.
If your social security number (SSN) has 
been lost or stolen or you suspect you are 
a victim of tax­related ID theft, visit 
www.irs.gov/identitytheft to learn what 
steps you should take.
To report ID theft, access the IRS ID Theft 
Tool Kit at IRS.gov/uac/Taxpayer-Guide-
to-Identity-Theft. This page also provides a 
list of helpful toll­free telephone numbers 
and links to other resources for reporting 
ID or data theft.
The IRS stops and flags suspicious or du­
plicate federal tax returns that falsely rep­
resent your identity, such as your name or 
social security number. If the IRS suspects 
tax ID theft, the agency will send a 5071C
letter to your home address. If you receive 
this letter, verify your identity at 
idverify.irs.gov or call the toll­free number 
listed in the letter.
If you are a victim of state tax ID theft, con­
tact your state's taxation department or 
comptroller's office about the next steps 
you need to take.
You should protect the information that you 
keep, and properly dispose of what you no 
longer need. And, of course, you should 
create a plan to respond to security inci­
dents. As part of its longstanding efforts to 
promote good data security practices, the 
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has un­
dertaken extensive efforts to educate busi­
nesses and has brought more than 50 law 
enforcement actions related to data secur­
ity issues. For more information, see Pro­
tecting Personal Information: A Guide for 
Business, available at www.ftc.gov/tips-
advice/business-center/guidance/
protecting-personal-information-guide-
business, for practical tips on creating and 
implementing a plan for safeguarding per­
sonal information used in your business. 
Most recently, the FTC released Start with 
Security: A Guide for Business, available 
at www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/business-
center/guidance/start-security-guide-
business?utm_source=govdelivery, which 
draws on the lessons learned from the 
FTC's enforcement actions.
The FTC works for consumers to prevent 
fraudulent, deceptive, and unfair business prac­
tices and to provide information to help spot, 
stop, and avoid them. To file a complaint, for 
example, to report someone falsely claiming to 
be from the government, a business, or a family 
member, visit the FTC’s online Complaint 
Assistant or call 1­877­FTC­HELP 
(1­877­382­4357). The FTC enters complaints 
into Consumer Sentinel, a secure, online data­
base available to more than 2,000 civil and 
criminal law enforcement agencies in the U.S. 
and abroad. Complaints from consumers help 
the FTC detect patterns of fraud and abuse. 
The FTC’s website provides free information on 
a variety of consumer topics, in English and in 
Spanish.
Consumer complaints regarding interna­
tional scams can be reported online through 
econsumer.gov. These are also entered into 
Consumer Sentinel, the complaint database 
maintained by the FTC, and are made available 
to enforcers and regulators in countries with 
participating agencies. Those agencies may 
use the complaints to investigate cross­border 
issues, uncover new scams, pursue regulatory 
or enforcement actions, and spot consumer 
trends.
Recognizing and reporting tax scams.  The 
Dirty Dozen  is compiled annually by the IRS 
and lists a variety of common scams taxpayers 
may encounter any time during the year. Many 
of these con games peak during filing season 
as people prepare their tax returns or hire 
someone to do so. Aggressive and threatening 
phone calls by criminals impersonating IRS 
agents remain near the top of the annual Dirty 
Dozen list of tax scams for the 2015 filing sea­
son.
Scammers are able to alter caller identifica­
tion (caller ID) numbers to make it look like the 
IRS is calling. They use fake names and bogus 
IRS identification or badge numbers. They often 
leave “urgent” callback requests. They prey on 
the most vulnerable people, such as the elderly, 
newly arrived immigrants, and those whose first 
language is not English. Scammers have been 
known to impersonate agents of IRS Criminal 
Investigation as well.
Be cautious when receiving suspicious calls 
at home or at work from sources claiming to be 
from the IRS, other agencies or outside sources 
asking for money, credit card information or 
threatening to have you arrested for not paying. 
These callers may demand money or may say 
you have a refund due and try to trick you into 
sharing private information. These con artists 
can sound convincing when they call. They may 
know a lot about you.
Here are five things the scammers often do 
but the IRS will not do. Any one of these five 
things is a tell­tale sign of a scam.
The IRS will never do any of the follow-
ing.
Call to demand immediate payment, nor 
will the agency call about taxes owed with­
out first having mailed you a bill.
Demand that you pay taxes without giving 
you the opportunity to question or appeal 
the amount they say you owe.
Require you to use a specific payment 
method for your taxes, such as a prepaid 
debit card.
Ask for credit or debit card numbers over 
the phone.
Threaten to bring in local police or other 
law­enforcement groups to have you arres­
ted for not paying.
If you get a phone call from someone claim­
ing to be from the IRS and asking for money, 
here’s what you should do.
If you know you owe taxes or think you 
might owe, call the IRS toll free at 
1­800­829­1040. The IRS assistors can 
help you with a payment issue.
If you know you don’t owe taxes or have no 
reason to believe that you do, report the in­
cident to the Treasury Inspector General 
for Tax Administration (TIGTA) toll free at 
1­800­366­4484 or at www.tigta.gov.
If you’ve been targeted by this scam, also 
contact the Federal Trade Commission 
and use their FTC Complaint Assistant at 
FTC.gov. Please add “IRS Telephone 
Scam” to the comments of your complaint.
Remember, too, the IRS does not use 
email, text messages, or any social media to 
discuss your personal tax issue involving bills or 
refunds. If you get a phone call from someone 
claiming to be from the IRS regarding a refund 
owed to you and asking you for your social se­
curity number and bank account information, do 
not give them this information. You should 
make notes of all information regarding the call 
and/or the caller, for example, any caller ID in­
formation, and report this scam. For more infor­
mation on reporting tax scams, go to IRS.gov 
and type “scam” in the search box. You can ver­
ify any potential refunds owed to you by con­
tacting the IRS directly.
Additional information about tax scams is 
available on IRS social media sites, including 
YouTube, www.youtube.com/irsvideos, and 
Tumblr, internalrevenueservice.tumblr.com, 
where people can search “scam” to find all the 
scam­related posts.
Checking on the status of a refund. 
The Where’s My Refund? tool is a fast and 
easy way to check on your tax refund on 
IRS.gov.
Go to www.irs.gov/refunds.
Download the free IRS2Go app to your 
smart phone and use it to check your re­
fund status.
Call the automated refund hotline toll free 
at 1­800­829­1954.
Making a tax payment.  You can make elec­
tronic payments online, by phone, or from a mo­
bile device. Paying electronically is safe and se­
cure. The IRS uses the latest encryption 
technology and does not store banking informa­
tion. It’s easy and secure and much quicker 
than mailing in a check or money order. Go to 
IRS.gov and click on the Payments tab or the 
“Pay Your Tax Bill” icon to make a payment us­
ing the following options.
Direct Pay (only if you are an individual 
who has a checking or savings account). 
Pay directly from your bank account. If 
you're an individual taxpayer, IRS Direct 
Pay offers you a free, secure payment 
method.
Debit or credit card. Choose an approved 
payment processor to make a secure tax 
payment online or by phone. Your payment 
will be processed by a payment processor 
who will charge a processing fee. The fees 
vary by service provider and may be tax 
deductible. No part of the service fee goes 
to the IRS. Note: You usually can’t cancel 
payments. You can’t make Federal Tax 
Deposits. You can't get an immediate re­
lease of a Federal Tax Lien.
Electronic Federal Tax Payment System 
(EFTPS®). EFTPS® is a system for pay­
ing federal taxes electronically using the in­
ternet, or by phone using the EFTPS® 
Voice Response System. EFTPS® is of­
fered free by the U.S. Department of 
Treasury. You can use EFTPS® to make 
all your federal tax payments, including in­
come, employment, estimated and excise 
taxes. You can initiate your tax payment 
from your home or office, 24/7. Businesses 
Page 49 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help  Page 49

and individuals can schedule payments up 
to 365 days in advance. Scheduled pay­
ments can be changed or cancelled up to 
two business days in advance of the 
scheduled payment date.
Check or money order.
What if I can’t pay now?  Click on the Pay­
ments tab or the “Pay Your Tax Bill” icon on 
IRS.gov to find more information about these 
additional options.
An online payment agreement determines 
if you are eligible to apply for an installment 
agreement if you cannot pay your taxes in 
full today. With the needed information, 
you can complete the application in about 
30 minutes, and get immediate approval.
An offer in compromise (OIC) allows you to 
settle your tax debt for less than the full 
amount you owe. Use the Offer in 
Compromise Pre-Qualifier to confirm your 
eligibility.
Checking the status of an amended return.
Go to IRS.gov and click on the Tools tab and 
then Where’s My Amended Return?  to check 
the status of your amended return.
Filing past due tax returns.  File all tax re­
turns that are due, regardless of whether or not 
you can pay in full. File your past due return the 
same way and to the same location where you 
would file an on­time return. If you have re­
ceived a notice, make sure to send your past 
due return to the location indicated on the no­
tice you received. If you have a past due return, 
filing your past due return now can help you do 
the following.
Avoid interest and penalties. File your 
past due return and pay now to limit inter­
est charges and late payment penalties.
Claim a refund. You risk losing your re­
fund if you don't file your return. If you are 
due a refund for withholding or estimated 
taxes, you must file your return to claim it 
within 3 years of the return due date. The 
same rule applies to a right to claim tax 
credits such as the EIC. We hold income 
tax refunds in cases where our records 
show that one or more income tax returns 
are past due. We hold them until we get 
the past due return or receive an accepta­
ble reason for not filing a past due return.
Protect social security benefits. If you 
are self­employed and do not file your fed­
eral income tax return, any self­employ­
ment income you earned will not be repor­
ted to the Social Security Administration 
and you will not receive credits toward so­
cial security retirement or disability bene­
fits.
Avoid issues obtaining loans. Loan ap­
provals may be delayed if you don't file 
your return. Copies of filed tax returns must 
be submitted to financial institutions, mort­
gage lenders/brokers, etc., whenever you 
want to buy or refinance a home, get a loan 
for a business, or apply for federal aid for 
higher education.
Substitute return. If you fail to file voluntarily, 
we may file a substitute return for you, based on 
income reported to the IRS. This return might 
not give you credit for deductions and exemp­
tions you may be entitled to receive. We will 
send you a Notice of Deficiency CP3219N
(90­day letter) proposing a tax assessment. 
You will have 90 days to file your past due tax 
return or file a petition in Tax Court. If you do 
neither, we will proceed with our proposed as­
sessment. If you have received a Notice of Defi­
ciency CP3219N, you can not request an exten­
sion to file.
If any of the income listed is incorrect, you 
may do the following.
Contact us toll free at 1­866­681­4271 to 
let us know.
Contact the payer (source) of the income 
to request a corrected Form W­2 or 1099.
Attach the corrected forms when you send 
us your completed tax returns.
If the IRS files a substitute return, it is still in 
your best interest to file your own tax return to 
take advantage of any exemptions, credits, and 
deductions you are entitled to receive. The IRS 
will generally adjust your account to reflect the 
correct figures. If you filed a past due return and 
have received a notice, you should send us a 
copy of the past due return to the indicated ad­
dress. It takes approximately 6 weeks for us to 
process an accurately completed past due tax 
return.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter. Enter 
“Understanding your notice” in the search box 
on IRS.gov or go to www.irs.gov/Individuals/
Understanding-Your-IRS-Notice-or-Letter to 
find additional information about your IRS 
notice or letter. We will send you a notice or let­
ter if any of the following applies.
You have a balance due.
You are due a larger or smaller refund.
We have a question about your tax return.
We need to verify your identity.
We need additional information.
We changed your return.
We are notifying you of delays in process­
ing your return.
When you receive correspondence from us, 
read the entire notice or letter carefully. Typi­
cally, we only need a response if you don’t 
agree with the information, we need additional 
information, or you have a balance due. If we 
changed your tax return, compare the informa­
tion we provided in the notice or letter with the 
information in your original return. If we receive 
a return that we suspect is identity theft, we will 
ask you to verify your identity using the web ad­
dress provided in the letter.
If we ask for a response within a specific 
timeframe, you must respond on time to mini­
mize additional interest and penalty charges or 
to preserve your appeal rights if you don’t 
agree. Pay as much as you can, even if you 
can’t pay the full amount you owe. You can pay 
online or apply for an Online Payment Agree­
ment or Offer in Compromise. See What if I 
can’t pay now?  above or visit our payments 
page, www.irs.gov/Payments, for more informa­
tion.
We provide our contact phone number on 
the top right­hand corner of our correspond­
ence. Be sure you have your tax return and any 
related documentation available when you call. 
You can also write to us at the address in the 
correspondence to explain why you disagree. If 
you write, allow at least 30 days for our re­
sponse. Keep a copy of all correspondence 
with your tax records.
Collection and enforcement actions.  The 
return we prepare for you (our proposed as­
sessment) will lead to a tax bill, which, if unpaid, 
will trigger the collection process. This can in­
clude such actions as a levy on your wages or 
bank account or the filing of a notice of federal 
tax lien. If you repeatedly do not file, you could 
be subject to additional enforcement measures, 
such as additional penalties and/or criminal 
prosecution.
Visiting the IRS. Locate the nearest Taxpayer 
Assistance Center (TAC) using the Office Loca­
tor tool on IRS.gov. Enter “office locator” in the 
search box. Or choose the “Contact Us” option 
on the IRS2Go app and search Local Offices. 
Before you visit, use the Locator tool to check 
hours and services available.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video Portal, 
www.irsvideos.gov, contains video and audio 
presentations on topics of interest to individu­
als, small businesses, and tax professionals. 
You’ll find video clips of tax topics, archived ver­
sions of live panel discussions and webinars, 
and audio archives of tax practitioner phone fo­
rums.
Getting tax information in other languages.
For taxpayers whose native language is not 
English, we have the following resources availa­
ble.
1. Taxpayers can find information on IRS.gov 
in the following languages.
a. Spanish.
b. Chinese.
c. Vietnamese.
d. Korean.
e. Russian.
2. The IRS TACs provide over­the­phone in­
terpreter service in over 170 languages, 
and the service is available free to taxpay­
ers.
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service Is Here To Help 
You
What is the Taxpayer 
Advocate Service?
The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an in-
dependent organization within the IRS that 
helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer rights. 
Our job is to ensure that every taxpayer is 
treated fairly and that you know and understand 
your rights under the Taxpayer Bill of Rights . 
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights groups the existing 
rights in the tax code into ten fundamental 
rights, and makes them clear, understandable, 
and accessible. See How Can You Learn About 
Your Taxpayer Rights? below.
Page 50 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 50  Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

What Can the TAS Do For You?
We can help you resolve problems that you 
can’t resolve with the IRS. And our service is 
free. If you qualify for our assistance, you will be 
assigned to one advocate who will work with 
you throughout the process and will do every­
thing possible to resolve your issue. The TAS 
can help you if:
Your problem is causing financial difficulty 
for you, your family, or your business;
You face (or your business is facing) an 
immediate threat of adverse action; or
You’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn’t responded by the date promised.
How Can You Reach Us?
We have offices in every state, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico . Your local advo­
cate’s number is in your local directory and at 
www.taxpayeradvocate.irs.gov. You can also 
call us toll free at 1­877­777­4778.
How Can You Learn About Your 
Taxpayer Rights?
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights describes ten basic 
rights that all taxpayers have when dealing with 
the IRS. Our Tax Toolkit at 
www.taxpayeradvocate.irs.gov can help you 
understand what these rights mean to you  and 
how they apply. These are your rights. Know 
them. Use them.
The IRS released the Taxpayer Bill of Rights 
following extensive discussions with the Tax­
payer Advocate Service. You can find a list of 
your rights and the IRS’s obligations to protect 
them in Publication 1, Your Rights as a 
Taxpayer. It includes the following.
1. The Right To Be Informed. Taxpayers 
have the right to know what they need to 
do to comply with the tax laws. They are 
entitled to clear explanations of the laws 
and IRS procedures in all tax forms, in­
structions, publications, notices, and cor­
respondence. They have the right to be in­
formed of IRS decisions about their tax 
accounts and to receive clear explana­
tions of the outcomes.
2. The Right to Quality Service. Taxpayers 
have the right to receive prompt, courte­
ous, and professional assistance in their 
dealings with the IRS, to be spoken to in a 
way they can easily understand, to receive 
clear and easily understandable communi­
cations from the IRS, and to speak to a su­
pervisor about inadequate service.
3. The Right To Pay No More Than the 
Correct Amount of Tax. Taxpayers have 
the right to pay only the amount of tax le­
gally due, including interest and penalties, 
and to have the IRS apply all tax payments 
properly.
4. The Right To Challenge the IRS’s Posi-
tion and Be Heard. Taxpayers have the 
right to raise objections and provide addi­
tional documentation in response to formal 
IRS actions or proposed actions, to expect 
that the IRS will consider their timely ob­
jections and documentation promptly and 
fairly, and to receive a response if the IRS 
does not agree with their position.
5. The Right To Appeal an IRS Decision 
in an Independent Forum. Taxpayers 
are entitled to a fair and impartial adminis­
trative appeal of most IRS decisions, in­
cluding many penalties, and have the right 
to receive a written response regarding 
the Office of Appeals’ decision. Taxpayers 
generally have the right to take their cases 
to court.
6. The Right to Finality. Taxpayers have 
the right to know the maximum amount of 
time they have to challenge the IRS’s posi­
tion as well as the maximum amount of 
time the IRS has to audit a particular tax 
year or collect a tax debt. Taxpayers have 
the right to know when the IRS has fin­
ished an audit.
7. The Right to Privacy. Taxpayers have 
the right to expect that any IRS inquiry, ex­
amination, or enforcement action will com­
ply with the law and be no more intrusive 
than necessary, and will respect all due 
process rights, including search and seiz­
ure protections, and will provide, where 
applicable, a collection due process hear­
ing.
8. The Right to Confidentiality. Taxpayers 
have the right to expect that any informa­
tion they provide to the IRS will not be dis­
closed unless authorized by the taxpayer 
or by law. Taxpayers have the right to ex­
pect appropriate action will be taken 
against employees, return preparers, and 
others who wrongfully use or disclose tax­
payer return information.
9. The Right To Retain Representation. 
Taxpayers have the right to retain an au­
thorized representative of their choice to 
represent them in their dealings with the 
IRS. Taxpayers have the right to seek as­
sistance from a Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinic if they cannot afford representation.
10. The Right to a Fair and Just Tax Sys-
tem. Taxpayers have the right to expect 
the tax system to consider facts and cir­
cumstances that might affect their underly­
ing liabilities, ability to pay, or ability to pro­
vide information timely. Taxpayers have 
the right to receive assistance from the 
Taxpayer Advocate Service if they are ex­
periencing financial difficulty or if the IRS 
has not resolved their tax issues properly 
and timely through its normal channels.
The IRS is trying to increase the number of 
Americans who know and understand their 
rights under the tax law. To expand awareness, 
the IRS is making Publication 1 available in mul­
tiple languages on IRS.gov. This important pub­
lication is available in the following languages.
English, Your Rights as a Taxpayer, at 
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p1.pdf.
Chinese, Chinese- Your Rights as a 
Taxpayer (Pub 1) , at www.irs.gov/
Chinese.
Korean, Korean- Your Rights as a 
Taxpayer (Pub 1), at www.irs.gov/Korean.
Russian, Ваши права в качестве 
налогоплательщика (Публикацию № 1), 
at www.irs.gov/Russian.
Spanish, Publicación 1SP, Derechos del 
Contribuyente, at www.irs.gov/Spanish.
Vietnamese, Quyền Hạn của Người Đóng 
Thuế , Your Rights as a Taxpayer (Pub1), 
at www.irs.gov/Vietnamese.
The IRS will include Publication 1 when sending 
notices to taxpayers on a range of issues, such 
as an audit or collection matter. All IRS facilities 
will publicly display the rights for taxpayers and 
employees to see.
How Else Does the TAS Help 
Taxpayers?
The TAS works to resolve large­scale problems 
that affect many taxpayers. If you know of one 
of these broad issues, please report it to us at 
www.irs.gov/sams.
Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinics (LITCs)
LITCs serve individuals whose income is below 
a certain level and need to resolve tax problems 
such as audits, appeals, and tax collection dis­
putes. Some LITCs can provide information 
about taxpayer rights and responsibilities in dif­
ferent languages for individuals who speak 
English as a second language. To find an LITC 
near you, visit www.irs.gov/litc or see IRS Publi­
cation 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List.
Page 51 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help  Page 51

To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
A
Advertising 43
Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) 
Assistant 48
Amortization:
Anti­abuse rule 31
Anti­churning rules 30
Atmospheric pollution control 
facilities 32
Corporate organization costs 27
Dispositions of section 197 
intangibles 31
Experimental costs 33
Geological and geophysical 
costs 32
How to deduct 26
Incorrect amount deducted 31
Partnership organization 
costs 27
Pollution control facilities 32
Reforestation costs 32
Reforestation expenses 24
Related person 30
Research costs 33
Section 197 intangibles 
defined 28
Starting a businesscosts 26
Start­up costs 27
Anticipated liabilities 44
Assistance (See Tax help)
At-risk limits 4
Attorney fees 45
Authorized IRS e-file 
providers 47
Awards 7
A-Z Index for Business 47
B
Bad debts:
Defined 39
How to treat 40
Recovery 40
Types of 39
When worthless 40
Bonuses:
Employee 7
Royalties 38
Bribes 44
Business:
Assets 3
Books and records 29
Meal expenses 43
Use of car 4, 44
Use of home 4
C
Campaign contribution 46
Capital expenses 3
Capitalization of interest 14
Car allowance 42
Car and truck expenses 44
Carrying charges 22
Charitable contributions 44
Checking amended return 
status 50
Choosing a tax return 
preparer 47
Circulation costs, newspapers 
and periodicals 24
Claim a refund 50
Club dues 44
Collection and enforcement 
actions 50
Commitment fees 14
Computer software 30
Constant-yield method, OID 13
Contested liability 5
Contributions:
Charitable 44
Political 46
Copyrights 29
Cost depletion 34
Cost of getting lease 10, 28
Cost of goods sold 3
Cost recovery 3
Covenant not to compete 29
Credit card convenience fees 44
D
Debt-financed distributions 12
Definitions:
Business bad debt 39
Necessary expense 3
Ordinary expense 3
Section 197 intangibles 28
De minimis OID 13
Demolition expenses 44
Depletion:
Mineral property 34
Oil and gas wells 35
Percentage table 37
Timber 38
Who can claim 33
Depreciation (See Cost recovery)
Development costs, miners 24
Direct Pay 49
Dirty Dozen 49
Disabled, improvements for 25
Drilling and development 
costs 23
Dues, membership 44
E
Earned Income Tax Credit 
Assistant 48
Economic interest 33
Economic performance 5
Education expenses 7, 44
e-File Form 940, 941, or 944 for 
Small Businesses 47
Elderly, improvements for 25
Electronic Federal Tax Payment 
System (EFTPS®) 49
Electronic Filing PIN Request 48
Employee benefit programs 8
Employer ID Numbers (EINs) 47
Employment taxes 17
Employment Taxes 47
Additional Medicare Tax 17
Self­employment tax:
Additional Medicare Tax 17
Unemployment fund 17
e-News 47
Entertainment 41
Experimentation costs 22, 33
Exploration costs 23
F
Federal Relay Service 47
Fees:
Commitment 14
Legal and professional 45
Regulatory 45
Tax return preparation 45
Filing past due tax returns 50
Fines 45
First Time Homebuyer Credit 
Account Look-up 48
Forgone 15
Forgone interest 15
Form:
3115 31
4562 26
5213 5
8826 26
T 38
Franchise 29, 44
Fringe benefits 7
G
Gas wells 37
Geological and geophysical 
costs:
Development, oil and gas 32
Exploration, oil and gas 32
Geothermal wells 23, 37
Gifts, nominal value 7
Going into business 3, 26
Goodwill 29
Gross income, not-for-profit 
activity 5
H
Health Coverage Tax Credit 
(HCTC) 18
Health insurance, deduction for 
self-employed 18
Heating equipment 4
Home, business use of 4
I
Identity (ID) theft issues 49
Impairment-related expenses 44
Improvements 3
By lessee 10
For disabled and elderly 25
Income Taxes 17
Accrual of contested income 
taxes 17
Federal income taxes 17
Foreign income taxes 17
State and local income taxes 17
Incorrect amount of amortization 
deducted 31
Independent Contractor 
(Self-Employed) or 
Employee? 47
Information Return Filing 
Requirements 47
Insurance:
Capitalized premiums 21
Deductible premiums 18
Nondeductible premiums 21
Self­employed individuals 18
Intangible drilling costs 23
Intangibles, amortization 28
Interactive Tax Assistant 48
Interest 15
Allocation of 11
Below­market 15
Business expense for 11
Capitalized 13, 14
Carrying charge 22
Deductible 12
Life insurance policies 14
Not deductible 13
Refunds of 14
When to deduct 14
Internet-related expenses 45
Interview expenses 45
IRS Tax Professional 
Partners 47
IRS Video Portal 47
K
Key person 14
Kickbacks 44
L
Leases:
Canceling 9
Cost of getting 10, 28
Improvements by lessee 10
Leveraged 9
Mineral 38
Oil and gas 38
Sales distinguished 9
Taxes on 10
Legal and professional fees 45
Letter 5071C 49
Licenses 29, 45
Life insurance coverage 8
Limit on deductions 5
Line of credit 12
Loans:
Below­market interestrate 15
Discounted 14
Loans or Advances 8
Lobbying expenses 45
Long-term care insurance 19
Losses 4, 5
At­risk limits 4
Net operating 5
Passive activities 4
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics 
(LITCs) 51
M
Machinery parts 4
Page 52 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 52 Publication 535 (2015)

Making a tax payment 49
Meals 41
Meals and entertainment 43
Meals and lodging 8
Methods of accounting 5
Mining:
Depletion 37
Development costs 24
Exploration costs 23
Mortgage 12, 13
Moving expenses, machinery 45
N
Natural gas 37
Nonqualifying intangibles 29
Not-for-profit activities 5
Not-for-profit activity, gross 
income 5
Notice of Deficiency 
CP3219N 50
O
Offer in compromise (OIC) 50
Office in home 4
Oil and gas wells:
Depletion 35
Drilling costs 23
Partnerships 36
S corporations 36
Online EIN Application 48
Online payment agreement 50
Online Tools & Educational 
Products 47
Optional safe harbor method 4
Optional write-off method:
Circulation costs 33
Experimental costs 33
Intangible drilling and 
development costs 33
Mining exploration and 
development costs 33
Research costs 33
Organizational costs 24
Organization costs:
Corporate 27
Partnership 27
Original issue discount 13
Other Taxes 17
Excise taxes 17
Franchise taxes 17
Fuel taxes 17
Occupational taxes 18
Personal property taxes 18
Sales taxes 18
Outplacement services 45
Over-the-phone interpreter 
service 50
P
Passive activities 4
Payments in kind 4
Penalties 13
Deductible 45
Nondeductible 45
Prepayment 13
Percentage depletion 34
Per diem and car allowances 42
Political contributions 46
Pollution control facilities 32
Prepaid expense 5
Extends useful life 22
Interest 14
Rent 9
Prepayment penalty 13
Presumption of profit 5
Pub 974 18
Publication 1, Your Rights as a 
Taxpayer 51
Publications (See Tax help)
R
Real EstateTaxes 16
Assessments Local 16
Charges for services 16
Electing to ratably accrue to a 
definite period 17
Form 3115 17
Making the election to ratably 
accrue the taxes 17
Purchase or sale of real 
estate 16
Separate elections to ratably 
accrue for each separate 
trade or business and for 
nonbusiness activities 17
Recapture:
Exploration expenses 23
Timber property 32
Recordkeeping 36
Recovery of amount deducted 4
Refiners who cannot claim 
percentage depletion 35
Reforestation costs 24, 32
Regulatory fees 45
Reimbursements 41
Business expenses 8
Mileage 42
Nonaccountable plan 43
Per diem 42
Related persons:
Anti­churning rules 30
Coal or iron ore 37
Payments to 5, 14
Refiners 35
Unreasonable rent 9
Removal 25
Rent expense, capitalizing 10
Repairs 46
Repayments (claim of right) 46
Reporting abusive tax 
preparers 48
Research costs 22, 33
S
Scammers 49
Section 179 expense 
deduction (See Cost recovery)
Self-employed health insurance 
deduction 18
Self-Employed Individuals Tax 
Center 47
Self-insurance, reserve for 21
Sick pay 8
Small Business and 
Self-Employed (SB/SE) Tax 
Center 47
Small Business Events 47
Small Business Forms and 
Publications 47
Standard meal allowance 42
Standard mileage 
rate (See Business use of your 
car)
Standby charges 14
Starting, Operating, or Closing a 
Business 47
Start-up costs 24, 27
Subscriptions 47
Substitute return 50
Supplies and materials 47
T
Taxes 10, 16
Carrying charge 22
Leased property 10
When To Deduct Taxes 16
Tax forms and publications 48
Tax help 47
Tax information in other 
languages 50
Tax law questions 48
Taxpayer Advocate Service 
(TAS) 50
Taxpayer Assistance Center 
(TAC) locator 50
Taxpayer Bill of Rights 50
Tax preparation 47
Tax preparation fees 45
Tax scams 49
Telephone 47
Timber 32, 38
Tools 4
Trademark, trade name 29, 44
transcript or copy of a return 48
Travel 41
TTY/TDD information 47
U
Understanding an IRS notice or 
letter 50
Unpaid expenses, related 
person 14
Utilities 47
V
Vacation pay 8
W
Wages:
Property 8
Tests for deducting pay 6
Welfare benefit funds 8
When To Deduct Taxes:
Carrying charges 16
Limit on accrual of taxes 16
Refunds of taxes 16
Uniform capitalization rules 16
Where to file 48
Where’s My Refund? 49
Withholding Calculator 48
Page 53 of 53  Fileid: … tions/P535/2015/A/XML/Cycle01/source 10:27 ­ 18­Feb­2016
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535 (2015)   Page 53