Userid: SD_RRKPB schema tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/XML Fileid: ...ments and Settings\RRKPB\My Documents\TY2011\Pub 463\P463.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 ContentsCat. No. 11081L
What's New .................... . 2Department
of the Reminder ..................... . 2Treasury Travel,
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue 1. Travel ...................... . 3Entertainment,Service Traveling Away From Home ........ . 3
Tax Home ................. . 3
Tax Home Different FromGift, and Car Family Home ........... . 3
Temporary Assignment or Job ...... . 4
What Travel Expenses AreExpenses
Deductible? ............... . 4
Meals .................... . 5
Travel in the United States ...... . 6
Travel Outside the UnitedFor use in preparing
States ................ . 7
Luxury Water Travel .......... . 8
2011 Returns Conventions ............... . 9
2. Entertainment ................. . 9
Directly-Related Test ............ . 9
Associated Test ............... . 10
50% Limit ................... . 10
Exceptions to the 50% Limit .... . 11
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Deductible? ............ . 12
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Not Deductible? ......... . 13
3. Gifts ....................... . 13
4. Transportation ................ . 14
Car Expenses ................ . 15
Standard Mileage Rate ....... . 15
Actual Car Expenses ........ . 16
Leasing a Car ............. . 25
Disposition of a Car ............ . 26
5. Recordkeeping ................ . 26
How To Prove Expenses ......... . 26
What Are Adequate
Records? ............. . 26
What If I Have Incomplete
Records? ............. . 28
Separating and Combining
Expenses ............. . 28
How Long To Keep Records
and Receipts ........... . 28
Examples of Records ........ . 29
6. How To Report ................ . 29
Where To Report .............. . 29
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer ............. . 29
Reimbursements .............. . 29
Accountable Plans .......... . 30
Nonaccountable Plans ....... . 33
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients .... . 33
Completing Forms 2106 and
2106-EZ ................. . 33
Special Rules ............. . 35
Get forms and other information Illustrated Examples ......... . 35
faster and easier by: 7. How To Get Tax Help ........... . 41
Appendices .................... . 42Internet IRS.gov
Index ......................... . 56
Jan 31, 2012

Page 2 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Who should use this publication. You You can write to us at the following address:
should read this publication if you are an em- Internal Revenue ServiceWhat's New ployee or a sole proprietor who has busi- Individual Forms and Publications Branchness-related travel, entertainment, gift, or
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:IStandard mileage rate. For 2011, the stan- transportation expenses.
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526dard mileage rate for the cost of operating your Users of employer-provided vehicles. If Washington, DC 20224car for business use is 51 cents per mile (55 1/2
an employer-provided vehicle was available forcents a mile after June 30, 2011). Car expenses your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener-and use of the standard mileage rate  are ex- ally, your employer must include the value of theplained in chapter 4. We respond to many letters by telephone.use or availability of the vehicle in your income.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-However, there are exceptions if the use of theDepreciation limits on cars, trucks, and clude your daytime phone number, including thevehicle qualifies as a working condition fringevans. For 2011, the first-year limit on the total
area code, in your correspondence.benefit (such as the use of a qualified nonper-depreciation deduction for cars remains at
sonal use vehicle).$11,060 ($3,060 if you elect not to claim the You can email us at taxforms@irs.gov .A working condition fringe benefit is anyspecial depreciation allowance). For trucks and Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-property or service provided to you by your em-vans the first-year limit has increased to $11,260 ject line. You can also send us comments fromployer for which you could deduct the cost as an($3,260 if you elect not to claim the special www.irs.gov/formspubs. Select ªComment onemployee business expense if you had paid fordepreciation allowance). Depreciation limits are Tax Forms and Publicationsº under ªInformationit.explained in chapter 4.
about.ºA qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is one
Cars for hire and the standard mileage rate. that is not likely to be used more than minimally Although we cannot respond individually toBeginning in 2011, you can elect to use the for personal purposes because of its design. each comment received, we do appreciate yourstandard mileage rate if you used a car for hire See Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles  under feedback and will consider your comments as(such as a taxi). Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4. we revise our tax products.For information on how to report your carFuture developments.  The IRS has created expenses that your employer did not provide or Ordering forms and publications. Visita page on IRS.gov for information about Publi- reimburse you for (such as when you pay for gas www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andcation 463, at www.irs.gov/pub463. Information and maintenance for a car your employer pro- publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theabout any future developments affecting Publi- vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employer address below and receive a response within 10cation 463 (such as legislation enacted after we in chapter 6. days after your request is received.release it) will be posted on that page.
Internal Revenue ServiceWho does not need to use this publication.
1201 N. Mitsubishi MotorwayPartnerships, corporations, trusts, and employ-
ers who reimburse their employees for business Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
expenses should refer to their tax form instruc-Reminder
tions and chapter 11 of Publication 535, Busi- Tax questions. If you have a tax question,ness Expenses, for information on deductingPhotographs of missing children. The Inter- check the information available on IRS.gov ortravel, meals, and entertainment expenses.nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxIf you are an employee, you will not need toNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- questions sent to either of the above addresses.read this publication if all of the following aredren. Photographs of missing children selected true.by the Center may appear in this publication on Useful Itemspages that would otherwise be blank. You can • You fully accounted to your employer for
help bring these children home by looking at the You may want to see:your work-related expenses.
photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST • You received full reimbursement for your(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. Publicationexpenses.
❏ 225 Farmer's Tax Guide• Your employer required you to return any
❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductionsexcess reimbursement and you did so.
❏ 535 Business ExpensesIntroduction • There is no amount shown with a code ªLº
in box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and ❏ 946 How To Depreciate PropertyYou may be able to deduct the ordinary and Tax Statement.necessary business-related expenses you have ❏ 1542 Per Diem Ratesfor: If you meet all of these conditions, there is no
need to show the expenses or the reimburse- Form (and Instructions)• Travel, ments on your return. If you would like more
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized• Entertainment, information on reimbursements and accounting
Deductionsto your employer, see chapter 6.• Gifts, or
❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss• Transportation. If you meet these conditions and your From Businessemployer included reimbursements onAn ordinary expense is one that is common and your Form W-2 in error, ask your em- ❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit
TIPaccepted in your trade or business. A necessary ployer for a corrected Form W-2. From Businessexpense is one that is helpful and appropriate for
your business. An expense does not have to be ❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or LossVolunteers. If you perform services as a
required to be considered necessary. From Farmingvolunteer worker for a qualified charity, you may
be able to deduct some of your costs as aThis publication explains: ❏ 2106 Employee Business Expensescharitable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Ex-
• What expenses are deductible, ❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employeepenses in Giving Services in Publication 526,
Charitable Contributions, for information on the Business Expenses• How to report them on your return,
expenses you can deduct. ❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization• What records you need to prove your ex-
penses, and See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help , forComments and suggestions. We welcome
information about getting these publications and• How to treat any expense reimbursements your comments about this publication and your
forms.you may receive. suggestions for future editions.
Page 2 Publication 463 (2011)

Page 3 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Members of the Armed Forces. If you are a 1. You perform part of your business in the
member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma- area of your main home and use that
nent duty assignment overseas, you are not home for lodging while doing business in
1. traveling away from home. You cannot deduct the area.
your expenses for meals and lodging. You can- 2. You have living expenses at your mainnot deduct these expenses even if you have to home that you duplicate because yourmaintain a home in the United States for your business requires you to be away from thatTravel family members who are not allowed to accom- home.pany you overseas. If you are transferred from
3. You have not abandoned the area in whichone permanent duty station to another, you mayIf you temporarily travel away from your tax
both your historical place of lodging andhave deductible moving expenses, which arehome, you can use this chapter to determine if your claimed main home are located; youexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses.you have deductible travel expenses. have a member or members of your familyA naval officer assigned to permanent dutyThis chapter discusses: living at your main home; or you often useaboard a ship that has regular eating and living
that home for lodging.• Traveling away from home, facilities has a tax home (explained next) aboard
the ship for travel expense purposes. If you satisfy all three factors, your tax home• Temporary assignment or job, and
is the home where you regularly live. If you• What travel expenses are deductible. Tax Home satisfy only two factors, you may have a tax
home depending on all the facts and circum-It also discusses the standard meal allowance,
To determine whether you are traveling away stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are anrules for travel inside and outside the United from home, you must first determine the location itinerant; your tax home is wherever you workStates, luxury water travel, and deductible con- of your tax home. and you cannot deduct travel expenses.vention expenses.
Generally, your tax home is your regular
place of business or post of duty, regardless of Example 1. You are single and live in Bos-Travel expenses defined. For tax purposes,
where you maintain your family home. It in- ton in an apartment you rent. You have workedtravel expenses are the ordinary and necessary
cludes the entire city or general area in which for your employer in Boston for a number ofexpenses of traveling away from home for your your business or work is located. years. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-monthbusiness, profession, or job. executive training program. You do not expect toIf you have more than one regular place ofAn ordinary expense is one that is common return to work in Boston after you complete yourbusiness, your tax home is your main place ofand accepted in your trade or business. A nec- training.business. See Main place of business or work ,essary expense is one that is helpful and appro- During your training, you do not do any worklater.priate for your business. An expense does not in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom andIf you do not have a regular or a main placehave to be required to be considered necessary. on-the-job training throughout the United States.of business because of the nature of your work,You will find examples of deductible travel You keep your apartment in Boston and return tothen your tax home may be the place where youexpenses in Table 1-1, later. it frequently. You use your apartment to conductregularly live. See No main place of business or
your personal business. You also keep up yourwork, later.
community contacts in Boston. When you com- If you do not have a regular or main place of
plete your training, you are transferred to Losbusiness or post of duty and there is no place
Angeles.Traveling Away From where you regularly live, you are considered an
You do not satisfy factor (1) because you diditinerant (a transient) and your tax home is wher-
not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-Home ever you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claim
cause you had duplicate living expenses. Youa travel expense deduction because you are
You are traveling away from home if: also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-never considered to be traveling away from
don your apartment in Boston as your mainhome.• Your duties require you to be away from home, you kept your community contacts, andthe general area of your tax home (defined you frequently returned to live in your apartment.Main place of business or work. If you havelater) substantially longer than an ordinary Therefore, you have a tax home in Boston.more than one place of work, consider the fol-day's work, and lowing when determining which one is your main
Example 2. You are an outside salesperson• You need to sleep or rest to meet the place of business or work.
with a sales territory covering several states.demands of your work while away from • The total time you ordinarily spend in each Your employer's main office is in Newark, buthome. place. you do not conduct any business there. Your
This rest requirement is not satisfied by merely work assignments are temporary, and you have• The level of your business activity in eachnapping in your car. You do not have to be away no way of knowing where your future assign-place.
from your tax home for a whole day or from dusk ments will be located. You have a room in your• Whether your income from each place isto dawn as long as your relief from duty is long married sister's house in Dayton. You stay theresignificant or insignificant.enough to get necessary sleep or rest. for one or two weekends a year, but you do no
work in the area. You do not pay your sister for
Example 1. You are a railroad conductor. the use of the room.Example. You live in Cincinnati where you
You leave your home terminal on a regularly You do not satisfy any of the three factorshave a seasonal job for 8 months each year and
scheduled round-trip run between two cities and listed earlier. You are an itinerant and have noearn $40,000. You work the other 4 months in
return home 16 hours later. During the run, you tax home.Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000.
have 6 hours off at your turnaround point where Cincinnati is your main place of work because
you spend most of your time there and earnyou eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get Tax Home Different From
most of your income there.necessary sleep before starting the return trip. Family HomeYou are considered to be away from home.
No main place of business or work. You If you (and your family) do not live at your taxmay have a tax home even if you do not have aExample 2. You are a truck driver. You home (defined earlier), you cannot deduct theregular or main place of work. Your tax homeleave your terminal and return to it later the cost of traveling between your tax home andmay be the home where you regularly live.same day. You get an hour off at your turn- your family home. You also cannot deduct the
around point to eat. Because you are not off to cost of meals and lodging while at your taxFactors used to determine tax home. If
get necessary sleep and the brief time off is not home. See Example 1, later.you do not have a regular or main place of
an adequate rest period, you are not traveling business or work, use the following three factors If you are working temporarily in the same
away from home. to determine where your tax home is. city where you and your family live, you may be
Chapter 1 Travel Page 3

Page 4 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
considered as traveling away from home. See prosecution, you are not subject to the 1-year your days off, you are not considered away from
Example 2, below. rule. This means you may be able to deduct home while you are in your hometown. You
travel expenses even if you are away from your cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-
Example 1. You are a truck driver and you tax home for more than 1 year provided you ing there. However, you can deduct your travel
and your family live in Tucson. You are em- meet the other requirements for deductibility. expenses, including meals and lodging, while
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in traveling between your temporary place of workFor you to qualify, the Attorney General (or
Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you return and your tax home. You can claim these ex-his or her designee) must certify that you are
to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend one penses up to the amount it would have cost youtraveling:
night there before returning home. You cannot to stay at your temporary place of work.• For the federal government,deduct any expenses you have for meals and If you keep your hotel room during your visit
lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel• In a temporary duty status, and
Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-• To investigate, prosecute, or provide sup-your tax home. penses of returning home up to the amount youport services for the investigation or prose- would have spent for meals had you stayed atcution of a federal crime.Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts- your temporary place of work.
burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The
Probationary work period. If you take a jobrest of the year you work for the same employer Determining temporary or indefinite. You
that requires you to move, with the understand-in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants must determine whether your assignment is
ing that you will keep the job if your work isand sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the temporary or indefinite when you start work. If
satisfactory during a probationary period, the jobsame whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti- you expect an assignment or job to last for 1
is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourmore. year or less, it is temporary unless there are
expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-Because you spend most of your working facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.
bationary period.time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore, An assignment or job that is initially temporary
that city is your tax home. You cannot deduct may become indefinite due to changed circum-
any expenses you have for meals and lodging stances. A series of assignments to the same
there. However, when you return to work in location, all for short periods but that together
Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax home What Travel Expensescover a long period, may be considered an in-
even though you stay at your family home. You definite assignment.
Are Deductible?can deduct the cost of your round trip between The following examples illustrate whether an
Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct assignment or job is temporary or indefinite.
Once you have determined that you are travel-your part of your family's living expenses for
ing away from your tax home, you can determinemeals and lodging while you are living and work- Example 1. You are a construction worker.
what travel expenses are deductible.ing in Pittsburgh. You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. You
You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-are a member of a trade union in Los Angeles
penses you have when you travel away fromthat helps you get work in the Los Angeles area.
home on business. The type of expense you canYour tax home is Los Angeles. Because of a
deduct depends on the facts and your circum-shortage of work, you took a job on a construc-Temporary 
stances.tion project in Fresno. Your job was scheduled to
Table 1-1 summarizes travel expenses youAssignment or Job end in 8 months. The job actually lasted 10
may be able to deduct. You may have othermonths.
deductible travel expenses that are not coveredYou may regularly work at your tax home and You realistically expected the job in Fresno
there, depending on the facts and your circum-also work at another location. It may not be to last 8 months. The job actually did last less
stances.practical to return to your tax home from this than 1 year. The job is temporary and your tax
other location at the end of each work day. home is still in Los Angeles. When you travel away from home on
business, you should keep records ofTemporary assignment vs. indefinite assign- Example 2. The facts are the same as in all the expenses you have and anyment. If your assignment or job away from
RECORDS Example 1, except that you realistically ex- advances you receive from your employer. Youyour main place of work is temporary, your tax pected the work in Fresno to last 18 months. The can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otherhome does not change. You are considered to job actually was completed in 10 months. written record to keep track of your expenses.be away from home for the whole period you are Your job in Fresno is indefinite because you The types of expenses you need to record,away from your main place of work. You can realistically expected the work to last longer than along with supporting documentation, are de-deduct your travel expenses if they otherwise 1 year, even though it actually lasted less than 1 scribed in Table 5-1 (see chapter 5).qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary year. You cannot deduct any travel expensesassignment in a single location is one that is Separating costs. If you have one expenseyou had in Fresno because Fresno became yourrealistically expected to last (and does in fact that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,tax home.last) for 1 year or less. and other services (such as lodging or transpor-
However, if your assignment or job is indefi- tation), you must allocate that expense betweenExample 3. The facts are the same as innite, the location of the assignment or job be- the cost of meals and entertainment and the costExample 1, except that you realistically ex-comes your new tax home and you cannot of other services. You must have a reasonablepected the work in Fresno to last 9 months. Afterdeduct your travel expenses while there. An basis for making this allocation. For example,8 months, however, you were asked to remainassignment or job in a single location is consid- you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last cludes one or more meals in its room charge.months).for more than 1 year, whether or not it actually Initially, you realistically expected the job in Travel expenses for another individual. If alasts for more than 1 year. Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, due spouse, dependent, or other individual goes withIf your assignment is indefinite, you must to changed circumstances occurring after 8 you (or your employee) on a business trip or to ainclude in your income any amounts you receive months, it was no longer realistic for you to business convention, you generally cannot de-from your employer for living expenses, even if expect that the job in Fresno would last for 1 duct his or her travel expenses.they are called travel allowances and you ac- year or less. You can only deduct your travelcount to your employer for them. You may be Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-expenses for the first 8 months. You cannotable to deduct the cost of relocating to your new penses of someone who goes with you if thatdeduct any travel expenses you had after thattax home as a moving expense. See Publication person:time because Fresno became your tax home521 for more information. when the job became indefinite. 1. Is your employee,Exception for federal crime investigations or
prosecutions. If you are a federal employee Going home on days off. If you go back to 2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the
participating in a federal crime investigation or your tax home from a temporary assignment on travel, and
Page 4 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 5 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Actual cost.
Table 1-1.  Travel Expenses You Can Deduct • The standard meal allowance.
This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home Both of these methods are explained below. But,for business purposes.
regardless of the method you use, you generally
can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed costIF you have of your meals.expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of...
If you are reimbursed for the cost of your
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends onbusiness destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you are whether your employer's reimbursement planriding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your was accountable or nonaccountable. If you arecost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whetherShips (under Conventions) for additional rules and limits. the unreimbursed meal expense is for business
travel or business entertainment. Chapter 2 dis-taxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you between:
bus, and airport cusses the 50% Limit in more detail, and chapter• The airport or station and your hotel, and
limousine 6 discusses accountable and nonaccountable• The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, your
plans.business meeting place, or your temporary work location.
baggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your regular
shipping and temporary work locations. Actual Cost
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home on You can use the actual cost of your meals tobusiness. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileage figure the amount of your expense before reim-rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a car bursement and application of the 50% deductionwhile away from home on business, you can deduct only the limit. If you use this method, you must keepbusiness-use portion of the expenses.
records of your actual cost.
lodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform your
duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages, taxes, and Standard Meal Allowance
related tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits.
Generally, you can use the ªstandard meal al-cleaning dry cleaning and laundry. lowanceº method as an alternative to the actual
cost method. It allows you to use a set amounttelephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes business
for your daily meals and incidental expensescommunication by fax machine or other communication devices.
(M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac-tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. tual costs. The set amount varies depending on
where and when you travel. In this publication,other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
ªstandard meal allowanceº refers to the federalbusiness travel. These expenses might include transportation to or
rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount offrom a business meal, public stenographer's fees, computer rental
standard meal allowance . If you use the stan-fees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer.
dard meal allowance, you still must keep rec-
ords to prove the time, place, and business
purpose of your travel. See the recordkeeping3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the but only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he uses
rules for travel in chapter 5.travel expenses. public transportation, he can deduct only his
fare.
Incidental expenses. The term ªincidental ex-Business associate. If a business associ-
pensesº means:ate travels with you and meets the conditions in Meals
(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel • Fees and tips given to porters, baggage
expenses you have for that person. A business You can deduct the cost of meals in either of the carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewardsassociate is someone with whom you could rea- following situations. or stewardesses and others on ships, andsonably expect to actively conduct business. A hotel servants in foreign countries,• It is necessary for you to stop for substan-business associate can be a current or prospec- tial sleep or rest to properly perform your • Transportation between places of lodgingtive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier, duties while traveling away from home on or business and places where meals areemployee, agent, partner, or professional advi- business. taken, if suitable meals can be obtained atsor.
the temporary duty site, and• The meal is business-related entertain-Bona fide business purpose. A bona fide ment. • Mailing costs associated with filing travelbusiness purpose exists if you can prove a real
vouchers and payment of em-business purpose for the individual's presence. Business-related entertainment is discussed in ployer-sponsored charge card billings.Incidental services, such as typing notes or as- chapter 2. The following discussion deals only
sisting in entertaining customers, are not with meals that are not business-related enter- Incidental expenses do not include expenses for
enough to make the expenses deductible. tainment. laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg-
ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephone
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi- Lavish or extravagant. You cannot deduct calls.
ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-
not Jerry's employee. Linda occasionally types gant. An expense is not considered lavish or Incidental expenses only method. You can
notes, performs similar services, and accompa- extravagant if it is reasonable based on the facts use an optional method (instead of actual cost)
nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per- and circumstances. Expenses will not be disal- for deducting incidental expenses only. The
formance of these services does not establish lowed merely because they are more than a amount of the deduction is $5 a day. You can
that her presence on the trip is necessary to the fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res- use this method only if you did not pay or incur
conduct of Jerry's business. Her expenses are taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts. any meal expenses. You cannot use this
not deductible. method on any day that you use the standard
50% limit on meals. You can figure your meal allowance. This method is subject to theJerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A
meals expense using either of the following proration rules for partial days. See Travel forsingle room costs $149 a day. He can deduct the
methods. days you depart and return, later in this chapter.total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,
Chapter 1 Travel Page 5

Page 6 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note. The incidental expenses only method travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other location Under Method 2 , Jen could also use any
is not subject to the 50% limit discussed below. outside the continental United States. The De- method that she applies consistently and that is
partment of Defense establishes per diem rates in accordance with reasonable business prac-Federal employees should refer to the for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American Sa- tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of theFederal Travel Regulations at www. moa, Guam, Midway, the Northern Mariana Is- standard meal allowance even though a federalgsa.gov. Find the ªMost Requested
CAUTION
! lands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake Island, and employee would have to use Method 1 and beLinksº on the upper left and click on ªRegula- other non-foreign areas outside the continental limited to only 21/2 days.tions: FAR, FMR, FTRº for Federal Travel Regu- United States. The Department of State estab-lation (FTR) for changes affecting claims for lishes per diem rates for all other foreign areas. Travel in the United Statesreimbursement.
You can access per diem rates for50% limit may apply. If you use the standard The following discussion applies to travel in thenon-foreign areas outside the conti-meal allowance method for meal expenses and United States. For this purpose, the Unitednental United States at:you are not reimbursed or you are reimbursed
 States includes the 50 states and the District ofwww.defensetravel.dod.mil/site/perdiemCalc.under a nonaccountable plan, you can generally Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-cfm. You can access all other foreign per diemdeduct only 50% of the standard meal allow- penses depends on how much of your trip wasrates at: www.state.gov/travel/. Click on ªTravelance. If you are reimbursed under an accounta- business related and on how much of your tripPer Diem Allowances for Foreign Areas,º underble plan and you are deducting amounts that are occurred within the United States. See Part ofªForeign Per Diem Ratesº to obtain the latestmore than your reimbursements, you can de- Trip Outside the United States, later.foreign per diem rates.duct only 50% of the excess amount. The 50%
limit is discussed in more detail in chapter 2, and Special rate for transportation workers.accountable and nonaccountable plans are dis- Trip Primarily for BusinessYou can use a special standard meal allowancecussed in chapter 6. if you work in the transportation industry. You You can deduct all of your travel expenses ifThere is no optional standard lodging are in the transportation industry if your work: your trip was entirely business related. If youramount similar to the standard meal • Directly involves moving people or goods trip was primarily for business and, while at yourallowance. Your allowable lodging ex-
CAUTION
! by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or business destination, you extended your stay forpense deduction is your actual cost. truck, and a vacation, made a personal side trip, or hadWho can use the standard meal allowance. other personal activities, you can deduct only• Regularly requires you to travel away fromYou can use the standard meal allowance your business-related travel expenses. Thesehome and, during any single trip, usuallywhether you are an employee or self-employed, expenses include the travel costs of getting toinvolves travel to areas eligible for differ-and whether or not you are reimbursed for your and from your business destination and anyent standard meal allowance rates.traveling expenses.
business-related expenses at your business
If this applies to you, you can claim a standard destination.Use of the standard meal allowance for other
meal allowance of $59 a day ($65 for traveltravel. You can use the standard meal allow-
outside the continental United States). Example. You work in Atlanta and take aance to figure your meal expenses when you
business trip to New Orleans in May. On yourtravel in connection with investment and other Using the special rate for transportation work-
way home, you stop in Mobile to visit your par-income-producing property. You can also use it ers eliminates the need for you to determine the
ents. You spend $1,996 for the 9 days you areto figure your meal expenses when you travel for standard meal allowance for every area where
away from home for travel, meals, lodging, andqualifying educational purposes. You cannot you stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to use
other travel expenses. If you had not stopped inuse the standard meal allowance to figure the the special rate for any trip, you must use the
cost of your meals when you travel for medical Mobile, you would have been gone only 6 days,special rate (and not use the regular standardor charitable purposes. and your total cost would have been $1,696.meal allowance rates) for all trips you take that
You can deduct $1,696 for your trip, includingyear.Amount of standard meal allowance. The the cost of round-trip transportation to and from
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE New Orleans. The deduction for your meals isTravel for days you depart and return. Forrate. For travel in 2011, the rate for most small subject to the 50% limit on meals  mentionedboth the day you depart for and the day youlocalities in the United States is $46 a day. earlier.return from a business trip, you must prorate theMost major cities and many other localities in standard meal allowance (figure a reducedthe United States are designated as high-cost amount for each day). You can do so by one ofareas, qualifying for higher standard meal al- Trip Primarily fortwo methods.lowances. These rates are listed in Publication Personal Reasons1542, Per Diem Rates, which is available on the • Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan-
Internet at IRS.gov. dard meal allowance. If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,
such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is aYou can also find this information (or- • Method 2: You can prorate using any nondeductible personal expense. However, youganized by state) on the Internet at method that you consistently apply and can deduct any expenses you have while at yourwww.gsa.gov . Click on ªPer Diem that is in accordance with reasonable busi-
 destination that are directly related to your busi-Rates,º then select ª2011º for the period January ness practice. ness.1, 2011 ± September 30, 2011, and select
A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be aª2012º for the period October 1, 2011 ± Decem- Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans vacation even if the promoter advertises that it isber 31, 2011. However, you can apply the rates as a convention planner. In March, her employer primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-in effect before October 1, 2011, for expenses of sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to dental business activities during a trip, such asall travel within the United States for 2011 in- attend a planning seminar. She left her home in viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingstead of the updated rates. You must consist- New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and with general subjects, will not change what isently use either the rates for the first 9 months of arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After really a vacation into a business trip.2011 or the updated rates for the period of Octo- spending two nights there, she flew back to Newber 1, 2011, through December 31, 2011. Orleans on Friday and arrived back home at
If you travel to more than one location in one 8:00 p.m. Jen's employer gave her a flat amount Part of Trip Outsideday, use the rate in effect for the area where you to cover her expenses and included it with her the United Statesstop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor- wages.
tation industry, however, see Special rate for If part of your trip is outside the United States,Under Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days oftransportation workers, later. use the rules described later in this chapterthe standard meal allowance for Washington,
under Travel Outside the United States  for thatDC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andStandard meal allowance for areas outside
Friday (the days she departed and returned), part of the trip. For the part of your trip that isthe continental United States. The standard
and the full daily rate for Thursday.meal allowance rates above do not apply to inside the United States, use the rules for travel
Page 6 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 7 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in the United States. Travel outside the United your trip does not, by itself, mean that you have round-trip plane fare and 16 days of meals (sub-
States does not include travel from one point in substantial control over arranging your trip. ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other related
the United States to another point in the United expenses.You do not have substantial control over
States. The following discussion can help you your trip if you: Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid-determine whether your trip was entirely within eration. Your trip is considered entirely for• Are an employee who was reimbursed orthe United States. business if you can establish that a personalpaid a travel expense allowance,
vacation was not a major consideration, even ifPublic transportation. If you travel by public • Are not related to your employer, and you have substantial control over arranging thetransportation, any place in the United States trip.• Are not a managing executive.where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a
point in the United States. Once the vehicle
ªRelated to your employerº is defined later inleaves the last scheduled stop in the United Travel Primarily for Businesschapter 6 under Per Diem and Car Allowances.States on its way to a point outside the United
A ªmanaging executiveº is an employee whoStates, you apply the rules under Travel Outside If you travel outside the United States primarily
has the authority and responsibility, without be-the United States. for business but spend some of your time on
ing subject to the veto of another, to decide on other activities, you generally cannot deduct all
Example. You fly from New York to Puerto the need for the business travel. of your travel expenses. You can only deduct the
Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return A self-employed person generally has sub- business portion of your cost of getting to and
to New York nonstop. The flight from New York stantial control over arranging business trips. from your destination. You must allocate the
to Miami is in the United States, so only the flight costs between your business and other activitiesException 2 - Outside United States nofrom Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United to determine your deductible amount. Seemore than a week. Your trip is consideredStates. Because there are no scheduled stops Travel allocation rules, later.entirely for business if you were outside thebetween Puerto Rico and New York, all of the
United States for a week or less, combining You do not have to allocate your travelreturn trip is outside the United States.
business and nonbusiness activities. One week expenses if you meet one of the four
means 7 consecutive days. In counting the exceptions listed earlier under TravelPrivate car. Travel by private car in the United
TIP
days, do not count the day you leave the United considered entirely for business. In those cases,States is travel between points in the United
States, but do count the day you return to the you can deduct the total cost of getting to andStates, even though you are on your way to a
United States. from your destination.destination outside the United States.
Travel allocation rules. If your trip outside theExample. You traveled to Brussels primarilyExample. You travel by car from Denver to United States was primarily for business, youfor business. You left Denver on Tuesday andMexico City and return. Your travel from Denver must allocate your travel time on a day-to-dayflew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew fromto the border and from the border back to Den- basis between business days and nonbusinessNew York to Brussels, arriving the next morning.ver is travel in the United States, and the rules in days. The days you depart from and return to theOn Thursday and Friday, you had business dis-this section apply. The rules under Travel United States are both counted as days outsidecussions, and from Saturday until Tuesday, youOutside the United States apply to your trip from the United States.were sightseeing. You flew back to New York,the border to Mexico City and back to the border. To figure the deductible amount of yourarriving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday, round-trip travel expenses, use the followingyou flew back to Denver.Travel Outside fraction. The numerator (top number) is the totalAlthough you were away from your home in number of business days outside the Unitedthe United States Denver for more than a week, you were not States. The denominator (bottom number) is theoutside the United States for more than a week.If any part of your business travel is outside the total number of business and nonbusiness daysThis is because the day you depart does notUnited States, some of your deductions for the of travel.count as a day outside the United States.cost of getting to and from your destination may
You can deduct your cost of the round-tripbe limited. For this purpose, the United States Counting business days. Your business
flight between Denver and Brussels. You canincludes the 50 states and the District of Colum- days include transportation days, days your
also deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels forbia. presence was required, days you spent on busi-
Thursday and Friday while you conducted busi-How much of your travel expenses you can ness, and certain weekends and holidays.
ness. However, you cannot deduct the cost ofdeduct depends in part upon how much of your Transportation day. Count as a businessyour stay in Brussels from Saturday throughtrip outside the United States was business re- day any day you spend traveling to or from aTuesday because those days were spent onlated. business destination. However, if because of anonbusiness activities. nonbusiness activity you do not travel by a direct
Exception 3 - Less than 25% of time on route, your business days are the days it wouldTravel Entirely for Business or personal activities. Your trip is considered take you to travel a reasonably direct route toConsidered Entirely for Business entirely for business if: your business destination. Extra days for side
trips or nonbusiness activities cannot beYou can deduct all your travel expenses of get- • You were outside the United States for counted as business days.ting to and from your business destination if your more than a week, and
trip is entirely for business or considered entirely Presence required. Count as a business• You spent less than 25% of the total timefor business. day any day your presence is required at ayou were outside the United States on particular place for a specific business purpose.nonbusiness activities.Travel entirely for business. If you travel Count it as a business day even if you spend
outside the United States and you spend the For this purpose, count both the day your trip most of the day on nonbusiness activities.
entire time on business activities, you can de- began and the day it ended. Day spent on business. If your principalduct all of your travel expenses.
activity during working hours is the pursuit ofExample. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo,
your trade or business, count the day as a busi-Travel considered entirely for business. where you spent 14 days on business and 5
ness day. Also, count as a business day any dayEven if you did not spend your entire time on days on personal matters. You then flew back to
you are prevented from working because of cir-business activities, your trip is considered en- Seattle. You spent 1 day flying in each direction.
cumstances beyond your control.tirely for business if you meet at least one of the Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of yourfollowing four exceptions. total time abroad was for nonbusiness activities, Certain weekends and holidays. Count
Exception 1 - No substantial control. you can deduct as travel expenses what it would weekends, holidays, and other necessary
Your trip is considered entirely for business if have cost you to make the trip if you had not standby days as business days if they fall be-
you did not have substantial control over arrang- engaged in any nonbusiness activity. The tween business days. But if they follow your
ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing of amount you can deduct is the cost of the business meetings or activity and you remain at
Chapter 1 Travel Page 7

Page 8 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your business destination for nonbusiness or expenses in traveling from New York to Paris to conferences are directed toward specific occu-
personal reasons, do not count them as busi- Dublin and back to New York ($750 + $400 + pations or professions. It is up to each partici-
ness days. $700 = $1,850). pant to seek out specialists and organizational
Your deductible air travel expense is $1,364 settings appropriate to his or her occupational
Example 1. Your tax home is New York ($1,850 − $486). interests.
City. You travel to Quebec, where you have a Three-hour sessions are held each day overNonbusiness activity at, near, or beyondbusiness appointment on Friday. You have an- a 5-day period at each of the selected overseasbusiness destination. If you had a vacationother appointment on the following Monday. Be- facilities where participants can meet with indi-or other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyondcause your presence was required on both vidual practitioners. These sessions are com-your business destination, you must allocateFriday and Monday, they are business days. posed of a variety of activities includingpart of your travel expenses to the nonbusinessBecause the weekend is between business workshops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill de-activity.days, Saturday and Sunday are counted as velopment, and exercises. Professional confer-The part you must allocate is the amount itbusiness days. This is true even though you use ence directors schedule and conduct thewould have cost you to travel between the pointthe weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, or sessions. Participants can choose those ses-where travel outside the United States beginsother nonbusiness activity. sions they wish to attend.and your business destination and a return to
You can participate in this program since youthe point where travel outside the United StatesExample 2. If, in Example 1, you had no are a member of the alumni association. Youends.business in Quebec after Friday, but stayed until and your family take one of the trips. You spendYou determine the nonbusiness portion ofMonday before starting home, Saturday and about 2 hours at each of the planned sessions.that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. TheSunday would be nonbusiness days. The rest of the time you go touring and sightsee-numerator (top number) of the fraction is the
ing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1number of nonbusiness days during your travelNonbusiness activity on the way to or from week.outside the United States and the denominatoryour business destination. If you stopped
Your travel expenses for the trip are not(bottom number) is the total number of days youfor a vacation or other nonbusiness activity ei-
deductible since the trip was primarily a vaca-spend outside the United States.ther on the way from the United States to your
tion. However, registration fees and any otherNone of your travel expenses for nonbusi-business destination, or on the way back to the
incidental expenses you have for the fiveness activities at, near, or beyond your businessUnited States from your business destination,
planned sessions you attended that are directlydestination are deductible.you must allocate part of your travel expenses to
related and beneficial to your business are de-the nonbusiness activity.
ductible business expenses. These expensesExample. Assume that the dates are theThe part you must allocate is the amount it
should be specifically stated in your records tosame as in the previous example but that in-would have cost you to travel between the point
ensure proper allocation of your deductible busi-stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you flywhere travel outside the United States begins
ness expenses.to Venice, Italy, for a vacation.and your nonbusiness destination and a return
You cannot deduct any part of the cost ofto the point where travel outside the United
your trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris.States ends. Luxury Water Travel
In addition, you cannot deduct 7/18 of the airfareYou determine the nonbusiness portion of
and other expenses from New York to Paris and If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or otherthat expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The
back to New York. form of luxury water transportation for businessnumerator (top number) of the fraction is the
You can deduct 11/18 of the round-trip plane purposes, there is a daily limit on the amountnumber of nonbusiness days during your travel
fare and other travel expenses from New York to you can deduct. The limit is twice the highestoutside the United States and the denominator
Paris, plus your meals (subject to the 50% limit), federal per diem rate allowable at the time of(bottom number) is the total number of days you
lodging, and any other business expenses you your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem isspend outside the United States.
had in Paris. (Assume these expenses total the amount paid to federal government employ-
$4,939). If the round-trip plane fare and other ees for daily living expenses when they travelExample. You live in New York. On May 4
travel-related expenses (such as food during the away from home, but in the United States, foryou flew to Paris to attend a business confer-
trip) are $1,750, you can deduct travel costs of business purposes.)ence that began on May 5. The conference
$1,069 (11/18 ×  $1,750), plus the full $4,939 forended at noon on May 14. That evening you flew
Daily limit on luxury water travel. The high-the expenses you had in Paris.to Dublin where you visited with friends until the
est federal per diem rate allowed and the dailyafternoon of May 21, when you flew directly Other methods. You can use another method limit for luxury water travel in 2011 is shown inhome to New York. The primary purpose for the of counting business days if you establish that it the following table.trip was to attend the conference. more clearly reflects the time spent on otherIf you had not stopped in Dublin, you would than business activities outside the United Highest Daily Limithave arrived home the evening of May 14. You 2011 Federal on LuxuryStates.did not meet any of the exceptions that would Dates Per Diem Water Travel
allow you to consider your travel entirely for
Jan. 1 ± Mar. 31 $332 $664business. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are Travel Primarily for Personalbusiness days and May 15 through May 21 (7 Apr. 1 ± May 31 283 566Reasonsdays) are nonbusiness days. June 1 ± Sept. 30 304 608
You can deduct the cost of your meals (sub- If you travel outside the United States primarily Oct. 1 ± Dec. 31 366 732ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other busi- for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-
ness-related travel expenses while in Paris. tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personal
You cannot deduct your expenses while in expense. However, if you spend some time at- Example. Caroline, a travel agent, traveled
Dublin. You also cannot deduct 7/18 of what it tending brief professional seminars or a continu- by ocean liner from New York to London, Eng-
would have cost you to travel round-trip between ing education program, you can deduct your land, on business in May. Her expense for the
New York and Dublin. registration fees and other expenses you have 6-day cruise was $5,200. Caroline's deduction
You paid $750 to fly from New York to Paris, that are directly related to your business. for the cruise cannot exceed $3,396 (6 days ×
$400 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $700 to fly $566 daily limit).
from Dublin back to New York. Round-trip Example. The university from which you
airfare from New York to Dublin would have graduated has a continuing education program Meals and entertainment. If your expenses
been $1,250. for members of its alumni association. This pro- for luxury water travel include separately stated
You figure the deductible part of your air gram consists of trips to various foreign coun- amounts for meals or entertainment, those
travel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of the tries where academic exercises and amounts are subject to the 50% limit on meals
round-trip fare and other expenses you would conferences are set up to acquaint individuals in and entertainment before you apply the daily
have had in traveling directly between New York most occupations with selected facilities in sev- limit. For a discussion of the 50% Limit , see
and Dublin ($1,250 ×  7/18 = $486) from your total eral regions of the world. However, none of the chapter 2.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 9 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. In the previous example, Caro- • It is as reasonable to hold the meeting b. The number of hours each day that you
line's luxury water travel had a total cost of devoted to scheduled business activi-outside the North American area as in it.
$5,200. Of that amount, $3,700 was separately ties, andIf the meeting meets these requirements, youstated as meals and entertainment. Caroline, c. A program of the scheduled businessalso must satisfy the rules for deducting ex-who is self-employed, is not reimbursed for any activities of the meeting.penses for business trips in general, discussedof her travel expenses. Caroline figures her de- earlier under Travel Outside the United States.ductible travel expenses as follows. 5. You attach to your return a written state-
ment signed by an officer of the organiza-North American area. The North AmericanMeals and entertainment ..... . $3,700
tion or group sponsoring the meeting thatarea includes the following locations.50% limit ............... . ×  .50
includes:Allowable meals & entertainment $1,850
American Samoa Jarvis IslandOther travel expenses ...... . + 1,500
a. A schedule of the business activities ofAntigua and Barbuda Johnston IslandAllowable cost before the daily limit ... . $3,350
each day of the meeting, andAruba Kingman ReefDaily limit for May 2011 ..... . $ 566 Bahamas Marshall IslandsTimes number of days ...... . ×  6 b. The number of hours you attended theBaker Island MexicoMaximum luxury water travel deduction $3,396 scheduled business activities.Barbados Micronesia
Bermuda Midway IslandsAmount of allowable deduction .... . $3,350
Canada Netherlands Antilles
Caroline's deduction for her cruise is limited to Costa Rica Northern Mariana
Dominica Islands$3,350, even though the limit on luxury water
Dominican Republic Palautravel is slightly higher.
Grenada Palmyra Atoll
Not separately stated. If your meal or en- Guam Puerto Rico
tertainment charges are not separately stated or Guyana Trinidad and Tobago
2.Honduras USAare not clearly identifiable, you do not have to
Howland Island U.S. Virgin Islandsallocate any portion of the total charge to meals
Jamaica Wake Islandor entertainment.
The North American area also includes U.S. Entertainment
islands, cays, and reefs that are possessions ofExceptions
the United States and not part of the fifty states You may be able to deduct business-relatedThe daily limit on luxury water travel (discussed or the District of Columbia. entertainment expenses you have for entertain-earlier) does not apply to expenses you have to ing a client, customer, or employee. The rulesattend a convention, seminar, or meeting on and definitions are summarized in Table 2-1.Reasonableness test. The following factorsboard a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships  under
You can deduct entertainment expensesare taken into account to determine if it wasConventions Held Outside the North American
only if they are both ordinary and necessary andreasonable to hold the meeting outside theArea.
meet one of the following tests.North American area.
• Directly-related test.Conventions • The purpose of the meeting and the activi-
ties taking place at the meeting. • Associated test.You can deduct your travel expenses when you
• The purposes and activities of the spon-attend a convention if you can show that your Both of these tests are explained later.
soring organizations or groups.attendance benefits your trade or business. You An ordinary expense is one that is commoncannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam- • The homes of the active members of the and accepted in your trade or business. A nec-ily. sponsoring organizations and the places essary expense is one that is helpful and appro-If the convention is for investment, political, at which other meetings of the sponsoring priate for your business. An expense does notsocial, or other purposes unrelated to your trade organizations or groups have been or will have to be required to be considered necessary.or business, you cannot deduct the expenses. be held. The amount you can deduct for enter-Your appointment or election as a dele- • Other relevant factors you may present. tainment expenses may be limited.gate does not, in itself, determine Generally, you can deduct only 50% of
CAUTION
!whether you can deduct travel ex-
CAUTION
! your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.penses. You can deduct your travel expenses Cruise Ships This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.only if your attendance is connected to your own
You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of yourtrade or business.
expenses of attending conventions, seminars,Convention agenda. The convention agenda or similar meetings held on cruise ships. Allor program generally shows the purpose of the ships that sail are considered cruise ships. Directly-Related Testconvention. You can show your attendance at
You can deduct these expenses only if all ofthe convention benefits your trade or business
To meet the directly-related test for entertain-by comparing the agenda with the official duties the following requirements are met.
ment expenses (including entertainment-relatedand responsibilities of your position. The agenda
1. The convention, seminar, or meeting is di- meals), you must show that:does not have to deal specifically with your offi-
rectly related to your trade or business.cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enough • The main purpose of the combined busi-
if the agenda is so related to your position that it 2. The cruise ship is a vessel registered in ness and entertainment was the active
shows your attendance was for business pur- conduct of business,the United States.
poses.
• You did engage in business with the per-3. All of the cruise ship's ports of call are in
son during the entertainment period, andthe United States or in possessions of the
United States.Conventions Held Outside • You had more than a general expectation
the North American Area of getting income or some other specific4. You attach to your return a written state-
business benefit at some future time.ment signed by you that includes informa-You cannot deduct expenses for attending a tion about:convention, seminar, or similar meeting held Business is generally not considered to be theoutside the North American area unless: a. The total days of the trip (not including main purpose when business and entertainment
the days of transportation to and from• The meeting is directly related to your are combined on hunting or fishing trips, or on
the cruise ship port),trade or business, and yachts or other pleasure boats. Even if you show
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 9

Page 10 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Directly before or after a substantial busi-Table 2-1.  When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible? ness discussion (defined later).
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client,
customer, or employee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or Associated with trade or business. Gener-the associated test. ally, an expense is associated with the active
conduct of your trade or business if you canDefinitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide show that you had a clear business purpose forentertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes meals having the expense. The purpose may be to getprovided to a customer or client.
new business or to encourage the continuation• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your of an existing business relationship.trade or business.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate.
Substantial business discussion. Whether
Tests to be met Directly-related test a business discussion is substantial depends on
the facts of each case. A business discussion• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
will not be considered substantial unless you• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business,
can show that you actively engaged in the dis-and
cussion, meeting, negotiation, or other businessYou did engage in business with the person during the entertainment
transaction to get income or some other specificperiod, and
business benefit.You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some
other specific business benefit. The meeting does not have to be for any
specified length of time, but you must show thatAssociated test the business discussion was substantial in rela-
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and tion to the meal or entertainment. It is not neces-
• Entertainment is directly before or after a substantial business sary that you devote more time to business than
discussion. to entertainment. You do not have to discuss
business during the meal or entertainment.Other rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment
Meetings at conventions. You are consid-expense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
ered to have a substantial business discussion if• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the
you attend meetings at a convention or similarcircumstances.
event, or at a trade or business meeting spon-• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed sored and conducted by a business or profes-entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit).
sional organization. However, your reason for
attending the convention or meeting must be to
further your trade or business. The organizationthat business was the main purpose, you gener- of business and civic leaders at the open- that sponsors the convention or meeting musting of a new hotel or play when the pur-ally cannot deduct the expenses for the use of schedule a program of business activities that ispose is to get business publicity ratheran entertainment facility. See Entertainment fa- the main activity of the convention or meeting.than to create or maintain the goodwill ofcilities under What Entertainment Expenses Are
the persons entertained.Not Deductible? later in this chapter. Directly before or after business discussion.
You must consider all the facts, including the If the entertainment is held on the same day as
Expenses not considered directly related.nature of the business transacted and the rea- the business discussion, it is considered to be
Entertainment expenses generally are not con- held directly before or after the business discus-sons for conducting business during the enter-
sidered directly related if you are not there or in sion.tainment. It is not necessary to devote more time
situations where there are substantial distrac- If the entertainment and the business discus-to business than to entertainment. However, if tions that generally prevent you from actively sion are not held on the same day, you mustthe business discussion is only incidental to the conducting business. The following are exam- consider the facts of each case to see if theentertainment, the entertainment expenses do ples of situations where there are substantial associated test is met. Among the facts to con-not meet the directly-related test. distractions. sider are the place, date, and duration of the
business discussion. If you or your business• A meeting or discussion at a nightclub,You do not have to show that business associates are from out of town, you must alsotheater, or sporting event.income or other business benefit actu- consider the dates of arrival and departure, andally resulted from each entertainment • A meeting or discussion during what is
TIP the reasons the entertainment and the discus-expense. essentially a social gathering, such as a sion did not take place on the same day.
cocktail party.Clear business setting. If the entertainment
takes place in a clear business setting and is for Example. A group of business associates• A meeting with a group that includes per-
your business or work, the expenses are consid- comes from out of town to your place of busi-sons who are not business associates at
ness to hold a substantial business discussion.ered directly related to your business or work. places such as cocktail lounges, country
If you entertain those business guests on theThe following situations are examples of enter- clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacation
evening before the business discussion, or ontainment in a clear business setting. resorts.
the evening of the day following the business• Entertainment in a hospitality room at a discussion, the entertainment generally is con-
convention where business goodwill is sidered to be held directly before or after the
created through the display or discussion discussion. The expense meets the associated
of business products. test. Associated Test
• Entertainment that is mainly a price rebate
Even if your expenses do not meet the di-on the sale of your products (such as a
rectly-related test, they may meet the associ-restaurant owner providing an occasional
50% Limitated test.free meal to a loyal customer).
To meet the associated test for entertain-• Entertainment of a clear business nature In general, you can deduct only 50% of yourment expenses (including entertainment-relatedoccurring under circumstances where business-related meal and entertainment ex-meals), you must show that the entertainment is:there is no meaningful personal or social penses. (If you are subject to the Department of
relationship between you and the persons • Associated with the active conduct of your Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits, you
entertained. An example is entertainment trade or business, and can deduct 80% of your business-related meal
Page 10 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 11 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
have to determine the amount of meal and en-Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses? tertainment expenses that would be deductible
under the other rules discussed in this publica-There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
tion.
Example 1. You spend $200 for a busi-
ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount is not
allowable because it is lavish and extravagant,
the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit.
Your deduction cannot be more than $45 (50% ×
$90).
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You
paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face
value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction
cannot be more than $80 (50% ×  $160).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
Figure A can help you determine if the 50% limit
applies to you.
Expenses not subject to 50% limit. Your
meal or entertainment expense is not subject to
the 50% limit if the expense meets one of the
following exceptions.
1 - Employee's reimbursed expenses. If
you are an employee, you are not subject to the
50% limit on expenses for which your employer
reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
2 - Self-employed. If you are
self-employed, your deductible meal and enter-
tainment expenses are not subject to the 50%
limit if all of the following requirements are met.
• You have these expenses as an indepen-
dent contractor.
• Your customer or client reimburses you or
gives you an allowance for these ex-
penses in connection with services you
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
Start Here
perform.
• You provide adequate records of these ex-and entertainment expenses. See Individuals • Cover charges for admission to a night- penses to your customer or client. (Seesubject to ªhours of serviceº limits, later.) club, chapter 5.)The 50% limit applies to employees or their • Rent paid for a room in which you hold a
employers, and to self-employed persons (in- dinner or cocktail party, and In this case, your client or customer is subjectcluding independent contractors) or their clients, to the 50% limit on the expenses.• Amounts paid for parking at a sportsdepending on whether the expenses are reim-
arena.bursed. Example. You are a self-employed attorney
However, the cost of transportation to and from  Figure A  summarizes the general rules who adequately accounts for meal and enter-
a business meal or a business-related entertain-explained in this section. tainment expenses to a client who reimburses
ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit. you for these expenses. You are not subject toThe 50% limit applies to business meals or
the directly-related or associated test, nor areentertainment expenses you have while:
you subject to the 50% limit. If the client canApplication of 50% limit. The 50% limit on• Traveling away from home (whether eat- deduct the expenses, the client is subject to themeal and entertainment expenses applies if theing alone or with others) on business, 50% limit.expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov- If you (as an independent contractor) have• Entertaining customers at your place of ered by one of the exceptions discussed later. expenses for meals and entertainment related tobusiness, a restaurant, or other location, The 50% limit also applies to certain meal providing services for a client but do not ade-or and entertainment expenses that are not busi- quately account for and seek reimbursementness related. It applies to meal and entertain-• Attending a business convention or recep- from the client for those expenses, you are sub-ment expenses you have for the production oftion, business meeting, or business lunch- ject to the directly-related or associated test andincome, including rental or royalty income. Iteon at a club. to the 50% limit.also applies to the cost of meals included in
deductible educational expenses. 3 - Advertising expenses. You are not sub-Included expenses. Expenses subject to the ject to the 50% limit if you provide meals, enter-50% limit include: When to apply the 50% limit. You apply the tainment, or recreational facilities to the general
• Taxes and tips relating to a business meal 50% limit after determining the amount that public as a means of advertising or promoting
or entertainment activity, would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first goodwill in the community. For example, neither
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 11

Page 12 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the expense of sponsoring a television or radio taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter- organizations include business leagues, cham-
show nor the expense of distributing free food tainment-related meal, you or your employee bers of commerce, real estate boards, trade
and beverages to the general public is subject to must be present when the food or beverages are associations, and professional associations.
the 50% limit. provided. Entertainment tickets. Generally, you cannot
4 - Sale of meals or entertainment. You You cannot claim the cost of your meal deduct more than the face value of an entertain-
are not subject to the 50% limit if you actually both as an entertainment expense and ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. For
sell meals, entertainment, goods and services, as a travel expense. example, you cannot deduct service fees you
CAUTION
!
or use of facilities to the public. For example, if pay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount
Meals sold in the normal course of youryou run a nightclub, your expense for the enter- over the face value of the tickets you pay to
business are not considered entertain-tainment you furnish to your customers, such as scalpers.
ment.a floor show, is not subject to the 50% limit.
TIP Exception for events that benefit charita-
ble organizations. Different rules apply when5 - Charitable sports event. You are not Deduction may depend on your type of the cost of a ticket to a sports event benefits asubject to the 50% limit if you pay for a package business. Your kind of business may deter- charitable organization. You can take into ac-deal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita- mine if a particular activity is considered enter- count the full cost you pay for the ticket, even if itble sports event. For the conditions the sports tainment. For example, if you are a dress is more than the face value, if all of the followingevent must meet, see Exception for events that designer and have a fashion show to introduce conditions apply.benefit charitable organizations under What En- your new designs to store buyers, the showtertainment Expenses Are Deductible?, later. generally is not considered entertainment. This • The event's main purpose is to benefit a
is because fashion shows are typical in your qualified charitable organization.Individuals subject to ªhours of serviceº lim-
business. But, if you are an appliance distributorits. You can deduct a higher percentage of • The entire net proceeds go to the charity.and hold a fashion show for the spouses of youryour meal expenses while traveling away from
retailers, the show generally is considered en- • The event uses volunteers to perform sub-your tax home if the meals take place during or
tertainment. stantially all the event's work.incident to any period subject to the Department
of Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits. The Separating costs. If you have one expensepercentage is 80%. The 50% limit on entertainment doesthat includes the costs of entertainment andIndividuals subject to the Department of not apply to any expense for a packageother services (such as lodging or transporta-Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits include deal that includes a ticket to such ation), you must allocate that expense between
TIPthe following persons. charitable sports event.the cost of entertainment and the cost of other
services. You must have a reasonable basis for• Certain air transportation workers (such as
making this allocation. For example, you mustpilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and Example 1. You purchase tickets to a golf
allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-control tower operators) who are under tournament organized by the local volunteer fire
tainment in its lounge on the same bill with yourFederal Aviation Administration regula- company. All net proceeds will be used to buy
room charge.tions. new fire equipment. The volunteers will run the
tournament. You can deduct the entire cost ofTaking turns paying for meals or entertain-• Interstate truck operators and bus drivers the tickets as a business expense if they other-ment. If a group of business acquaintanceswho are under Department of Transporta- wise qualify as an entertainment expense.take turns picking up each others' meal or enter-tion regulations.
tainment checks without regard to whether any• Certain railroad employees (such as engi- Example 2.  You purchase tickets to a col-business purposes are served, no member ofneers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- lege football game through a ticket broker. Afterthe group can deduct any part of the expense.ers, and control operations personnel) having a business discussion, you take a client
who are under Federal Railroad Adminis- Lavish or extravagant expenses. You can- to the game. Net proceeds from the game go to
tration regulations. not deduct expenses for entertainment that are colleges that qualify as charitable organizations.
lavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid- However, since the colleges also pay individuals• Certain merchant mariners who are under ered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable to perform services, such as coaching andCoast Guard regulations. considering the facts and circumstances. Ex- recruiting, you can only use the face value of the
penses will not be disallowed just because they tickets in determining your business deduction.
are more than a fixed dollar amount or take Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes. Ifplace at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs, you rent a skybox or other private luxury box foror resorts.What Entertainment more than one event at the same sports arena,
Allocating between business and nonbusi- you generally cannot deduct more than the priceExpenses ness. If you entertain business and nonbusi- of a nonluxury box seat ticket.
ness individuals at the same event, you must To determine whether a skybox has beenAre Deductible? divide your entertainment expenses between rented for more than one event, count each
business and nonbusiness. You can deduct only game or other performance as one event. ForThis section explains different types of entertain- the business part. If you cannot establish the example, renting a skybox for a series of playoffment expenses you may be able to deduct. part of the expense for each person participat- games is considered renting it for more than one
ing, allocate the expense to each participant onEntertainment. Entertainment includes any event. All skyboxes you rent in the same arena,
a pro rata basis.activity generally considered to provide enter- along with any rentals by related parties, are
tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples considered in making this determination.
Example. You entertain a group of individu-include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so- Related parties include:
als that includes yourself, three business pros-cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at • Family members (spouses, ancestors, andpects, and seven social guests. Only 4/11 of thesporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish- lineal descendants),expense qualifies as a business entertainmenting, vacation, and similar trips.
expense. You cannot deduct the expenses forEntertainment also may include meeting per- • Parties who have made a reciprocal ar-
the seven social guests because those costs aresonal, living, or family needs of individuals, such rangement involving the sharing of
nonbusiness expenses.as providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to skyboxes,
customers or their families. Trade association meetings. You can de- • Related corporations,
A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter- duct entertainment expenses that are directly • A partnership and its principal partners,tainment includes the cost of a meal you provide related to and necessary for attending business andto a customer or client, whether the meal is a meetings or conventions of certain exempt orga-
part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal nizations if the expenses of your attendance are • A corporation and a partnership with com-
expense includes the cost of food, beverages, related to your active trade or business. These mon ownership.
Page 12 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 13 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seat beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that indirect gift to the customer. This rule does not
skybox at Team Stadium for three baseball you provided during entertainment at a facility. apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-
games. The cost of regular nonluxury box seats These are not expenses for the use of an enter- ness connection with that family member and
at each event is $30 a seat. You can deduct tainment facility. However, these expenses are the gift is not intended for the customer's even-
(subject to the 50% limit) $900 ((10 seats ×  $30 subject to the directly-related and associated tual use.
each) ×  3 events). tests and to the 50% limit, all discussed earlier. If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of
you are treated as one taxpayer. It does notFood and beverages in skybox seats. If Expenses for spouses. You generally cannot matter whether you have separate businesses,expenses for food and beverages are separately deduct the cost of entertainment for your spouse are separately employed, or whether each ofstated, you can deduct these expenses in addi- or for the spouse of a customer. However, you you has an independent connection with thetion to the amounts allowable for the skybox, can deduct these costs if you can show you had recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-subject to the requirements and limits that apply. a clear business purpose, rather than a personal ship and the partners are treated as one tax-The amounts separately stated for food and or social purpose, for providing the entertain- payer.beverages must be reasonable. You cannot in- ment.
flate the charges for food and beverages to Example. Bob Jones sells products to Localavoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals. Example. You entertain a customer. The Company. He and his wife, Jan, gave Local
cost is an ordinary and necessary business ex- Company three cheese packages to thank them
pense and is allowed under the entertainment for their business. They paid $80 for each pack-
rules. The customer's spouse joins you because age, or $240 total. Three of Local Company's
it is impractical to entertain the customer withoutWhat Entertainment executives took the packages home for their
the spouse. You can deduct the cost of enter- families' use. Bob and Jan have no independentExpenses Are Not taining the customer's spouse. If your spouse business relationship with any of the executives'
joins the party because the customer's spouse other family members. They can deduct a totalDeductible? is present, the cost of the entertainment for your of $75 ($25 limit ×  3) for the cheese packages.
spouse is also deductible.
This section explains different types of entertain- Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as
Gift or entertainment. Any item that might bement expenses you generally may not be able to engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,
considered either a gift or entertainment gener-deduct. and mailing, are generally not included in deter-
ally will be considered entertainment. However, mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25
Club dues and membership fees. You can- if you give a customer packaged food or bever- limit.
not deduct dues (including initiation fees) for ages that you intend the customer to use at a A cost is incidental only if it does not add
membership in any club organized for: later date, treat it as a gift. substantial value to the gift. For example, the
If you give a customer tickets to a theater cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-• Business, performance or sporting event and you do not go ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for• Pleasure, with the customer to the performance or event, packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the
you have a choice. You can treat the tickets as value of the basket is substantial compared to• Recreation, or either a gift or entertainment, whichever is to the value of the fruit.• Other social purpose. your advantage.
Exceptions. The following items are not con-You can change your treatment of the ticketsThis rule applies to any membership organiza- sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. at a later date by filing an amended return.tion if one of its principal purposes is either: Generally, an amended return must be filed 1. An item that costs $4 or less and:• To conduct entertainment activities for within 3 years from the date the original return
members or their guests, or was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax a. Has your name clearly and permanently
was paid, whichever is later. imprinted on the gift, and• To provide members or their guests with
If you go with the customer to the event, youaccess to entertainment facilities, dis- b. Is one of a number of identical itemsmust treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-cussed later. you widely distribute. Examples includement expense. You cannot choose, in this case,
pens, desk sets, and plastic bags andto treat the tickets as a gift.The purposes and activities of a club, not its cases.name, will determine whether or not you can
deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid 2. Signs, display racks, or other promotionalto: material to be used on the business prem-
ises of the recipient.• Country clubs,
• Golf and athletic clubs, Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be3. considered either a gift or entertainment gener-• Airline clubs,
ally will be considered entertainment. However,• Hotel clubs, and if you give a customer packaged food or bever-
ages you intend the customer to use at a laterGifts• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-
date, treat it as a gift.cumstances generally considered to be
If you give a customer tickets to a theaterconducive to business discussions. If you give gifts in the course of your trade or
performance or sporting event and you do not gobusiness, you can deduct all or part of the cost.
with the customer to the performance or event,This chapter explains the limits and rules forEntertainment facilities. Generally, you can- you have a choice. You can treat the cost of thededucting the costs of gifts.not deduct any expense for the use of an enter- tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-tainment facility. This includes expenses for $25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25 ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.depreciation and operating costs such as rent, for business gifts you give directly or indirectly to You can change your treatment of the ticketsutilities, maintenance, and protection. each person during your tax year. A gift to a at a later date by filing an amended return.An entertainment facility is any property you company that is intended for the eventual per- Generally, an amended return must be filedown, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples sonal use or benefit of a particular person or a within 3 years from the date the original returninclude a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, limited class of people will be considered an was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxswimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, indirect gift to that particular person or to the was paid, whichever is later.airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a individuals within that class of people who re-  If you go with the customer to the event, youvacation resort. ceive the gift. must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
Out-of-pocket expenses. You can deduct If you give a gift to a member of a customer's ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,
out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and family, the gift is generally considered to be an to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.
Chapter 3 Gifts Page 13

Page 14 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your car expense deduction. See Car Expenses,Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible? later.
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. (Do not use this chart if your Daily transportation expenses you incur while
home is your principal place of business. See Office in the home.) traveling from home to one or more regular
places of business are generally nondeductible
commuting expenses. However, there may be
exceptions to this general rule. You can deduct
daily transportation expenses incurred going be-
tween your residence and a temporary work
station outside the metropolitan area where you
live. Also, daily transportation expenses can be
deducted if: (1) If you have one or more regular
work locations away from your residence or (2)
your residence is your principal place of busi-
ness and you incur expenses going between the
residence and another work location in the same
trade or business, regardless of whether the
work is temporary or permanent and regardless
of the distance.
Illustration of transportation expenses. 
Figure B  illustrates the rules that apply for
deducting transportation expenses when you
have a regular or main job away from your
home. You may want to refer to it when deciding
whether you can deduct your transportation ex-
penses.
Temporary work location. If you have one or
more regular work locations away from your
home and you commute to a temporary work
location in the same trade or business, you can
deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last (and does in fact
last) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo-
rary unless there are facts and circumstances
that would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last for more than 1 year
or if there is no realistic expectation that the
employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
ployment is not temporary, regardless of
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.
If employment at a work location initially is
realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,
but at some later date the employment is realisti-
cally expected to last more than 1 year, that
employment will be treated as temporary (un-
less there are facts and circumstances that
would indicate otherwise) until your expectation
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. If you do not go directly from your first job to your second
job, you can only deduct the transportation expenses of going directly from your first
job to your second job. You cannot deduct your transportation expenses between
your home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
changes. It will not be treated as temporary after
the date you determine it will last more than 1
when you are traveling within the city or year.
general area that is your tax home. Tax If the temporary work location is beyond the
home is defined in chapter 1. general area of your regular place of work and4. you stay overnight, you are traveling away from• Visiting clients or customers. home. You may have deductible travel ex-
• Going to a business meeting away from penses as discussed in chapter 1.
your regular workplace.
Transportation No regular place of work. If you have no• Getting from your home to a temporary regular place of work but ordinarily work in the
workplace when you have one or more metropolitan area where you live, you can de-This chapter discusses expenses you can de- regular places of work. These temporary duct daily transportation costs between homeduct for business transportation when you are workplaces can be either within the area and a temporary work site outside that metropol-not traveling away from home  as defined in
itan area.of your tax home or outside that area.chapter 1. These expenses include the cost of
Generally, a metropolitan area includes thetransportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the Transportation expenses do not include ex- area within the city limits and the suburbs thatcost of driving and maintaining your car. penses you have while traveling away from are considered part of that metropolitan area.Transportation expenses include the ordi- home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex- You cannot deduct daily transportation costsnary and necessary costs of all of the following. penses discussed in chapter 1. However, if you between your home and temporary work sites
use your car while traveling away from home• Getting from one workplace to another in within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
the course of your business or profession overnight, use the rules in this chapter to figure ductible commuting expenses.
Page 14 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 15 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Two places of work. If you work at two places for commuting or other personal uses, you still
in one day, whether or not for the same em- cannot deduct your expenses for those uses. Car Expensesployer, you can deduct the expense of getting Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost offrom one workplace to the other. However, if for If you use your car for business purposes, youusing your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do notsome personal reason you do not go directly ordinarily can deduct car expenses. You gener-include payments you receive from the passen-from one location to the other, you cannot de- ally can use one of the two following methods togers in your income. These payments are con-duct more than the amount it would have cost figure your deductible expenses.sidered reimbursements of your expenses.you to go directly from the first location to the
• Standard mileage rate.second. However, if you operate a car pool for a profit,
Transportation expenses you have in going you must include payments from passengers in • Actual car expenses.between home and a part-time job on a day off your income. You can then deduct your car
from your main job are commuting expenses. expenses (using the rules in this publication). If you use actual expenses to figure your de-You cannot deduct them. duction for a car you lease, there are rules thatHauling tools or instruments. Hauling affect the amount of your lease payments youArmed Forces reservists. A meeting of an tools or instruments in your car while commuting can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later.Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of to and from work does not make your car ex-business if the meeting is held on a day on which In this publication, ªcarº includes a van,penses deductible. However, you can deductyou work at your regular job. You can deduct the pickup, or panel truck. For the definition of ªcarºany additional costs you have for hauling tools orexpense of getting from one workplace to the for depreciation purposes, see Car definedinstruments (such as for renting a trailer you towother as just discussed under Two places of under Actual Car Expenses, later.
with your car).work. You may be entitled to a tax credit forYou usually cannot deduct the expense if the Union members' trips from a union hall. If an alternative motor vehicle you placereserve meeting is held on a day on which you you get your work assignments at a union hall in service during the year. The vehicle
TIPdo not work at your regular job. In this case, your and then go to your place of work, the costs of must meet certain requirements, and you do nottransportation generally is a nondeductible com- getting from the union hall to your place of work have to use it in your business to qualify for themuting expense. However, you can deduct your credit. However, you must reduce your basis forare nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-transportation expenses if the location of the depreciation of the alternative motor vehicle bythough you need the union to get your workmeeting is temporary and you have one or more the amount of the credit you claim. See Depreci-assignments, you are employed where youregular places of work. ation Deduction , later, under Actual Car Ex-work, not where the union hall is located.If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol- penses.itan area but not at any specific location and the
 For more information on alternative motor vehi-reserve meeting is held at a temporary location Office in the home. If you have an office in cles, see Form 8910, Alternative Motor Vehicleoutside that metropolitan area, you can deduct your home that qualifies as a principal place of Credit.your transportation expenses. business, you can deduct your daily transporta-If you travel away from home overnight to Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mailtion costs between your home and another workattend a guard or reserve meeting, you can carrier, you may be able to treat the qualified
location in the same trade or business. (Seededuct your travel expenses. These expenses reimbursement you received as your allowable
Publication 587, Business Use of Your Home,are discussed in chapter 1. expense. Because the qualified reimbursement
for information on determining if your home of-If you travel more than 100 miles away from is treated as paid under an accountable plan,
home in connection with your performance of fice qualifies as a principal place of business.) your employer should not include the reimburse-
services as a member of the reserves, you may ment in your income.
be able to deduct some of your reserve-related If your vehicle expenses are more than theExamples of deductible transportation. Thetravel costs as an adjustment to gross income amount of your reimbursement, you can deductfollowing examples show when you can deductrather than as an itemized deduction. For more the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-transportation expenses based on the locationinformation, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav- duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You mustof your work and your home.eling More Than 100 Miles From Home  under complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Form
Special Rules, in chapter 6. 1040, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.Example 1. You regularly work in an office
A ªqualified reimbursementº is the reim-Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct in the city where you live. Your employer sends bursement you receive that meets both of thethe costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, you to a 1-week training session at a different following conditions.or of driving a car between your home and your office in the same city. You travel directly frommain or regular place of work. These costs are • It is given as an equipment maintenanceyour home to the training location and returnpersonal commuting expenses. You cannot de- allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.each day. You can deduct the cost of your dailyduct commuting expenses no matter how far Postal Service.round-trip transportation between your homeyour home is from your regular place of work.
and the training location. • It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if
lective bargaining agreement. Any lateryou work during the commuting trip.
Example 2. Your principal place of business agreement cannot increase the qualified
is in your home. You can deduct the cost of reimbursement amount by more than theExample. You sometimes use your cell
rate of inflation.round-trip transportation between your qualify-phone to make business calls while commuting
to and from work. Sometimes business associ- ing home office and your client's or customer's See your employer for information on your reim-ates ride with you to and from work, and you place of business. bursement.have a business discussion in the car. These
activities do not change the trip from personal to Example 3. You have no regular office, and If you are a rural mail carrier and re-business. You cannot deduct your commuting you do not have an office in your home. In this ceived a qualified reimbursement, youexpenses. case, the location of your first business contact cannot use the standard mileage rate.
CAUTION
!
inside the metropolitan area is considered yourParking fees. Fees you pay to park your car
office. Transportation expenses between yourat your place of business are nondeductible Standard Mileage Ratehome and this first contact are nondeductiblecommuting expenses. You can, however, de-
duct business-related parking fees when visiting commuting expenses. Transportation expenses You may be able to use the standard mileagea customer or client. between your last business contact and your rate to figure the deductible costs of operating
home are also nondeductible commuting ex- your car for business purposes. For 2011, theAdvertising display on car. Putting display
penses. While you cannot deduct the costs of standard mileage rate for the cost of operatingmaterial that advertises your business on your
these trips, you can deduct the costs of going your car for business use is 51 cents per milecar does not change the use of your car from
before July 1, 2011. After June 30, 2011, thefrom one client or customer to another.personal use to business use. If you use this car
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 15

Page 16 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business mileage rate increases to 55 1/2 cents Note. Beginning in 2011, you can elect to Personal property taxes. If you itemize your
per mile. deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you canuse the standard mileage rate if you used a car
deduct on line 7 state and local personal prop-for hire (such as a taxi). However, if you use fiveIf you use the standard mileage rate for erty taxes on motor vehicles. You can take thisor more cars at the same time (as in fleet opera-a year, you cannot deduct your actual deduction even if you use the standard mileagetions) then you cannot elect to use the standardcar expenses for that year. You cannot
CAUTION
! rate or if you do not use the car for business.mileage rate.deduct depreciation, lease payments, mainte- If you are self-employed and use your car innance and repairs, gasoline (including gasoline Five or more cars. If you own or lease five your business, you can deduct the business parttaxes), oil, insurance, or vehicle registration or more cars that are used for business at the of state and local personal property taxes onfees. See Choosing the standard mileage rate same time, you cannot use the standard mile- motor vehicles on Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ,and Standard mileage rate not allowed, later. age rate for the business use of any car. How- or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize yourever, you may be able to deduct your actualYou generally can use the standard mileage deductions, you can include the remainder of
expenses for operating each of the cars in yourrate whether or not you are reimbursed and your state and local personal property taxes on
business. See Actual Car Expenses , later, forwhether or not any reimbursement is more or the car on Schedule A (Form 1040).
information on how to figure your deduction.less than the amount figured using the standard
Parking fees and tolls. In addition to usingmileage rate. See chapter 6 for more information You are not using five or more cars for busi-
the standard mileage rate, you can deduct anyon reimbursements. ness at the same time if you alternate using (use
business-related parking fees and tolls. (Parkingat different times) the cars for business.
fees you pay to park your car at your place ofChoosing the standard mileage rate. If you The following examples illustrate the rules work are nondeductible commuting expenses.)want to use the standard mileage rate for a car for when you can and cannot use the standardyou own, you must choose to use it in the first mileage rate for five or more cars. Sale, trade-in, or other disposition. If youyear the car is available for use in your business. sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car,Then in later years, you can choose to use either Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns you may have a gain or loss on the transactionthe standard mileage rate or actual expenses. three cars and two vans that she alternates or an adjustment to the basis of your new car.
If you want to use the standard mileage rate using for calling on her customers. She can use See Disposition of a Car, later.
for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire the standard mileage rate for the business mile-
lease period. For leases that began on or before age of the three cars and the two vans because Actual Car ExpensesDecember 31, 1997, the standard mileage rate she does not use them at the same time.
must be used for the entire portion of the lease If you do not use the standard mileage rate, youperiod (including renewals) that is after 1997. Example 2. Tony and his employees use may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.
You must make the choice to use the stan- his four pickup trucks in his landscaping busi-
If you qualify to use both methods, youdard mileage rate by the due date (including ness. During the year, he traded in two of his old may want to figure your deduction bothextensions) of your return. You cannot revoke trucks for two newer ones. Tony can use the ways to see which gives you a larger
TIPthe choice. However, in later years, you can standard mileage rate for the business mileage deduction.switch from the standard mileage rate to the of all six of the trucks he owned during the year.
Actual car expenses include:actual expenses method. If you change to the
Example 3. Chris owns a repair shop andactual expenses method in a later year, but
Depreciation Lease Registration before your car is fully depreciated, you have to an insurance business. He and his employees Licenses payments feesestimate the remaining useful life of the car and use his two pickup trucks and van for the repair Gas Insurance Repairsuse straight line depreciation. shop. Chris alternates using his two cars for the Oil Garage rent Tiresinsurance business. No one else uses the cars Tolls Parking feesExample. Larry is an employee who occa- for business purposes. Chris can use the stan-
If you have fully depreciated a car that yousionally uses his own car for business purposes. dard mileage rate for the business use of the
still use in your business, you can continue toHe purchased the car in 2009, but he did not pickup trucks, van, and the cars because he
claim your other actual car expenses. Continueclaim any unreimbursed employee expenses on never has more than four vehicles used for busi-
to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5.his 2009 tax return. Because Larry did not use ness at the same time.
the standard mileage rate the first year the car Business and personal use. If you use yourwas available for business use, he cannot use Example 4. Maureen owns a car and four car for both business and personal purposes,the standard mileage rate in 2011 to claim un- vans that are used in her housecleaning busi- you must divide your expenses between busi-reimbursed employee business expenses. ness. Her employees use the vans, and she ness and personal use. You can divide your
uses the car to travel to various customers.For more information about depreciation in- expense based on the miles driven for each
Maureen cannot use the standard mileage ratecluded in the standard mileage rate, see Excep- purpose.
for the car or the vans. This is because all fivetion under Methods of depreciation  under
vehicles are used in Maureen's business at theDepreciation Deduction, later. Example. You are a sales representative
same time. She must use actual expenses for all for a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000
Standard mileage rate not allowed. You vehicles. miles during the year: 12,000 miles for business
cannot use the standard mileage rate if you: and 8,000 miles for personal use. You can claim
Interest. If you are an employee, you cannot only 60% (12,000 ÷  20,000) of the cost of oper-• Use five or more cars at the same time (as
deduct any interest paid on a car loan. This ating your car as a business expense.in fleet operations),
applies even if you use the car 100% for busi- Employer-provided vehicle. If you use a ve-• Claimed a depreciation deduction for the ness as an employee. hicle provided by your employer for businesscar using any method other than straight However, if you are self-employed and use purposes, you can deduct your actual un-line, for example, MACRS (as discussed your car in your business, you can deduct that reimbursed car expenses. You cannot use thelater under Depreciation Deduction), part of the interest expense that represents your standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided bybusiness use of the car. For example, if you use• Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis- Your Employer in chapter 6.your car 60% for business, you can deduct 60%cussed later) on the car,
Interest on car loans. If you are an employee,of the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). You• Claimed the special depreciation allow- you cannot deduct any interest paid on a carcannot deduct the part of the interest expenseance on the car, loan. This interest is treated as personal interestthat represents your personal use of the car.
and is not deductible. If you are self-employed• Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 If you use a home equity loan to and use your car in that business, see Interest,for a car you leased, or purchase your car, you may be able to earlier, under Standard Mileage Rate.deduct the interest. See Publication• Are a rural mail carrier who received a
TIP
936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, forqualified reimbursement. (See Rural mail Taxes paid on your car. If you are an em-
more information.carriers, earlier.) ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes
Page 16 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 17 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enter for the driver, or only for the driver plus a folding If the cost of your qualifying section 179
the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Form jump seat, are qualified nonpersonal use vehi- property placed in service in 2011 is over
1040). cles. $2,000,000, you must reduce the $500,000 dol-
lar limit (but not below zero) by the amount ofSales taxes. Generally, sales taxes on your More information. See Depreciation De- cost over $2,000,000. If the cost of your sectioncar are part of your car's basis and are recov- duction, later, for more information on how to 179 property placed in service during 2011 isered through depreciation, discussed later. depreciate your vehicle. $2,500,000 or more, you cannot take a section
Fines and collateral. You cannot deduct fines 179 deduction.
you pay or collateral you forfeit for traffic viola- The total amount you can deduct under sec-Section 179 Deductiontions. tion 179 each year after you apply the limits
The section 179 deduction allows you to treat a listed above cannot be more than the taxableCasualty and theft losses. If your car is dam- portion or all of the business cost of a car as a income from the active conduct of any trade oraged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able to current expense instead of taking depreciation business during the year.deduct part of the loss not covered by insurance. deductions over a number of years. If you are married and file a joint return, youSee Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and
and your spouse are treated as one taxpayer inThefts, for information on deducting a loss on There is a limit on the total section 179
determining any reduction to the dollar limit,your car. deduction, special depreciation allow-
regardless of which of you purchased the prop-ance, and depreciation deduction for
TIPDepreciation and section 179 deductions. erty or placed it in service.cars, trucks, and vans that may reduce or elimi-Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and If you and your spouse file separate returns,nate any benefit from claiming the section 179improvements, is a capital expense. Because you are treated as one taxpayer for the dollardeduction. See Depreciation Limits, later.the benefits last longer than 1 year, you gener- limit. You must allocate the dollar limit (after anyYou can claim the section 179 deductionally cannot deduct a capital expense. However, reduction) between you.only in the year you place the car in service. Foryou can recover this cost through the section
For more information on the above sectionthis purpose, a car is placed in service when it is179 deduction (the deduction allowed by section
179 deduction limits, see Publication 946.ready and available for a specific use, whether in179 of the Internal Revenue Code), special de-
a trade or business, a tax-exempt activity, apreciation allowance, and depreciation deduc- Limit for sport utility and certain other ve-personal activity, or for the production of in-tions. Depreciation allows you to recover the hicles. For sport utility and certain other vehi-come. Even if you are not using the property, it iscost over more than 1 year by deducting part of it cles placed in service in 2011, the portion of thein service when it is ready and available for itseach year. The section 179 deduction , special vehicle's cost taken into account in figuring yourspecific use.depreciation allowance , and depreciation de- section 179 deduction is limited to $25,000. ThisA car first used for personal purposes cannotductions are discussed later. rule applies to any four-wheeled vehicle prima-qualify for the deduction in a later year when itsGenerally, there are limits on these deduc- rily designed or used to carry passengers overuse changes to business.tions. Special rules apply if you use your car public streets, roads, or highways, that is not
50% or less in your work or business. subject to any of the passenger automobile lim-Example. In 2010 you bought a new car andYou can claim a section 179 deduction and its explained under Depreciation Limits , later,used it for personal purposes. In 2011, you be-use a depreciation method other than straight and that is rated at no more than 14,000 poundsgan to use it for business. Changing its use toline only if you do not use the standard mileage gross vehicle weight. However, the $25,000 limitbusiness use does not qualify the cost of yourrate to figure your business-related car ex- does not apply to any vehicle:car for a section 179 deduction in 2011. How-penses in the year you first place a car in serv-
• Designed to have a seating capacity ofever, you can claim a depreciation deduction forice.
the business use of the car starting in 2011. See more than nine persons behind theIf you claim either a section 179 deduction or
Depreciation Deduction, later. driver's seat,use a depreciation method other than straight
line in the year you first place a car in service, • Equipped with a cargo area of at least 6More than 50% business use requirement.you cannot use the standard mileage rate on feet in interior length that is an open areaYou must use the property more than 50% forthat car in any future year. or is designed for use as an open area butbusiness to claim any section 179 deduction. If
is enclosed by a cap and is not readilyCar defined. For depreciation purposes, a car you used the property more than 50% for busi-
accessible directly from the passengeris any four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck or ness, multiply the cost of the property by the
compartment, orvan) made primarily for use on public streets, percentage of business use. The result is the
roads, and highways. Its unloaded gross vehicle cost of the property that can qualify for the sec- • That has an integral enclosure, fully en-weight must not be more than 6,000 pounds. A tion 179 deduction. closing the driver compartment and loadcar includes any part, component, or other item carrying device, does not have seatingphysically attached to it or usually included in the Example. Peter purchased a car in April rearward of the driver's seat, and has nopurchase price. 2011 for $19,500 and used it 60% for business. body section protruding more than 30 in-A car does not include: The total cost of Peter's car that qualifies for the ches ahead of the leading edge of the
section 179 deduction is $11,700 ($19,500 cost windshield.• An ambulance, hearse, or combination ×  60% business use). But see Limit on totalambulance-hearse used directly in a busi- section 179, special depreciation allowance, Limit on total section 179, special depreci-ness, and depreciation deduction, discussed later. ation allowance, and depreciation deduc-• A vehicle used directly in the business of tion. Generally, the total amount of sectiontransporting persons or property for pay or Limits. There are limits on: 179, special depreciation allowance, and depre-hire, or ciation deduction you can claim for a qualified• The amount of the section 179 deduction,
car you placed in service in 2011 is $11,060.• A truck or van that is a qualified nonper- • The section 179 deduction for sport utility The limit is reduced if your business use of thesonal use vehicle. and certain other vehicles, and car is less than 100%. See Depreciation Limits,
later, for more information.Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles. • The total amount of the section 179 de-
These are vehicles that by their nature are not duction, special depreciation allowance,
Example. In the earlier example  underlikely to be used more than a minimal amount for and depreciation deduction (discussed
More than 50% business use requirement, Peterpersonal purposes. They include trucks and later) you can claim for a qualified prop-
had a car with a qualifying cost (for purposes ofvans that have been specially modified so that erty.
the section 179 deduction) of $11,700. How-they are not likely to be used more than a mini-
ever, Peter's total section 179, special deprecia-mal amount for personal purposes, such as by Limit on the amount of the section 179
tion allowance, and depreciation deduction isinstallation of permanent shelving and painting deduction. For 2011, the total amount you
limited to $6,636 ($11,060 limit x 60% businessthe vehicle to display advertising or the com- can choose to deduct under section 179 gener-
pany's name. Delivery trucks with seating only ally cannot be more than $500,000. use).
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 17

Page 18 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cost of car. For purposes of the section 179 You must keep records that show the 2011. For vehicles purchased before Septem-
specific identification of each piece of ber 9, 2010, the allowance is an additional de-deduction, the cost of the car does not include
qualifying section 179 property. These preciation deduction of 50% of the car'sany amount figured by reference to any other
CAUTION
!
records must show how you acquired the prop- depreciable basis (after any section 179 deduc-property held by you at any time. For example, if
erty, the person you acquired it from, and when tion, but before figuring your regular deprecia-you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car to
you placed it in service. tion deduction under MACRS). If you purchaseduse in your business, your cost for purposes of
the vehicle after September 8, 2010, and placedthe section 179 deduction does not include your Revoking an election. An election (or any it in service before January 1, 2012, the addi-adjusted basis in the car you trade in for the new specification made in the election) to take a tional depreciation allowance increases to 100%car. Your cost includes only the cash you paid. section 179 deduction for 2011 can only be of depreciable basis. The special depreciationBasis of car for depreciation. The amount revoked with the Commissioner's approval. allowance applies only for the first year the car isof the section 179 deduction reduces your basis placed in service. To qualify for the allowanceRecapture of section 179 deduction. To bein your car. If you choose the section 179 deduc- more than 50% of the use of the car must be in aeligible to claim the section 179 deduction, yoution, you must subtract the amount of the deduc- qualified business use (as defined under Depre-must use your car more than 50% for businesstion from the cost of your car. The resulting ciation Deduction, later).or work in the year you acquired it. If your busi-amount is the basis in your car you use to figure ness use of the car is 50% or less in a later tax Generally, if you claim the 100% additionalyour depreciation deduction. year during the recovery period, you have to depreciation allowance, no depreciation deduc-
recapture (include in income) in that later year tion is allowed after the year your passenger
any excess depreciation. Any section 179 de-When to choose. If you want to take the sec- automobile is placed in service and before the
duction claimed on the car is included in calcu- end of the recovery period. However, a safetion 179 deduction, you must make the choice in
lating the excess depreciation. For information harbor exception, explained later, allows part orthe tax year you both purchase the car and place
on this calculation, see Excess depreciation , all of this entire amount to be deducted in yearsit in service for business or work.
later in this chapter under Car Used 50% or Less following the placed-in-service year during the
for Business. recovery period.How to choose. Employees use Form 2106 to
Dispositions. If you dispose of a car on whichmake this choice and report the section 179 Figuring the special depreciation allowance.you had claimed the section 179 deduction, thededuction. All others use Form 4562. To determine the special depreciation allow-amount of that deduction is treated as a depreci-File the appropriate form with either of the ance, you must calculate your 100% additionalation deduction for recapture purposes. Youfollowing. first-year depreciation deduction on your quali-treat any gain on the disposition of the property
fied car, truck, or van using your unadjustedas ordinary income up to the amount of the• Your original tax return filed for the year basis. This depreciation deduction is limited bysection 179 deduction and any allowable depre-the property was placed in service the maximum allowable depreciation deduction.ciation (unless you establish the amount actually(whether or not you file it timely). For 2011, the maximum allowable first-year de-allowed). For information on the disposition of a• An amended return filed within the time preciation deduction for cars is $11,060 and forcar, see Disposition of a Car, later.prescribed by law. An election made on an trucks and vans is $11,260. Any excess amount
amended return must specify the item of beyond the maximum depreciation deduction is
section 179 property to which the election considered your unrecovered basis and isSpecial Depreciation Allowance
applies and the part of the cost of each treated as a deductible expense in the first tax
such item to be taken into account. The year after the end of the recovery period. TheYou may be able to claim the special deprecia-
amended return must also include any re- excess amount is subject to the maximum de-tion allowance for your car, truck, or van, if it is
sulting adjustments to taxable income. preciation limit for that period.qualified property and was placed in service in
Unrecovered Basis for Safe Harbor Exception Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Note: Use the information from the Form 2106 and its instructions for the tax year you placed the vehicle in service, and claimed the 100%
additional first-year special depreciation deduction
1. Enter the total amount from line 30 of your Form 2106 .............................. .
2. Multiply line 1 by the percentage on Form 2106, line 14, and enter the result ................ .
3. Enter any section 179 deduction claimed ....................................... .
4. Subtract line 3 from line 2 .................................................. .
5. Multiply line 4 by 50% (.50) ................................................. .
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4 .................................................. .
7. Multiply line 6 by the applicable depreciation rate .................................. .
8. Add lines 5 and 7 ....................................................... .
9. Multiply the applicable limit explained in the Form 2106, line 36, instructions by the percentage on
Form 2106, line 14, and enter the result ........................................ .
10. Subtract line 3 from line 9 .................................................. .
11. Subtract line 10 from line 8. If negative, enter -0-. This is your unrecovered basis ........... .
Page 18 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 19 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. Maria Jones, a calendar-year Under the safe harbor method of accounting, cars of $11,060 ($3,060 if you elect not to claim
Jason is assumed to have claimed the 50%taxpayer, placed a new car in service in Decem- the special depreciation allowance). For trucks
additional first-year depreciation deduction forber 2011 with an unadjusted basis of $20,000. and vans, the first-year limit has increased to
purposes of determining the unrecovered basisThe car is eligible for the 100% additional $11,260 ($3,260 if you elect not to claim the
of the car. As a result, the total depreciationfirst-year depreciation deduction. The 100% ad- special depreciation allowance). See Deprecia-
allowable for the car in 2010 is deemed to beditional first-year depreciation deduction is lim- tion Limits, later in this chapter.
$12,000 [($20,000, the unadjusted depreciableited to the maximum depreciation limit of
basis ×  50%, the deemed additional special de-$11,060. However, the excess amount of Qualified car. To be a qualified car (including
preciation allowance) + ($10,000, the remaining$8,940 ($20,000 ± $11,060) is treated as unre- trucks and vans), the car must meet all of the
adjusted depreciable basis ×  20%, the percent-covered basis. Maria can deduct this $8,940 following tests.age from the 2010 optional depreciation tablesamount beginning in 2017. The $8,940 amount • You purchased the car new on or afterusing the 200% declining balance method)].will be subject to the maximum depreciation limit January 1, 2008, but only if no bindingHowever, because his depreciation deduction isfor 2017. written contract to acquire the car existedlimited to $11,060, the unrecovered basis for the
Safe harbor exception. The safe harbor before January 1, 2008,car for 2010 is $940 ($12,000 − $11,060). The
method of accounting allows you to recover the $940 is recovered by Jason beginning in the • You placed the car in service in your tradeleftover basis in your passenger automobile 2016 tax year, subject to the 2016 limits. or business before January 1, 2013,without having to wait until the end of the recov- For 2011, the total depreciation deduction
• You used the car more than 50% in aery period. You elect this method of accounting allowable for the car is $3,200 ($10,000, the
qualified business use.on your federal tax return for the first tax year remaining adjusted depreciable basis ×  32%,
the percentage from the 2011 optional deprecia-after the placed-in service year of the passenger
tion tables using the 200% declining balanceautomobile. Under this safe harbor, you would Election not to claim the special depreciation
method). Because this amount is less than thebe deemed to have elected the 50% additional allowance. You can elect not to claim the spe-
depreciation limit of $4,900 for 2011, Jason de-depreciation allowance rather than the 100% cial depreciation allowance for your car, truck, orducts $3,200 as depreciation on his federal in-depreciation allowance. The following steps de- van, that is qualified property. If you make thiscome tax return for the 2011 tax year.scribe how to use the safe harbor method. election, it applies to all 5-year property placed
in service during the year.1. In the tax year you placed the automobile Example 3. The facts are the same as To make the election, attach a statement toin service, determine your 100% additional above, except the cost of the passenger auto- your timely filed return (including extensions)mobile is $18,400. For 2010, Jason deductsfirst-year depreciation deduction on your indicating the class of property (5-year for cars)$11,060 for the 100% additional first-year depre-qualified car, truck, or van using your un- for which you are making the election and thatciation for this property, which is the deprecia-adjusted basis, as discussed earlier under you are electing not to claim the special depreci-tion limitation for 2010. Under the safe harborFiguring the special depreciation allow- ation allowance for qualified property acquiredmethod of accounting, Jason is deemed to haveance. after December 31, 2008.claimed the 50% additional first-year deprecia-2. In the following tax year, you would deter- tion deduction for purposes of determining the Unless you elect not to claim the spe-mine your unrecovered basis, if any, by unrecovered basis and the remaining adjusted cial depreciation allowance, you mustrecalculating the special depreciation al- depreciable basis of the passenger automobile. reduce the car's adjusted basis by the
CAUTION
!lowance for the year you placed the auto- As a result, for 2010, the total depreciation al- amount of the allowance, even if the allowancemobile in service using the 50% additional lowable for the passenger automobile is was not claimed.depreciation allowance instead of the deemed to be $11,040 [($18,400, the unad-
100% depreciation allowance described in justed depreciable basis ×  50%, the deemed
(1). additional special depreciation allowance) + Depreciation Deduction($9,200, the remaining adjusted depreciable ba-3. If there is unrecovered basis, it is excluded sis ×  20%)]. As a result, there is no unrecovered If you use actual car expenses to figure yourfrom adjusted depreciable basis but will be basis for the car for 2010 because the 2010 deduction for a car you own and use in yourused to determine the depreciation deduc- allowable deemed depreciation of $11,040 is business, you can claim a depreciation deduc-tion for tax years after the less than the 2010 depreciation deduction of tion. This means you can deduct a certainplaced-in-service year. See Example 2. $11,060. amount each year as a recovery of your cost or
4. If there is no unrecovered basis, you will Jason must not use the optional depreciation other basis in your car.
determine the depreciation deduction for tables for computing the depreciation deduc- You generally need to know the followingthe subsequent years by multiplying your tions for the car for the tax years after the things about the car you intend to depreciate.placed-in-service year. Assuming the applicableadjusted depreciable basis by the applica-
• Your basis in the car.depreciation method and convention for the carble depreciation rate for each tax year.
is the 200% declining balance method and theSee Example 3. • The date you place the car in service.half-year convention, respectively, the total de-Use the Unrecovered Basis for Safe Harbor Ex- • The method of depreciation and recoverypreciation allowable for the passenger automo-ception Worksheet earlier to determine whether period you will use.bile for 2011 is $2,936 [40% ×  $7,340, theyou have an unrecovered basis for purposes of adjusted depreciable basis ($18,400, unad-the safe harbor exception. justed depreciable basis − $11,060, total depre- Basis. Your basis in a car for figuring depreci-ciation allowable for prior tax year)]. Because ation is generally its cost. This includes anyExample 2. In September 2010, Jason this amount is less than the depreciation limit of amount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-Smith, a calendar-year taxpayer, purchased a $4,900 for 2011, Jason deducts $2,936 as de- erty, or services.new car and placed it in service for use in his preciation on his federal income tax return for Generally, you figure depreciation on yourbusiness. The cost basis of the car was $20,000. the 2011 tax year. car, truck, or van using your unadjusted basisThe car is 5-year property under section 168(e), For more information about the 100% addi- (see Unadjusted basis, later). However, in someand is eligible for the 100% additional first-year tional depreciation allowance and the safe har- situations you will use your adjusted basis (yourdepreciation deduction. Jason does not claim bor, see Rev. Proc. 2011-26, 2011-16 I.R.B. basis reduced by depreciation allowed or allow-any section 179 deduction for the passenger 664, available at www.irs.gov/irb/2011-16_IRB/
able in earlier years). For one of these situationsautomobile. For 2010, Jason deducts $11,060 ar10.html.
see Exception under Methods of depreciation,for the 100% additional first-year depreciation
later.for this property, which is the depreciation de- Note. Your combined section 179 deduc-
If you change the use of a car from personalduction limitation for 2010, and adopts the safe tion, special depreciation allowance, and regular
to business, your basis for depreciation is theharbor method of accounting described above to MACRS depreciation deduction is limited to the
lesser of the fair market value or your adjustedrecover the leftover basis. maximum allowable depreciation deduction for
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 19

Page 20 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
basis in the car on the date of conversion. Addi- • It results in a payment of fair market rent. improvements you make to your car, such as
tional rules concerning basis are discussed later This includes any payment to you for the adding air conditioning or a new engine. De-
in this chapter under Unadjusted basis. use of your car. crease your basis by any section 179 deduction,
special depreciation allowance, gas guzzler tax,
clean-fuel vehicle deduction (for vehicles placedPlaced in service. You generally place a car Business use changes. If you used your car in service before Jan. 1, 2006), and alternativein service when it is available for use in your more than 50% in qualified business use in the motor vehicle credit.work or business, in an income-producing activ- year you placed it in service, but 50% or less in aity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation begins See Form 8910 for information on the alter-later year (including the year of disposition), youwhen the car is placed in service for use in your native motor vehicle credit.have to change to the straight line method ofwork or business or for the production of income. depreciation. See Qualified business use 50% If your business use later falls to 50%For purposes of computing depreciation, if or less in a later year  under Car Used 50% or or less, you may have to recaptureyou first start using the car only for personal use Less for Business, later. (include in your income) any excess
CAUTION
!and later convert it to business use, you place depreciation. See Car Used 50% or Less forProperty does not cease to be usedthe car in service on the date of conversion. Business, later, for more information.more than 50% in qualified businessCar placed in service and disposed of in If you acquired the car by gift or inheritance,use by reason of a transfer at death.
TIPthe same year. If you place a car in service see Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for infor-and dispose of it in the same tax year, you Use for more than one purpose. If you use mation on your basis in the car.cannot claim any depreciation deduction for that your car for more than one purpose during the Improvements. A major improvement to acar. tax year, you must allocate the use to the vari- car is treated as a new item of 5-year recoveryous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile- property. It is treated as placed in service in theMethods of depreciation. Generally, you fig- age. Figure the percentage of qualified business year the improvement is made. It does not mat-ure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac- use by dividing the number of miles you drive ter how old the car is when the improvement iscelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS). your car for business purposes during the year added. Follow the same steps for depreciatingMACRS is discussed later in this chapter. by the total number of miles you drive the car the improvement as you would for depreciatingduring the year for any purpose.Exception. If you used the standard mile- the original cost of the car. However, you must
age rate in the first year of business use and Change from personal to business use. If treat the improvement and the car as a wholechange to the actual expenses method in a later you change the use of a car from 100% personal when applying the limits on the depreciationyear, you cannot depreciate your car under the use to business use during the tax year, you deductions. Your car's depreciation deductionMACRS rules. You must use straight line depre- may not have mileage records for the time for the year (plus any section 179 deduction,ciation over the estimated remaining useful life before the change to business use. In this case, special depreciation allowance, and deprecia-of the car. you figure the percentage of business use for tion on any improvements) cannot be more thanTo figure depreciation under the straight line the year as follows. the depreciation limit that applies for that year.method, you must reduce your basis in the car See Depreciation Limits, later.1. Determine the percentage of business use(but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for all
for the period following the change. Do thismiles for which you used the standard mileage Car trade-in. If you traded in one car (the ªoldby dividing business miles by total milesrate. The rate per mile varies depending on the carº) for another car (the ªnew carº) in 2011,driven during that period.year(s) you used the standard mileage rate. For there are two ways you can treat the transaction.
the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustment 2. Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction.when you used the standard mileage rate under 1. You can elect to treat the transaction as aThe numerator (top number) is the numberDisposition of a Car, later. tax-free disposition of the old car and theof months the car is used for business and purchase of the new car. If you make thisThis reduction of basis is in addition to those the denominator (bottom number) is 12. election, you treat the old car as disposedbasis adjustments described later under Unad-
of at the time of the trade-in. The deprecia-justed basis. You must use your adjusted basis
Example. You use a car only for personalin your car to figure your depreciation deduction. ble basis of the new car is the adjusted
purposes during the first 6 months of the year.For additional information on the straight line basis of the old car (figured as if 100% of
During the last 6 months of the year, you drivemethod of depreciation, see Publication 946. the car's use had been for business pur-
the car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000 poses) plus any additional amount you
miles are for business. This gives you a busi- paid for the new car. You then figure yourMore-than-50%-use test. Generally, you ness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷  15,000) depreciation deduction for the new car be-must use your car more than 50% for qualified for that period. Your business use for the year is ginning with the date you placed it in serv-business use (defined next) during the year to 40% (80% ×  6/12). ice. You make this election by completinguse MACRS. You must meet this
Form 2106, Part II, Section D. This methodmore-than-50%-use test each year of the recov- Limits. The amount you can claim for section
is explained later, beginning at Effect ofery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car. 179, special depreciation allowance, and depre-
trade-in on basis.If your business use is 50% or less, you must ciation deductions may be limited. The maxi-
use the straight line method to depreciate your mum amount you can claim depends on the year 2. If you do not make the election describedcar. This is explained later under Car Used 50% in which you placed your car in service. You in (1), you must figure depreciation sepa-or Less for Business. have to reduce the maximum amount if you did rately for the remaining basis of the old carnot use the car exclusively for business. See and for any additional amount you paid forQualified business use. A qualified business Depreciation Limits, later. the new car. You must apply two deprecia-use is any use in your trade or business. It does tion limits (see Depreciation Limits, later).Unadjusted basis. You use your unadjustednot include use for the production of income The limit that applies to the remaining ba-basis (often referred to as your basis or your(investment use). However, you do combine sis of the old car generally is the amountbasis for depreciation) to figure your deprecia-your business and investment use to compute that would have been allowed had you nottion using the MACRS depreciation chart, ex-your depreciation deduction for the tax year. traded in the old car. The limit that appliesplained later under Modified Accelerated Cost
to the additional amount you paid for theRecovery System (MACRS) . Your unadjustedUse of your car by another person. Do not
new car generally is the limit that appliesbasis for figuring depreciation is your originaltreat any use of your car by another person as
for the tax year, reduced by the deprecia-basis increased or decreased by certainuse in your trade or business unless that use
tion allowance for the remaining basis ofamounts.meets one of the following conditions.
the old car. You must use Form 4562 toTo figure your unadjusted basis, begin with• It is directly connected with your business. compute your depreciation deduction. Youyour car's original basis, which generally is its
cannot use Form 2106, Part II, Section D.• It is properly reported by you as income to cost. Cost includes sales taxes (see Sales taxes
This method is explained in Publicationthe other person (and, if you have to, you earlier), destination charges, and dealer prepa-
946.withhold tax on the income). ration. Increase your basis by any substantial
Page 20 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 21 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
($3,627) or adjusted basis If you elect to use the method described in Traded car used partly in business. If you
of old van ($8,619) − 3,627(1), you must do so on a timely filed tax return trade in a car you used partly in your business
(including extensions). Otherwise, you must use for a new car you will use in your business, you Unadjusted basis of part of new van the method described in (2). must make a ªtrade-inº adjustment for the per- that can be treated as newly sonal use of the old car. This adjustment has the purchased MACRS property $ 4,992Effect of trade-in on basis. The discussion effect of reducing your basis in your old car, butthat follows applies to trade-ins of cars in 2011, not below zero, for purposes of figuring your Additional basis (cash paid) for new where the election was made to treat the trans- depreciation deduction for the new car. (This van that is treated as newly action as a tax-free disposition of the old car and adjustment is not used, however, when you de- purchased MACRS property $12,500the purchase of the new car. For information on termine the gain or loss on the later dispositionhow to figure depreciation for cars involved in a * These decimal amounts come from the Depreciationof the new car. See Publication 544, Sales and Method and Percentage Chart for that particular tax year'slike-kind exchange (trade-in) in 2011, for which Other Dispositions of Assets, for information on Form 2106 instructions. the election was not made, see Publication 946 ** These limit amounts come from the Limits for Truckshow to report the disposition of your car.)and Regulations section 1.168(i)-6(d)(3). and Vans table for that particular tax year's Form 2106To figure the unadjusted basis of your new instructions.Traded car used only for business. If you car for depreciation, first add to your adjusted
trade in a car you used only in your business for basis in the old car any additional amount you
another car that will be used only in your busi- Example 2. Rob paid $21,000 for a new carpay for the new car. Then subtract from that total
ness, your original basis in the new car is your that he placed in service in 2008. He used itthe excess, if any, of:
adjusted basis in the old car, plus any additional partly for business in 2008 (9,600 business
1. The total of the amounts that would haveamount you pay for the new car. miles of 15,000 total miles), 2009 (12,000 busi-
been allowable as depreciation during the ness miles of 16,000 total miles), and 2010
tax years before the trade if 100% of theExample 1. Paul trades in a car that has an (14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He used the
use of the car had been business and in-adjusted basis of $5,000 for a new car. In addi- standard mileage rate in those years to claim the
vestment use, overtion, he pays cash of $20,000 for the new car. business use of his car. (See Depreciation ad-
His original basis of the new car is $25,000 (his justment when you used the standard mileage2. The total of the amounts actually allowed$5,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus the rate under Disposition of a Car, later.)as depreciation during those years.$20,000 cash paid). Paul's unadjusted basis is On January 3, 2011, Rob traded in this carFor information about figuring depreciation, see$25,000 unless he claims the section 179 de- and paid an additional $10,000 for his new car.Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Systemduction, special depreciation allowance, or has Rob figures the unadjusted basis for his new car(MACRS), which follows Example 2, later.other increases or decreases to his original ba- as shown next.
sis, discussed under Unadjusted basis, earlier.
Example 1. In March, Mark traded his 2007 Cost of old car $21,000
van (placed in service in June 2007) for a newExample 2. In September 2008, Marcia pur- Less: Total depreciation allowed:
2011 model. He used the old van 75% for busi- 2010Ð14,400 mi. ×  .23* $3,312chased a car for $26,000 and placed it in service
2009Ð12,000 mi. ×  .21* 2,520ness and he used the new van 75% for businessfor 100% use in her business. Marcia did not
2008Ð 9,600 mi. ×  .21* 2,016 − 7,848in 2011. Mark claimed actual expenses (includ-claim a section 179 deduction or elect to claim
Adjusted basis of old caring $10,881 depreciation expense) for the busi-the special depreciation allowance. Marcia's un- before trade-in adjustment $13,152ness use of the old van since 2007. He did notadjusted basis for the car was $26,000. For
claim a section 179 deduction for the old or the2008 through 2010, Marcia figured her deprecia- Trade-in adjustment:new van.tion deduction using the 200% declining balance Depreciation at 100% business use:
method in the MACRS depreciation chart for Mark paid $19,500 for the 2007 van in June 2010Ð18,000 mi. ×  .23* $4,140
those years. 2007. He paid an additional $12,500 when he 2009Ð16,000 mi. ×  .21* 3,360
2008Ð15,000 mi. ×  .21* 3,150acquired the 2011 van. Mark was allowed 1/2 ofIn September 2011, Marcia traded that car in
Total $10,650the depreciation deduction amount (which is in-and paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be used Less: Actual depreciation cluded in the $10,881 depreciation expense to-100% in her business. Marcia is allowed allowed − 7,848tal) for his old van for 2011, the year ofone-half of the MACRS depreciation amount Excess of 100% over actual $2,802disposition, as explained later under Dispositionfigured for 2011 for her old car. (See Disposition
Less: Lesser of excess amountof a Car.of a Car, later.)  Marcia figures her basis in the
($2,802) or adjusted basisMark figures the unadjusted basis for depre-new car as follows.  of old car ($13,152) − 2,802ciating his new van as shown next. He uses the
Cost of old car $26,000 200% declining balance method in the MACRS Unadjusted basis of part of new car Less total depreciation allowed: depreciation chart for those years. that can be treated as newly 2011Ð($26,000 ×  .1152*) ×  1/2
purchased MACRS property $10,350(Limit: $1,775**) $1,498 Cost of old van $19,500
2010Ð($26,000 ×  .192*) Less: Total depreciation allowed on Additional basis (cash paid) for new(Limit: $2,850**) 2,850 the business cost of old van car that is treated as newly 2009Ð($26,000 ×  .32*) from 2007±2011 −10,881 purchased MACRS property  $10,000(Limit: $4,800**) 4,800 Adjusted basis of old van before
2008Ð($26,000 ×  .20*) trade-in adjustment $ 8,619 * These decimal amounts are from the chart under
(Limit: $2,960**) 2,960 Depreciation adjustments when you used the standard
Total depreciation allowed ±12,108 mileage rate, later.Trade-in adjustment:
Depreciation at 100% business use:
Adjusted basis of old car and basis of 2011±($19,500 ×  .1152*) ×  1/2
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Systempart of new car that can be treated as (Limit: $1,875**) $ 1,123 (MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost Re-newly purchased MACRS property $ 13,892 2010±($19,500 ×  .1152*)
covery System (MACRS) is the name given to(Limit: $1,875**) 1,875Additional basis (cash paid) for new the tax rules for getting back (recovering)2009±($19,500 ×  .192*)car that is treated as newly purchased through depreciation deductions the cost of(Limit: $3,050**) 3,050MACRS property +14,200 2008±($19,500 ×  .32*) property used in a trade or business or to pro-
(Limit: $5,200**) 5,200 duce income.Total basis of new car $28,092 2007±($19,500 ×  .20*) The maximum amount you can deduct is(Limit: $3,260**) 3,260* These decimal amounts come from the Depreciation limited, depending on the year you placed yourTotal $14,508Method and Percentage Chart for that particular tax year's car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later.Less: Actual depreciation Form 2106 instructions. 
allowed −10,881** These limit amounts come from the Limits for Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars are
Passenger Automobiles (Except Trucks and Vans) table Excess of 100% over actual $ 3,627 classified as 5-year property. You actually de-for that particular tax year's Form 2106 instructions.
Less: Lesser of excess amount preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over a
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 21

Page 22 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
period of 6 calendar years. This is because your 3. During the year, all of the following condi- basis of his truck equals its cost because Phil
car is generally treated as placed in service in tions apply. used it exclusively for business. He multiplied
the middle of the year, and you claim deprecia- the unadjusted basis of his truck, $9,200, by thea. You placed some property in servicetion for one-half of both the first year and the percentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2010from January through September.sixth year. depreciation deduction of $1,840.
b. You placed some property in serviceDepreciation deduction for certain Indian In 2011, Phil used the truck for personalfrom October through December.reservation property. Shorter recovery peri- purposes when he repaired his father's cabin.ods are provided under MACRS for qualified c. Your basis in the property you placed in His records show that the business use of hisIndian reservation property placed in service on service from October through Decem- truck was 90% in 2011. Phil used Table 4-1 toIndian reservations after 1993 and before 2012. ber (excluding nonresidential real prop- find his percentage. Reading down the first col-The recovery that applies for a business-use car erty, residential rental property, and umn for the date placed in service and across tois 3 years instead of 5 years. However, the property placed in service and disposed the 200% DB column, he locates his percent-depreciation limits, discussed later, will still ap- of in the same year) was more thanply. age, 32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis of40% of your total bases in all propertyFor more information on the qualifications for his truck, $8,280 ($9,200 cost ×  90% businessyou placed in service during the year.this shorter recovery period and the percent- use), by 32% to figure his 2011 depreciation
ages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc- deduction of $2,650.4. You placed qualified property in service ontion, see chapter 4 of Publication 946. an Indian reservation.
Depreciation methods. You can use one
Depreciation LimitsDepreciation in future years. If you useof the following methods to depreciate your car.
the percentages from the chart, you generally• The 200% declining balance method There are limits on the amount you can deductmust continue to use them for the entire recov-(200% DB) over a 5-year recovery period for depreciation of your car, truck, or van. Theery period of your car. However, you cannotthat switches to the straight line method section 179 deduction and special depreciationcontinue to use the chart if your basis in your carwhen that method provides an equal or allowance are treated as depreciation for pur-is adjusted because of a casualty. In that case,greater deduction. poses of the limits. The maximum amount youfor the year of the adjustment and the remaining
recovery period, figure the depreciation without can deduct each year depends on the year you• The 150% declining balance method
the chart using your adjusted basis in the car at(150% DB) over a 5-year recovery period place the car in service. These limits are shown
the end of the year of the adjustment and overthat switches to the straight line method in the following tables.
when that method provides an equal or the remaining recovery period. See Figuring the
greater deduction. Deduction Without Using the Tables in chapter 4 Maximum
of Publication 946.  Depreciation Deduction• The straight line method (SL) over a  for Cars5-year recovery period. In future years, do not use the chart in
this edition of the publication. Instead, Date 4th &
use the chart in the publication or the Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later
TIPIf you use Table 4-1  (discussed later In Service Year Year Year Yearsform instructions for those future years.under MACRS depreciation chart ) to
2010±2011 $11,0601 $4,900 $2,950 $1,775determine your depreciation rate for Disposition of car during recovery period.
TIP
2011, you do not need to determine in what year 2008±2009  10,9602  4,800  2,850  1,775If you dispose of the car before the end of the
using the straight line method provides an equal recovery period, you are generally allowed a half 2007 3,060 4,900 2,850 1,775or greater deduction. This is because the chart year of depreciation in the year of disposition
2006 2,960 4,800 2,850 1,775has the switch to the straight line method built unless you purchased the car during the last
into its rates. 2005 2,960 4,700 2,850 1,675quarter of a year. See Depreciation deduction
Before choosing a method, you may wish to for the year of disposition under Disposition of a 2004 10,6102 4,800 2,850 1,675
consider the following facts. Car, later, for information on how to figure the
5/06/2003± 10,7103 4,900 2,950 1,775depreciation allowed in the year of disposition.• Using the straight line method provides 12/31/2003
equal yearly deductions throughout the re- How to use the 2011 chart. To figure your 1/01/2003± 7,6604 4,900 2,950 1,775covery period. depreciation deduction for 2011, find the per- 5/05/2003
centage in the column of Table 4 ±1 based on• Using the declining balance methods pro- 2001±2002 7,6604 4,900 2,950 1,775the date that you first placed the car in servicevides greater deductions during the earlier 2000 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775and the depreciation method that you are using.recovery years with the deductions gener- Multiply the unadjusted basis  of your car (de- 1$3,060 if the car is not qualified property or if you electally getting smaller each year.
not to claim the special depreciation allowance.fined earlier) by that percentage to determine
the amount of your depreciation deduction. If 2$2,960 if the car is not qualified property or if you elect
MACRS depreciation chart. A 2011 MACRS you prefer to figure your depreciation deduction not to claim the special depreciation allowance.
Depreciation Chart and instructions are included without the help of the chart, see Publication 3$7,660 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $3,060 if
in this chapter as Table 4-1. Using this table will 946. the car is not qualified property or if you elect not to
claim any special depreciation allowance.make it easy for you to figure the 2011 deprecia- Your deduction cannot be more thantion deduction for your car. A similar chart ap- 4$3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the carthe maximum depreciation limit forpears in the Instructions for Form 2106. is not qualified property, or you elect not to claim the
cars. See Depreciation Limits, later. special depreciation allowance.
CAUTION
!
You may have to use the tables in
Publication 946 instead of using this Example. Phil bought a used truck in Febru- Trucks and vans. For 2011, the maximumMACRS Depreciation Chart.
CAUTION
! ary 2010 to use exclusively in his landscape depreciation deductions for trucks and vans are
You must use the Depreciation Tables  in business. He paid $9,200 for the truck with no generally higher than those for cars. A truck orPublication 946 rather than the 2011 MACRS trade-in. Phil did not claim any section 179 de- van is a passenger automobile that is classifiedDepreciation Chart in this publication if any one duction, the truck did not qualify for the special by the manufacturer as a truck or van and ratedof the following four conditions applies to you. depreciation allowance, and he chose to use the at 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less.200% DB method to get the largest depreciation For trucks and vans placed in service before1. You file your return on a fiscal year basis. deduction in the early years.
2003, use the Maximum Depreciation Deduction2. You file your return for a short tax year Phil used the MACRS depreciation chart in for Cars table.(less than 12 months). 2010 to find his percentage. The unadjusted
Page 22 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 23 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deductions in years after the recovery pe- At the end of 2010, Bob had an unrecoveredMaximum
riod. If the depreciation deductions for your basis in the car of $15,965 ($31,500 ± $15,535).Depreciation Deduction
car are reduced under the passenger automo- If Bob continued to use the car 100% for busi-for Trucks and Vans
ness in 2011 and later years, he can claim abile limits (discussed earlier), you will have unre-
depreciation deduction equal to the lesser ofcovered basis in your car at the end of the
$1,675 or his remaining unrecovered basis.Date 4th & recovery period. If you continue to use your car
 Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later If Bob's business use of the car was lessfor business, you can deduct that unrecovered
In Service Year Year Year Years than 100% during any year, his depreciationbasis (subject to depreciation limits) after the
deduction would be less than the maximumrecovery period ends.2011 $11,2601 $5,200 $3,150 $1,875
amount allowable for that year. However, in de-2010 11,1601 5,100 3,050 1,875 Unrecovered basis. This is your cost or termining his unrecovered basis in the car, heother basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuel2009 11,0601  4,900 2,950 1,775 would still reduce his original basis by the maxi-vehicle deduction (for vehicles placed in service mum amount allowable as if the business use2008 11,1601 5,100 3,050 1,875 before Jan. 1, 2006), alternative motor vehicle had been 100%. For example, if Bob had used2007 3,260 5,200 3,050 1,875 credit, electric vehicle credit, gas guzzler tax, his car 60% for business instead of 100%, his
and depreciation (including any special depreci-2005±2006 3,260 5,200 3,150 1,875 allowable depreciation deductions would have
ation allowance , discussed earlier, unless you been $9,321 ($15,535 ×  60%), but he still would2004 10,9101 5,300 3,150 1,875 elect not to claim it) and section 179 deductions have to reduce his basis by $15,535 to deter-2003 11,0102 5,400 3,250 1,975 that would have been allowable if you had used mine his unrecovered basis.
the car 100% for business and investment use.1If the special depreciation allowance does not apply or
you make the election not to claim the special
The recovery period. For 5-year property,depreciation allowance, the first-year limit is $3,260 for Car Used 50% or Less2011, $3,160 for 2010, $3,060 for 2009, $3,160 for your recovery period is 6 calendar years. A part
for Business2008, $3,260 for 2004, and $3,360 for 2003. year's depreciation is allowed in the first calen-
2If the truck or van was acquired before 5/06/03, the truck dar year, a full year's depreciation is allowed in If you use your car 50% or less for qualifiedor van is qualified property, and you claim the special each of the next 4 calendar years, and a part business use  (defined earlier under Deprecia-depreciation allowance for the truck or van, the year's depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen-maximum deduction is $7,960. tion Deduction ) either in the year the car isdar year. placed in service or in a later year, special rules
Under MACRS, your recovery period is theCar used less than full year. The deprecia- apply. The rules that apply in these two situa-
same whether you use declining balance ortion limits are not reduced if you use a car for tions are explained in the following paragraphs.
straight line depreciation. You determine yourless than a full year. This means that you do not (For this purpose, ªcarº was defined earlier
unrecovered basis in the 7th year after youreduce the limit when you either place a car in under Actual Car Expenses and includes certain
placed the car in service.service or dispose of a car during the year. trucks and vans.)
However, the depreciation limits are reduced if How to treat unrecovered basis. If you Qualified business use 50% or less in yearyou do not use the car exclusively for business continue to use your car for business after the placed in service. If you use your car 50% orand investment purposes. See Reduction for recovery period, you can claim a depreciation less for qualified business use, the followingpersonal use later. deduction in each succeeding tax year until you rules apply.
recover your basis in the car. The maximumReduction for personal use. The deprecia- • You cannot take the section 179 deduc-amount you can deduct each year is determinedtion limits are reduced based on your percent- tion.by the date you placed the car in service andage of personal use. If you use a car less than
your business-use percentage. For example, no • You cannot take the special depreciation100% in your business or work, you must deter-
deduction is allowed for a year you use your car allowance.mine the depreciation deduction limit by multi-
100% for personal purposes.plying the limit amount by the percentage of • You must figure depreciation using thebusiness and investment use during the tax straight line method over a 5-year recov-Example. In April 2005, Bob bought andyear. ery period. You must continue to use theplaced in service a car he used exclusively in his
straight line method even if your percent-business. The car cost $31,500. Bob did notSection 179 deduction. The section 179 de-
age of business use increases to moreclaim a section 179 deduction or the specialduction is treated as a depreciation deduction. If
than 50% in a later year.depreciation allowance for the car. He continuedyou place a car that is not a truck or van in
to use the car 100% in his business throughoutservice in 2011, use it only for business, and
Instead of making the computation yourself,choose the section 179 deduction, the special the recovery period (2005 through 2010). For
you can use column (c) of Table 4-1 to find thedepreciation allowance, and the depreciation those years, Bob used the MACRS Depreciation
percentage to use.deduction for that car for 2011 is limited to Chart (200% declining balance method) and the
$11,060. Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Cars table Example. In May 2011, Dan bought a carfor the applicable tax year to compute his depre- for $17,500. He used it 40% for his consultingExample. On September 4, 2011, Jack ciation deductions during the recovery period. business. Because he did not use the car morebought a used car for $10,000 and placed it in Bob's depreciation deductions were subject to than 50% for business, Dan cannot take anyservice. He used it 80% for his business, and he the depreciation limits so he will have unrecov- section 179 deduction or special depreciationchooses to take a section 179 deduction for the ered basis at the end of the recovery period as allowance, and he must use the straight linecar. The car is not qualified property for pur- shown in the following table. method over a 5-year recovery period to recoverposes of the special depreciation allowance.
the cost of his car.MACRS Deprec.Before applying the limit, Jack figures his
Dan deducts $700 in 2011. This is the lesserYear %* Amount Limit** Allowedmaximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000.
of:2005 20.00 $6,300 $2,960 $ 2,960This is the cost of his qualifying property (up to
2006 32.00 10,080 4,700 4,700the maximum $500,000 amount) multiplied by 1. $700 (($17,500 cost ×  40% business use)2007 19.20 6,048 2,850 2,850his business use ($10,000 ×  80%). ×  10% recovery percentage (from column2008 11.52 3,629 1,675 1,675Jack then figures that his section 179 deduc- 2009 11.52 3,629 1,675 1,675 (c), Table 4-1)), ortion for 2011 is limited to $2,448 (80% of 2010 5.76 1,814 1,675 1,675
2. $1,224 ($3,060 maximum limit ×  40% busi-$3,060). He then figures his unadjusted basis of Total $31,500 15,535
ness use).$5,552 (($10,000 ×  80%) − $2,448) for determin- *These amounts come from the Depreciation Method and
ing his depreciation deduction. Jack has Percentage Chart for that particular tax year's Form 2106
reached his maximum depreciation deduction Qualified business use 50% or less in a laterinstructions.
**These limit amounts come from the Limits for Passengerfor 2011. For 2012, Jack will use his unadjusted year. If you use your car more than 50% in
Automobiles (Except Trucks and Vans) table for thatbasis of $5,552 to figure his depreciation deduc- qualified business use in the tax year it is placedparticular tax year's Form 2106 instructions.
tion. in service but the business use drops to 50% or
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 23

Page 24 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4-1.  2011 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2011.)
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below to find the For cars placed in service before 2011, you must use the same
depreciation method and percentage to use for your 2011 return. method you used on last year's return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line method. (See
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the car in service. Car Used 50% or Less for Business.)
Then select the depreciation method and percentage from column (a), (b),
or (c) following the rules explained in this chapter. Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in the
chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for 2011. (Also
see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the same
year, you may have to use the Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1ÐDec. 31 percentage for your car.
CAUTION
!
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of that year and 2) the basis
of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in service after September is not more than
40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the entire year, use the percentage for Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30 for
figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of Publication 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2011 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2011, both used 100% in your
business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1ÐSept. 30, 2011, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the $20,000 basis of the
property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in service during the year (40% ×
($32,000 + 20,000) = $20,800).
(a) (b) (c)
200% Declining 150% Declining Straight Line Date Placed In Service Balance (200% DB)1 Balance (150% DB)1 (SL)
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2011 200 DB  5.0% 150 DB  3.75% SL  2.5%
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2011 200 DB 20.0 150 DB 15.0 SL 10.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2010 200 DB 38.0 150 DB 28.88 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2010 200 DB 32.0 150 DB 25.5 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2009 200 DB 22.8 150 DB 20.21 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2009 200 DB 19.2 150 DB 17.85 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2008 200 DB 13.68 150 DB 16.4 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2008 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2007 200 DB 10.94 150 DB 16.41 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2007 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2006 200 DB  9.58 150 DB 14.35 SL 17.5
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2006 200 DB  5.76 150 DB  8.33 SL 10.0
 Prior to 20062
1 You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
2 If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to claim depreciation. See 
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
less in a later year, you can no longer use an (from column (c) of Table 4-1 ). You also will in which you used the car more than 50%
have to determine and include in your grossaccelerated depreciation method for that car. in qualified business use, minus
income any excess depreciation, discussedFor the year the business use drops to 50% 2. The amount of the depreciation deductionsnext.or less and all later years in the recovery period, that would have been allowable for those
you must use the straight line depreciation Excess depreciation. You must include years if you had not used the car more
any excess depreciation in your gross incomemethod over a 5-year recovery period. In addi- than 50% in qualified business use for the
and add it to your car's adjusted basis for thetion, for the year your business use drops to year you placed it in service. This meansfirst tax year in which you do not use the car50% or less, you must recapture (include in your the amount of depreciation figured usingmore than 50% in qualified business use. Usegross income) any excess depreciation  (dis- the straight line method.Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig-cussed later). You also increase the adjusted
ure and report the excess depreciation in yourbasis of your car by the same amount.
Example. In September 2007, you bought agross income.
car for $20,500 and placed it in service. You didExample. In June 2008, you purchased a Excess depreciation is: not claim the section 179 deduction or the spe-car for exclusive use in your business. You met
cial depreciation allowance. You used the carthe more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 years 1. The amount of the depreciation deductions
exclusively in qualified business use for 2007,of the recovery period (2008 through 2010) but allowable for the car (including any section
2008, 2009, and 2010. For those years, youfailed to meet it in the fourth year (2011). You 179 deduction claimed and any special de-
determine your depreciation for 2011 using 20% preciation allowance claimed) for tax years used the appropriate MACRS Depreciation
Page 24 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 25 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chart to figure depreciation deductions totaling depreciation deduction you would have on the the last tax year of the lease, use the
vehicle if you owned it.) dollar amount for the preceding year.$12,585 ($3,060 for 2007, $4,900 for 2008,
$2,850 for 2009, and $1,775 for 2010) under the The inclusion amount is a percentage of part
2. Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) for200% DB method. of the fair market value of the leased vehicle
the number of days of the lease term in-During 2011, you used the car 30% for busi- multiplied by the percentage of business and
cluded in the tax year.investment use of the vehicle for the tax year. Itness and 70% for personal purposes. Since you
is prorated for the number of days of the leasedid not meet the more-than-50%-use test, you 3. Multiply the prorated amount from (2) by
term in the tax year.must switch from the 200% DB depreciation the percentage of business and investment
method to the straight line depreciation method The inclusion amount applies to each tax use for the tax year. This is your inclusion
for 2011, and include in gross income for 2011 year that you lease the vehicle if the fair market amount.
your excess depreciation determined as follows. value  (defined next) when the lease began was
more than the amounts shown in the following Example. On January 17, 2011, you leasedTotal depreciation claimed: $12,585 tables.(MACRS 200% DB method) a car for 3 years and placed it in service for use
CarsMinus total depreciation allowable: in your business. The car had a fair market value
(Except for Trucks and Vans)(Straight line method) of $32,250 on the first day of the lease term. You
2007Ð10% of $20,500 ... . $2,050 use the car 75% for business and 25% for per-(Limit: $3,060*) Year Lease Began Fair Market Value sonal purposes during each year of the lease.2008Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 4,100 Assuming you continue to use the car 75% for2008±2011 $18,500(Limit: $4,900*) 2007 15,500 business, you use Appendix A-6 to arrive at the2009Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 2,850 2005±2006 15,200 following inclusion amounts for each year of the(Limit: $2,850*) 2004 17,500 lease:2010Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 1,775 10,775 2003 18,000(Limit: $1,775*) 2000±2002 15,500 Tax Dollar Business InclusionExcess depreciation $1,810
year amount Proration use amount
Trucks and Vans* These limit amounts come from the Limits for Passenger 2011 $17 349/365 75% $12Automobiles (Except Trucks and Vans) table for that
2012  38 366/366 75% 29particular tax year's Form 2106 instructions.
Year Lease Began Fair Market Value 2013 56 365/365 75% 42
2014 68 16/365 75% 2In 2011, using Form 4797, you figure and 2010±2011 $19,000
report the $1,810 excess depreciation you must 2009 18,500 For each year of the lease that you deduct lease2008 19,000include in your gross income. Your adjusted payments, you must reduce your deduction by2007 16,400basis in the car is also increased by $1,810. the inclusion amount computed for that year.2005±2006 16,700Your 2011 depreciation is $1,230 ($20,500 (un-
2004 18,000adjusted basis) ×  30% (business use percent- Leased car changed from business to per-2003  18,500age) ×  20% (from column (c) of Table 4-1 on the sonal use. If you lease a car for business use2000±2002 15,500line for Jan. 1ÐSept. 30, 2007)). However, your and, in a later year, change it to personal use,
depreciation deduction is limited to $533 follow the rules explained earlier under Figuring
($1,775 x 30% business use). Fair market value. Fair market value is the the inclusion amount. For the tax year in which
price at which the property would change hands you stop using the car for business, use the
between a buyer and a seller, neither having to dollar amount for the previous tax year. ProrateLeasing a Car
buy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl- the dollar amount for the number of days in the
edge of all the necessary facts. Sales of similarIf you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in lease term that fall within the tax year.
property around the same date may be helpful inyour business, you can use the standard mile-
figuring the fair market value of the property.age rate or actual expenses to figure your de- Example. On August 16, 2010, Will leased
ductible expense. This section explains how to a car with a fair market value of $38,500 for 3Figure the fair market value on the first day of
figure actual expenses for a leased car, truck, or years. He used the car exclusively in his ownthe lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car is
van. data processing business. On November 5,specified in the lease agreement, use that
2011, Will closed his business and went to workamount as the fair market value.
for a company where he is not required to use aDeductible payments. If you choose to use
Figuring the inclusion amount. Inclusion car for business. Using Appendix A-5, Will com-actual expenses, you can deduct the part of
amounts are listed in Appendix A  for cars, in puted his inclusion amount for 2010 and 2011 aseach lease payment that is for the use of the
Appendix B for trucks and vans, and in Appendix shown in the following table and reduced hisvehicle in your business. You cannot deduct any
C for electric cars leased after August 5, 1997, deductions for lease payments by thosepart of a lease payment that is for personal use
and before 2007. If the fair market value of the amounts.of the vehicle, such as commuting.
vehicle is $100,000 or less, use the appropriateYou must spread any advance payments Tax Dollar Business Inclusionappendix (depending on the year you firstover the entire lease period. You cannot deduct year amount Proration use amountplaced the vehicle in service) to determine theany payments you make to buy a car, truck, or
inclusion amount. If the fair market value is more 2010 $ 46 138/365 100% $ 17van even if the payments are called lease pay-
2011 100 309/365 100%   85than $100,000, see the Revenue Procedure(s)ments.
identified in the footnote of the appendices forIf you lease a car, truck, or van for 30 days or the inclusion amount. Leased car changed from personal to busi-more, you may have to reduce your lease pay-
For each tax year during which you lease the ness use. If you lease a car for personal usement deduction by an ªinclusion amount,º ex-
car for business, determine your inclusion and, in a later year, change it to business use,plained next.
amount by following these three steps. you must determine the car's fair market value
on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-
1. Locate the appendix that applies to you. sion amount using the rules explained earlierInclusion Amounts To find the inclusion amount, do the follow- under Figuring the inclusion amount . Use the
ing.If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in fair market value on the date of conversion.
your business for a lease term of 30 days or a. Find the line that includes the fair mar-more, you may have to include an inclusion Example. In March 2009, Janice leased aket value of the car on the first day ofamount in your income for each tax year you car for 4 years for personal use. On June 1,the lease term.lease the vehicle. To do this, you do not add an 2011, she started working as a self-employed
amount to income. Instead, you reduce your b. Go across the line to the column for the advertising consultant and started using the
deduction for your lease payment. (This reduc- tax year in which the car is used under leased car for business purposes. Her records
tion has an effect similar to the limit on the the lease to find the dollar amount. For show that her business use for June 1 through
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 25

Page 26 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
December 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusion 2011 and 55 1/2 cents per mile after June 30,
amount for 2011, Janice obtained an appraisal 2011) for business miles driven.
from an independent car leasing company that These rates do not apply for any year in 5.showed the fair market value of her 2009 car on which the actual expenses methodJune 1, 2011, was $21,650. Using Appendix was used.
TIPA-6, Janice computed her inclusion amount for
2011 as shown in the following table. Depreciation RecordkeepingYear(s) Rate per MileTax Dollar Business Inclusion
2011 $.22year amount Proration use amount If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-
2010 .23 portation expenses, you must be able to prove2011 $6 214/365 60% $2
2008±2009 .21 (substantiate) certain elements of expense. This
2007 .19 chapter discusses the records you need to keepReporting inclusion amounts. For informa- 2005±2006 .17 to prove these expenses.tion on reporting inclusion amounts, employees 2003±2004 .16
should see Car rentals under Completing Forms 2001±2002 .15 If you keep timely and accurate rec-
2000 .142106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6. Sole proprietors ords, you will have support to show the
should see the Instructions for Schedule C IRS if your tax return is ever examined.
RECORDS
(Form 1040) and farmers should see the Instruc- You will also have proof of expenses that yourExample. In 2006, you bought a car for ex-tions for Schedule F (Form 1040). employer may require if you are reimbursedclusive use in your business. The car cost
under an accountable plan. These plans are$22,500. From 2006 through 2011, you used the
discussed in chapter 6 under Reimbursements.standard mileage rate to figure your car expense
deduction. You drove your car 14,100 miles in
Disposition of a Car 2006, 16,300 miles in 2007, 15,600 miles in
2008, 16,700 miles in 2009, 15,100 miles in
If you dispose of your car, you may have a 2010, and 14,900 miles in 2011. Your deprecia- How To Provetaxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion of tion is figured as follows.
any gain that is due to depreciation (including Expensesany section 179 deduction, clean-fuel vehicle Year Miles x Rate Depreciation
deduction (for vehicles placed in service before Table 5-1 is a summary of records you need to2006 14,100 ×  .17 $ 2,397Jan. 1, 2006), and special depreciation allow- prove each expense discussed in this publica-2007 16,300 ×  .19 3,097ance) that you claimed on the car will be treated 2008 15,600 ×  .21 3,276 tion. You must be able to prove the elementsas ordinary income. However, you may not have 2009 16,700 ×  .21 3,507 listed across the top portion of the chart. Youto recognize a gain or loss if you dispose of the 2010 15,100 ×  .23 3,473 prove them by having the information and re-
2011 14,900 ×  .22 3,278car because of a casualty, theft, or trade-in. ceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed inTotal depreciation $19,028This section gives some general information the first column.about dispositions of cars. For information on At the end of 2011, your adjusted basis in the car You cannot deduct amounts that youhow to report the disposition of your car, see is $3,472 ($22,500 − $19,028). approximate or estimate.Publication 544.
CAUTION
!
Depreciation deduction for the year of dispo-Casualty or theft. For a casualty or theft, a sition. If you deduct actual car expenses andgain results when you receive insurance or other you dispose of your car before the end of its You should keep adequate records to provereimbursement that is more than your adjusted recovery period, you are allowed a reduced de- your expenses or have sufficient evidence thatbasis in your car. If you then spend all of the preciation deduction for the year of disposition. will support your own statement. You must gen-proceeds to acquire replacement property (a erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-To figure the reduced depreciation deductionnew car or repairs to the old car) within a speci- ered adequate. This is because written evidencefor a car disposed of in 2011, first determine thefied period of time, you do not recognize any is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-depreciation deduction for the full year usinggain. Your basis in the replacement property is ever, if you prepare a record on a computer, it isTable 4-1.its cost minus any gain that is not recognized. considered an adequate record.If you used a Date Placed in Service line forSee Publication 547 for more information. Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30, you can deduct one-half of
the depreciation amount figured for the full year. What Are AdequateTrade-in. When you trade in an old car for a Figure your depreciation deduction for the fullnew one, the transaction is considered a Records?year using the rules explained in this chapterlike-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is and deduct 50% of that amount with your other You should keep the proof you need in an ac-recognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of actual car expenses. count book, diary, log, statement of expense,Publication 544.) In a trade-in situation, your
If you used a Date Placed in Service line for trip sheets, or similar record. You should alsobasis in the new property is generally your ad-
Oct. 1 ÐDec. 31, you can deduct a percentage keep documentary evidence that, together withjusted basis in the old property plus any addi-
of the depreciation amount figured for the full your record, will support each element of antional amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis,
year. The percentage you use is determined by expense.earlier.)
the month you disposed of the car. Figure your
depreciation deduction for the full year using theDepreciation adjustment when you used the Documentary evidence. You generally must
rules explained in this chapter and multiply thestandard mileage rate. If you used the stan- have documentary evidence, such as receipts,
result by the percentage from the following tabledard mileage rate for the business use of your canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-
for the month that you disposed of the car.car, depreciation was included in that rate. The penses.
rate of depreciation that was allowed in the stan- Exception. Documentary evidence is notMonth Percentagedard mileage rate is shown in the chart that needed if any of the following conditions apply.follows. You must reduce your basis in your car Jan., Feb., March ........... . 12.5%
April, May, June ............ . 37.5%(but not below zero) by the amount of this depre- • You have meals or lodging expenses
July, Aug., Sept. ............ . 62.5%ciation. while traveling away from home for which
Oct., Nov., Dec. ............ . 87.5%If your basis is reduced to zero (but not below you account to your employer under an
zero) through the use of the standard mileage accountable plan, and you use a per diem
Do not use this table if you are a fiscalrate, and you continue to use your car for busi- allowance method that includes meals
year filer. See Sale or Other Disposi-ness, no adjustment (reduction) to the standard and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and
tion Before the Recovery Period Endsmileage rate is necessary. Use the full standard
CAUTION
! per diem allowances are discussed in
in chapter 4 of Publication 946.mileage rate (51 cents per mile before July 1, chapter 6.)
Page 26 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 27 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your expense, other than lodging, is less If a charge is made for items other than food and You do not need to write down the elements
than $75. beverages, the receipt must show that this is the of every expense on the day of the expense. If
case. you maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac-• You have a transportation expense for counts for use during the week, the log is consid-which a receipt is not readily available. Canceled check. A canceled check, to- ered a timely-kept record.gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es- If you give your employer, client, or customerAdequate evidence. Documentary evi- tablishes the cost. However, a canceled check an expense account statement, it can also bedence ordinarily will be considered adequate if it by itself does not prove a business expense considered a timely-kept record. This is true ifshows the amount, date, place, and essential without other evidence to show that it was for a you copy it from your account book, diary, log,character of the expense. business purpose. statement of expense, trip sheets, or similarFor example, a hotel receipt is enough to record.Duplicate information. You do not have tosupport expenses for business travel if it has all record information in your account book or otherof the following information. Proving business purpose. You must gener-record that duplicates information shown on a ally provide a written statement of the business• The name and location of the hotel. receipt as long as your records and receipts purpose of an expense. However, the degree ofcomplement each other in an orderly manner.• The dates you stayed there. proof varies according to the circumstances inYou do not have to record amounts your each case. If the business purpose of an ex-• Separate amounts for charges such as employer pays directly for any ticket or other pense is clear from the surrounding circum-lodging, meals, and telephone calls. travel item. However, if you charge these items stances, then you do not need to give a writtento your employer, through a credit card or other- explanation.A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an wise, you must keep a record of the amounts
expense for a business meal if it has all of the you spend. Example. If you are a sales representativefollowing information. Timely-kept records. You should record the who calls on customers on an established sales
• The name and location of the restaurant. elements of an expense or of a business use at route, you do not have to give a written explana-
or near the time of the expense or use and tion of the business purpose for traveling that• The number of people served. support it with sufficient documentary evidence. route. You can satisfy the requirements by re-
• The date and amount of the expense. A timely-kept record has more value than a cording the length of the delivery route once, the
statement prepared later when generally there is date of each trip at or near the time of the trips,
a lack of accurate recall. and the total miles you drove the car during the
Table 5-1.  How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements . . .
expenses for . .
Amount Time Place or Business Purpose
Description Business Relationship
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area of Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the
expense for travel, and returned your travel (name of business benefit gained or expected to be gained.
lodging, and meals. for each trip city, town, or other  
Incidental expenses may and number designation). Relationship: N/A
be totaled in reasonable of days spent
categories such as taxis, on business.
fees and tips, etc.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address or Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the
expense. Incidental entertainment. location of place of business benefit gained or expected to be gained. 
expenses such as taxis, (Also see entertainment. Type of For entertainment, the nature of the business
telephones, etc., may be Business entertainment if not discussion or activity. If the entertainment was directly
totaled on a daily basis. Purpose.) otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the date, place,
(Also see Business nature, and duration of the business discussion, and
Purpose.) the identities of the persons who took part in both the
business discussion and the entertainment activity.
 
Relationship: Occupations or other information (such as
names, titles, or other designations) about the
recipients that shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that you or your
employee was present if the entertainment was a
business meal.
Gifts Cost of the gift. Date of the Description of the gift.
gift.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
expense. For car expense. For destination.  
expenses, the cost of the car expenses, Relationship: N/A
car and any the date of
improvements, the date the use of the
you started using it for car.
business, the mileage for
each business use, and
the total miles for the
year.
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 27

Page 28 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax year. You could also establish the date of • You were unable to obtain evidence for an between two deliveries. You can account for
element of the expense or use that com- these using a single record of miles driven.each trip with a receipt, record of delivery, or
pletely satisfies the requirements ex-other documentary evidence. Gift expenses. You do not always have toplained earlier under What Are Adequate record the name of each recipient of a gift. ARecords.Confidential information. You do not need to general listing will be enough if it is evident thatput confidential information relating to an ele- • You are unable to obtain evidence for an you are not trying to avoid the $25 annual limitment of a deductible expense (such as the element that completely satisfies the two on the amount you can deduct for gifts to anyplace, business purpose, or business relation- rules listed earlier under What If I Have one person. For example, if you buy a largeship) in your account book, diary, or other re- Incomplete Records. number of tickets to local high school basketball
cord. However, you do have to record the games and give one or two tickets to each of• You have presented other evidence for theinformation elsewhere at or near the time of the many customers, it is usually enough to record aelement that is the best proof possibleexpense and have it available to fully prove that general description of the recipients.under the circumstances.element of the expense.
Allocating total cost. If you can prove the
total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-Destroyed records. If you cannot produce aWhat If I Have Incomplete not prove how much it cost for each person whoreceipt because of reasons beyond your control,Records? participated in the event, you may have to allo-you can prove a deduction by reconstructing cate the total cost among you and your guestsyour records or expenses. Reasons beyondIf you do not have complete records to prove an on a pro rata basis. To do so, you must establishyour control include fire, flood, and other casu-element of an expense, then you must prove the the number of persons who participated in thealty.element with: event.
• Your own written or oral statement con- An allocation would be needed, for example,Separating and Combiningtaining specific information about the ele- if you did not have a business relationship with
Expensesment, and all of your guests. See Allocating between busi-
ness and nonbusiness in chapter 2.• Other supporting evidence that is sufficient This section explains when expenses must be
to establish the element. If your return is examined. If your return iskept separate and when expenses can be com-
examined, you may have to provide additionalbined.
If the element is the description of a gift, or the information to the IRS. This information could be
Separating expenses. Each separate pay-cost, time, place, or date of an expense, the needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy or
ment is generally considered a separate ex-supporting evidence must be either direct evi- reliability of information contained in your rec-
pense. For example, if you entertain a customerdence or documentary evidence. Direct evi- ords, statements, testimony, or documentary
or client at dinner and then go to the theater, thedence can be written statements or the oral evidence before a deduction is allowed.
dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-testimony of your guests or other witnesses set-
ets are two separate expenses. You must recordting forth detailed information about the element. How Long To Keepthem separately in your records.Documentary evidence can be receipts, paid Records and Receiptsbills, or similar evidence. Season or series tickets. If you buy sea-
If the element is either the business relation- son or series tickets for business use, you must You must keep records as long as they may be
ship of your guests or the business purpose of treat each ticket in the series as a separate item. needed for the administration of any provision of
the amount spent, the supporting evidence can To determine the cost of individual tickets, divide the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this
be circumstantial rather than direct. For exam- the total cost (but not more than face value) by means you must keep records that support your
ple, the nature of your work, such as making the number of games or performances in the deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years from
deliveries, provides circumstantial evidence of series. You must keep records to show whether the date you file the income tax return on which
the use of your car for business purposes. In- you use each ticket as a gift or entertainment. the deduction is claimed. A return filed early is
voices of deliveries establish when you used Also, you must be able to prove the cost of considered filed on the due date. For a more
the car for business. nonluxury box seat tickets if you rent a skybox or complete explanation of how long to keep rec-
other private luxury box for more than one event. ords, see Publication 583, Starting a Business
See Entertainment tickets in chapter 2.Sampling. You can keep an adequate record and Keeping Records.
for parts of a tax year and use that record to You must keep records of the business useCombining items. You can make one dailyprove the amount of business or investment use of your car for each year of the recovery period.entry in your record for reasonable categories offor the entire year. You must demonstrate by See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 underexpenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephoneother evidence that the periods for which an Depreciation Deduction.calls, or other incidental travel costs. Mealsadequate record is kept are representative of Reimbursed for expenses. Employees whoshould be in a separate category. You can in-the use throughout the tax year. give their records and documentation to theirclude tips for meal-related services with the
employers and are reimbursed for their ex-costs of the meals.Example. You use your car to visit the of- penses generally do not have to keep copies ofExpenses of a similar nature occurring dur-fices of clients, meet with suppliers and other this information. However, you may have toing the course of a single event are considered asubcontractors, and pick up and deliver items to prove your expenses if any of the following con-single expense. For example, if during entertain-clients. There is no other business use of the ditions apply.ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately forcar, but you and your family use the car for
each serving of refreshments, the total expensepersonal purposes. You keep adequate records • You claim deductions for expenses thatfor the refreshments is treated as a single ex-during the first week of each month that show are more than reimbursements.pense.that 75% of the use of the car is for business. • Your expenses are reimbursed under aInvoices and bills show that your business use Car expenses. You can account for several nonaccountable plan.continues at the same rate during the later uses of your car that can be considered part of a
weeks of each month. Your weekly records are • Your employer does not use adequate ac-single use, such as a round trip or uninterrupted
representative of the use of the car each month counting procedures to verify expense ac-business use, with a single record. Minimal per-
and are sufficient evidence to support the per- counts.sonal use, such as a stop for lunch on the way
centage of business use for the year. between two business stops, is not an interrup- • You are related to your employer as de-tion of business use. fined under Per Diem and Car Allowances,Exceptional circumstances. You can satisfy in chapter 6.the substantiation requirements with other evi- Example. You make deliveries at several
dence if, because of the nature of the situation in different locations on a route that begins and Reimbursements, adequate accounting , and
which an expense is made, you cannot get a ends at your employer's business premises and nonaccountable plans are discussed in chapter
receipt. This applies if all the following are true. that includes a stop at the business premises 6.
Page 28 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 29 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Report all other business expenses dis- For example, if you have rental real estateExamples of Records
income and expenses, report your expenses oncussed in this publication on line 32. You
Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Incomecan only include 50% of your meals andExamples of records that show the information
and Loss. See Publication 527, Residentialentertainment on that line.you need to keep for different types of expenses
Rental Property, for more information on theare included in this publication as Table 6-2 and See your form instructions for more information rental of real estate. If you have deductible in-Table 6-3. They are part of the illustrated exam- on how to complete your tax return. vestment-related transportation expenses, re-ples shown at the end of chapter 6.
port them on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.Both self-employed and an employee. If
you are both self-employed and an employee,
Vehicle Provided byyou must keep separate records for each busi-
ness activity. Report your business expenses for Your Employer
self-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F
If your employer provides you with a car, you(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your
6. may be able to deduct the actual expenses ofbusiness expenses for your work as an em-
operating that car for business purposes. Theployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed
amount you can deduct depends on the amountnext.
that your employer included in your income and
How To Report the business and personal miles you drove dur-Employees. If you are an employee, you gen-
ing the year. You cannot use the standard mile-erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your
age rate.This chapter explains where and how to report travel, transportation, and entertainment ex-
the expenses discussed in this publication. It penses. However, you can use the shorter Form
Value reported on Form W-2. Your employerdiscusses reimbursements and how to treat 2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all of
can figure and report either the actual value ofthem under accountable and nonaccountable the following conditions.
your personal use of the car or the value of theplans. It also explains rules for independent con- • You are an employee deducting expenses car as if you used it only for personal purposestractors and clients, fee-basis officials, certain attributable to your job. (100% income inclusion). Your employer mustperforming artists, Armed Forces reservists, and
separately state the amount if 100% of the an-certain disabled employees. The chapter ends • You were not reimbursed by your em-
nual lease value was included in your income. Ifwith illustrations of how to report travel, enter- ployer for your expenses (amounts in-
you are unsure of the amount included on yourtainment, gift, and car expenses on Forms 2106 cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not
Form W-2, ask your employer.and 2106-EZ. considered reimbursements).
• If you claim car expenses, you use the Full value included in your income. You can
standard mileage rate. deduct the value of the business use of an em-
ployer-provided car if your employer reportedWhere To Report For more information on how to report your 100% of the value of the car in your income. On
expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see your 2011 Form W-2, the amount of the valueThis section provides general information on Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later. will be included in box 1, Wages, tips, otherwhere to report the expenses discussed in this compensation, and box 14.publication. Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse- To claim your expenses, complete Formments (or the reimbursements were all included 2106, Part II, Sections A and C. Enter yourSelf-employed. You must report your income in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only business actual expenses on line 23 of Section C andand expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form expense you are claiming is for gifts, and the include the entire value of the em-1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched- Special Rules  discussed later do not apply to ployer-provided car on line 25. Complete theule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not you, do not complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. rest of the form.use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your deductible
If you claim car or truck expenses, you must gifts directly on line 21 of Schedule A (Form Less than full value included in your income.provide certain information on the use of your 1040). If less than the full annual lease value of the carvehicle. You provide this information on Sched- was included on your Form W-2, this means thatStatutory employees. If you received aule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Form 4562. your Form W-2 only includes the value of yourForm W-2 and the ªStatutory employeeº box inIf you file Schedule C: personal use of the car. Do not enter this valuebox 13 was checked, report your income and
on your Form 2106 because it is not deductible.• Report your travel expenses, except expenses related to that income on Schedule C
If you paid any actual costs (that your em-meals, on line 24a, or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form
ployer did not provide or reimburse you for) to2106 or 2106-EZ.• Report your deductible meals (actual cost operate the car, you can deduct the businessStatutory employees include full-time life in-or standard meal allowance) and enter- portion of those costs. Examples of costs thatsurance salespersons, certain agent or commis-tainment on line 24b, you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com-sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain plete Form 2106, Part II, Sections A and C.• Report your gift expenses and transporta- homeworkers. Enter your actual costs on line 23 of Section Ction expenses, other than car expenses,
 If you are entitled to a reimbursement and leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of theon line 27, and
from your employer but you do not form.• Report your car expenses on line 9. Com- claim it, you cannot claim a deduction
CAUTION
!
plete Part IV of the form unless you have for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-
to file Form 4562 for depreciation or amor- bursement applies.
tization. Reimbursement for personal expenses. If Reimbursements
your employer reimburses you for nondeduct-If you file Schedule C-EZ, report the total of all This section explains what to do when you re-ible personal expenses, such as for vacationbusiness expenses on line 2. You can only in- ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any oftrips, your employer must report the reimburse-clude 50% of your meals and entertainment in the employee business expenses discussed inment as wage income in box 1 of your Formthat total. If you include car expenses, you must this publication.W-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.also complete Part III of the form. If you received an advance, allowance, orIf you file Schedule F: Income-producing property. If you have reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-
travel or transportation expenses related to in-• Report your car expenses on line 10. At- port this amount and your expenses depends on
come-producing property, report your deducti-tach Form 4562 and provide information whether the reimbursement was paid to you
ble expenses on the form appropriate for thaton the use of your car in Part V of Form under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable
activity.4562. plan.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

Page 30 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This section explains the two types of plans, Reasonable period of time. The definition The employer makes the decision
how per diem and car allowances simplify prov- of reasonable period of time depends on the whether to reimburse employees
ing the amount of your expenses, and the tax facts and circumstances of your situation. How- under an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIP
treatment of your reimbursements and ex- ever, regardless of the facts and circumstances countable plan. If you are an employee who
penses. It also covers rules for independent of your situation, actions that take place within receives payments under a nonaccountable
contractors. the times specified in the following list will be plan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-
treated as taking place within a reasonable pe- ments under an accountable plan by voluntarily
riod of time. accounting to your employer for the expensesNo reimbursement. You are not reimbursed
and voluntarily returning excess reimburse-or given an allowance for your expenses if you • You receive an advance within 30 days of ments to the employer.are paid a salary or commission with the under- the time you have an expense.
standing that you will pay your own expenses. In
• You adequately account for your ex-this situation, you have no reimbursement or
penses within 60 days after they were paidallowance arrangement, and you do not have to Adequate Accountingor incurred.read this section on reimbursements. Instead,
One of the rules for an accountable plan is thatsee Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later, • You return any excess reimbursement you must adequately account to your employerfor information on completing your tax return. within 120 days after the expense was for your expenses. You adequately account bypaid or incurred. giving your employer a statement of expense,Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. A • You are given a periodic statement (at an account book, a diary, or a similar record inreimbursement or other expense allowance ar- least quarterly) that asks you to either re- which you entered each expense at or near therangement is a system or plan that an employer turn or adequately account for outstanding time you had it, along with documentary evi-uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex- advances and you comply within 120 days dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage,penses, advances, reimbursements, and of the statement. and other employee business expenses. (Seeamounts charged to the employer for employee
Table 5-1 in chapter 5 for details you need tobusiness expenses. Arrangements include per
enter in your record and documents you need todiem and car allowances. Employee meets accountable plan rules. If
prove certain expenses.) A per diem or car al-you meet the three rules for accountable plans,A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of
lowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-your employer should not include any reim-daily reimbursement your employer gives you
quirement under certain conditions. See Perbursements in your income in box 1 of yourfor your lodging, meals, and incidental expenses
Diem and Car Allowances, later.Form W-2. If your expenses equal your reim-when you are away from home on business.
bursement, you do not complete Form 2106.(The term ªincidental expensesº  is defined in You must account for all amounts you re-
You have no deduction since your expenseschapter 1 under Standard Meal Allowance. ) A ceived from your employer during the year as
and reimbursement are equal.car allowance is an amount your employer gives advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This
you for the business use of your car. includes amounts you charged to your employerIf your employer included reimburse-Your employer should tell you what method by credit card or other method. You must givements in box 1 of your Form W-2 andof reimbursement is used and what records you your employer the same type of records andyou meet all the rules for accountable
TIPmust provide. supporting information that you would have toplans, ask your employer for a corrected Form
give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deductionW-2.
on your return. You must pay back the amount ofEmployers. If you are an employer and you
any reimbursement or other expense allowancereimburse employee business expenses, how Accountable plan rules not met. Even for which you do not adequately account or thatyou treat this reimbursement on your em- though you are reimbursed under an accounta- is more than the amount for which you ac-ployee's Form W-2 depends in part on whether ble plan, some of your expenses may not meet counted.you have an accountable plan. Reimburse- all three rules. All reimbursements that fail toments treated as paid under an accountable meet all three rules for accountable plans areplan, as explained next, are not reported as pay. generally treated as having been reimbursed Per Diem and Car AllowancesReimbursements treated as paid under nonac- under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).countable plans, as explained later, are reported If your employer reimburses you for your ex-Failure to return excess reimbursements.as pay. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em-
penses using a per diem or a car allowance, youIf you are reimbursed under an accountableployer's Tax Guide, for information on employee
can generally use the allowance as proof for theplan, but you fail to return, within a reasonablepay.
amount of your expenses. A per diem or cartime, any amounts in excess of the substanti-
allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-ated amounts, the amounts paid in excess of theAccountable Plans quirements for the amount of your expensessubstantiated expenses are treated as paid
only if all the following conditions apply.under a nonaccountable plan. See ReasonableTo be an accountable plan, your employer's
period of time , earlier, and Returning Excessreimbursement or allowance arrangement must • Your employer reasonably limits payments
Reimbursements, later.include all of the following rules. of your expenses to those that are ordi-
nary and necessary in the conduct of theReimbursement of nondeductible ex-1. Your expenses must have a business con- trade or business.penses. You may be reimbursed under yournection Ð that is, you must have paid or employer's accountable plan for expenses re- • The allowance is similar in form to and notincurred deductible expenses while per- lated to that employer's business, some of which more than the federal rate (defined later).forming services as an employee of your are deductible as employee business expensesemployer. • You prove the time (dates), place, andand some of which are not deductible. The reim-
business purpose of your expenses to2. You must adequately account to your em- bursements you receive for the nondeductible
your employer (as explained in Table 5-1)ployer for these expenses within a reason- expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountable
within a reasonable period of time.able period of time. plans, and they are treated as paid under a
nonaccountable plan. • You are not related to your employer (as3. You must return any excess reimburse-
defined next). If you are related to yourment or allowance within a reasonable pe- Example. Your employer's plan reimburses employer, you must be able to prove yourriod of time. you for travel expenses while away from home expenses to the IRS even if you have al-ªAdequate accountingº  and ªreturning ex- on business and also for meals when you work ready adequately accounted to your em-cess reimbursementsº are discussed later. late at the office, even though you are not away ployer and returned any excessAn excess reimbursement or allowance is from home. The part of the arrangement that reimbursement.any amount you are paid that is more than the reimburses you for the nondeductible meals
If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allow-business-related expenses that you adequately when you work late at the office is treated as
accounted for to your employer. paid under a nonaccountable plan. ance practices are not based on reasonably
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 31 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec- • Reimburses you, based on your receipts, the federal rate. This is true even though a
federal employee would be limited to a re-for the actual cost of your lodging.ognition of cost differences in different areas for
imbursement of M&IE for only 11/2 days ofper diem amounts), you will not be considered to • Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your the federal M&IE rate.have accounted to your employer. In this case, lodging.you must be able to prove your expenses to the
The standard mileage rate. This is a set• Does not have a reasonable belief thatIRS.
rate per mile that you can use to compute youryou had (or will have) lodging expenses,
deductible car expenses. For 2011, the standardsuch as when you stay with friends or rela-Related to employer. You are related to your
mileage rate for the cost of operating your car fortives or sleep in the cab of your truck.employer if: 
business use is 51 cents per mile before July 1• Figures the allowance on a basis similar to1. Your employer is your brother or sister, (551/2 cents per mile after June 30).that used in computing your compensa-half brother or half sister, spouse, ances- Fixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is antion, such as number of hours worked ortor, or lineal descendant, allowance your employer may use to reimbursemiles traveled.
your car expenses. Under this method, your2. Your employer is a corporation in which
employer pays an allowance that includes ayou own, directly or indirectly, more than High-low rate. This is a simplified method
combination of payments covering fixed and va-of computing the federal per diem rate for travel10% in value of the outstanding stock, or
riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate towithin the continental United States. It elimi-3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi- cover your variable operating costs (such asnates the need to keep a current list of the perduciary, or beneficiary) exist between you, gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover yourdiem rate for each city.a trust, and your employer. fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-Under the high-low method, the per diem
ments), insurance, etc.). If your employerYou may be considered to indirectly own stock, amount for travel during January through Sep-
chooses to use this method, your employer willfor purposes of (2), if you have an interest in a tember of 2011 is $233 (including $65 for M&IE)
request the necessary records from you.for certain high-cost locations. All other areascorporation, partnership, estate, or trust that
have a per diem amount of $160 (including $52owns the stock or if a member of your family or Reporting your expenses with a per diem orfor M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542your partner owns the stock. car allowance. If your reimbursement is in theon the Internet, which gives the areas eligible for form of an allowance received under an ac-the $233 per diem amount under the high-lowThe federal rate. The federal rate can be fig- countable plan, the following facts affect yourmethod for all or part of this period.)ured using any one of the following methods. reporting.
Effective October 1, 2011, the per diem1. For per diem amounts: • The federal rate.rate for certain high-cost locations in-
• Whether the allowance or your actual ex-creased to $242 (including $65 fora. The regular federal per diem rate.
CAUTION
!
penses were more than the federal rate.M&IE). The rate for all other locations increasedb. The standard meal allowance. to $163 (including $52 for M&IE). However, an The following discussions explain where to re-employer can continue to use the rates de-c. The high-low rate. port your expenses depending upon how thescribed in the preceding paragraph for the re- amount of your allowance compares to the fed-mainder of 2011 if those rates and locations are2. For car expenses: eral rate.used consistently during October, November,
Allowance less than or equal to the federala. The standard mileage rate. and December for all employees. Employers
rate. If your allowance is less than or equal towho did not use the high-low method during theb. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). the federal rate, the allowance will not be in-first 9 months of 2011 cannot begin to use it
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do notbefore 2012. For more information, see Reve-
For per diem amounts, use the rate in need to report the related expenses or the allow-nue Procedure 2011-47, which can be found on
effect for the area where you stop for ance on your return if your expenses are equalthe Internet at www.irs.gov/irb/2011-42_IRB/
sleep or rest. to or less than the allowance.ar12.html. Also see Publication 1542 (available
TIP
However, if your actual expenses are moreon the Internet at IRS.gov).
Regular federal per diem rate. The regular than your allowance, you can complete Form
Prorating the standard meal allowance on 2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-federal per diem rate is the highest amount that
partial days of travel. The standard meal al- ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-the federal government will pay to its employees
lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If you penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS thefor lodging, meals, and incidental expenses (or
travel for part of a day, such as on the days you total amount of your expenses and reimburse-meals and incidental expenses only) while they
depart and return, you must prorate the full-day ments for the entire year. If you are using theare traveling away from home in a particular M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em- standard meal allowance or the standard mile-area. The rates are different for different loca- ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or age rate, you do not have to prove that amount.tions. Your employer should have these rates the high-low rate.available. (Employers can get Publication 1542, You can use either of the following methods Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-daywhich gives the rates in the continental United to figure the federal M&IE for that day. business trip to Denver. The federal rate forStates for the current year. Publication 1542 is Denver is $207 per day. As required by hisavailable on the Internet at IRS.gov.) 1. Method 1: employer's accountable plan, he accounts for
The standard meal allowance. The stan- the time (dates), place, and business purpose ofa. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of thedard meal allowance (discussed in chapter 1) is the trip. His employer reimburses him $207 astandard meal allowance amount forthe federal rate for meals and incidental ex- day ($414 total) for living expenses. Jeremy'sthat day.penses (M&IE). The rate for most small localities living expenses in Denver are not more than
b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of the $207 a day.in the United States is $46 a day. Most major
standard meal allowance amount for Jeremy's employer does not include any ofcities and many other localities qualify for higher
the preceding day. the reimbursement on his Form W-2 and Jeremyrates. The rates for localities within the continen-
does not deduct the expenses on his return.tal United States are listed in Publication 1542.
2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-You can also find this information on the Internet
lowance using any method you consist- Example 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-dayat www.gsa.gov.
ently apply in accordance with reasonable business trip to Boston. Matt's employer usesYou receive an allowance only for meals and business practice. For example, an em- the high-low method to reimburse employees.incidental expenses when your employer does ployer can treat 2 full days of per diem Since Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is givenone of the following. (that includes M&IE) paid for travel away an advance of $233 a day ($466 total) for his
• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in from home from 9 a.m. of one day to 5 lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Matt's
kind). p.m. of the next day as being no more than actual expenses totaled $700.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

Page 32 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Laura does not have to complete Form 2106;Table 6-1.  Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, however, she must include the $36 in her grossand Car Expenses and Reimbursements income as wages (by reporting the total amount
shown in box 1 of her Form W-2).IF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee
other expense allowance) reports on Form W-2: reports on
Example 2. Joe also lives in Austin and arrangement is under:  Form 2106: *
works for the same employer as Laura. In May
An accountable plan with: the employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 days
and paid the hotel directly for Joe's hotel bill. TheActual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount.
employer reimbursed Joe $75 a day for hisAdequate accounting made and
meals and incidental expenses. The federal rateexcess returned.
for San Diego is $71 a day.
Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as No amount. Joe can prove that his actual meal expensesAdequate accounting and return of wages in box 1. totaled $380. His employer's accountable planexcess both required but excess not will not pay more than $75 a day for travel to Sanreturned. Diego, so Joe does not give his employer the
records that prove that he actually spent $380.Per diem or mileage allowance up to No amount. All expenses and
However, he does account for the time, place,the federal rate: Adequate reimbursements only if
accounting made and excess excess expenses are and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe's
returned. claimed. Otherwise, form is only business trip this year.
not filed. Joe was reimbursed $300 ($75 ×  4 days),
which is $16 more than the federal rate of $284Per diem or mileage allowance up to The excess amount as No amount. ($71 ×  4 days). The employer includes the $16the federal rate: Adequate wages in box 1. The as income on Joe's Form W-2 in box 1. Theaccounting and return of excess both amount up to the federal
employer also enters $284 in box 12 of Joe'srequired but excess not returned. rate is reported only in box
Form W-2.12Ðit is not reported in
Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-box 1.
ductible expenses. He enters the total of hisPer diem or mileage allowance The excess amount as All expenses (and actual expenses for the year ($380) on Formexceeds the federal rate:  Adequate wages in box 1. The reimbursements reported on 2106. He also enters the reimbursements thataccounting up to the federal rate only amount up to the federal Form W-2, box 12) only if were not included in his income ($284). His totaland excess not returned. rate is reported only in box expenses in excess of the deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is $96.12Ðit is not reported in federal rate are claimed. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-box 1. Otherwise, form is not filed. reimbursed meals and entertainment, he will
A nonaccountable plan with: include the balance, $48, as an itemized deduc-
tion.Either adequate accounting or return The entire amount as All expenses.
of excess, or both, not required by wages in box 1. Example 3. Debbie drives 10,000 milesplan. (5,000 miles from January 1 through June 30,
and 5,000 miles from July 1 through DecemberNo reimbursement plan: The entire amount as All expenses.
wages in box 1. 31) in 2011 for business. Under her employer's
accountable plan, she gets reimbursed 60 cents* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. a mile, which is more than the standard mileage
rate. Her total reimbursement is $6,000.
Debbie's employer must include the reim-Since Matt's $700 of expenses are more amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your bursement amount up to the standard mileageForm W-2. This amount is not taxable. However,than his $466 advance, he includes the excess rate, $5,325 [(5,000 ×  51 cents) + (5,000 ×  55.5the excess allowance will be included in box 1 ofexpenses when he itemizes his deductions. Matt cents)], in box 12 of her Form W-2. That amountyour Form W-2. You must report this part of yourcompletes Form 2106 (showing all of his ex- is not taxable. Her employer must also includeallowance as if it were wage income.penses and reimbursements). He must also al- $635 ($6,000 − $5,325) in box 1 of her FormIf your actual expenses are less than orlocate his reimbursement between his meals W-2. This is the reimbursement that is more thanequal to the federal rate, you do not completeand other expenses as discussed later under the standard mileage rate.Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses onCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.  If Debbie's expenses are equal to or lessyour return. than the standard mileage rate, she would notExample 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles However, if your actual expenses are more complete Form 2106. If her expenses are more(5,000 miles from January 1 through June 30, than the federal rate, you can complete Form than the standard mileage rate, she would com-2106 and deduct those excess expenses. Youand 5,000 miles from July 1 through December plete Form 2106 and report her total expensesmust report on Form 2106 your reimbursements31) in 2011 for business. Under her employer's and reimbursement (shown in box 12 of herup to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of youraccountable plan, she accounts for the time Form W-2). She would then claim the excessForm W-2) and all your expenses. You should(dates), place, and business purpose of each expenses as an itemized deduction.be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowance
of 40 cents a mile.
Example 1.  Laura lives and works in Aus- Returning ExcessSince Nicole's $5,325 expense computed tin. In July her employer sent her to Albuquerqueunder the standard mileage rate [(5,000 miles x Reimbursementsfor 4 days on business. Laura's employer paid51 cents) + (5,000 miles x 55 1/2 cents)] is more the hotel directly for her lodging and reimbursed Under an accountable plan, you are required tothan her $4,000 reimbursement (10,000 miles × Laura $65 a day ($260 total) for meals and return any excess reimbursement or other ex-40 cents), she itemizes her deductions to claim incidental expenses. Laura's actual meal ex- pense allowances for your business expensesthe excess expense. Nicole completes Form penses were not more than the federal rate for to the person paying the reimbursement or al-2106 (showing all her expenses and reimburse- Albuquerque, which is $56 per day. lowance. Excess reimbursement means anyments) and enters $1,325 ($5,325 − $4,000) as Her employer included the $36 that was amount for which you did not adequately ac-an itemized deduction. more than the federal rate (($65 − $56) ×  4) in count within a reasonable period of time. For
Allowance more than the federal rate. If box 1 of Laura's Form W-2. Her employer shows example, if you received a travel advance and
your allowance is more than the federal rate, $224 ($56 a day ×  4) in box 12 of her Form W-2. you did not spend all the money on busi-
your employer must include the allowance This amount is not included in Laura's income. ness-related expenses or you do not have proof
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 33 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of all your expenses, you have an excess reim- your wages, salary, or other pay will be treated You must keep adequate records of these ex-
bursement. as a nonaccountable plan. This is because you penses whether or not you account to your client
ªAdequate accountingº and ªreasonable pe- are entitled to receive the full amount of your pay for these expenses.
riod of timeº were discussed earlier in this chap- whether or not you have any business ex- If you do not separately account for and seek
ter. penses. reimbursement for meals and entertainment in
connection with providing services for a client,If you are not sure if the reimbursement orTravel advance. You receive a travel ad- you are subject to the 50% limit on those ex-expense allowance arrangement is an account-vance if your employer provides you with an penses. See 50% Limit  in chapter 2.able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-expense allowance before you actually have the
ployer.expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-
Adequate accounting. As a self-employedpected to be no more than your expense. Under
Reporting your expenses under a nonac- person, you adequately account by reportingan accountable plan, you are required to ade-
countable plan. Your employer will combine your actual expenses. You should follow thequately account to your employer for this ad-
the amount of any reimbursement or other ex- recordkeeping rules in chapter 5.vance and to return any excess within a
pense allowance paid to you under a nonac-reasonable period of time. How to report. For information on how tocountable plan with your wages, salary, or otherIf you do not adequately account for or do not report expenses on your tax return, seepay. Your employer will report the total in box 1return any excess advance within a reasonable Self-employed at the beginning of this chapter.of your Form W-2.period of time, the amount you do not account
You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZfor or return will be treated as having been paid
and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later). Required Records forpenses for travel, transportation, meals, or en- Clients or CustomersUnproved amounts. If you do not prove tertainment. Your meal and entertainmentthat you actually traveled on each day for which expenses will be subject to the 50% limit  dis- If you are a client or customer, you generally doyou received a per diem or car allowance (prov- cussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expenses not have to keep records to prove the reimburse-ing the elements described in Table 5-1 ), you will be subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- ments or allowances you give, in the course ofmust return this unproved amount of the travel gross-income limit that applies to most miscella- your business, to an independent contractor foradvance within a reasonable period of time. If neous itemized deductions. travel or gift expenses incurred on your behalf.you do not do this, the unproved amount will be
However, you must keep records if:considered paid under a nonaccountable plan Example 1. Kim's employer gives her(discussed later). • You reimburse the contractor for entertain-$1,000 a month ($12,000 total for the year) for
ment expenses incurred on your behalf,Per diem allowance more than federal rate. her business expenses. Kim does not have to
andIf your employer's accountable plan pays you an provide any proof of her expenses to her em-
allowance that is higher than the federal rate, ployer, and Kim can keep any funds that she • The contractor adequately accounts to youyou do not have to return the difference between does not spend. for these expenses.the two rates for the period you can prove busi- Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-
ness-related travel expenses. However, the dif- countable plan. Her employer will include the Contractor adequately accounts. If the con-ference will be reported as wages on your Form $12,000 on Kim's Form W-2 as if it were wages. tractor adequately accounts to you for entertain-W-2. This excess amount is considered paid If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses, ment expenses, you (the client or customer)under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later). she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and must keep records documenting each elementitemize her deductions. of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. UseExample.  Your employer sends you on a
your records as proof for a deduction on your tax5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2011 Example 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month by
return. If entertainment expenses are accountedand gives you a $400 ($80 ×  5 days) advance to his employer. On days that he travels away from
cover your meals and incidental expenses. The for separately, you are subject to the 50% limithome on business, his employer designates $50
federal per diem for meals and incidental ex- on entertainment. If the contractor adequatelya day of his salary as paid to reimburse his travel
penses for Phoenix is $71. Your trip lasts only 3 accounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you doexpenses. Because his employer would pay Ke-
days. Under your employer's accountable plan, not have to report the amounts on an informationvin his monthly salary whether or not he wasyou must return the $160 ($80 ×  2 days) ad- return.traveling away from home, the arrangement is avance for the 2 days you did not travel. For the 3 nonaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a daydays you did travel you do not have to return the Contractor does not adequately account.  Ifdesignated by his employer is treated as paid$27 difference between the allowance you re- the contractor does not adequately account tounder an accountable plan.ceived and the federal rate for Phoenix (($80 − you for allowances or reimbursements of enter-
$71) ×  3 days). However, the $27 will be re- tainment expenses, you do not have to keepRules for Independentported on your Form W-2 as wages. records of these items. You are not subject to
Contractors and Clients the 50% limit on entertainment in this case. You
can deduct the reimbursements or allowancesNonaccountable Plans This section provides rules for independent con- as payment for services if they are ordinary andtractors who incur expenses on behalf of a clientA nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or necessary business expenses. However, youor customer. The rules cover the reporting andexpense allowance arrangement that does not must file Form 1099-MISC to report amountssubstantiation of certain expenses discussed inmeet one or more of the three rules listed earlier paid to the independent contractor if the total ofthis publication, and they affect both indepen-under Accountable Plans. the reimbursements and any other fees is $600dent contractors and their clients or customers.In addition, even if your employer has an or more during the calendar year.You are considered an independent contrac-accountable plan, the following payments will be
tor if you are self-employed and you performtreated as being paid under a nonaccountable
services for a customer or client.plan:
• Excess reimbursements you fail to return Completing Forms
to your employer, and Accounting to Your Client 2106 and 2106-EZ• Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- If you received a reimbursement or an allow-penses related to your employer's busi- This section briefly describes how employeesance for travel, entertainment, or gift expensesness. See Reimbursement of complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 6-1that you incurred on behalf of a client, younondeductible expenses, earlier, under explains what the employer reports on Formshould provide an adequate accounting of theseAccountable Plans. W-2 and what the employee reports on Formexpenses to your client. If you do not account to
2106. The instructions for the forms have moreyour client for these expenses, you must includeAn arrangement that repays you for business
any reimbursements or allowances in income. information on completing them.expenses by reducing the amount reported as
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Page 34 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are self-employed, do not file Car rentals. If you claim car rental ex- Allocating your reimbursement. If you
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report your penses on Form 2106, line 24a, you may have to were reimbursed under an accountable plan and
expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F reduce that expense by an inclusion amount as want to deduct excess expenses that were not
CAUTION
!
(Form 1040). See the instructions for the form described in chapter 4. If so, you can show your reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-
that you must file. car expenses and any inclusion amount as fol- bursement. This is necessary when your em-
lows. ployer pays your reimbursement in the followingForm 2106-EZ. You may be able to use the
manner:shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employee 1. Compute the inclusion amount without tak-business expenses. You can use this form if you • Pays you a single amount that coversing into account your business use per-meet all the following conditions. meals and/or entertainment, as well ascentage for the tax year.
other business expenses, and• You are an employee deducting ordinary 2. Report the inclusion amount from (1) onand necessary expenses attributable to • Does not clearly identify how much is forForm 2106, Part II, line 24b.your job. deductible meals and/or entertainment.
3. Report on line 24c the net amount of car• You were not reimbursed by your em- You must allocate that single payment so thatrental expenses (total car rental expensesployer for your expenses (amounts in- you know how much to enter on Form 2106, lineminus the inclusion amount computed included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not 7, Column A and Column B.(1)).considered reimbursements).
The net amount of car rental expenses will be Example. Rob's employer paid him an ex-• If you are claiming car expenses, you are adjusted on Form 2106, Part II, line 27, to reflect pense allowance of $12,000 this year under anusing the standard mileage rate. the percentage of business use for the tax year. accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con-
sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for meals,Transportation expenses. Show your trans-Car expenses. If you used a car to perform entertainment, and car expenses. The employerportation expenses that did not involve overnightyour job as an employee, you may be able to did not clearly show how much of the $7,000travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or ondeduct certain car expenses. These are gener- was for the cost of deductible meals and enter-Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on thisally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and then tainment. Rob actually spent $14,000 during theline business expenses you have for parkingclaimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A. year ($5,500 for airfare, $4,500 for meals andfees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-Car expenses using the standard mileage rate entertainment, and $4,000 for car expenses).ating your car or expenses of commuting be-can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com- Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-tween your home and work.pleting Part II and Part I, line 1. tified, Rob knows that $5,000 of the payment
goes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. ToEmployee business expenses other thanInformation on use of cars. If you claim
allocate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses themeals and entertainment. Show your otherany deduction for the business use of a car, you
worksheet from the Instructions for Form 2106.employee business expenses on Form 2106,must answer certain questions and provide in-
His completed worksheet follows.lines 3 and 4, Column A, or Form 2106-EZ, linesformation about the use of the car. The informa-
3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals andtion relates to the following items. Reimbursement Allocation Worksheetentertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex-• Date placed in service. (Keep for your records)penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui-
tion and books), office-in-the-home expenses,• Mileage (total, business, commuting, and 1. Enter the total amount ofand trade and professional publications.other personal mileage). reimbursements your employer
gave you that were not reportedIf line 4 expenses are the only ones you• Percentage of business use. to you in box 1 of Form W-2 .. . $7,000are claiming, you received no reim- 2. Enter the total amount of your• After-work use. bursements (or the reimbursements
TIP expenses for the periodswere all included in box 1 of your Form W-2),• Use of other vehicles. covered by this reimbursement 8,500and the Special Rules  discussed later do not 3. Of the amount on line 2, enter• Whether you have evidence to support the apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or your total expense for mealsdeduction. 2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on and entertainment ........ . 4,500
4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter theSchedule A (Form 1040), line 21. List the type• Whether or not the evidence is written.
result as a decimal (rounded toand amount of each expense on the dotted linesEmployees must complete Form 2106, Part II, at least three places) ...... .  .529 and include the total on line 21.Section A, or Form 2106-EZ, Part II, to provide 5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter
the result here and in Columnthis information. Meal and entertainment expenses. Show B, line 7 .............. . 3,703the full amount of your expenses for busi-Standard mileage rate. If you claim a de- 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enterness-related meals and entertainment on Formduction based on the standard mileage rate in- the result here and in Column
2106, line 5, Column B. Include meals whilestead of your actual expenses, you must A, line 7 .............. . $3,297
away from your tax home overnight and othercomplete Form 2106, Part II, Section B. The On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297business meals and entertainment. Enter 50%amount on line 22 (Section B) is carried to Form ($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) inof the line 8, Column B, meal and entertainment2106, Part I, line 1. In addition, on Part 1, line 2, Column A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in Columnexpenses on line 9, Column B.you can deduct parking fees and tolls that apply B.If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the fullto the business use of the car. If you file Form
amount of your meals and entertainment on the2106-EZ, complete Part I, line 1, for the standard After you complete the form. After you haveline to the left of line 5 and multiply the total bymileage rate and line 2 for parking fees and tolls. completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, follow50%. Enter the result on line 5.See Standard Mileage Rate  in chapter 4 for the directions on that form to deduct your ex-
information on using this rate. penses on the appropriate line of your tax return.Hours of service limits. If you are subject
For most taxpayers, this is line 21 of Schedule Ato the Department of Transportation's ªhours ofActual expenses. If you claim a deduction
(Form 1040). However, if you are a governmentserviceº limits (as explained earlier under Indi-based on actual car expenses, you cannot use
official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist,viduals subject to ªhours of serviceº limits  inForm 2106-EZ. You must complete Form 2106,
an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em-chapter 2), use 80% instead of 50% for mealsPart II, Section C. In addition, unless you lease
ployee with impairment-related work expenses,while away from your tax home.your car, you must complete Section D to show
see Special Rules, later.your depreciation deduction and any section Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 7179 deduction you claim. (you cannot use Form 2106-EZ) the amounts Limits on employee business expenses.
If you are still using a car that is fully depreci- your employer (or third party) reimbursed you Your employee business expenses may be sub-
ated, continue to complete Section C. Since you that were not reported to you in box 1 of your ject to either of the limits described next. They
have no depreciation deduction, enter zero on Form W-2. This includes any amount reported are figured in the following order on the specified
line 28. In this case, do not complete Section D. under code L in box 12 of Form W-2. form.
Page 34 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 35 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer- Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, onOfficials Paid on a Fee Basis
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28, and identifytain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-
Certain fee-basis officials can claim their em- the type and amount of this expense on theject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, you
ployee business expenses whether or not they dotted line next to line 28. Enter your employeefigure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 of itemize their other deductions on Schedule A business expenses that are unrelated to yourForm 2106-EZ. (See 50% Limit in chapter 2.) (Form 1040). disability from Form 2106, line 10, or Form2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc- Fee-basis officials are persons who are em- 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),tions. If you are an employee, deduct your ployed by a state or local government and who line 21.employee business expenses (as figured on are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They Impairment-related work expenses are yourForm 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 21 of Schedule A can deduct their business expenses in perform- allowable expenses for attendant care at your(Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de- ing services in that job as an adjustment to gross workplace and other expenses in connectionincome rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedductions, including employee business ex- with your workplace that are necessary for youdeduction.penses, are subject to a 2%-of-adjusted- to be able to work.If you are a fee-basis official, include yourgross-income limit. This limit is figured on line 26 You are disabled if you have:employee business expenses from Form 2106,of Schedule A (Form 1040).
line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on • A physical or mental disability (for exam-
Form 1040, line 24. ple, blindness or deafness) that function-Special Rules
ally limits your being employed, or
This section discusses special rules that apply • A physical or mental impairment (for ex-Expenses of Certainonly to Armed Forces reservists, government ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatPerforming Artistsofficials who are paid on a fee basis, performing substantially limits one or more of yourartists, and disabled employees with impair- If you are a performing artist, you may qualify to major life activities, such as performingment-related work expenses. deduct your employee business expenses as an manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-
adjustment to gross income rather than as a ing, learning, or working.
miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,Armed Forces Reservists Traveling you must meet all of the following requirements. You can deduct impairment-related expensesMore Than 100 Miles From Home as business expenses if they are:1. During the tax year, you perform services
If you are a member of a reserve component of • Necessary for you to do your work satis-in the performing arts as an employee for
the Armed Forces of the United States and you factorily,at least two employers.
travel more than 100 miles away from home in • For goods and services not required or2. You receive at least $200 each from anyconnection with your performance of services as used, other than incidentally, in your per-two of these employers.a member of the reserves, you can deduct your sonal activities, andtravel expenses as an adjustment to gross in- 3. Your related performing-arts business ex-
• Not specifically covered under other in-come rather than as a miscellaneous itemized penses are more than 10% of your gross
come tax laws.income from the performance of thosededuction. The amount of expenses you can
services.deduct as an adjustment to gross income is
limited to the regular federal per diem rate (for Example 1. You are blind. You must use a4. Your adjusted gross income is not morelodging, meals, and incidental expenses) and reader to do your work. You use the reader boththan $16,000 before deducting these busi-
the standard mileage rate (for car expenses) during your regular working hours at your placeness expenses.
plus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. See of work and outside your regular working hours
Per Diem and Car Allowances  earlier for more away from your place of work. The reader'sSpecial rules for married persons. If you are
information. Any expenses in excess of these services are only for your work. You can deductmarried, you must file a joint return unless you
amounts can be claimed only as a miscellane- your expenses for the reader as business ex-lived apart from your spouse at all times during
ous itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit. penses.the tax year. If you file a joint return, you must
figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separately
Example 2. You are deaf. You must use aMember of a reserve component. You are a for both you and your spouse. However, require-
sign-language interpreter during meetings whilement (4) applies to your and your spouse's com-member of a reserve component of the Armed
you are at work. The interpreter's services arebined adjusted gross income.Forces of the United States if you are in the
used only for your work. You can deduct yourArmy, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast Where to report. If you meet all of the above expenses for the interpreter as business ex-Guard Reserve; the Army National Guard of the requirements, you should first complete Form penses.United States; the Air National Guard of the 2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your per-
United States; or the Reserve Corps of the Pub- forming-arts-related expenses from Form 2106, Illustrated Exampleslic Health Service. line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on
Form 1040, line 24. The following examples illustrate the reporting ofHow to report. If you have reserve-related If you do not meet all of the above require- travel, entertainment, gift, and transportation ex-travel that takes you more than 100 miles from ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex- penses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Businesshome, you should first complete Form 2106 or penses as an adjustment to gross income. use of a car is shown using actual car expensesInstead, you must complete Form 2106 orForm 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses for in Example 1 and the standard mileage rate in2106-EZ and deduct your employee businessreserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to Example 2. Sample records that prove some ofexpenses as an itemized deduction on Schedulethe federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or the claimed expenses are also shown.A (Form 1040), line 21.Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040,
line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on Example 1. David Pine purchased a new
Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, and car for $24,500 (not including sales tax) on Jan-Impairment-Related Workdeduct the balance as an itemized deduction on uary 5, 2011. In 2011, he used the car 70% forExpenses of Disabled EmployeesSchedule A (Form 1040), line 21. business purposes. A sample page from David's
You cannot deduct expenses of travel that logbook is illustrated in Table 6-2. He records hisIf you are an employee with a physical or mental
does not take you more than 100 miles from business mileage (but not his personal miles)disability, your impairment-related work ex-
and expenses daily.home as an adjustment to gross income. In- penses are not subject to the
stead, you must complete Form 2106 or David uses Form 2106 to claim actual car2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an expenses. He completes Part II, Section A, asto most other employee business expenses. Af-
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), shown later on his illustrated form. He does notter you complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, enter
line 21. claim the section 179 deduction but he doesyour impairment-related work expenses from
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

Page 36 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
claim the special depreciation allowance elect- transportation expenses. This amount was paid for lodging and for any other expenses of $75 or
ing safe-harbor exception. He uses the MACRS from an accountable plan and was not shown on more.
double declining balance method (200% DB) to David's Form W-2. However, since he is claim- During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000
determine his depreciation deduction. ing expenses that are more than his reimburse- miles of which 20,000 miles (10,000 miles from
David first figures his special depreciation ments, he must show the entire reimbursement January 1 through June 30 and 10,000 miles
allowance to be $17,150 ($24,500 ×  70% × amount on Part I, Column A, line 7. Since David from July 1 through December 31) were for
100%). David's depreciation limit for 2011 is had no meal or entertainment expenses, he en- business. Following the Instructions for Form
reduced because his business use is less than ters his excess deductible expenses ($7,741) on 2106-EZ, Part II, he answers all the questions
100%. He figures his reduced limit to be $7,742 Part I, line 10. He can deduct these expenses and figures his car expense to be $10,650
(2011 depreciation limit ($11,060 (from the Max- (subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income [(10,000 ×  51 cents per mile) + (10,000 ×  55.5
imum Depreciation Deduction for Cars  table limit) on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21, if he cents per mile)].
shown in chapter 4) ×  70%)). David notes that itemizes his deductions. His total employee business expenses are
his special allowance ($17,150) exceeds his de- shown in the following table.
Example 2. Bill Wilson is an employee ofpreciation limit ($7,742) for 2011. He then
Fashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In afigures his unadjusted basis to be $9,408 Type of Expense Amount
typical travel week, Bill leaves his home on Long($24,500 ×  70% ± $7,742). David figures his Parking fees and tolls .......... . $  520Island on Monday morning and drives to AlbanyMACRS depreciation deduction to be $1,882 Car expenses ............... . 10,650
to exhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to prospec-($9,408 (unadjusted basis) x 20%). David Meals .................... . 3,861
tive customers. Then he drives to Troy to showfigures his total depreciation deduction to be Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning .... . 18,318
Fashion's new line of merchandise to Town De-$9,624 ($7,742 (special allowance) + $1,882 Entertainment ............... . 3,250
Gifts, education, etc. .......... . 650partment Store, an old customer. While in Troy,(MACRS depreciation)). However, David's de-
Total $37,249he talks with Tom Brown, purchasing agent forpreciation deduction is limited by the maximum
Town Department Store, to discuss the new line.depreciation limit to $7,742. He enters the ap-
He later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out topropriate amounts in Part II, Section D. Bill received an allowance of $33,000dinner to discuss Attire Co.'s buying Fashion'sHis other car expenses included $4,970 for ($2,750 per month) to help offset his expenses.new line of clothing.gas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters this Bill did not have to account to his employer foramount in Part II, Section C, and multiplies it by Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2008. the reimbursement and the $33,000 was in-the 70% business use. He adds this amount He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex- cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W-2.($3,479) to the depreciation deduction ($7,742) pense purposes. He records his total mileage,
Because Bill's reimbursement was includedand reports the total ($11,221) on Part I, line 1. business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the
in his income and he is using the standard mile-His other transportation expenses for park- year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-
age rate for his car expenses, he files Forming fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,320. He enters nent information in his Weekly Traveling Ex-
2106-EZ with his tax return.this amount on Part I, line 2. David's employer pense and Entertainment Record, shown in
reimbursed him a total of $4,800 for his car and Table 6-3. He obtains receipts for his expenses
Table 6-2.  Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name: David Pine
Odometer Readings Expenses
Destination  Type
 (City, Town, or Business Miles  (Gas, oil, tolls,
Date Area) Purpose  Start  Stop  this trip etc.) Amount
5/31/11
6/1/11 Local Sales calls 8,097 8,188 91 Gas $ 25.50
(St. Louis)
6/2/11 Indianapolis Sales calls 8,211 8,486 275 Parking 6.50
6/3/11 Louisville See Bob Smith 8,486 8,599 113 Gas/Repair flat 30.00
(Pot. Client) tire 105.00
6/4/11 Return to 8,599 8,875 276 Gas 27.50
St. Louis
6/5/11 Local Sales calls 8,914 9,005 91
(St. Louis)
6/6/11
Weekly 8,097 9,005 846 $ 194.50
Total
Total 6,236 $1,935.00
Year-to-Date
Page 36 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 37 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form  2106 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service  (99) 
Employee Business Expenses 
a See separate instructions.
a Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
OMB No. 1545-0074 
2011 
Attachment   
Sequence No.    129 
Your name Occupation in which you incurred expenses Social security number
Part I                     Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements 
Step 1  Enter Your Expenses 
Column A   
Other Than Meals   
and Entertainment 
Column B   
Meals and   
Entertainment 
1 Vehicle expense from line 22 or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See 
instructions.) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 
2 Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that 
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work . 2 
3 Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, 
airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and entertainment .  3 
4 Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not  include 
meals and entertainment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 
5 Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions) . . . . . 5 
6 Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the 
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5 . . . . . . 6 
         Note:  If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8. 
Step 2  Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1 
7 
 
 
Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not 
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements 
reported under code “L” in box 12 of your Form W-2 (see 
instructions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 
Step 3  Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR) 
8 
 
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if  line 7
is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as  income on
Form 1040, line 7 (or on Form 1040NR, line 8) . . . . . . .  8 
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct 
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form 2106 to 
your return. 
9 
 
 
 
In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply line
8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of Transportation
(DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred while
away from home on business by 80% (.80) instead of 50%. For 
details, see instructions.) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 
10 
 
 
Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21 (or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR), line 7). (Armed Forces 
reservists,  qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or local government officials, and individuals 
with  disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter the total.) . . . . .  a 10 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11700N Form 2106 (2011) 
David Pine Sales 559 00 9559
11,221
1,320
12,541
4,800
7,741
7,741
7,741
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 37

Page 38 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2106 (2011) Page  2 
Part II                     Vehicle Expenses 
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you   
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (a)  Vehicle 1 (b)  Vehicle 2 
11 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service . . . . . . . . . 11 / / / / 
12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2011 . . . . . . . . . 12 miles miles 
13 Business miles included on line 12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 miles miles 
14 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12 . . . . . . . . . 14 % % 
15 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance . . . . . . . . . . 15 miles miles 
16 Commuting miles included on line 12 . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 miles miles 
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 . .  17 miles miles 
18 Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours? . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes No
19 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use? . . . . . . . . . . . Yes No
20 Do you have evidence to support your deduction? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes No
21 If “Yes,” is the evidence written? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes No
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or Section C.) 
22 Multiply line 13 by 51¢ (.51) for miles driven before July 1, 2011, and by 55.5¢ (.555) for miles 
driven after June 30, 2011.  Add the amounts, then enter the result here and on line 1. . . . 22 
Section C—Actual Expenses    (a)  Vehicle 1       (b)  Vehicle 2       
23 Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle 
insurance, etc. . . . . . . 23 
24a Vehicle rentals . . . . . .  24a 
b Inclusion amount (see instructions) . 24b 
c Subtract line 24b from line 24a . 24c 
25 Value of employer-provided vehicle 
(applies only if 100% of annual 
lease value was included on Form 
W-2—see instructions) . . . .  25 
26 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25. . .  26 
27 Multiply line 26 by the percentage 
on line 14 . . . . . . . .  27 
28 Depreciation (see instructions) . 28 
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total  
here and on line 1 . . . . . 29 
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles  (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C for the vehicle.) 
   (a)  Vehicle 1       (b)  Vehicle 2       
30 Enter cost or other basis (see  
instructions) . . . . . . . 30 
31 Enter section 179 deduction and 
special allowance (see instructions) 31 
32 Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see  
instructions if you claimed the  
section 179 deduction or special 
allowance). . . . . . . .  32 
33 Enter depreciation method and  
percentage (see instructions) .  33 
34 Multiply line 32 by the percentage  
on line 33 (see instructions) . . 34 
35 Add lines 31 and 34 . . . .  35 
36 Enter the applicable limit explained  
in the line 36 instructions . . . 36 
37 Multiply line 36 by the percentage 
on line 14 . . . . . . . .  37 
38 Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 
37. If you skipped lines 36 and 37, 
enter the amount from line 35. 
Also enter this  amount on line 28 
above . . . . . . . . . 38 
Form 2106 (2011) 
1 5 11
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600




4,970
4,970
3,479
7,742
7,742
11,221
24,500
9,408
200 DB 20%
11,060
7,742
7,742
1,882
9,624
Page 38 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 39 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
Table 6-3.  Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
From: August 2, 2011 To: August 8, 2011 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
1. Travel Expenses:
Airlines
Excess Baggage
Bus ±  Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
2.  Meals and Lodging: 
Breakfast 8 75 8 00 8 25 9 00 34 00
 Lunch 9 75 10 00 10 25 10 25 10 50 50 75
 Dinner 22 00 20 25 21 50 63 75
 Hotel and Motel 111 00 111 00 111 00 97 00 430 00(Detail in Schedule B)
3.  Entertainment 130 00 130 00
(Detail in Schedule C)
4. Other Expenses: 
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph 5 50 4 00 9 50
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room 75 00 75 00 150 00
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s) 150 00 150 00 300 00
Trade Shows
5. Car Expenses:  (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls 8 00 6 00 6 00 20 00
6. Other (Identify)
Total 156 25 375 00 375 75 251 50 29 50 1,158 50
Note:  Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A ±  Car
Mileage: End 57,600 57,620 57,650 57,660 57,840
Start 57,445 57,600 57,620 57,650 57,660
Total 155 20 30 10 180 395
Business Mileage 155 20 30 10 170 385
Schedule B ±  Lodging
Name Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern HotelHotel 
or
City Albany Albany Albany TroyMotel
Schedule C ±  Entertainment
Date Item Place Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
August 6, 2011 Bar John's Steak House 55 00 Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.
Dinner Troy 75 00
 WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Travel and transportation expenses ... . N/A
Other reimbursements ........... .
TOTAL .................... .
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 39

Page 40 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form  2106-EZ
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service   (99)
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses
/uni25B6 Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
OMB No. 1545-0074
2011
Attachment 
Sequence No.  129A
Your name Occupation in which you incurred expenses Social security number
You Can Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
• You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is 
common and accepted in your /f_ield of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for 
your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
• You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not 
considered reimbursements for this purpose).
• If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2011.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2011 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the ﬁrst year 
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
Part I Figure Your Expenses
1 Complete Part II. Multiply line 8a by 51¢ (.51) for miles driven before July 1, 2011, and by 55.5¢ 
(.555) for miles driven after June 30, 2011. Add the amounts , then enter the result here . . . 1 
2 Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight 
travel or commuting to and from work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 
3 Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc. Do 
not include meals and entertainment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
4 Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and 
entertainment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 
5 Meals and entertainment expenses:   $ ×  50% (.50). (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred 
while away from home on business by 80% (.80) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.) 5 
6 
 
 
6 
Part II Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7 When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /uni25B6 / /
8 Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2011, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
a Business b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
9 Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes No
10 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use? . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes No
11a Do you have evidence to support your deduction? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes No
b If “Yes,” is the evidence written? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes No
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2011)
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21 (or 
on Schedule A (Form 1040NR), line 7). (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local 
government of/f_icials, quali/f_ied performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the
instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.) . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bill Wilson Sales 555 00 5555
10,650
520
18,318
650
3,556
33,694
7,111
1 3 2008
20,000 2,600 2,400
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
Page 40 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 41 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by of our telephone services. One method is for a
using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) second IRS representative to listen in on or
Assistant available online at www.irs.gov/ record random telephone calls. Another is to ask7. individuals. some callers to complete a short survey at the
end of the call.• Sign up to receive local and national tax
news by email. Walk-in. Many products and servicesHow To Get Tax are available on a walk-in basis.• Get information on starting and operating
a small business.
Help • Products. You can walk in to many post
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up
Phone. Many services are available byYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, certain forms, instructions, and publica-
phone. order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- stores, copy centers, city and county gov-
eral ways. By selecting the method that is best ernment offices, credit unions, and office• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-for you, you will have quick and easy access to supply stores have a collection of productstions. Call 1-800-TAX-FORMtax help. available to print from a CD or photocopy(1-800-829-3676) to order current-year from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRSforms, instructions, and publications, andFree help with your return. Free help in pre- offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-prior-year forms and instructions. Youparing your return is available nationwide from enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenueshould receive your order within 10 days.IRS-certified volunteers. The Volunteer Income Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with able for research purposes.help low-moderate income taxpayers and the your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) program is • Services. You can walk in to your local
• Solving problems. You can getdesigned to assist taxpayers age 60 and older Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
face-to-face help solving tax problemswith their tax returns. Most VITA and TCE sites ness day for personal, face-to-face tax
every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-offer free electronic filing and all volunteers will help. An employee can explain IRS letters,
sistance Centers. An employee can ex-let you know about credits and deductions you request adjustments to your tax account,
plain IRS letters, request adjustments tomay be entitled to claim. To find the nearest or help you set up a payment plan. If you
your account, or help you set up a pay-VITA or TCE site, visit IRS.gov or call need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-
ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-1-800-906-9887 or 1-800-829-1040. tions about how the tax law applies to your
tance Center for an appointment. To findAs part of the TCE program, AARP offers the individual tax return, or you are more com-
the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near- fortable talking with someone in person,
tacts or look in the phone book underest AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or visit your local Taxpayer Assistance
United States Government, Internal Reve-visit AARP's website at Center where you can spread out your
nue Service.www.aarp.org/money/taxaide. records and talk with an IRS representa-
For more information on these programs, go tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessto IRS.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, youto TTY/TDD equipment, callupper right-hand corner. can call your local Center and leave a1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to
message requesting an appointment to re-order forms and publications.Internet. You can access the IRS web-
solve a tax account issue. A representa-site at IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis- tive will call you back within 2 businessa week to:
 ten to pre-recorded messages covering days to schedule an in-person appoint-
various tax topics.• Check the status of your 2011 refund. Go ment at your convenience. If you have an
to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Re- ongoing, complex tax account problem or• Refund information. You can check thefund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS a special need, such as a disability, anstatus of your refund on the new IRSacknowledges receipt of your e-filed re- appointment can be requested. All otherphone app. Download the free IRS2Goturn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper issues will be handled without an appoint-app by visiting the iTunes app store or thereturn. If you filed Form 8379 with your ment. To find the number of your localAndroid Marketplace. IRS2Go is a newreturn, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you office, go to way to provide you with information andfiled electronically). Have your 2011 tax www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in thetools. To check the status of your refundreturn available so you can provide your phone book under United States Govern-by phone, call 1-800-829-4477 (automatedsocial security number, your filing status, ment, Internal Revenue Service.refund information 24 hours a day, 7 daysand the exact whole dollar amount of your a week). Wait at least 72 hours after therefund. IRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filed Mail. You can send your order for
return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a forms, instructions, and publications to• E-file your return. Find out about commer-
paper return. If you filed Form 8379 with the address below. You should receivecial tax preparation and e-file services
your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if a response within 10 days after your request isavailable free to eligible taxpayers.
you filed electronically). Have your 2011 received.• Download forms, including talking tax tax return available so you can provideforms, instructions, and publications. your social security number, your filing Internal Revenue Service
status, and the exact whole dollar amount• Order IRS products online. 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
of your refund. If you check the status of Bloomington, IL 61705-6613• Research your tax questions online. your refund and are not given the date it Taxpayer Advocate Service. The Taxpayer• Search publications online by topic or will be issued, please wait until the next Advocate Service (TAS) is your voice at the IRS.keyword. week before checking back. Our job is to ensure that every taxpayer is
treated fairly, and that you know and understand• Use the online Internal Revenue Code, • Other refund information. To check the
your rights. We offer free help to guide youregulations, or other official guidance. status of a prior-year refund or amended
through the often-confusing process of resolvingreturn refund, call 1-800-829-1040.• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) tax problems that you haven't been able to solvepublished in the last few years. on your own. Remember, the worst thing youEvaluating the quality of our telephone
can do is nothing at all.• Figure your withholding allowances using services. To ensure IRS representatives give
the withholding calculator online at www. accurate, courteous, and professional answers, TAS can help if you can't resolve your prob-
irs.gov/individuals. we use several methods to evaluate the quality lem with the IRS and:
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 41

Page 42 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your problem is causing financial difficul- who speak English as a second language. For • Links to other Internet based Tax Re-
ties for you, your family, or your business. more information and to find a clinic near you, search Materials.
see the LITC page on www.irs.gov/advocate or• You face (or your business is facing) an • Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxIRS Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayerimmediate threat of adverse action. forms.Clinic List. This publication is also available by
• You have tried repeatedly to contact the • Internal Revenue Bulletins.calling 1-800-829-3676 or at your local IRS of-
IRS but no one has responded, or the IRS fice. • Toll-free and email technical support.has not responded to you by the date Free tax services. Publication 910, IRS • Two releases during the year.promised. Guide to Free Tax Services, is your guide to IRS ± The first release will ship the beginningservices and resources. Learn about free taxIf you qualify for our help, we'll do everything of January 2012.information from the IRS, including publications,we can to get your problem resolved. You will be ± The final release will ship the beginningservices, and education and assistance pro-assigned to one advocate who will be with you at of March 2012.grams. The publication also has an index of overevery turn. We have offices in every state, the 100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) Purchase the DVD from National TechnicalDistrict of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Although you can listen to on the telephone. The majority Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/TAS is independent within the IRS, our advo- of the information and services listed in this cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or callcates know how to work with the IRS to get your publication are available to you free of charge. If 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30problems resolved. And our services are always there is a fee associated with a resource or (plus a $6 handling fee).free. service, it is listed in the publication.As a taxpayer, you have rights that the IRS Accessible versions of IRS published prod-must abide by in its dealings with you. Our tax ucts are available on request in a variety oftoolkit at www.TaxpayerAdvocate.irs.gov can alternative formats for people with disabilities.help you understand these rights. AppendicesDVD for tax products. You can orderIf you think TAS might be able to help you,
Publication 1796, IRS Tax Productscall your local advocate, whose number is in There are thirteen appendices.DVD, and obtain:your phone book and on our website at www.irs.
 Appendices  A-1 through A-6 show the leasegov/advocate. You can also call our toll-free inclusion amounts that you may need to report if• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-number at 1-877-777-4778. you leased a car (other than a truck or van, or anlications.TAS also handles large-scale or systemic electric car) for 30 days or more. The tables are• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-problems that affect many taxpayers. If you numbered.tions.know of one of these broad issues, please report Appendices B-1 through B-6 show the leaseit to us through our Systemic Advocacy Manage- inclusion amounts that you may need to report if• Tax Map: an electronic research tool andment System at www.irs.gov/advocate. you leased a truck or van.finding aid.
Appendix C-1 shows the lease inclusionLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). • Tax law frequently asked questions. amounts that you may need to report if youLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are inde-
leased an electric car before 2007.pendent from the IRS. Some clinics serve indi- • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-
If any of these apply to you, use the appendixviduals whose income is below a certain level sponse system.
for the year you first leased the car. (See chapterand who need to resolve a tax problem. These • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the 4.)clinics provide professional representation U.S. Code.before the IRS or in court on audits, appeals, tax
collection disputes, and other issues for free or
for a small fee. Some clinics can provide infor-
mation about taxpayer rights and responsibili-
ties in many different languages for individuals
Page 42 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 43 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 2002 through 2006
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 2002 Beginning in 2003 Beginning in 2004 Beginning in 2005 Beginning in 2006
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 15,200 $ 15,500 $  0 $  0 $  0 $ 13 $ 10
15,500 15,800 6 0 0 19 18
15,800 16,100 13 0 0 26 28
16,100 16,400 19 0 0 32 36
16,400 16,700 26 0 0 39 45
16,700 17,000 31 0 0 44 53
17,000 17,500 40 0 0 52 66
17,500 18,000 50 0 48 63 80
18,000 18,500 61 45 56 73 95
18,500 19,000 72 53 65 83 110
19,000 19,500 82 61 73 94 125
19,500 20,000 93 69 81 104 139
20,000 20,500 103 77 89 115 154
20,500 21,000 114 85 97 125 168
21,000 21,500 123 92 106 135 184
21,500 22,000 134 100 114 146 198
22,000 23,000 150 111 126 161 220
23,000 24,000 171 127 142 182 250
24,000 25,000 192 143 159 202 279
25,000 26,000 213 158 176 223 309
26,000 27,000 234 174 192 244 339
27,000 28,000 255 189 209 265 368
28,000 29,000 276 204 225 285 397
29,000 30,000 296 221 242 306 426
30,000 31,000 318 236 257 326 455
31,000 32,000 338 251 274 348 485
32,000 33,000 360 267 291 367 515
33,000 34,000 381 283 307 389 545
34,000 35,000 402 298 323 409 574
35,000 36,000 422 314 340 430 604
36,000 37,000 443 330 357 451 633
37,000 38,000 464 346 373 471 662
38,000 39,000 485 361 389 491 691
39,000 40,000 506 376 405 512 721
40,000 41,000 527 391 423 533 750
41,000 42,000 549 407 438 554 780
42,000 43,000 570 423 455 575 810
43,000 44,000 590 438 471 595 839
44,000 45,000 611 454 488 616 869
45,000 46,000 632 470 504 636 898
46,000 47,000 653 486 520 657 927
47,000 48,000 674 501 538 678 956
48,000 49,000 695 516 554 699 986
49,000 50,000 717 532 570 719 1,016
50,000 51,000 737 548 586 740 1,045
51,000 52,000 758 563 603 760 1,075
52,000 53,000 779 578 619 781 1,104
53,000 54,000 800 594 636 802 1,133
54,000 55,000 821 610 652 823 1,163
55,000 56,000 842 626 669 844 1,192
56,000 57,000 863 641 685 864 1,221
57,000 58,000 883 656 701 884 1,251
58,000 59,000 905 672 718 905 1,281
59,000 60,000 925 688 734 925 1,311
60,000 62,000 957 711 759 957 1,354
62,000 64,000 999 743 792 998 1,413
64,000 66,000 1,041 773 825 1,039 1,473
66,000 68,000 1,083 805 857 1,081 1,531
68,000 70,000 1,125 835 890 1,123 1,590
70,000 72,000 1,166 867 923 1,163 1,649
72,000 74,000 1,208 898 956 1,204 1,707
74,000 76,0002 1,250 930 990 1,247 1,767
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,501, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
.
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-05.pdf.
For 2003, Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
For 2004, Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html. 
For 2005, Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
For 2006, Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 43

Page 44 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2007
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,000 $ 15,800 $ 2  $ 5 $ 11 $ 11 $ 13
15,800 16,100 4 10 17 19 22
16,100 16,400 6 14 24 28 31
16,400 16,700 9 18 31 35 41
16,700 17,000 11 23 37 43 50
17,000 17,500 13 29 46 54 62
17,500 18,000 17 37 56 68 77
18,000 18,500 20 44 68 81 93
18,500 19,000 24 51 80 94 108
19,000 19,500 27 59 90 108 124
19,500 20,000 30 67 101 121 139
20,000 20,500 34 74 113 134 154
20,500 21,000 37 82 123 148 170
21,000 21,500 41 89 135 161 185
21,500 22,000 44 97 146 174 201
22,000 23,000 49 108 163 194 224
23,000 24,000 56 123 185 221 255
24,000 25,000 63 138 207 248 285
25,000 26,000 70 153 229 275 316
26,000 27,000 77 168 251 302 347
27,000 28,000 83 183 274 328 378
28,000 29,000 90 198 296 355 409
29,000 30,000 97 213 318 382 439
30,000 31,000 104 228 341 408 470
31,000 32,000 111 243 363 435 501
32,000 33,000 118 258 385 461 532
33,000 34,000 125 273 407 488 563
34,000 35,000 131 288 430 515 593
35,000 36,000 138 303 452 542 624
36,000 37,000 145 318 474 568 656
37,000 38,000 152 333 496 595 686
38,000 39,000 159 348 519 621 717
39,000 40,000 166 363 541 648 748
40,000 41,000 172 378 564 674 779
41,000 42,000 179 393 586 701 810
42,000 43,000 186 408 608 728 840
43,000 44,000 193 423 630 755 871
44,000 45,000 200 438 652 782 902
45,000 46,000 207 453 674 809 933
46,000 47,000 213 468 697 835 964
47,000 48,000 220 483 719 862 995
48,000 49,000 227 498 742 888 1,025
49,000 50,000 234 513 764 915 1,056
50,000 51,000 241 528 786 942 1,087
51,000 52,000 278 543 808 969 1,117
52,000 53,000 254 558 831 995 1,148
53,000 54,000 261 573 853 1,022 1,179
54,000 55,000 268 588 875 1,049 1,210
55,000 56,000 275 603 897 1,076 1,241
56,000 57,000 282 618 920 1,102 1,271
57,000 58,000 289 633 942 1,128 1,303
58,000 59,000 296 648 964 1,155 1,334
59,000 60,000 302 663 987 1,182 1,364
60,000 62,000 313 685 1,020 1,222 1,411
62,000 64,000 326 716 1,064 1,276 1,472
64,000 66,000 340 746 1,108 1,329 1,534
66,000 68,000 354 775 1,154 1,382 1,595
68,000 70,000 367 806 1,198 1,435 1,657
70,000 72,000 381 836 1,242 1,489 1,719
72,000 74,000 395 865 1,287 1,543 1,780
74,000 76,000 408 896 1,331 1,596 1,842
76,000 78,000 422 926 1,376 1,649 1,903
78,000 80,000 436 955 1,421 1,703 1,965
80,000 85,000 460 1,008 1,498 1,796 2,074
85,000 90,000 494 1,083 1,610 1,929 2,228
90,000 95,000 528 1,158 1,721 2,063 2,382
95,000 100,0002 562 1,233 1,833 2,196 2,536
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2007-30 (2007-18 IRB 1104), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-18_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 44 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 45 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2008
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 20 $ 42 $ 62 $ 73 $ 84
19,000 19,500 22 47 71 83 94
19,500 20,000 25 53 78 93 106
20,000 20,500 27 58 87 102 117
20,500 21,000 30 63 95 112 128
21,000 21,500 32 69 103 122 139
21,500 22,000 34 75 111 131 151
22,000 23,000 38 83 123 146 167
23,000 24,000 43 94 139 165 190
24,000 25,000 48 105 155 185 212
25,000 26,000 53 115 172 204 235
26,000 27,000 58 126 188 223 257
27,000 28,000 63 137 204 243 279
28,000 29,000 68 148 220 262 302
29,000 30,000 73 159 236 282 324
30,000 31,000 78 107 252 301 347
31,000 32,000 83 181 268 321 368
32,000 33,000 88 192 284 340 391
33,000 34,000 93 202 301 359 414
34,000 35,000 98 213 317 379 436
35,000 36,000 103 224 333 398 459
36,000 37,000 108 235 349 418 481
37,000 38,000 113 246 365 437 503
38,000 39,000 118 257 381 457 525
39,000 40,000 123 268 397 476 548
40,000 41,000 128 279 413 495 571
41,000 42,000 133 289 430 515 593
42,000 43,000 137 301 446 534 615
43,000 44,000 142 312 462 553 638
44,000 45,000 147 323 478 573 659
45,000 46,000 152 333 495 592 682
46,000 47,000 157 344 511 611 705
47,000 48,000 162 355 527 631 727
48,000 49,000 167 366 543 650 750
49,000 50,000 172 377 559 670 772
50,000 51,000 177 388 575 689 794
51,000 52,000 182 399 591 709 816
52,000 53,000 187 410 607 728 839
53,000 54,000 192 420 624 747 862
54,000 55,000 197 431 640 767 884
55,000 56,000 202 442 657 785 906
56,000 57,000 207 453 673 805 928
57,000 58,000 212 464 689 824 951
58,000 59,000 217 475 705 844 973
59,000 60,000 222 486 721 863 996
60,000 62,000 229 502 746 892 1,029
62,000 64,000 239 524 778 931 1,074
64,000 66,000 249 546 810 970 1,118
66,000 68,000 259 567 843 1,008 1,164
68,000 70,000 269 589 875 1,047 1,209
70,000 72,000 279 611 907 1,086 1,253
72,000 74,000 289 633 939 1,125 1,298
74,000 76,000 299 654 972 1,164 1,342
76,000 78,000 309 676 1,004 1,203 1,387
78,000 80,000 319 698 1,036 1,242 1,432
80,000 85,000 336 736 1,093 1,309 1,511
85,000 90,000 361 791 1,173 1,406 1,623
90,000 95,000 386 845 1,255 1,503 1,734
95,000 100,0002 410 900 1,335 1,600 1,846
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2008-22 (2008-12 IRB 658), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-12_IRB/ar18.html.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 45

Page 46 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2009
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 9 $ 19 $ 28 $ 34 $ 38
19,000 19,500 10 21 32 38 43
19,500 20,000 11 24 36 42 48
20,000 20,500 12 27 39 46 54
20,500 21,000 13 29 43 51 58
21,000 21,500 15 31 47 55 64
21,500 22,000 16 34 50 60 68
22,000 23,000 17 38 56 66 76
23,000 24,000 20 42 64 75 86
24,000 25,000 22 47 71 84 96
25,000 26,000 24 52 78 93 107
26,000 27,000 26 58 85 101 117
27,000 28,000 29 62 93 110 127
28,000 29,000 31 67 100 119 138
29,000 30,000 33 72 108 128 147
30,000 31,000 35 77 115 137 157
31,000 32,000 38 82 122 146 167
32,000 33,000 40 87 129 155 178
33,000 34,000 42 92 137 163 188
34,000 35,000 44 97 144 172 199
35,000 36,000 47 102 151 181 208
36,000 37,000 49 107 159 189 219
37,000 38,000 51 112 166 199 228
38,000 39,000 53 117 173 208 239
39,000 40,000 56 122 180 216 250
40,000 41,000 58 127 188 225 259
41,000 42,000 60 132 195 234 269
42,000 43,000 62 137 203 242 280
43,000 44,000 65 141 210 252 290
44,000 45,000 67 146 218 260 300
45,000 46,000 69 151 225 269 311
46,000 47,000 71 157 232 278 320
47,000 48,000 74 161 240 286 331
48,000 49,000 76 166 247 296 340
49,000 50,000 78 171 255 304 351
50,000 51,000 80 176 262 313 361
51,000 52,000 83 181 269 322 371
52,000 53,000 85 186 276 331 381
53,000 54,000 87 191 284 339 392
54,000 55,000 89 196 291 349 401
55,000 56,000 92 201 298 357 412
56,000 57,000 94 206 306 365 423
57,000 58,000 96 211 313 375 432
58,000 59,000 98 216 320 384 442
59,000 60,000 101 221 327 393 452
60,000 62,000 104 228 339 406 467
62,000 64,000 109 238 353 424 488
64,000 66,000 113 248 368 441 509
66,000 68,000 118 258 382 459 529
68,000 70,000 122 268 397 476 550
70,000 72,000 127 277 413 493 570
72,000 74,000 131 288 427 511 590
74,000 76,000 136 297 442 529 610
76,000 78,000 140 307 457 546 631
78,000 80,000 145 317 471 564 651
80,000 85,000 152 335 497 595 686
85,000 90,000 164 359 534 639 737
90,000 95,000 175 384 570 683 789
95,000 100,0002 186 409 607 727 839
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2009-24 (2009-17 IRB 885), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-17_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 46 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 47 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2010
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 7 $ 15 $ 22 $ 26 $ 31
19,000 19,500 8 17 25 30 35
19,500 20,000 9 19 29 34 39
20,000 20,500 10 21 32 38 44
20,500 21,000 11 23 35 42 48
21,000 21,500 12 26 38 45 53
21,500 22,000 13 28 41 50 57
22,000 23,000 14 31 46 56 63
23,000 24,000 16 36 52 63 73
24,000 25,000 18 40 59 71 81
25,000 26,000 20 44 66 78 90
26,000 27,000 22 49 71 86 100
27,000 28,000 24 53 78 94 108
28,000 29,000 26 57 85 101 118
29,000 30,000 28 61 92 109 126
30,000 31,000 30 66 97 117 135
31,000 32,000 32 70 104 125 144
32,000 33,000 34 74 111 132 153
33,000 34,000 36 79 117 140 161
34,000 35,000 38 83 123 148 171
35,000 36,000 40 87 130 156 179
36,000 37,000 42 92 136 163 188
37,000 38,000 44 96 143 170 198
38,000 39,000 46 100 149 179 206
39,000 40,000 48 105 155 186 215
40,000 41,000 50 109 162 194 224
41,000 42,000 52 113 169 201 233
42,000 43,000 54 118 174 210 241
43,000 44,000 56 122 181 217 251
44,000 45,000 58 126 188 225 259
45,000 46,000 60 131 194 232 269
46,000 47,000 61 135 201 240 277
47,000 48,000 63 140 207 248 286
48,000 49,000 65 144 213 256 295
49,000 50,000 67 148 220 263 304
50,000 51,000 69 153 226 271 313
51,000 52,000 71 157 232 279 322
52,000 53,000 73 161 239 287 331
53,000 54,000 75 166 245 294 340
54,000 55,000 77 170 252 302 348
55,000 56,000 79 174 258 310 358
56,000 57,000 81 178 265 318 366
57,000 58,000 83 183 271 325 375
58,000 59,000 85 187 278 333 384
59,000 60,000 87 191 284 341 393
60,000 62,000 90 198 294 352 406
62,000 64,000 94 207 306 368 424
64,000 66,000 98 215 320 382 443
66,000 68,000 102 224 332 398 460
68,000 70,000 106 232 346 413 478
70,000 72,000 110 241 358 429 496
72,000 74,000 114 250 371 444 513
74,000 76,000 118 258 384 460 531
76,000 78,000 122 267 396 476 549
78,000 80,000 126 276 409 491 566
80,000 85,000 132 291 432 518 598
85,000 90,000 142 313 464 556 643
90,000 95,000 152 334 497 594 687
95,000 100,0002 162 356 528 634 731
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2010-18 (2010-9 IRB 427), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2010-09_IRB/ar04.html.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 47

Page 48 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2011
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 3 $ 8 $ 11 $ 13 $ 16
19,000 19,500 4 9 13 15 18
19,500 20,000 4 10 15 17 20
20,000 20,500 5 11 16 19 23
20,500 21,000 5 12 18 21 25
21,000 21,500 6 13 19 24 26
21,500 22,000 6 14 21 26 29
22,000 23,000 7 16 23 29 32
23,000 24,000 8 18 27 32 37
24,000 25,000 9 20 30 36 42
25,000 26,000 10 23 33 40 46
26,000 27,000 11 25 36 44 51
27,000 28,000 12 27 40 48 55
28,000 29,000 13 29 43 52 60
29,000 30,000 14 31 47 55 65
30,000 31,000 15 34 49 60 69
31,000 32,000 16 36 53 63 73
32,000 33,000 17 38 56 68 77
33,000 34,000 18 40 60 71 82
34,000 35,000 19 42 63 75 87
35,000 36,000 20 45 66 79 91
36,000 37,000 21 47 69 83 96
37,000 38,000 22 49 73 87 100
38,000 39,000 23 51 76 91 105
39,000 40,000 24 53 80 94 110
40,000 41,000 25 56 82 99 114
41,000 42,000 26 58 86 102 119
42,000 43,000 27 60 89 107 123
43,000 44,000 28 62 93 110 128
44,000 45,000 29 64 96 114 133
45,000 46,000 30 67 98 119 137
46,000 47,000 31 69 102 122 141
47,000 48,000 32 71 105 127 145
48,000 49,000 33 73 109 130 150
49,000 50,000 34 76 111 134 155
50,000 51,000 35 78 115 138 159
51,000 52,000 36 80 118 142 164
52,000 53,000 37 82 122 146 168
53,000 54,000 38 84 125 150 173
54,000 55,000 39 87 128 153 178
55,000 56,000 40 89 131 158 182
56,000 57,000 41 91 135 161 187
57,000 58,000 42 93 138 166 191
58,000 59,000 43 95 142 169 196
59,000 60,000 44 98 144 174 200
60,000 62,000 46 101 149 179 207
62,000 64,000 48 105 156 187 216
64,000 66,000 50 109 163 195 225
66,000 68,000 52 114 169 203 234
68,000 70,000 54 118 176 211 243
70,000 72,000 56 123 182 218 253
72,000 74,000 58 127 189 226 262
74,000 76,000 60 132 195 234 270
76,000 78,000 62 136 202 242 279
78,000 80,000 64 140 209 250 288
80,000 85,000 67 148 220 264 304
85,000 90,000 72 159 237 283 327
90,000 95,000 77 170 253 303 350
95,000 100,0002 82 181 269 323 372
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2011-21 (2011-12 IRB 560), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2011-12_IRB/ar10.html.
Page 48 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 49 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2002 through 2006
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 2002 Beginning in 2003 Beginning in 2004 Beginning in 2005 Beginning in 2006
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 15,500 $ 15,800 $  6 $  0 $  0 $  0 $  0
15,800 16,100 13 0 0 0 0
16,100 16,400 19 0 0 0 0
16,400 16,700 26 0 0 0 0
16,700 17,000 31 0 0 11 16
17,000 17,500 40 0 0 20 29
17,500 18,000 50 0 0 30 43
18,000 18,500 61 0 30 40 58
18,500 19,000 72 29 38 51 72
19,000 19,500 82 36 47 61 87
19,500 20,000 93 44 55 71 102
20,000 20,500 103 52 63 81 116
20,500 21,000 114 60 72 92 131
21,000 21,500 123 67 80 103 146
21,500 22,000 134 75 88 113 161
22,000 23,000 150 86 100 129 183
23,000 24,000 171 102 117 149 213
24,000 25,000 192 118 133 169 242
25,000 26,000 213 133 149 190 271
26,000 27,000 234 149 166 210 300
27,000 28,000 255 165 183 231 330
28,000 29,000 276 180 198 253 359
29,000 30,000 296 196 215 272 389
30,000 31,000 318 212 231 294 418
31,000 32,000 338 227 248 314 447
32,000 33,000 360 242 264 335 478
33,000 34,000 381 258 281 355 506
34,000 35,000 402 273 298 376 536
35,000 36,000 422 289 314 397 566
36,000 37,000 443 305 330 418 595
37,000 38,000 464 320 346 438 624
38,000 39,000 485 336 364 459 654
39,000 40,000 506 352 379 480 684
40,000 41,000 527 367 396 500 712
41,000 42,000 549 383 412 521 743
42,000 43,000 570 398 429 542 772
43,000 44,000 590 414 445 562 801
44,000 45,000 611 429 462 583 831
45,000 46,000 632 445 479 603 860
46,000 47,000 653 460 495 624 890
47,000 48,000 674 476 511 645 919
48,000 49,000 695 492 527 666 948
49,000 50,000 717 507 544 687 977
50,000 51,000 737 523 560 707 1,008
51,000 52,000 758 538 577 728 1,037
52,000 53,000 779 554 593 748 1,066
53,000 54,000 800 570 610 769 1,096
54,000 55,000 821 585 626 789 1,125
55,000 56,000 842 601 643 811 1,155
56,000 57,000 863 617 659 830 1,184
57,000 58,000 883 632 675 852 1,213
58,000 59,000 905 647 691 873 1,243
59,000 60,000 925 663 708 893 1,272
60,000 62,000 957 687 733 924 1,316
62,000 64,000 999 717 766 966 1,375
64,000 66,000 1,041 749 798 1,007 1,435
66,000 68,000 1,083 780 832 1,048 1,494
68,000 70,000 1,125 811 864 1,089 1,552
70,000 72,000 1,166 842 897 1,131 1,612
72,000 74,000 1,208 873 931 1,172 1,670
74,000 76,0002 1,250 905 963 1,213 1,729
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,501, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-05.pdf.
For 2003, Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
For 2004, Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html.
For 2005, Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
For 2006, Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 49

Page 50 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2007
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,400 $ 16,700 $ 2  $ 4 $ 8 $ 10 $ 11
16,700 17,000 4 9 15 17 21
17,000 17,500 6 15 24 28 33
17,500 18,000 10 22 35 42 48
18,000 18,500 13 30 46 55 64
18,500 19,000 17 37 57 69 79
19,000 19,500 20 45 68 82 94
19,500 20,000 24 52 80 95 109
20,000 20,500 27 60 90 109 125
20,500 21,000 30 67 102 122 141
21,000 21,500 34 75 113 135 156
21,500 22,000 37 82 124 149 171
22,000 23,000 42 94 140 169 194
23,000 24,000 49 109 163 195 225
24,000 25,000 56 123 186 222 256
25,000 26,000 63 138 208 249 286
26,000 27,000 70 153 230 276 317
27,000 28,000 77 168 252 302 349
28,000 29,000 83 184 274 329 379
29,000 30,000 90 199 296 356 410
30,000 31,000 97 214 318 383 440
31,000 32,000 104 228 342 408 472
32,000 33,000 111 243 364 435 503
33,000 34,000 118 258 386 462 534
34,000 35,000 125 273 408 489 564
35,000 36,000 131 289 430 515 595
36,000 37,000 138 304 452 542 626
37,000 38,000 145 318 475 569 657
38,000 39,000 152 333 497 596 688
39,000 40,000 159 348 520 622 718
40,000 41,000 166 363 542 649 749
41,000 42,000 172 379 563 676 780
42,000 43,000 179 397 586 702 811
43,000 44,000 186 409 608 729 842
44,000 45,000 193 423 631 756 872
45,000 46,000 200 438 653 783 903
46,000 47,000 207 453 675 810 934
47,000 48,000 213 469 697 836 965
48,000 49,000 220 484 719 863 996
49,000 50,000 227 499 741 890 1,026
50,000 51,000 234 514 764 916 1,057
51,000 52,000 241 528 787 943 1,088
52,000 53,000 248 543 809 969 1,119
53,000 54,000 254 559 831 996 1,150
54,000 55,000 261 574 853 1,023 1,180
55,000 56,000 268 589 875 1,050 1,211
56,000 57,000 275 604 897 1,076 1,243
57,000 58,000 282 618 920 1,103 1,273
58,000 59,000 289 633 943 1,129 1,304
59,000 60,000 296 648 965 1,156 1,335
60,000 62,000 306 671 998 1,196 1,381
62,000 64,000 319 701 1,043 1,249 1,443
64,000 66,000 333 731 1,087 1,303 1,504
66,000 68,000 347 761 1,131 1,357 1,566
68,000 70,000 361 791 1,176 1,410 1,627
70,000 72,000 374 821 1,221 1,463 1,689
72,000 74,000 388 851 1,265 1,517 1,751
74,000 76,000 402 881 1,309 1,570 1,813
76,000 78,000 415 911 1,354 1,624 1,874
78,000 80,000 429 941 1,399 1,676 1,936
80,000 85,000 453 994 1,476 1,770 2,044
85,000 90,000 487 1,069 1,587 1,904 2,198
90,000 95,000 521 1,144 1,699 2,037 2,352
95,000 100,0002 555 1,219 1,810 2,171 2,506
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2007-30 (2007-18 IRB 1104), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-18_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 50 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 51 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-3. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2008
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 19,000 $ 19,500 $ 17 $ 37 $ 54 $ 65 $ 73
19,500 20,000 20 42 63 73 85
20,000 20,500 22 48 70 84 96
20,500 21,000 25 53 79 93 107
21,000 21,500 27 59 86 103 118
21,500 22,000 30 64 95 112 130
22,000 23,000 33 72 107 128 146
23,000 24,000 38 83 123 147 168
24,000 25,000 43 94 139 166 191
25,000 26,000 48 105 155 186 213
26,000 27,000 53 116 171 205 236
27,000 28,000 58 127 187 225 258
28,000 29,000 63 138 204 243 280
29,000 30,000 68 148 221 263 302
30,000 31,000 73 159 237 282 325
31,000 32,000 78 170 253 301 348
32,000 33,000 83 181 269 321 370
33,000 34,000 88 192 285 340 393
34,000 35,000 93 203 301 360 414
35,000 36,000 98 214 317 379 437
36,000 37,000 103 225 333 399 459
37,000 38,000 108 235 350 418 482
38,000 39,000 113 246 366 437 505
39,000 40,000 118 257 382 457 526
40,000 41,000 123 268 398 476 549
41,000 42,000 128 279 414 496 571
42,000 43,000 133 290 430 515 594
43,000 44,000 137 301 447 534 616
44,000 45,000 142 312 463 553 639
45,000 46,000 147 323 479 573 661
46,000 47,000 152 334 495 592 684
47,000 48,000 157 345 511 612 705
48,000 49,000 162 356 527 631 728
49,000 50,000 167 366 544 651 750
50,000 51,000 172 377 560 670 773
51,000 52,000 177 388 576 689 796
52,000 53,000 182 399 592 709 817
53,000 54,000 187 410 608 728 840
54,000 55,000 192 421 624 748 862
55,000 56,000 197 432 640 767 885
56,000 57,000 202 443 656 787 907
57,000 58,000 207 453 673 806 929
58,000 59,000 212 464 689 825 952
59,000 60,000 217 475 705 845 974
60,000 62,000 224 492 729 874 1,008
62,000 64,000 234 513 762 913 1,052
64,000 66,000 244 535 794 951 1,098
66,000 68,000 254 557 826 990 1,142
68,000 70,000 264 579 858 1,029 1,187
70,000 72,000 274 600 892 1,067 1,232
72,000 74,000 284 622 924 1,106 1,276
74,000 76,000 294 644 956 1,145 1,321
76,000 78,000 304 666 988 1,184 1,366
78,000 80,000 314 687 1,021 1,222 1,411
80,000 85,000 331 726 1,077 1,290 1,489
85,000 90,000 356 780 1,158 1,387 1,601
90,000 95,000 381 835 1,238 1,484 1,713
95,000 100,0002 405 889 1,320 1,581 1,825
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2008-22 (2008-12 IRB 658), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-12_IRB/ar18.html.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 51

Page 52 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-4 Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2009
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 8 $ 17 $ 25 $ 30 $ 35
19,000 19,500 9 19 29 35 40
19,500 20,000 10 22 33 38 45
20,000 20,500 11 25 36 43 50
20,500 21,000 12 27 40 48 55
21,000 21,500 13 30 43 52 60
21,500 22,000 15 32 47 56 66
22,000 23,000 16 36 52 64 72
23,000 24,000 18 41 60 72 83
24,000 25,000 21 45 68 81 93
25,000 26,000 23 50 75 90 103
26,000 27,000 25 56 82 98 114
27,000 28,000 27 61 89 107 124
28,000 29,000 30 65 97 116 134
29,000 30,000 32 70 104 125 144
30,000 31,000 34 75 112 134 154
31,000 32,000 36 80 119 143 164
32,000 33,000 39 85 126 151 175
33,000 34,000 41 90 134 160 184
34,000 35,000 43 95 141 169 195
35,000 36,000 45 100 148 178 205
36,000 37,000 48 105 155 187 215
37,000 38,000 50 110 163 195 226
38,000 39,000 52 115 170 204 236
39,000 40,000 55 120 177 213 246
40,000 41,000 57 125 185 221 256
41,000 42,000 59 130 192 231 266
42,000 43,000 61 135 199 240 276
43,000 44,000 64 139 207 249 286
44,000 45,000 66 144 215 257 296
45,000 46,000 68 149 222 266 307
46,000 47,000 70 155 229 274 317
47,000 48,000 73 159 237 283 327
48,000 49,000 75 164 244 292 338
49,000 50,000 77 169 251 301 348
50,000 51,000 79 174 259 310 357
51,000 52,000 82 179 266 318 368
52,000 53,000 84 184 273 328 378
53,000 54,000 86 189 281 336 388
54,000 55,000 88 194 288 345 399
55,000 56,000 91 199 295 354 408
56,000 57,000 93 204 302 363 419
57,000 58,000 95 209 310 371 429
58,000 59,000 97 214 317 381 439
59,000 60,000 100 219 324 389 450
60,000 62,000 103 226 336 402 465
62,000 64,000 107 236 351 420 485
64,000 66,000 112 246 365 438 505
66,000 68,000 116 256 380 455 526
68,000 70,000 121 266 394 473 546
70,000 72,000 125 276 409 491 566
72,000 74,000 130 286 423 509 586
74,000 76,000 134 296 438 526 607
76,000 78,000 139 305 454 543 627
78,000 80,000 143 316 467 561 648
80,000 85,000 151 333 493 592 684
85,000 90,000 163 357 531 635 735
90,000 95,000 174 382 567 680 785
95,000 100,0002 185 407 604 724 836
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2009-24 (2009-17 IRB 885), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-17_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 52 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 53 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-5. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2010
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 19,000 $ 19,500 $ 7 $ 15 $ 21 $ 26 $ 29
19,500 20,000 8 17 25 29 34
20,000 20,500 9 19 28 33 38
20,500 21,000 10 21 31 37 43
21,000 21,500 11 23 35 41 47
21,500 22,000 12 25 38 45 51
22,000 23,000 13 29 42 51 58
23,000 24,000 15 33 49 58 67
24,000 25,000 17 37 56 66 76
25,000 26,000 19 42 62 73 85
26,000 27,000 21 46 68 82 93
27,000 28,000 23 50 75 89 103
28,000 29,000 25 55 81 97 111
29,000 30,000 27 59 88 104 121
30,000 31,000 29 63 94 113 129
31,000 32,000 31 68 100 120 138
32,000 33,000 33 72 107 127 148
33,000 34,000 35 76 114 135 156
34,000 35,000 37 81 119 143 165
35,000 36,000 39 85 126 151 174
36,000 37,000 41 89 133 158 183
37,000 38,000 43 94 139 166 191
38,000 39,000 45 98 145 174 201
39,000 40,000 47 102 152 182 209
40,000 41,000 49 106 159 189 218
41,000 42,000 51 111 164 198 227
42,000 43,000 53 115 171 205 236
43,000 44,000 55 119 178 213 245
44,000 45,000 57 124 184 220 254
45,000 46,000 59 128 190 228 263
46,000 47,000 60 133 197 235 272
47,000 48,000 62 137 203 244 280
48,000 49,000 64 142 209 251 290
49,000 50,000 66 146 216 259 298
50,000 51,000 68 150 223 266 308
51,000 52,000 70 154 229 275 316
52,000 53,000 72 159 235 282 325
53,000 54,000 74 163 242 290 334
54,000 55,000 76 167 249 297 343
55,000 56,000 78 172 254 305 352
56,000 57,000 80 176 261 313 361
57,000 58,000 82 180 268 320 370
58,000 59,000 84 185 274 328 378
59,000 60,000 86 189 280 336 388
60,000 62,000 89 195 291 347 401
62,000 64,000 93 204 303 363 418
64,000 66,000 97 213 315 379 436
66,000 68,000 101 221 329 394 454
68,000 70,000 105 230 341 410 472
70,000 72,000 109 239 354 424 490
72,000 74,000 113 247 367 440 508
74,000 76,000 117 256 380 455 526
76,000 78,000 121 264 393 471 543
78,000 80,000 125 273 406 486 561
80,000 85,000 131 289 428 513 592
85,000 90,000 141 310 461 552 636
90,000 95,000 151 332 492 591 681
95,000 100,0002 161 353 525 629 726
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2010-18 (2010-9 IRB 427), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2010-09_IRB/ar04.html.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 53

Page 54 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-6. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2011
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 19,000 $ 19,500 $ 3 $ 7 $ 9 $ 12 $ 13
19,500 20,000 3 8 11 14 15
20,000 20,500 4 9 13 15 18
20,500 21,000 4 10 15 17 20
21,000 21,500 5 11 16 20 22
21,500 22,000 5 12 18 22 24
22,000 23,000 6 14 20 24 29
23,000 24,000 7 16 24 28 32
24,000 25,000 8 18 27 32 37
25,000 26,000 9 20 31 36 41
26,000 27,000 10 23 33 40 46
27,000 28,000 11 25 37 43 51
28,000 29,000 12 27 40 48 55
29,000 30,000 13 29 43 52 60
30,000 31,000 14 31 47 56 64
31,000 32,000 15 34 49 60 69
32,000 33,000 16 36 53 63 74
33,000 34,000 17 38 56 68 78
34,000 35,000 18 40 60 71 83
35,000 36,000 19 43 62 76 87
36,000 37,000 20 45 66 79 92
37,000 38,000 21 47 69 83 97
38,000 39,000 22 49 73 87 101
39,000 40,000 23 51 76 91 105
40,000 41,000 24 54 79 95 109
41,000 42,000 25 56 82 99 114
42,000 43,000 26 58 86 103 118
43,000 44,000 27 60 89 107 123
44,000 45,000 28 62 93 110 128
45,000 46,000 29 65 95 115 132
46,000 47,000 30 67 99 118 137
47,000 48,000 31 69 102 123 141
48,000 49,000 32 71 106 126 146
49,000 50,000 33 73 109 130 151
50,000 51,000 34 76 112 134 155
51,000 52,000 35 78 115 138 160
52,000 53,000 36 80 118 143 164
53,000 54,000 37 82 122 146 169
54,000 55,000 38 84 125 150 173
55,000 56,000 39 87 128 154 177
56,000 57,000 40 89 131 158 182
57,000 58,000 41 91 135 162 186
58,000 59,000 42 93 138 166 191
59,000 60,000 43 95 142 169 196
60,000 62,000 45 99 146 175 203
62,000 64,000 47 103 153 183 212
64,000 66,000 49 107 160 191 221
66,000 68,000 51 112 166 199 229
68,000 70,000 53 116 173 206 239
70,000 72,000 55 121 179 214 248
72,000 74,000 57 125 186 222 257
74,000 76,000 59 129 192 231 266
76,000 78,000 61 134 198 239 275
78,000 80,000 63 138 205 246 285
80,000 85,000 66 146 217 260 300
85,000 90,000 71 157 233 280 322
90,000 95,000 76 168 250 299 345
95,000 100,0002 81 179 266 319 368
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2011-21 (2011-12 IRB 560), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2011-12_IRB/ar10.html.
Page 54 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 55 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2002 through 2006
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 2002 Beginning in 2003 Beginning in 2004 Beginning in 2005 Beginning in 2006
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 45,000 $ 46,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 25 $ 12
46,000 47,000 12 0 0 45 42
47,000 48,000 33 0 0 66 72
48,000 49,000 54 0 0 86 101
49,000 50,000 74 0 0 107 131
50,000 51,000 96 0 0 127 160
51,000 52,000 117 0 0 148 189
52,000 53,000 138 0 0 169 219
53,000 54,000 159 124 147 190 248
54,000 55,000 180 140 164 210 277
55,000 56,000 201 156 180 231 307
56,000 57,000 222 171 197 252 337
57,000 58,000 242 187 213 272 367
58,000 59,000 264 203 229 293 396
59,000 60,000 284 218 245 314 425
60,000 62,000 316 241 270 345 470
62,000 64,000 358 273 303 386 528
64,000 66,000 400 304 336 427 587
66,000 68,000 442 334 369 469 646
68,000 70,000 484 366 402 510 705
70,000 72,000 525 397 435 551 764
72,000 74,000 567 428 468 593 823
74,000 76,000 609 460 500 634 881
76,000 78,000 652 491 534 675 940
78,000 80,000 693 521 566 717 1,000
80,000 85,000 767 576 624 789 1,103
85,000 90,000 871 655 706 892 1,250
90,000 95,000 976 732 788 995 1,397
95,000 100,0002 1,081 810 870 1,099 1,544
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-05.pdf.
For 2003, Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
For 2004, Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html.
For 2005, Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
For 2006, Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 55

Page 56 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Car rentals ................. . 26 Excess reimbursements  (See L
Reimbursements)Form 2106 ................ . 34``Hours of service'' limits ... . 12 Lavish or extravagant
Extravagant expenses .... . 5, 12Car, defined ................ . 17Form 2106 ................ . 34 expenses .............. . 5, 12
Car, truck, or van50% limit on meals .......... . 5 Leasing a car, truck, or
rentals ................ . 25-26 van .................... . 25-26
FCasualty and theft losses: Luxury private boxes at
Fair market value of car .... . 25A Cars ...................... . 17 entertainment events ..... . 12
Farmers:Accountable plans ...... . 30-33 Depreciation ............ . 26 Luxury water travel .......... . 8
Form 1040, Schedule F .... . 29Accounting to employer .... . 30 Charitable organizations:
Federal crime investigations orAdequate accounting ....... . 30 Benefit events for ......... . 12 Mprosecutions:Independent contractors ... . 33 Sports events to benefit .... . 12
MACRS (Modified AcceleratedFederal employees engagedAdequate records .......... . 26 Club dues .................. . 13 Cost Recoveryin ....................... . 4Advertising: Commuting expenses ...... . 15 System) .................. . 21Federal rate for per diem .... . 6,Car display ............... . 15 Conventions ............. . 9, 10 2011 chart (Table 4-1) ..... . 2431Expenses ................. . 11 Country clubs .............. . 13 Main place of business orFee-basis officials .......... . 35Signs, display racks, or other Cruise ships ................ . 9 work ...................... . 3Fees you pay ............... . 15promotional material to be
Married taxpayers:used on recipient's business Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) Performing artists ......... . 35premises ............... . 13 allowance ................ . 31D Meal expenses .............. . 5Airline clubs ............... . 13 Form 1040, Schedule C ..... . 29Daily business mileage and 50% limit .................. . 10Allocating costs ...... . 4, 12, 28 Form 1040, Schedule F ..... . 29expense log (Table Determination of applicabilityAllowance  (See 6-2) ...................... . 36 Form 2106 ........ . 18, 29, 33-36 (Figure A) ............ . 11Reimbursements) Depreciation of car  (See also Form 2106-EZ .......... . 34, 36 Exceptions .............. . 11Armed forces: Section 179 deductions) ... . 17 Form 4562 .................. . 29 Actual cost method ......... . 5Assigned overseas ......... . 3 Adjustment for using standard Form 4797 .................. . 24 Form 2106 ................ . 34mileage rate ............ . 26Assistance  (See Tax help) Form W-2: Major cities with higherBasis ..................... . 19Associated allowances .............. . 6Employer-providedSales taxes ............. . 17entertainment ............ . 10 Standard meal allowance ... . 5,vehicles ................ . 29Unrecovered basis ...... . 23Athletic clubs .............. . 13 6, 31Reimbursement of personalCasualty or theft, effect .... . 26 expenses ............... . 29 Meals,Deduction ............. . 17, 26 Statutory employees ....... . 29 entertainment-related .... . 12Excess depreciation ....... . 24B Free tax services ........... . 41 Mileage rate  (See StandardModified Accelerated CostBasis of car  (See also mileage rate)Recovery SystemDepreciation of car) ....... . 19 Military  (See Armed forces)(MACRS) ............... . 21Bona fide business G Missing children, photographsSection 179 deduction ..... . 23purpose ................... . 5 Gifts ....................... . 13 of ......................... . 2Trade-in, effect ........ . 20, 26Box seats at entertainment $25 limit .................. . 13 Modified Accelerated CostTrucks and vans .......... . 22events ................... . 12 Combining for recordkeeping Recovery SystemDirectly-related purposes ............... . 28Business travel ............. . 6 (MACRS) ................. . 21entertainment ............. . 9 Reporting requirements .... . 29Outside U.S. ............... . 7 2011 chart (Table 4-1) ..... . 24Disabled employees: Golf clubs .................. . 13Business use of car ........ . 16 More information  (See Tax help)Impairment-related workMore-than-50%-use expenses ............... . 35test. .................... . 20
Documentary evidence ..... . 26 H NQualified business use ..... . 20
Hauling tools ............... . 15 Nonaccountable plans ..... . 33
Help  (See Tax help)EC High-low rate method ...... . 31 OEmployer-providedCanceled checks: Home office ................ . 15vehicles .................. . 16 Office in the home .......... . 15As evidence of business Hotel clubs ................. . 13Reporting requirements .... . 29 Officials paid on feeexpenses ............... . 27
Entertainment basis ..................... . 35Car expenses ........... . 15-26
expenses ........... . 9-12, 13 Overseas travel:Actual expenses .......... . 16 I50% limit .................. . 10 Conventions ............... . 9Allowances for ......... . 30-32 Impairment-related workDetermination of applicability Meal allowance ............ . 6Business and personal expenses ................ . 35(Figure A) ............ . 11 Part of trip outside U.S. ..... . 6use ..................... . 16 Incidental expenses:Associated test ............ . 10Combining expenses ...... . 28 Defined .................... . 5Deductible ............. . 12-13Disposition of car .......... . 26 Gifts ...................... . 13 PSummary (Table 2-1) .... . 12Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) No meals, incidentals Parking fees ............ . 15, 16Directly-related test ......... . 9allowance ............... . 31 only ..................... . 5 Per diem allowances .... . 30-32Entertainment, defined ..... . 12Form 2106 ................ . 34 Income-producing Defined ................... . 30Form 2106 ................ . 34Leasing a car, truck, or property .................. . 29 Federal rate for ............ . 31Tickets (See Tickets)van .................. . 25-26 Incomplete records ......... . 28 Performing artists .......... . 35Entertainment facilities:Mileage rate (See Standard
Indefinite job assignment ... . 4Expenses for use of ....... . 13 Personal property taxes .... . 16mileage rate)
Independent contractors ... . 33Estimates of expenses ..... . 26Taxes paid on car ......... . 16 Personal trips ............... . 6
Traffic tickets .............. . 17 Interest on car loans ....... . 16 Outside U.S. ............... . 8Exceptions to the 50%
Limit ..................... . 11Car pools .................. . 15 Itinerants .................... . 3 Placed in service, cars ..... . 20
Page 56 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 57 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Probationary work period ... . 4 Reservists: Proving expenses (Table Travel expenses ........... . 3-9
Transportation 5-1) .................... . 27 Another individualProving business
expenses ............... . 15 Reporting reimbursements accompanyingpurpose .................. . 27
Traveling more than 100 miles (Table 6-1) .............. . 32 taxpayer ................. . 4Public transportation:
from home .............. . 35 Transportation expenses, Away from home ........... . 3Outside of U.S. travel ....... . 7
determination of deductibility Deductible ............... . 4-9Returning excessPublications  (See Tax help) (Figure B) ........... . 13, 14 Summary of (Tablereimbursements .......... . 32
Travel expenses, determination 1-1) ................... . 5Rural mail carriers ......... . 15R of deductibility (Table Defined .................... . 3
Recordkeeping 1-1) ..................... . 5 Going home on days off .... . 4Srequirements .......... . 26-29 Weekly travel expense and In U.S. ..................... . 6
Section 179 deduction:Adequate records ......... . 26 entertainment record (Table Lodging .................... . 6
Amended return ........... . 18Daily business mileage and 6-3) .................... . 39 Luxury water travel ......... . 8
Deduction ................. . 17expense log (Table Outside U.S. ............... . 7Tax help .................... . 41Limits ..................... . 176-2) .................... . 36 Travel to family home ....... . 3Tax home, determinationDestroyed records ......... . 28 Self-employed persons ..... . 11 Trucks and vans:of ......................... . 3How to prove expenses (Table Reporting requirements .... . 29 Depreciation .............. . 22Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 415-1) .................... . 27 Skyboxes .................. . 12 Transportation workers .... . 12Temporary jobIncomplete records ........ . 28 Spouse, expenses for .... . 4, 13 Transportation workers'assignments .............. . 4Reimbursed expenses ..... . 28 expenses ................ . 6Standard meal allowance .... . 5, Temporary work location ... . 14Sampling to prove 6, 31 TTY/TDD information ....... . 41Tickets ................. . 12, 13expenses ............... . 28 Standard mileage rate ... . 2, 15, Two places of work ......... . 15Season or series tickets ... . 28Separating and combining 31 Traffic violations ........... . 17expenses ............... . 28 Depreciation adjustment for Tools: UThree-year period of using ................... . 26 Hauling tools .............. . 15retention ................ . 28 UnclaimedForm 2106 ................ . 34 Trade associationWeekly travel expense and reimbursements .......... . 29Statutory employees ....... . 29 meetings ................. . 12entertainment record (Table Unions:
6-3) .................... . 39 Trade-in of car ......... . 20, 26 Trips from union hall to place of
TReimbursements ........ . 29-33 work .................... . 15Traffic tickets .............. . 17
Tables and figures:Accountable plans ......... . 30 Unrecovered basis of car ... . 23Transients ................... . 3
50% limit determination (FigureExcess ............... . 32, 33 TransportationA) ...................... . 11Form 2106 ................ . 34 expenses ............. . 14-26 VDaily business mileage andNonaccountable plans ..... . 33 Car expenses .......... . 15-26 Volunteers .................. . 2expense log (TableNondeductible expenses ... . 30 Deductible (Figure B) ..... . 13,6-2) .................... . 36Personal expenses ........ . 29 14Entertainment expenses,Recordkeeping ............ . 28 Wfive or more cars .......... . 16determination of deductibilityReporting (Table 6-1) ...... . 32 Weekly travel expense andForm 2106 ................ . 34(Table 2-1) .............. . 10Unclaimed ................ . 29 entertainment record (TableTransportation workers ..... . 6,Maximum depreciationReporting 6-3) ...................... . 3912deduction for carsrequirements .......... . 29-36 Travel advance  (See also ■table ................... . 22Per diem or car Reimbursements) ..... . 30, 33Modified Accelerated Costallowance ............... . 31
Recovery System (MACRS)Reimbursements ....... . 29-33
2011 chart (Table 4-1) ... . 24
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 57

Page 58 of 58 of Publication 463 11:04 - 31-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including by computer,
phone, and mail.
531 Reporting Tip Income 908 Bankruptcy Tax GuideGeneral Guides
535 Business Expenses 915 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad1 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Retirement Benefits536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for17 Your Federal Income Tax For Individuals Individuals, Estates, and Trusts 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules334 Tax Guide for Small Business (For 537 Installment Sales 926 Household Employer's Tax Guide ForIndividuals Who Use Schedule C or Wages Paid in 2012541 PartnershipsC-EZ) 929 Tax Rules for Children and Dependents544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets509 Tax Calendars for 2012 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts910 IRS Guide to Free Tax Services 946 How To Depreciate Property550 Investment Income and ExpensesSpecialized Publications (Including Capital Gains and Losses) 947 Practice Before the IRS and Power of
Attorney551 Basis of Assets3 Armed Forces' Tax Guide
950 Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes554 Tax Guide for Seniors54 Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
969 Health Savings Accounts and Other555 Community PropertyResident Aliens Abroad
Tax-Favored Health Plans556 Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,225 Farmer's Tax Guide
970 Tax Benefits for Educationand Claims for Refund463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
971 Innocent Spouse Relief559 Survivors, Executors, and AdministratorsExpenses
972 Child Tax Credit561 Determining the Value of Donated501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Property 1542 Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within theFiling Information
Continental United States)570 Tax Guide for Individuals With Income502 Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
From U.S. Possessions 1544 Reporting Cash Payments of Overthe Health Coverage Tax Credit)
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or571 Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Business)Plans) For Employees of Public504 Divorced or Separated Individuals
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt 1546 Taxpayer Advocate Service ± Your505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Organizations Voice at the IRS514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
575 Pension and Annuity Income516 U.S. Government Civilian Employees Spanish Language Publications584 Casualty, Disaster, and Theft LossStationed Abroad 1SP Derechos del ContribuyenteWorkbook (Personal-Use Property)517 Social Security and Other Information for 17(SP) El Impuesto Federal sobre los Ingresos587 Business Use of Your Home (IncludingMembers of the Clergy and Religious Para Personas FisicasUse by Daycare Providers)Workers 547(SP) Hechos Fortuitos Desastres y Robos590 Individual Retirement Arrangements519 U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens 584(SP) Registro de PÂerdidas por Hechos(IRAs)521 Moving Expenses Fortuitos (Imprevistos), Desastres y594 The IRS Collection Process523 Selling Your Home Robos (Propiedad de Uso Personal)596 Earned Income Credit (EIC)524 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled 594SP El Proceso de Cobro del IRS721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income 596SP CrÂedito por Ingreso del TrabajoRetirement Benefits526 Charitable Contributions 850(EN/ English-Spanish Glossary of Words and901 U.S. Tax Treaties527 Residential Rental Property (Including SP) Phrases Used in Publications Issued907 Tax Highlights for Persons withRental of Vacation Homes) by the Internal Revenue ServiceDisabilities529 Miscellaneous Deductions 1544 Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en Exceso530 Tax Information for Homeowners (SP) de $10,000 (Recibidos en una
OcupaciÂon o Negocio)
Commonly Used Tax Forms See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
2441 Child and Dependent Care ExpensesForm Number and Title
2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration of Representative1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 2848(SP) Poder Legal y DeclaraciÂon del RepresentanteSch A Itemized Deductions 3903 Moving ExpensesSch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends 4562 Depreciation and AmortizationSch C Profit or Loss From Business 4868 Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S.Sch C-EZ Net Profit From Business Individual Income Tax ReturnSch D Capital Gains and Losses 4868(SP) Solicitud de PrÂorroga AutomÂatica para Presentar laSch E Supplemental Income and Loss DeclaraciÂon del Impuesto sobre el Ingreso Personal de losSch EIC Earned Income Credit Estados UnidosSch F Profit or Loss From Farming 4952 Investment Interest Expense DeductionSch H Household Employment Taxes 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) andSch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Other Tax-Favored AccountsFishermen 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐIndividualsSch R Credit for the Elderly or 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributionsthe Disabled 8582 Passive Activity Loss LimitationsSch SE Self-Employment Tax 8606 Nondeductible IRAs1040A U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 8812 Additional Child Tax Credit Sch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends 8822 Change of Address1040EZ Income Tax Return for Single and Joint Filers With No 8829 Expenses for Business Use of Your HomeDependents 8863 Education Credits (American Opportunity, and Lifetime1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals Learning Credits)1040X Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 8949 Sales and Other Dispositions of Capital Assets2106 Employee Business Expenses 9465 Installment Agreement Request2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses 9465(SP) Solicitud para un Plan de Pagos a Plazos2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals, Estates, and
Trusts
Page 58 Publication 463 (2011)