Userid: SD_77WMB DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\77WMB\Documents\463\P463-2010v2.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 ContentsCat. No. 11081L
What's New .................... . 2Department
of the Reminder ..................... . 2Treasury Travel,
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue 1. Travel ...................... . 3Entertainment,Service Traveling Away From Home ........ . 3
Tax Home ................. . 3
Tax Home Different FromGift, and Car Family Home ........... . 3
Temporary Assignment or Job ...... . 4
What Travel Expenses AreExpenses Deductible? ............... . 4
Meals .................... . 5
Travel in the United States ...... . 6
Travel Outside the UnitedFor use in preparing States ................ . 7
Luxury Water Travel .......... . 8
Conventions ............... . 92010 Returns
2. Entertainment ................. . 9
Directly-Related Test ............ . 9
Associated Test ............... . 10
50% Limit ................... . 11
Exceptions to the 50% Limit .... . 11
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Deductible? ............ . 12
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Not Deductible? ......... . 13
3. Gifts ....................... . 13
4. Transportation ................ . 14
Car Expenses ................ . 15
Standard Mileage Rate ....... . 15
Actual Car Expenses ........ . 16
Leasing a Car ............. . 23
Disposition of a Car ............ . 24
5. Recordkeeping ................ . 25
How To Prove Expenses ......... . 25
What Are Adequate
Records? ............. . 25
What If I Have Incomplete
Records? ............. . 26
Separating and Combining
Expenses ............. . 27
How Long To Keep Records
and Receipts ........... . 27
Examples of Records ........ . 27
6. How To Report ................ . 27
Where To Report .............. . 27
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer ............. . 28
Reimbursements .............. . 28
Accountable Plans .......... . 29
Nonaccountable Plans ....... . 32
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients .... . 32
Completing Forms 2106 and
2106-EZ ................. . 32
Special Rules ............. . 33
Illustrated Examples ......... . 35
7. How To Get Tax Help ........... . 41Get forms and other information
Appendices .................... . 42faster and easier by:
Index ......................... . 57
Internet IRS.gov
Feb 25, 2011

Page 2 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• What expenses are deductible, charitable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Ex-What's New penses in Giving Services in Publication 526,• How to report them on your return, Charitable Contributions, for information on the
Standard mileage rate. For 2010, the stan- • What records you need to prove your ex- expenses you can deduct.
dard mileage rate for the cost of operating your penses, and
Comments and suggestions. We welcomecar for business use is 50 cents per mile. Car
• How to treat any expense reimbursements your comments about this publication and yourexpenses and use of the standard mileage rate
you may receive. suggestions for future editions.are explained in chapter 4.
You can write to us at the following address:
Depreciation limits on cars, trucks, and Who should use this publication. You Internal Revenue Servicevans. For 2010, the first-year limit on the total should read this publication if you are an em- Individual Forms and Publications Branchdepreciation deduction for cars increases to ployee or a sole proprietor who has busi- SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I$11,060 ($3,060 if you elect not to claim the ness-related travel, entertainment, gift, or 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526special depreciation allowance). For trucks and transportation expenses. Washington, DC 20224vans the first-year limit has increased to $11,160
Users of employer-provided vehicles. If($3,160 if you elect not to claim the special
an employer-provided vehicle was available fordepreciation allowance). Depreciation limits are We respond to many letters by telephone.
your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener-explained in chapter 4. Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
ally, your employer must include the value of the clude your daytime phone number, including the
Increase in section 179 expenses. You may use or availability in your income. However, area code, in your correspondence.
now deduct up to $500,000 of the cost of section there are exceptions if the use of the vehicle You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
179 property placed in service in 2010. This qualifies as a working condition fringe benefit asterisk must be included in the address.)
deduction is phased out if the cost of the prop- (such as the use of a qualified nonpersonal use Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-
erty exceeds $2,000,000. The section 179 de- vehicle). ject line. You can also send us comments from
duction is subject to the deduction limits A working condition fringe benefit is any www.irs.gov/formspubs, select ªComment on
explained above. See Publication 946 and Sec- property or service provided to you by your em- Tax Forms and Publicationsº under ªInformation
tion 179 Deduction in chapter 4 for more details. ployer for which you could deduct the cost as an about.º
employee business expense if you had paid for Although we cannot respond individually toExtension of special allowance. The special it. each comment received, we do appreciate yourfirst-year deprecation allowance has been ex- A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is one feedback and will consider your comments astended to property placed in service in 2010. that is not likely to be used more than minimally we revise our tax products.See Publication 946 and Special Depreciation for personal purposes because of its design.Allowance in chapter 4 for more details, includ- Ordering forms and publications. VisitSee Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles  undering which property is eligible for the special al- www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andActual Car Expenses in chapter 4.lowance. publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theFor information on how to report your car address below and receive a response within 10expenses that your employer did not provide orNote. Additional information with respect to days after your request is received.reimburse you for (such as when you pay for gasPublication 463, including the application of the
and maintenance for a car your employer pro- Internal Revenue Service50% bonus and 100% bonus depreciation rules,
vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employer 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwaywill be available on www.irs.gov/pub463 later in
in chapter 6. Bloomington, IL 61705-6613the filing season.
Who does not need to use this publication.
Partnerships, corporations, trusts, and employ- Tax questions. If you have a tax question,
ers who reimburse their employees for business check the information available on IRS.gov or
expenses should refer to their tax form instruc- call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxReminder
tions and chapter 11 of Publication 535, Busi- questions sent to either of the above addresses.
ness Expenses, for information on deductingPhotographs of missing children. The Inter- travel, meals, and entertainment expenses. Useful Itemsnal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the If you are an employee, you will not need to You may want to see:National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- read this publication if all of the following aredren. Photographs of missing children selected true. Publicationby the Center may appear in this publication on
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can • You fully accounted to your employer for ❏ 225 Farmer's Tax Guidehelp bring these children home by looking at the your work-related expenses.
❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductionsphotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST • You received full reimbursement for your(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. ❏ 535 Business Expensesexpenses.
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property• Your employer required you to return any
excess reimbursement and you did so. ❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates
Introduction • There is no amount shown with a code ªLº
Form (and Instructions)in box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage andYou may be able to deduct the ordinary and
Tax Statement.necessary business-related expenses you have ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
for: DeductionsIf you meet all of these conditions, there is no
need to show the expenses or the reimburse-• Travel, ❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss
ments on your return. If you would like more From Business• Entertainment, information on reimbursements and accounting
❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profitto your employer, see chapter 6.• Gifts, or From Business
• Transportation. If you meet these conditions and your ❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss
employer included reimbursements onAn ordinary expense is one that is common and From Farming
your Form W-2 in error, ask your em-accepted in your trade or business. A necessary
TIP ❏ 2106 Employee Business Expensesployer for a corrected Form W-2.expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for
your business. An expense does not have to be ❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed EmployeeVolunteers. If you perform services as arequired to be considered necessary. Business Expensesvolunteer worker for a qualified charity, you may
This publication explains: be able to deduct some of your costs as a ❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization
Page 2 Publication 463 (2010)

Page 3 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help , for same day. You get an hour off at your turn- Factors used to determine tax home. If
around point to eat. Because you are not off to you do not have a regular or main place ofinformation about getting these publications and
get necessary sleep and the brief time off is not business or work, use the following three factorsforms.
an adequate rest period, you are not traveling to determine where your tax home is.
away from home.
1. You perform part of your business in the
Members of the Armed Forces. If you are a area of your main home and use that
member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma- home for lodging while doing business in
nent duty assignment overseas, you are not the area.
traveling away from home. You cannot deduct1. 2. You have living expenses at your mainyour expenses for meals and lodging. You can- home that you duplicate because yournot deduct these expenses even if you have to business requires you to be away from thatmaintain a home in the United States for your home.family members who are not allowed to accom-Travel pany you overseas. If you are transferred from 3. You have not abandoned the area in which
one permanent duty station to another, you may both your historical place of lodging and
If you temporarily travel away from your tax have deductible moving expenses, which are your claimed main home are located; you
home, you can use this chapter to determine if explained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses. have a member or members of your family
you have deductible travel expenses. A naval officer assigned to permanent duty living at your main home; or you often use
This chapter discusses: aboard a ship that has regular eating and living that home for lodging.
facilities has a tax home (explained next) aboard• Traveling away from home, If you satisfy all three factors, your tax homeship for travel expense purposes. is the home where you regularly live. If you• Temporary assignment or job, and satisfy only two factors, you may have a tax
Tax Home• What travel expenses are deductible. home depending on all the facts and circum-
stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are anIt also discusses the standard meal allowance, To determine whether you are traveling away itinerant; your tax home is wherever you workrules for travel inside and outside the United from home, you must first determine the location and you cannot deduct travel expenses.States, luxury water travel, and deductible con- of your tax home.
vention expenses. Generally, your tax home is your regular Example 1. You are single and live in Bos-place of business or post of duty, regardless of ton in an apartment you rent. You have workedTravel expenses defined. For tax purposes, where you maintain your family home. It in- for your employer in Boston for a number oftravel expenses are the ordinary and necessary cludes the entire city or general area in which years. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-monthexpenses of traveling away from home for your your business or work is located. executive training program. You do not expect tobusiness, profession, or job. If you have more than one regular place of return to work in Boston after you complete yourbusiness, your tax home is your main place ofAn ordinary expense is one that is common training.business. See Main place of business or work ,and accepted in your trade or business. A nec- During your training, you do not do any worklater.essary expense is one that is helpful and appro- in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom andIf you do not have a regular or a main placepriate for your business. An expense does not on-the-job training throughout the United States.of business because of the nature of your work,have to be required to be considered necessary. You keep your apartment in Boston and return tothen your tax home may be the place where youYou will find examples of deductible travel it frequently. You use your apartment to conductregularly live. See No main place of business orexpenses in Table 1-1, later. your personal business. You also keep up yourwork, later. community contacts in Boston. When you com- If you do not have a regular or main place of plete your training, you are transferred to Losbusiness or post of duty and there is no place Angeles.where you regularly live, you are considered an
Traveling Away From You do not satisfy factor (1) because you diditinerant (a transient) and your tax home is wher-
not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-ever you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claimHome cause you had duplicate living expenses. Youa travel expense deduction because you are
also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-never considered to be traveling away fromYou are traveling away from home if: don your apartment in Boston as your mainhome.
home, you kept your community contacts, and• Your duties require you to be away from Main place of business or work. If you have you frequently returned to live in your apartment.the general area of your tax home (defined more than one place of work, consider the fol- You have a tax home in Boston.later) substantially longer than an ordinary lowing when determining which one is your mainday's work, and place of business or work. Example 2. You are an outside salesperson
• You need to sleep or rest to meet the with a sales territory covering several states.• The total time you ordinarily spend in eachdemands of your work while away from Your employer's main office is in Newark, butplace.home. you do not conduct any business there. Your
• The level of your business activity in each work assignments are temporary, and you haveThis rest requirement is not satisfied by merely place. no way of knowing where your future assign-napping in your car. You do not have to be away ments will be located. You have a room in your• Whether your income from each place isfrom your tax home for a whole day or from dusk married sister's house in Dayton. You stay theresignificant or insignificant.to dawn as long as your relief from duty is long for one or two weekends a year, but you do noenough to get necessary sleep or rest. work in the area. You do not pay your sister for
Example. You live in Cincinnati where you the use of the room.Example 1. You are a railroad conductor. have a seasonal job for 8 months each year and You do not satisfy any of the three factorsYou leave your home terminal on a regularly earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months in listed earlier. You are an itinerant and have noscheduled round-trip run between two cities and Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000. tax home.return home 16 hours later. During the run, you Cincinnati is your main place of work becausehave 6 hours off at your turnaround point where you spend most of your time there and earn Tax Home Different Fromyou eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get most of your income there.necessary sleep before starting the return trip. Family Home
You are considered to be away from home. No main place of business or work. You
may have a tax home even if you do not have a If you (and your family) do not live at your tax
Example 2. You are a truck driver. You regular or main place of work. Your tax home home (defined earlier), you cannot deduct the
leave your terminal and return to it later the may be the home where you regularly live. cost of traveling between your tax home and
Chapter 1 Travel Page 3

Page 4 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your family home. You also cannot deduct the tax home as a moving expense. See Publication deduct any travel expenses you had after that
cost of meals and lodging while at your tax time because Fresno became your tax home521 for more information.
home. See Example 1 that follows. when the job became indefinite.
If you are working temporarily in the same Exception for federal crime investigations or
Going home on days off. If you go back tocity where you and your family live, you may be prosecutions. If you are a federal employee
your tax home from a temporary assignment onconsidered as traveling away from home. See participating in a federal crime investigation or
your days off, you are not considered away fromExample 2, below. prosecution, you are not subject to the 1-year
home while you are in your hometown. Yourule. This means you may be able to deduct
cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-Example 1. You are a truck driver and you travel expenses even if you are away from your
ing there. However, you can deduct your traveland your family live in Tucson. You are em- tax home for more than 1 year provided you
expenses, including meals and lodging, whileployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in meet the other requirements for deductibility.
traveling between your temporary place of workPhoenix. At the end of your long runs, you return For you to qualify, the Attorney General (or and your tax home. You can claim these ex-to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend one his or her designee) must certify that you are penses up to the amount it would have cost younight there before returning home. You cannot traveling: to stay at your temporary place of work.deduct any expenses you have for meals and
• For the federal government,lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from If you keep your hotel room during your visit
Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel• In a temporary duty status, and
your tax home. room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-
• To investigate or prosecute, or provide penses of returning home up to the amount you
support services for the investigation orExample 2. Your family home is in Pitts- would have spent for meals had you stayed at
prosecution of a federal crime.burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The your temporary place of work.
rest of the year you work for the same employer
in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants Probationary work period. If you take a jobDetermining temporary or indefinite. You
and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the that requires you to move, with the understand-must determine whether your assignment is
same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti- ing that you will keep the job if your work istemporary or indefinite when you start work. Ifmore. satisfactory during a probationary period, the jobyou expect an assignment or job to last for 1 is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourBecause you spend most of your working year or less, it is temporary unless there are expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore, facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise. bationary period.that city is your tax home. You cannot deduct An assignment or job that is initially temporary
any expenses you have for meals and lodging may become indefinite due to changed circum-
there. However, when you return to work in stances. A series of assignments to the samePittsburgh, you are away from your tax home location, all for short periods but that togethereven though you stay at your family home. You What Travel Expensescover a long period, may be considered an in-can deduct the cost of your round trip between definite assignment.Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct Are Deductible?The following examples illustrate whether anyour part of your family's living expenses for assignment or job is temporary or indefinite.meals and lodging while you are living and work- Once you have determined that you are travel-
ing in Pittsburgh. ing away from your tax home, you can determineExample 1. You are a construction worker. what travel expenses are deductible.You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. You
You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-are a member of a trade union in Los Angeles
penses you have when you travel away fromthat helps you get work in the Los Angeles area.
Temporary home on business. The type of expense you canBecause of a shortage of work, you took a job on
deduct depends on the facts and your circum-a construction project in Fresno. Your job wasAssignment or Job stances.scheduled to end in 8 months. The job actually
Table 1-1 summarizes travel expenses youlasted 10 months.You may regularly work at your tax home and may be able to deduct. You may have otherYou realistically expected the job in Fresnoalso work at another location. It may not be deductible travel expenses that are not coveredto last 8 months. The job actually did last lesspractical to return to your tax home from this there, depending on the facts and your circum-than 1 year. The job is temporary and your taxother location at the end of each work day. stances.home is still in Los Angeles.
Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign- When you travel away from home on
Example 2. The facts are the same as inment. If your assignment or job away from business, you should keep records of
Example 1, except that you realistically ex-your main place of work is temporary, your tax all the expenses you have and any
RECORDS
pected the work in Fresno to last 18 months. Thehome does not change. You are considered to advances you receive from your employer. You
job actually was completed in 10 months.be away from home for the whole period you are can use a log, diary, notebook, or any other
Your job in Fresno is indefinite because youaway from your main place of work. You can written record to keep track of your expenses.
realistically expected the work to last longer thandeduct your travel expenses if they otherwise The types of expenses you need to record,
1 year, even though it actually lasted less than 1qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary along with supporting documentation, are de-
year. You cannot deduct any travel expensesassignment in a single location is one that is scribed in Table 5-1 (see chapter 5).
you had in Fresno because Fresno became yourrealistically expected to last (and does in fact
tax home.last) for 1 year or less. Separating costs. If you have one expense
However, if your assignment or job is indefi- that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,
Example 3. The facts are the same as innite, the location of the assignment or job be- and other services (such as lodging or transpor-
Example 1, except that you realistically ex-comes your new tax home and you cannot tation), you must allocate that expense between
pected the work in Fresno to last 9 months. Afterdeduct your travel expenses while there. An the cost of meals and entertainment and the cost
8 months, however, you were asked to remainassignment or job in a single location is consid- of other services. You must have a reasonable
for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last basis for making this allocation. For example,
months).for more than 1 year, whether or not it actually you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-
lasts for more than 1 year. Initially, you realistically expected the job in cludes one or more meals in its room charge.
Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, dueIf your assignment is indefinite, you must
to changed circumstances occurring after 8include in your income any amounts you receive Travel expenses for another individual. If a
months, it was no longer realistic for you tofrom your employer for living expenses, even if spouse, dependent, or other individual goes with
expect that the job in Fresno would last for 1they are called travel allowances and you ac- you (or your employee) on a business trip or to a
year or less. You can only deduct your travelcount to your employer for them. You may be business convention, you generally cannot de-
expenses for the first 8 months. You cannotable to deduct the cost of relocating to your new duct his or her travel expenses.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 5 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
extravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsTable 1-1.  Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
and circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-
lowed merely because they are more than aThis chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home
fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-for business purposes.
taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.
IF you have
expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of... 50% limit on meals. You can figure your
meals expense using either of the followingtransportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your methods.business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you are
riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your • Actual cost.
cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise
• The standard meal allowance.Ships (under Conventions) for additional rules and limits.
Both of these methods are explained below. But,taxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you between:
regardless of the method you use, you generallybus, and airport • The airport or station and your hotel, and can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed costlimousine • The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, your of your meals.business meeting place, or your temporary work location.
If you are reimbursed for the cost of yourbaggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your regular meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends onshipping and temporary work locations. whether your employer's reimbursement plan
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home on was accountable or nonaccountable. If you are
business. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileage not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether
rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a car the unreimbursed meal expense is for business
while away from home on business, you can deduct only the travel or business entertainment. Chapter 2 dis-
business-use portion of the expenses. cusses the 50% Limit in more detail, and chapter
6 discusses accountable and nonaccountablelodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long
plans.enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform your
duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages, taxes, and
related tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits.
Actual Cost
cleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
You can use the actual cost of your meals totelephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes business figure the amount of your expense before reim-communication by fax machine or other communication devices. bursement and application of the 50% deduction
limit. If you use this method, you must keeptips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart.
records of your actual cost.other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
business travel. These expenses might include transportation to or
from a business meal, public stenographer's fees, computer rental Standard Meal Allowancefees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer.
Generally, you can use the ªstandard meal al-
lowanceº method as an alternative to the actual
Employee. You can deduct the travel ex- notes, performs similar services, and accompa- cost method. It allows you to use a set amount
nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per-penses of someone who goes with you if that for your daily meals and incidental expenses
formance of these services does not establishperson: (M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac-
that her presence on the trip is necessary to the tual costs. The set amount varies depending on1. Is your employee, conduct of Jerry's business. Her expenses are where and when you travel. In this publication,
not deductible. ªstandard meal allowanceº refers to the federal2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the Jerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount oftravel, and single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct the standard meal allowance . If you use the stan-3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago, dard meal allowance, you still must keep rec-
travel expenses. but only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he uses ords to prove the time, place, and business
public transportation, he can deduct only his purpose of your travel. See the recordkeepingBusiness associate. If a business associ- fare. rules for travel in chapter 5.
ate travels with you and meets the conditions in
(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel Meals Incidental expenses. The term ªincidental ex-
expenses you have for that person. A business pensesº means:
You can deduct the cost of meals in either of theassociate is someone with whom you could rea-
• Fees and tips given to porters, baggagefollowing situations.sonably expect to actively conduct business. A
carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewardsbusiness associate can be a current or prospec- • It is necessary for you to stop for substan- or stewardesses and others on ships, andtive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier, tial sleep or rest to properly perform your hotel servants in foreign countries,employee, agent, partner, or professional advi- duties while traveling away from home on
sor. • Transportation between places of lodgingbusiness.
or business and places where meals areBona fide business purpose. A bona fide • The meal is business-related entertain- taken, if suitable meals can be obtained atbusiness purpose exists if you can prove a real ment. the temporary duty site, andbusiness purpose for the individual's presence. Business-related entertainment is discussed in • Mailing costs associated with filing travelIncidental services, such as typing notes or as- chapter 2. The following discussion deals only vouchers and payment of em-sisting in entertaining customers, are not with meals that are not business-related enter- ployer-sponsored charge card billings.enough to make the expenses deductible. tainment.
Incidental expenses do not include expenses for
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi- laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg-Lavish or extravagant. You cannot deduct
ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephoneexpenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-
calls.not Jerry's employee. Linda occasionally types gant. An expense is not considered lavish or
Chapter 1 Travel Page 5

Page 6 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Incidental expenses only method. You can If you travel to more than one location in one Orleans on Friday and arrived back home at
use an optional method (instead of actual cost) day, use the rate in effect for the area where you 8:00 p.m. Jen's employer gave her a flat amount
for deducting incidental expenses only. The stop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor- to cover her expenses and included it with her
amount of the deduction is $5 a day. You can tation industry, however, see Special rate for wages.
use this method only if you did not pay or incur transportation workers, later. Under Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days of
any meal expenses. You cannot use this the standard meal allowance for Washington,Standard meal allowance for areas outsidemethod on any day that you use the standard DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andthe continental United States. The standardmeal allowance. This method is subject to the Friday (the days she departed and returned),meal allowance rates above do not apply toproration rules for partial days. See Travel for and the full daily rate for Thursday.travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other locationdays you depart and return, later in this chapter. Under Method 2 , Jen could also use anyoutside the continental United States. The De-
method that she applies consistently and that isFederal employees should refer to the partment of Defense establishes per diem rates
Federal Travel Regulations at www. in accordance with reasonable business prac-for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American Sa-
gsa.gov. Find the ªMost Requested tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of themoa, Guam, Midway, the Northern Mariana Is-
CAUTION
!
Linksº on the upper left and click on ªRegula- standard meal allowance even though a federallands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake Island, and
tions: FAR, FMR, FTRº for Federal Travel Regu- employee would have to use Method 1 and beother non-foreign areas outside the continental
lation (FTR) for changes affecting claims for limited to only 21/2 days.United States. The Department of State estab-
reimbursement. lishes per diem rates for all other foreign areas.
Travel in the United StatesYou can access per diem rates for50% limit may apply. If you use the standard
non-foreign areas outside the conti-meal allowance method for meal expenses and The following discussion applies to travel in thenental United States at:you are not reimbursed or you are reimbursed
 United States. For this purpose, the Unitedhttp://www.defensetravel.dod.mil/perdiem/under a nonaccountable plan, you can generally States includes the 50 states and the District ofperdiemrates.html. You can access all other for-deduct only 50% of the standard meal allow- Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-ance. If you are reimbursed under an accounta- eign per diem rates at: www.state.gov/travel/. penses depends on how much of your trip wasble plan and you are deducting amounts that are Click on ªTravel Per Diem Allowances for For- business related and on how much of your tripmore than your reimbursements, you can de- eign Areas,º under ªForeign Per Diem Ratesº to occurred within the United States. See Part ofduct only 50% of the excess amount. The 50% obtain the latest foreign per diem rates. Trip Outside the United States, later.limit is discussed in more detail in chapter 2, and
Special rate for transportation workers.accountable and nonaccountable plans are dis-
You can use a special standard meal allowancecussed in chapter 6. Trip Primarily for Businessif you work in the transportation industry. You
There is no optional standard lodging are in the transportation industry if your work: You can deduct all of your travel expenses ifamount similar to the standard meal
your trip was entirely business related. If your• Directly involves moving people or goodsallowance. Your allowable lodging ex-
CAUTION
!
trip was primarily for business and, while at yourby airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, orpense deduction is your actual cost.
business destination, you extended your stay fortruck, and
Who can use the standard meal allowance. a vacation, made a personal side trip, or had• Regularly requires you to travel away fromYou can use the standard meal allowance other personal activities, you can deduct yourhome and, during any single trip, usuallywhether you are an employee or self-employed, business-related travel expenses. These ex-involves travel to areas eligible for differ-and whether or not you are reimbursed for your penses include the travel costs of getting to andent standard meal allowance rates.traveling expenses. from your business destination and any busi-
If this applies to you, you can claim a standard ness-related expenses at your business desti-Use of the standard meal allowance for other
meal allowance of $59 a day ($65 for travel nation.travel. You can use the standard meal allow-
outside the continental United States).ance to figure your meal expenses when you Example. You work in Atlanta and take atravel in connection with investment and other Using the special rate for transportation work- business trip to New Orleans in May. On yourincome-producing property. You can also use it ers eliminates the need for you to determine the way home, you stop in Mobile to visit your par-to figure your meal expenses when you travel for standard meal allowance for every area where ents. You spend $1,999 for the 9 days you arequalifying educational purposes. You cannot you stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to use away from home for travel, meals, lodging, anduse the standard meal allowance to figure the the special rate for any trip, you must use the other travel expenses. If you had not stopped incost of your meals when you travel for medical special rate (and not use the regular standard Mobile, you would have been gone only 6 days,or charitable purposes. meal allowance rates) for all trips you take that and your total cost would have been $1,699.year.Amount of standard meal allowance. The You can deduct $1,699 for your trip, including
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE the cost of round-trip transportation to and fromTravel for days you depart and return. Forrate. For travel in 2010, the rate for most small New Orleans. The deduction for your meals isboth the day you depart for and the day youlocalities in the United States is $46 a day. subject to the 50% limit on meals  mentionedreturn from a business trip, you must prorate theMost major cities and many other localities in earlier.standard meal allowance (figure a reducedthe United States are designated as high-cost
amount for each day). You can do so by one ofareas, qualifying for higher standard meal al-
two methods.lowances. These rates are listed in Publication Trip Primarily for
1542, which is available on the Internet at Personal Reasons• Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan-IRS.gov. dard meal allowance.
If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,You can also find this information (or- • Method 2: You can prorate using any such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is aganized by state) on the Internet at method that you consistently apply and nondeductible personal expense. However, youwww.gsa.gov . Click on ªPer Diem
 that is in accordance with reasonable busi- can deduct any expenses you have while at yourRates,º then select ª2010º for the period January ness practice. destination that are directly related to your busi-1, 2010 ± September 30, 2010, and select
ness.ª2011º for the period October 1, 2010 ± Decem-
A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be aExample. Jen is employed in New Orleansber 31, 2010. However, you can apply the rates
vacation even if the promoter advertises that it isas a convention planner. In March, her employerin effect before October 1, 2010, for expenses of
primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, toall travel within the United States for 2010 in-
dental business activities during a trip, such asattend a planning seminar. She left her home instead of the updated rates. You must consist-
viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingNew Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday andently use either the rates for the first 9 months of
with general subjects, will not change what isarrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After2010 or the updated rates for the period of Octo-
really a vacation into a business trip.spending two nights there, she flew back to Newber 1, 2010, through December 31, 2010.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 7 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business activities, your trip is considered en- days on personal matters. You then flew back toPart of Trip Outside
Seattle. You spent 1 day flying in each direction.tirely for business if you meet at least one of thethe United States
Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of yourfollowing four exceptions.
If part of your trip is outside the United States, total time abroad was for nonbusiness activities,Exception 1 - No substantial control.use the rules described later in this chapter you can deduct as travel expenses what it wouldYour trip is considered entirely for business ifunder Travel Outside the United States  for that have cost you to make the trip if you had notyou did not have substantial control over arrang-part of the trip. For the part of your trip that is engaged in any nonbusiness activity. Theing the trip. The fact that you control the timing ofinside the United States, use the rules for travel amount you can deduct is the cost of theyour trip does not, by itself, mean that you havein the United States. Travel outside the United round-trip plane fare and 16 days of meals (sub-substantial control over arranging your trip.States does not include travel from one point in ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other related
You do not have substantial control overthe United States to another point in the United expenses.
your trip if you:States. The following discussion can help you Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid-determine whether your trip was entirely within • Are an employee who was reimbursed or eration. Your trip is considered entirely forthe United States. paid a travel expense allowance, business if you can establish that a personal
vacation was not a major consideration, even ifPublic transportation. If you travel by public • Are not related to your employer, and you have substantial control over arranging thetransportation, any place in the United States • Are not a managing executive. trip.where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a
point in the United States. Once the vehicle ªRelated to your employerº is defined later inleaves the last scheduled stop in the United chapter 6 under Per Diem and Car Allowances. Travel Primarily for BusinessStates on its way to a point outside the United
A ªmanaging executiveº is an employee whoStates, you apply the rules under Travel Outside If you travel outside the United States primarilyhas the authority and responsibility, without be-the United States. for business but spend some of your time oning subject to the veto of another, to decide on other activities, you generally cannot deduct allthe need for the business travel.Example. You fly from New York to Puerto of your travel expenses. You can only deduct theRico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return A self-employed person generally has sub- business portion of your cost of getting to andto New York nonstop. The flight from New York stantial control over arranging business trips. from your destination. You must allocate theto Miami is in the United States, so only the flight costs between your business and other activitiesException 2 - Outside United States nofrom Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United to determine your deductible amount. Seemore than a week. Your trip is consideredStates. Because there are no scheduled stops Travel allocation rules, later.entirely for business if you were outside thebetween Puerto Rico and New York, all of the United States for a week or less, combiningreturn trip is outside the United States. You do not have to allocate your travelbusiness and nonbusiness activities. One week expenses if you meet one of the fourmeans 7 consecutive days. In counting thePrivate car. Travel by private car in the United exceptions listed earlier under Travel
TIPdays, do not count the day you leave the UnitedStates is travel between points in the United considered entirely for business. In those cases,
States, but do count the day you return to theStates, even though you are on your way to a you can deduct the total cost of getting to and
United States.destination outside the United States. from your destination.
Example. You traveled to Brussels primarilyExample. You travel by car from Denver to Travel allocation rules. If your trip outside thefor business. You left Denver on Tuesday andMexico City and return. Your travel from Denver United States was primarily for business, youflew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew fromto the border and from the border back to Den- must allocate your travel time on a day-to-dayNew York to Brussels, arriving the next morning.ver is travel in the United States, and the rules in basis between business days and nonbusinessOn Thursday and Friday, you had business dis-this section apply. The rules under Travel days. The days you depart from and return to theOutside the United States apply to your trip from cussions, and from Saturday until Tuesday, you United States are both counted as days outsidethe border to Mexico City and back to the border. were sightseeing. You flew back to New York, the United States.
arriving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday, To figure the deductible amount of your
you flew back to Denver.Travel Outside round-trip travel expenses, use the following
Although you were away from your home in fraction. The numerator (top number) is the totalthe United States
Denver for more than a week, you were not number of business days outside the United
outside the United States for more than a week.If any part of your business travel is outside the States. The denominator (bottom number) is the
This is because the day you depart does notUnited States, some of your deductions for the total number of business and nonbusiness days
count as a day outside the United States.cost of getting to and from your destination may of travel.
be limited. For this purpose, the United States You can deduct your cost of the round-trip
Counting business days. Your businessincludes the 50 states and the District of Colum- flight between Denver and Brussels. You can days include transportation days, days yourbia. also deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels for presence was required, days you spent on busi-How much of your travel expenses you can Thursday and Friday while you conducted busi- ness, and certain weekends and holidays.deduct depends in part upon how much of your ness. However, you cannot deduct the cost of
trip outside the United States was business re- your stay in Brussels from Saturday through Transportation day. Count as a businesslated. Tuesday because those days were spent on day any day you spend traveling to or from a
nonbusiness activities. business destination. However, if because of a
nonbusiness activity you do not travel by a directException 3 - Less than 25% of time onTravel Entirely for Business or route, your business days are the days it wouldpersonal activities. Your trip is consideredConsidered Entirely for Business take you to travel a reasonably direct route toentirely for business if: your business destination. Extra days for sideYou can deduct all your travel expenses of get- • You were outside the United States for trips or nonbusiness activities cannot beting to and from your business destination if your more than a week, and counted as business days.trip is entirely for business or considered entirely
for business. • You spent less than 25% of the total time Presence required. Count as a business
you were outside the United States on day any day your presence is required at a
Travel entirely for business. If you travel particular place for a specific business purpose.nonbusiness activities.
outside the United States and you spend the Count it as a business day even if you spendFor this purpose, count both the day your tripentire time on business activities, you can de- most of the day on nonbusiness activities.began and the day it ended.duct all of your travel expenses.
Day spent on business. If your principal
Example. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo,Travel considered entirely for business. activity during working hours is pursuit of your
Even if you did not spend your entire time on where you spent 14 days on business and 5 trade or business, count the day as a business
Chapter 1 Travel Page 7

Page 8 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
day. Also, count as a business day any day you from Dublin back to New York. Round trip airfare Example. The university from which you
are prevented from working because of circum- from New York to Dublin would have been graduated has a continuing education program
stances beyond your control. $1,250. for members of its alumni association. This pro-
gram consists of trips to various foreign coun-You figure the deductible part of your airCertain weekends and holidays. Count tries where academic exercises andtravel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of theweekends, holidays, and other necessary conferences are set up to acquaint individuals inround-trip fare and other expenses you wouldstandby days as business days if they fall be- most occupations with selected facilities in sev-have had in traveling directly between New Yorktween business days. But if they follow your eral regions of the world. However, none of theand Dublin ($1,250 ×  7/18 = $486) from your totalbusiness meetings or activity and you remain at expenses in traveling from New York to Paris to conferences are directed toward specific occu-your business destination for nonbusiness or Dublin and back to New York ($750 + $400 + pations or professions. It is up to each partici-personal reasons, do not count them as busi- $700 = $1,850). pant to seek out specialists and organizationalness days. settings appropriate to his or her occupationalYour deductible air travel expense is $1,364
interests.($1,850 − $486).Example 1. Your tax home is New York
Three-hour sessions are held each day overCity. You travel to Quebec, where you have a Nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond a 5-day period at each of the selected overseasbusiness appointment on Friday. You have an- business destination. If you had a vacation facilities where participants can meet with indi-other appointment on the following Monday. Be- or other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond vidual practitioners. These sessions are com-cause your presence was required on both your business destination, you must allocate posed of a variety of activities includingFriday and Monday, they are business days. part of your travel expenses to the nonbusiness workshops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill de-Because the weekend is between business activity. velopment, and exercises. Professional confer-days, Saturday and Sunday are counted as The part you must allocate is the amount it ence directors schedule and conduct thebusiness days. This is true even though you use would have cost you to travel between the point sessions. Participants can choose those ses-the weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, or where travel outside the United States begins sions they wish to attend.other nonbusiness activity. and your business destination and a return to You can participate in this program since youthe point where travel outside the United StatesExample 2. If, in Example 1, you had no are a member of the alumni association. Youends.business in Quebec after Friday, but stayed until and your family take one of the trips. You spendYou determine the nonbusiness portion ofMonday before starting home, Saturday and about 2 hours at each of the planned sessions.that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. TheSunday would be nonbusiness days. The rest of the time you go touring and sightsee-numerator of the fraction is the number of non- ing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1Nonbusiness activity on the way to or from business days during your travel outside the week.your business destination. If you stopped United States and the denominator is the total Your travel expenses for the trip are notfor a vacation or other nonbusiness activity ei- number of days you spend outside the United deductible since the trip was primarily a vaca-ther on the way from the United States to your States. tion. However, registration fees and any otherbusiness destination, or on the way back to the None of your travel expenses for nonbusi- incidental expenses you have for the fiveUnited States from your business destination, ness activities at, near, or beyond your business planned sessions you attended that are directlyyou must allocate part of your travel expenses to destination are deductible. related and beneficial to your business are de-the nonbusiness activity.
ductible business expenses. These expensesThe part you must allocate is the amount it Example. Assume that the dates are the should be specifically stated in your records towould have cost you to travel between the point same as in the previous example but that in- ensure proper allocation of your deductible busi-where travel outside the United States begins stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you fly ness expenses.and your nonbusiness destination and a return to Venice, Italy, for a vacation.
to the point where travel outside the United You cannot deduct any part of the cost of
States ends. Luxury Water Travelyour trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris.
You determine the nonbusiness portion of In addition, you cannot deduct 7/18 of the airfare If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or otherthat expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The and other expenses from New York to Paris and form of luxury water transportation for businessnumerator of the fraction is the number of non- back to New York. purposes, there is a daily limit on the amountbusiness days during your travel outside the You can deduct 11/18 of the round-trip plane you can deduct. The limit is twice the highestUnited States and the denominator is the total fare and other travel expenses from New York to federal per diem rate allowable at the time ofnumber of days you spend outside the United Paris, plus your meals (subject to the 50% limit), your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem isStates. lodging, and any other business expenses you the amount paid to federal government employ-had in Paris. (Assume these expenses total ees for daily living expenses when they travelExample. You live in New York. On May 4 $4,939). If the round-trip plane fare and other away from home, but in the United States, foryou flew to Paris to attend a business confer- travel-related expenses (such as food during the business purposes.)ence that began on May 5. The conference trip) are $1,750, you can deduct travel costs ofended at noon on May 14. That evening you flew $1,069 (11/18 ×  $1,750), plus the full $4,939 forto Dublin where you visited with friends until the Daily limit on luxury water travel. The high-the expenses you had in Paris.afternoon of May 21, when you flew directly est federal per diem rate allowed and the daily
home to New York. The primary purpose for the limit for luxury water travel in 2010 is shown inOther methods. You can use another method
trip was to attend the conference. the following table.of counting business days if you establish that it
If you had not stopped in Dublin, you would more clearly reflects the time spent on other Highest Daily Limithave arrived home the evening of May 14. You than business activities outside the United 2010 Federal on Luxurydid not meet any of the exceptions that would States. Dates Per Diem Water Travelallow you to consider your travel entirely for
business. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are Jan. 1 ± Mar. 31 $342 $684
business days and May 15 through May 21 (7 Travel Primarily for Personal Apr. 1 ± June 30 389 778
days) are nonbusiness days. Reasons July 1 ± Aug. 31 350 700You can deduct the cost of your meals (sub-
ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other busi- If you travel outside the United States primarily Sept. 1 ± Sept. 30 411 822
ness-related travel expenses while in Paris. for vacation or for investment purposes, the en- Oct. 1 ± Dec. 31 340 680You cannot deduct your expenses while in tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personal
Dublin. You also cannot deduct 7/18 of what it expense. If you spend some time attending brief
Example. Caroline, a travel agent, traveledwould have cost you to travel round-trip between professional seminars or a continuing education
by ocean liner from New York to London, Eng-New York and Dublin. program, you can deduct your registration fees
land, on business in May. Her expense for theYou paid $750 to fly from New York to Paris, and other expenses you have that are directly
6-day cruise was $5,200. Caroline's deduction$400 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $700 to fly related to your business.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 9 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for the cruise cannot exceed $4,668 (6 days × shows your attendance was for business pur- 3. All of the cruise ship's ports of call are in
$778 daily limit). poses. the United States or in possessions of the
United States.
Meals and entertainment. If your expenses 4. You attach to your return a written state-Conventions Held Outsidefor luxury water travel include separately stated ment signed by you that includes informa-the North American Areaamounts for meals or entertainment, those tion about:amounts are subject to the 50% limit on meals
You cannot deduct expenses for attending aand entertainment before you apply the daily a. The total days of the trip (not includingconvention, seminar, or similar meeting heldlimit. For a discussion of the 50% Limit , see the days of transportation to and fromoutside the North American area unless:chapter 2. the cruise ship port),
• The meeting is directly related to your b. The number of hours each day that youExample. In the previous example, Caro- trade or business, and devoted to scheduled business activi-line's luxury water travel had a total cost of
ties, and• It is as reasonable to hold the meeting$5,200. Of that amount, $2,350 was separately
outside the North American area as in it.stated as meals and entertainment. Caroline, c. A program of the scheduled business
who is self-employed, is not reimbursed for any activities of the meeting.If the meeting meets these requirements, you
of her travel expenses. Caroline figures her de- also must satisfy the rules for deducting ex-
ductible travel expenses as follows. 5. You attach to your return a written state-penses for business trips in general, discussed
ment signed by an officer of the organiza-earlier under Travel Outside the United States.Meals and entertainment ..... . $2,350 tion or group sponsoring the meeting that50% limit ............... . ×  .50 North American area. The North American includes:Allowable meals & entertainment $1,175 area includes the following locations.Other travel expenses ...... . + 2,850 a. A schedule of the business activities ofAllowable cost before the daily limit ... . $4,025 each day of the meeting, andAmerican Samoa Jarvis Island
Daily limit for May 2010 ..... . $ 778 Antigua and Barbuda Johnston Island b. The number of hours you attended theTimes number of days ...... . ×  6 Aruba Kingman Reef
scheduled business activities.Maximum luxury water travel deduction $4,668 Bahamas Marshall Islands
Baker Island MexicoAmount of allowable deduction .... . $4,025 Barbados Micronesia
Bermuda Midway IslandsCaroline's deduction for her cruise is limited to Canada Netherlands Antilles$4,025, even though the limit on luxury water Costa Rica Northern Marianatravel is higher. Dominica Islands
Dominican Republic PalauNot separately stated. If your meal or en-
Grenada Palmyra Atolltertainment charges are not separately stated or Guam Puerto Rico 2.are not clearly identifiable, you do not have to Guyana Trinidad and Tobagoallocate any portion of the total charge to meals Honduras USAor entertainment. Howland Island U.S. Virgin Islands
Jamaica Wake Island Entertainment
Exceptions The North American area also includes U.S.
islands, cays, and reefs that are possessions of You may be able to deduct business-relatedThe daily limit on luxury water travel (discussed the United States and not part of the fifty states entertainment expenses you have for entertain-earlier) does not apply to expenses you have to or the District of Columbia. ing a client, customer, or employee. The rulesattend a convention, seminar, or meeting on and definitions are summarized in Table 2-1.board a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships  under Reasonableness test. The following factors You can deduct entertainment expensesConventions Held Outside the North American are taken into account to determine if it was only if they are both ordinary and necessary andArea. reasonable to hold the meeting outside the meet one of the following tests.
North American area.
• Directly-related test.Conventions • The purpose of the meeting and the activi-
• Associated test.ties taking place at the meeting.You can deduct your travel expenses when you
Both of these tests are explained later.attend a convention if you can show that your • The purposes and activities of the spon-
attendance benefits your trade or business. You soring organizations or groups. An ordinary expense is one that is commoncannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam- and accepted in your trade or business. A nec-• The homes of the active members of theily. essary expense is one that is helpful and appro-sponsoring organizations and the placesIf the convention is for investment, political, priate for your business. An expense does notat which other meetings of the sponsoringsocial, or other purposes unrelated to your trade have to be required to be considered necessary.organizations or groups have been or willor business, you cannot deduct the expenses. be held. The amount you can deduct for enter-
Your appointment or election as a dele- tainment expenses may be limited.• Other relevant factors you may present.gate does not, in itself, determine Generally, you can deduct only 50% of
CAUTION
!
whether you can deduct travel ex- your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
CAUTION
!
penses. You can deduct your travel expenses Cruise Ships This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.
only if your attendance is connected to your own
You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of yourtrade or business.
expenses of attending conventions, seminars,
or similar meetings held on cruise ships. AllConvention agenda. The convention agenda Directly-Related Testships that sail are considered cruise ships.or program generally shows the purpose of the
You can deduct these expenses only if all ofconvention. You can show your attendance at To meet the directly-related test for entertain-the following requirements are met.the convention benefits your trade or business ment expenses (including entertainment-relatedby comparing the agenda with the official duties 1. The convention, seminar, or meeting is di- meals), you must show that:and responsibilities of your position. The agenda rectly related to your trade or business.does not have to deal specifically with your offi- • The main purpose of the combined busi-
cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enough 2. The cruise ship is a vessel registered in ness and entertainment was the active
if the agenda is so related to your position that it the United States. conduct of business,
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 9

Page 10 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2-1.  When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
Associated TestGeneral rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client,
customer, or employee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or Even if your expenses do not meet the di-the associated test. rectly-related test, they may meet the associ-
ated test.Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide To meet the associated test for entertain-entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes meals
ment expenses (including entertainment-relatedprovided to a customer or client.
meals), you must show that the entertainment is:• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your
trade or business. • Associated with the active conduct of your
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate. trade or business, and
Tests to be met Directly-related test • Directly before or after a substantial busi-
ness discussion (defined later).• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business,
and Associated with trade or business. Gener-
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment ally, an expense is associated with the activeperiod, and conduct of your trade or business if you canYou had more than a general expectation of getting income or some show that you had a clear business purpose forother specific business benefit. having the expense. The purpose may be to get
new business or to encourage the continuationAssociated test
of an existing business relationship.• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly before or after a substantial business Substantial business discussion. Whetherdiscussion. a business discussion is substantial depends on
the facts of each case. A business discussionOther rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment will not be considered substantial unless youexpense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
can show that you actively engaged in the dis-• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the cussion, meeting, negotiation, or other businesscircumstances.
transaction to get income or some other specific• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed business benefit.entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit).
The meeting does not have to be for any
specified length of time, but you must show that
the business discussion was substantial in rela-• You did engage in business with the per- • Entertainment that is mainly a price rebate tion to the meal or entertainment. It is not neces-on the sale of your products (such as ason during the entertainment period, and sary that you devote more time to business thanrestaurant owner providing an occasional• You had more than a general expectation to entertainment. You do not have to discussfree meal to a loyal customer).of getting income or some other specific business during the meal or entertainment.
• Entertainment of a clear business naturebusiness benefit at some future time. Meetings at conventions. You are consid-occurring under circumstances where ered to have a substantial business discussion ifthere is no meaningful personal or socialBusiness is generally not considered to be the you attend meetings at a convention or similarrelationship between you and the personsmain purpose when business and entertainment event, or at a trade or business meeting spon-entertained. An example is entertainmentare combined on hunting or fishing trips, or on sored and conducted by a business or profes-of business and civic leaders at the open-yachts or other pleasure boats. Even if you show sional organization. However, your reason foring of a new hotel or play when the pur-that business was the main purpose, you gener- attending the convention or meeting must be topose is to get business publicity ratherally cannot deduct the expenses for the use of further your trade or business. The organizationthan to create or maintain the goodwill ofan entertainment facility. See Entertainment fa- that sponsors the convention or meeting mustthe persons entertained.cilities under What Entertainment Expenses Are schedule a program of business activities that isNot Deductible? later in this chapter. the main activity of the convention or meeting.
You must consider all the facts, including the Expenses not considered directly related.
nature of the business transacted and the rea- Entertainment expenses generally are not con- Directly before or after business discussion.
sons for conducting business during the enter- sidered directly related if you are not there or in If the entertainment is held on the same day as
tainment. It is not necessary to devote more time situations where there are substantial distrac- the business discussion, it is considered to be
to business than to entertainment. However, if tions that generally prevent you from actively held directly before or after the business discus-
the business discussion is only incidental to the conducting business. The following are exam- sion.
entertainment, the entertainment expenses do ples of situations where there are substantial If the entertainment and the business discus-
not meet the directly-related test. distractions. sion are not held on the same day, you must
consider the facts of each case to see if the• A meeting or discussion at a nightclub, associated test is met. Among the facts to con-You do not have to show that business theater, or sporting event. sider are the place, date, and duration of theincome or other business benefit actu-
• A meeting or discussion during what is business discussion. If you or your businessally resulted from each entertainment
TIP
essentially a social gathering, such as a associates are from out of town, you must alsoexpense.
cocktail party. consider the dates of arrival and departure, and
the reasons the entertainment and the discus-• A meeting with a group that includes per-Clear business setting. If the entertainment sion did not take place on the same day.sons who are not business associates attakes place in a clear business setting and is for
places such as cocktail lounges, countryyour business or work, the expenses are consid- Example. A group of business associatesclubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacationered directly related to your business or work. comes from out of town to your place of busi-resorts.The following situations are examples of enter- ness to hold a substantial business discussion.tainment in a clear business setting. If you entertain those business guests on the
• Entertainment in a hospitality room at a evening before the business discussion, or on
convention where business goodwill is the evening of the day following the business
created through the display or discussion discussion, the entertainment generally is con-
of business products. sidered to be held directly before or after the
Page 10 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 11 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
also applies to the cost of meals included in
deductible educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit. You apply the
50% limit after determining the amount that
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
have to determine the amount of meal and en-
tertainment expenses that would be deductible
under the other rules discussed in this publica-
tion.
Example 1. You spend $200 for a busi-
ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount is not
allowable because it is lavish and extravagant,
the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit.
Your deduction cannot be more than $45 (50% ×
$90).
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You
paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face
value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction
cannot be more than $80 (50% ×  $160).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
Figure A can help you determine if the 50% limit
applies to you.
Expenses not subject to 50% limit. Your
meal or entertainment expense is not subject to
the 50% limit if the expense meets one of the
following exceptions.
1 - Employee's reimbursed expenses. If
you are an employee, you are not subject to the
50% limit on expenses for which your employer
reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
2 - Self-employed. If you are
self-employed, your deductible meal and enter-
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
tainment expenses are not subject to the 50%
limit if all of the following requirements are met.discussion. The expense meets the associated • Attending a business convention or recep-
tion, business meeting, or business lunch-test. • You have these expenses as an indepen-eon at a club. dent contractor.
• Your customer or client reimburses you orIncluded expenses. Expenses subject to the gives you an allowance for these ex-50% Limit 50% limit include: penses in connection with services you
• Taxes and tips relating to a business meal perform.In general, you can deduct only 50% of your or entertainment activity,business-related meal and entertainment ex- • You provide adequate records of these ex-
penses. (If you are subject to the Department of • Cover charges for admission to a night- penses to your customer or client. (See
club,Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits, you chapter 5.)
can deduct 80% of your business-related meal • Rent paid for a room in which you hold a In this case, your client or customer is subjectand entertainment expenses. See Individuals dinner or cocktail party, and to the 50% limit on the expenses.subject to ªhours of serviceº limits, later.)
• Amounts paid for parking at a sportsThe 50% limit applies to employees or their Example. You are a self-employed attorneyarena.employers, and to self-employed persons (in- who adequately accounts for meal and enter-cluding independent contractors) or their clients, However, the cost of transportation to and from tainment expenses to a client who reimbursesdepending on whether the expenses are reim- a business meal or a business-related entertain- you for these expenses. You are not subject tobursed. ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit. the directly-related or associated test, nor are  Figure A  summarizes the general rules you subject to the 50% limit. If the client can
explained in this section. Application of 50% limit. The 50% limit on deduct the expenses, the client is subject to the
meal and entertainment expenses applies if theThe 50% limit applies to business meals or 50% limit.
expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-entertainment expenses you have while: If you (the contractor) have expenses for
ered by one of the exceptions discussed later. meals and entertainment related to providing• Traveling away from home (whether eat- The 50% limit also applies to certain meal services for a client but do not adequately ac-ing alone or with others) on business, and entertainment expenses that are not busi- count for and seek reimbursement from the cli-
• Entertaining customers at your place of ness related. It applies to meal and entertain- ent for those expenses, you are subject to the
business, a restaurant, or other location, ment expenses you have for the production of directly-related or associated test and to the
or income, including rental or royalty income. It 50% limit.
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 11

Page 12 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3 - Advertising expenses. You are not sub- A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter- Trade association meetings. You can de-
ject to the 50% limit if you provide meals, enter- duct entertainment expenses that are directlytainment includes the cost of a meal you provide
tainment, or recreational facilities to the general related to and necessary for attending businessto a customer or client, whether the meal is a
public as a means of advertising or promoting meetings or conventions of certain exempt orga-part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal
goodwill in the community. For example, neither nizations if the expenses of your attendance areexpense includes the cost of food, beverages,
the expense of sponsoring a television or radio related to your active trade or business. Thesetaxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter-
show nor the expense of distributing free food organizations include business leagues, cham-tainment-related meal, you or your employee
and beverages to the general public is subject to bers of commerce, real estate boards, trademust be present when the food or beverages are
the 50% limit. associations, and professional associations.provided.
4 - Sale of meals or entertainment. You You cannot claim the cost of your meal Entertainment tickets. Generally, you cannot
are not subject to the 50% limit if you actually both as an entertainment expense and deduct more than the face value of an entertain-
sell meals, entertainment, goods and services, as a travel expense. ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. For
CAUTION
!
or use of facilities to the public. For example, if example, you cannot deduct service fees you
you run a nightclub, your expense for the enter- Meals sold in the normal course of your pay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount
tainment you furnish to your customers, such as business are not considered entertain- over the face value of the tickets you pay to
a floor show, is not subject to the 50% limit. ment. scalpers.
TIP
5 - Charitable sports event. You are not Exception for events that benefit charita-Deduction may depend on your type ofsubject to the 50% limit if you pay for a package ble organizations. Different rules apply whenbusiness. Your kind of business may deter-deal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita- the cost of a ticket to a sports event benefits amine if a particular activity is considered enter-ble sports event. For the conditions the sports charitable organization. You can take into ac-tainment. For example, if you are a dressevent must meet, see Exception for events that count the full cost you pay for the ticket, even if itdesigner and have a fashion show to introducebenefit charitable organizations under What En- is more than the face value, if all of the followingyour new designs to store buyers, the showtertainment Expenses Are Deductible?, later. conditions apply.generally is not considered entertainment. This
is because fashion shows are typical in your • The event's main purpose is to benefit aIndividuals subject to ªhours of serviceº lim-
business. But, if you are an appliance distributor qualified charitable organization.its. You can deduct a higher percentage of
and hold a fashion show for the spouses of youryour meal expenses while traveling away from • The entire net proceeds go to the charity.retailers, the show generally is considered en-your tax home if the meals take place during or
tertainment. • The event uses volunteers to perform sub-incident to any period subject to the Department
stantially all the event's work.of Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits. The
Separating costs. If you have one expensepercentage is 80%.
that includes the costs of entertainment andIndividuals subject to the Department of The 50% limit on entertainment doesother services (such as lodging or transporta-Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits include not apply to any expense for a packagetion), you must allocate that expense betweenthe following persons. deal that includes a ticket to such a
TIPthe cost of entertainment and the cost of other
charitable sports event.• Certain air transportation workers (such as services. You must have a reasonable basis for
pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and making this allocation. For example, you must
control tower operators) who are under Example 1. You purchase tickets to a golfallocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-
Federal Aviation Administration regula- tournament organized by the local volunteer firetainment in its lounge on the same bill with your
tions. company. All net proceeds will be used to buyroom charge.
new fire equipment. The volunteers will run the• Interstate truck operators and bus drivers Taking turns paying for meals or entertain- tournament. You can deduct the entire cost ofwho are under Department of Transporta- ment. If a group of business acquaintances the tickets as a business expense if they other-tion regulations. take turns picking up each others' meal or enter- wise qualify as an entertainment expense.
• Certain railroad employees (such as engi- tainment checks without regard to whether any
neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- Example 2.  You purchase tickets to a col-business purposes are served, no member of
ers, and control operations personnel) lege football game through a ticket broker. Afterthe group can deduct any part of the expense.
who are under Federal Railroad Adminis- having a business discussion, you take a client
Lavish or extravagant expenses. You can-tration regulations. to the game. Net proceeds from the game go to
not deduct expenses for entertainment that are colleges that qualify as charitable organizations.• Certain merchant mariners who are under lavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid- However, since the colleges also pay individualsCoast Guard regulations. ered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable to perform services, such as coaching and
considering the facts and circumstances. Ex- recruiting, you can only use the face value of the
penses will not be disallowed just because they tickets in determining your business deduction.
are more than a fixed dollar amount or take
Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes. Ifplace at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs,What Entertainment you rent a skybox or other private luxury box foror resorts.
more than one event at the same sports arena,Expenses
Allocating between business and nonbusi- you generally cannot deduct more than the price
ness. If you entertain business and nonbusi- of a nonluxury box seat ticket.Are Deductible?
ness individuals at the same event, you must To determine whether a skybox has been
divide your entertainment expenses between rented for more than one event, count eachThis section explains different types of entertain-
business and nonbusiness. You can deduct only game or other performance as one event. Forment expenses you may be able to deduct.
the business part. If you cannot establish the example, renting a skybox for a series of playoff
Entertainment. Entertainment includes any part of the expense for each person participat- games is considered renting it for more than one
activity generally considered to provide enter- ing, allocate the expense to each participant on event. All skyboxes you rent in the same arena,
tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples a pro rata basis. along with any rentals by related parties, are
include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so- considered in making this determination.
Example. You entertain a group of individu-cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at Related parties include:
als that includes yourself, three business pros-sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish- • Family members (spouses, ancestors, andpects, and seven social guests. Only 4/11 of theing, vacation, and similar trips. lineal descendants),expense qualifies as a business entertainmentEntertainment also may include meeting per-
expense. You cannot deduct the expenses forsonal, living, or family needs of individuals, such • Parties who have made a reciprocal ar-
the seven social guests because those costs areas providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to rangement involving the sharing of
nonbusiness expenses.customers or their families. skyboxes,
Page 12 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 13 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Related corporations, An entertainment facility is any property you company that is intended for the eventual per-
own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples sonal use or benefit of a particular person or a• A partnership and its principal partners, include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, limited class of people will be considered anand swimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, indirect gift to that particular person or to the
airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a individuals within that class of people who re-• A corporation and a partnership with com-
vacation resort. ceive the gift.mon ownership.
If you give a gift to a member of a customer'sOut-of-pocket expenses. You can deduct family, the gift is generally considered to be anExample. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seat out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and indirect gift to the customer. This rule does notskybox at Team Stadium for three baseball beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-you provided during entertainment at a facility.games. The cost of regular nonluxury box seats ness connection with that family member andThese are not expenses for the use of an enter-at each event is $30 a seat. You can deduct the gift is not intended for the customer's even-tainment facility. However, these expenses are(subject to the 50% limit) $900 ((10 seats ×  $30 tual use.subject to the directly-related and associatedeach) ×  3 events). If you and your spouse both give gifts, both oftests and to the 50% limit, all discussed earlier. you are treated as one taxpayer. It does notFood and beverages in skybox seats. If
matter whether you have separate businesses,Expenses for spouses. You generally cannotexpenses for food and beverages are separately
are separately employed, or whether each ofdeduct the cost of entertainment for your spousestated, you can deduct these expenses in addi-
you has an independent connection with theor for the spouse of a customer. However, yoution to the amounts allowable for the skybox,
recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-can deduct these costs if you can show you hadsubject to the requirements and limits that apply.
ship and the partners are treated as one tax-a clear business purpose, rather than a personalThe amounts separately stated for food and
payer.or social purpose, for providing the entertain-beverages must be reasonable. You cannot in-
ment.flate the charges for food and beverages to
Example. Bob Jones sells products to Localavoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals.
Company. He and his wife, Jan, gave LocalExample. You entertain a customer. The
Company three cheese packages to thank themcost is an ordinary and necessary business ex-
for their business. They paid $80 for each pack-pense and is allowed under the entertainment
age, or $240 total. Three of Local Company'srules. The customer's spouse joins you becauseWhat Entertainment executives took the packages home for theirit is impractical to entertain the customer without
families' use. Bob and Jan have no independentthe spouse. You can deduct the cost of enter-Expenses Are Not business relationship with any of the executives'taining the customer's spouse. If your spouse
other family members. They can deduct a totaljoins the party because the customer's spouseDeductible? of $75 ($25 limit ×  3) for the cheese packages.is present, the cost of the entertainment for your
spouse is also deductible.This section explains different types of entertain- Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as
ment expenses you generally may not be able to Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,
deduct. considered either a gift or entertainment gener- and mailing, are generally not included in deter-
ally will be considered entertainment. However, mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25
if you give a customer packaged food or bever-Club dues and membership fees. You can- limit.
ages that you intend the customer to use at a A cost is incidental only if it does not addnot deduct dues (including initiation fees) for
later date, treat it as a gift. substantial value to the gift. For example, themembership in any club organized for:
If you give a customer tickets to a theater cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-• Business, performance or sporting event and you do not go ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for
with the customer to the performance or event, packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the• Pleasure,
you have a choice. You can treat the tickets as value of the basket is substantial compared to• Recreation, or either a gift or entertainment, whichever is to the value of the fruit.
your advantage.• Other social purpose. Exceptions. The following items are not con-You can change your treatment of the ticketsThis rule applies to any membership organiza- sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. at a later date by filing an amended return.tion if one of its principal purposes is either: Generally, an amended return must be filed 1. An item that costs $4 or less and:
within 3 years from the date the original return• To conduct entertainment activities for
was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxmembers or their guests, or a. Has your name clearly and permanently
was paid, whichever is later. imprinted on the gift, and• To provide members or their guests with If you go with the customer to the event, youaccess to entertainment facilities, dis- b. Is one of a number of identical itemsmust treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain- you widely distribute. Examples includecussed later. ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case, pens, desk sets, and plastic bags andto treat the tickets as a gift.The purposes and activities of a club, not its cases.
name, will determine whether or not you can
2. Signs, display racks, or other promotionaldeduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid
material to be used on the business prem-to:
ises of the recipient.• Country clubs,
• Golf and athletic clubs, Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be3. considered either a gift or entertainment gener-• Airline clubs, ally will be considered entertainment. However,
• Hotel clubs, and if you give a customer packaged food or bever-
ages you intend the customer to use at a laterGifts• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir- date, treat it as a gift.cumstances generally considered to be If you give a customer tickets to a theaterIf you give gifts in the course of your trade orconducive to business discussions. performance or sporting event and you do not gobusiness, you can deduct all or part of the cost. with the customer to the performance or event,This chapter explains the limits and rules forEntertainment facilities. Generally, you can- you have a choice. You can treat the cost of thededucting the costs of gifts.not deduct any expense for the use of an enter- tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-
tainment facility. This includes expenses for $25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25 ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.
depreciation and operating costs such as rent, for business gifts you give directly or indirectly to You can change your treatment of the tickets
utilities, maintenance, and protection. each person during your tax year. A gift to a at a later date by filing an amended return.
Chapter 3 Gifts Page 13

Page 14 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
use your car while traveling away from home
overnight, use the rules in this chapter to figure
your car expense deduction. See Car Expenses,
later.
Illustration of transportation expenses.
Figure B illustrates the rules that apply for de-
ducting transportation expenses when you have
a regular or main job away from your home. You
may want to refer to it when deciding whether
you can deduct your transportation expenses.
Temporary work location. If you have one or
more regular work locations away from your
home and you commute to a temporary work
location in the same trade or business, you can
deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last (and does in fact
last) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo-
rary unless there are facts and circumstances
that would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last for more than 1 year
or if there is no realistic expectation that the
employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
ployment is not temporary, regardless of
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.
If employment at a work location initially is
realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,
but at some later date the employment is realisti-
cally expected to last more than 1 year, that
employment will be treated as temporary (un-
less there are facts and circumstances that
would indicate otherwise) until your expectation
changes. It will not be treated as temporary after
the date you determine it will last more than 1
year.
If the temporary work location is beyond the
general area of your regular place of work and
you stay overnight, you are traveling away from
home. You may have deductible travel ex-
penses as discussed in chapter 1.
No regular place of work. If you have no
regular place of work but ordinarily work in the
metropolitan area where you live, you can de-
duct daily transportation costs between home
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home.)
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. If you do not go directly from your first job to your second
job, you can only deduct the transportation expenses of going directly from your first
job to your second job. You cannot deduct your transportation expenses between
your home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
and a temporary work site outside that metropol-
itan area.
Generally, an amended return must be filed transportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the Generally, a metropolitan area includes the
within 3 years from the date the original return cost of driving and maintaining your car. area within the city limits and the suburbs that
was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax Transportation expenses include the ordi- are considered part of that metropolitan area.
was paid, whichever is later. You cannot deduct daily transportation costsnary and necessary costs of all of the following.
 If you go with the customer to the event, you between your home and temporary work sites• Getting from one workplace to another inmust treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain- within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-the course of your business or professionment expense. You cannot choose, in this case, ductible commuting expenses.when you are traveling within the city orto treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.
Two places of work. If you work at two placesgeneral area that is your tax home. Tax
in one day, whether or not for the same em-home is defined in chapter 1.
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting
• Visiting clients or customers. from one workplace to the other. However, if for
some personal reason you do not go directly• Going to a business meeting away from
from one location to the other, you cannot de-your regular workplace.
duct more than the amount it would have cost4. • Getting from your home to a temporary you to go directly from the first location to the
workplace when you have one or more second.
regular places of work. These temporary Transportation expenses you have in going
workplaces can be either within the area between home and a part-time job on a day offTransportation
of your tax home or outside that area. from your main job are commuting expenses.
You cannot deduct them.Transportation expenses do not include ex-This chapter discusses expenses you can de-
penses you have while traveling away fromduct for business transportation when you are Armed Forces reservists. A meeting of an
home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-not traveling away from home  as defined in Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of
penses discussed in chapter 1. However, if youchapter 1. These expenses include the cost of business if the meeting is held on a day on which
Page 14 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 15 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you work at your regular job. You can deduct the any additional costs you have for hauling tools or You may be entitled to a tax credit for
expense of getting from one workplace to the an alternative motor vehicle you placeinstruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow
other as just discussed under Two places of in service during the year. The vehiclewith your car).
TIP
work. must meet certain requirements, and you do notUnion members' trips from a union hall. If have to use it in your business to qualify for theYou usually cannot deduct the expense if the you get your work assignments at a union hall credit. However, you must reduce your basis forreserve meeting is held on a day on which you and then go to your place of work, the costs of depreciation of the alternative motor vehicle bydo not work at your regular job. In this case, your getting from the union hall to your place of work the amount of the credit you claim. See Depreci-transportation generally is a nondeductible com- are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al- ation Deduction , later, under Actual Car Ex-muting expense. However, you can deduct your though you need the union to get your work penses.transportation expenses if the location of the assignments, you are employed where you  For more information on alternative motor vehi-meeting is temporary and you have one or more work, not where the union hall is located. cles, see Form 8910, Alternative Motor Vehicleregular places of work.
Credit.If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol- Office in the home. If you have an office initan area but not at any specific location and the your home that qualifies as a principal place of Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mailreserve meeting is held at a temporary location business, you can deduct your daily transporta- carrier, you may be able to treat the qualifiedoutside that metropolitan area, you can deduct tion costs between your home and another work reimbursement you received as your allowableyour transportation expenses. location in the same trade or business. (See expense. Because the qualified reimbursementIf you travel away from home overnight to Publication 587, Business Use of Your Home, is treated as paid under an accountable plan,attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can for information on determining if your home of- your employer should not include the reimburse-deduct your travel expenses. These expenses fice qualifies as a principal place of business.) ment in your income.are discussed in chapter 1. If your vehicle expenses are more than theIf you travel more than 100 miles away from Examples of deductible transportation. The amount of your reimbursement, you can deducthome in connection with your performance of following examples show when you can deduct the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-services as a member of the reserves, you may transportation expenses based on the location duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You mustbe able to deduct some of your reserve-related of your work and your home. complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Formtravel costs as an adjustment to gross income 1040, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.rather than as an itemized deduction. For more Example 1. You regularly work in an office A ªqualified reimbursementº is the reim-information, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav- in the city where you live. Your employer sends bursement you receive that meets both of theeling More Than 100 Miles From Home  under you to a 1-week training session at a different following conditions.Special Rules, in chapter 6. office in the same city. You travel directly from • It is given as an equipment maintenanceyour home to the training location and returnCommuting expenses. You cannot deduct allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.each day. You can deduct the cost of your dailythe costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, Postal Service.round-trip transportation between your homeor of driving a car between your home and your and the training location. • It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-main or regular place of work. These costs are lective bargaining agreement. Any laterpersonal commuting expenses. You cannot de- Example 2. Your principal place of business agreement cannot increase the qualifiedduct commuting expenses no matter how far is in your home. You can deduct the cost of reimbursement amount by more than theyour home is from your regular place of work. round-trip transportation between your qualify- rate of inflation.You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if ing home office and your client's or customer'syou work during the commuting trip. See your employer for information on your reim-place of business. bursement.
Example. You sometimes use your cell Example 3. You have no regular office, andphone to make business calls while commuting If you are a rural mail carrier and re-you do not have an office in your home. In thisto and from work. Sometimes business associ- ceived a qualified reimbursement, youcase, the location of your first business contactates ride with you to and from work, and you cannot use the standard mileage rate.
CAUTION
!is considered your office. Transportation ex-have a business discussion in the car. These penses between your home and this first contactactivities do not change the trip from personal to are nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans- Standard Mileage Ratebusiness. You cannot deduct your commuting portation expenses between your last businessexpenses. contact and your home are also nondeductible You may be able to use the standard mileage
Parking fees. Fees you pay to park your car commuting expenses. Although you cannot de- rate to figure the deductible costs of operating
at your place of business are nondeductible duct the costs of these trips, you can deduct the your car for business purposes. For 2010, the
commuting expenses. You can, however, de- costs of going from one client or customer to standard mileage rate for the cost of operating
duct business-related parking fees when visiting another. your car for business use is 50 cents per mile.
a customer or client.
If you use the standard mileage rate for
Advertising display on car. Putting display a year, you cannot deduct your actual
material that advertises your business on your car expenses for that year. You cannot
CAUTION
!Car Expensescar does not change the use of your car from deduct depreciation, lease payments, mainte-
personal use to business use. If you use this car nance and repairs, gasoline (including gasolineIf you use your car for business purposes, youfor commuting or other personal uses, you still taxes), oil, insurance, or vehicle registrationordinarily can deduct car expenses. You gener-cannot deduct your expenses for those uses. fees. See Choosing the standard mileage rateally can use one of the two following methods to and Standard mileage rate not allowed, later.Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of figure your deductible expenses. You generally can use the standard mileageusing your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not
• Standard mileage rate. rate whether or not you are reimbursed andinclude payments you receive from the passen-
whether or not any reimbursement is more orgers in your income. These payments are con- • Actual car expenses. less than the amount figured using the standardsidered reimbursements of your expenses.
mileage rate. See chapter 6 for more informationHowever, if you operate a car pool for a profit, If you use actual expenses to figure your de- on reimbursements.you must include payments from passengers in duction for a car you lease, there are rules that
your income. You can then deduct your car affect the amount of your lease payments you Choosing the standard mileage rate. If youexpenses (using the rules in this publication). can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later. want to use the standard mileage rate for a car
In this publication, ªcarº includes a van,Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling you own, you must choose to use it in the first
pickup, or panel truck. For the definition of ªcarºtools or instruments in your car while commuting year the car is available for use in your business.
for depreciation purposes, see Car definedto and from work does not make your car ex- Then in later years, you can choose to use either
under Actual Car Expenses, later.penses deductible. However, you can deduct the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 15

Page 16 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you want to use the standard mileage rate Example 2. Tony and his employees use Actual Car Expenses
for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire his four pickup trucks in his landscaping busi-
lease period. For leases that began on or before ness. During the year, he traded in two of his old If you do not use the standard mileage rate, you
December 31, 1997, the standard mileage rate may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.trucks for two newer ones. Tony can use the
must be used for the entire portion of the lease standard mileage rate for the business mileage If you qualify to use both methods, youperiod (including renewals) that is after 1997. of all six of the trucks he owned during the year. may want to figure your deduction bothYou must make the choice to use the stan- ways to see which gives you a larger
TIPExample 3. Chris owns a repair shop anddard mileage rate by the due date (including deduction.an insurance business. He and his employeesextensions) of your return. You cannot revoke Actual car expenses include:use his two pickup trucks and van for the repairthe choice. However, in later years, you can
switch from the standard mileage rate to the shop. Chris alternates using his two cars for the Depreciation Lease Registration actual expenses method. If you change to the insurance business. No one else uses the cars Licenses payments fees
actual expenses method in a later year, but for business purposes. Chris can use the stan- Gas Insurance Repairs
before your car is fully depreciated, you have to dard mileage rate for the business use of the Oil Garage rent Tires
estimate the remaining useful life of the car and Tolls Parking feespickup trucks, van, and the cars because he
use straight line depreciation. never has more than four vehicles used for busi- If you have fully depreciated a car that you
ness at the same time. still use in your business, you can continue toExample. Larry is an employee who occa- claim your other actual car expenses. Continuesionally uses his own car for business purposes. Example 4. Maureen owns a car and four to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5.He purchased the car in 2008, but he did not vans that are used in her housecleaning busi-
claim any unreimbursed employee expenses on ness. Her employees use the vans, and she Business and personal use. If you use yourhis 2008 tax return. Because Larry did not use uses the car to travel to various customers. car for both business and personal purposes,the standard mileage rate the first year the car Maureen cannot use the standard mileage rate you must divide your expenses between busi-was available for business use, he cannot use for the car or the vans. This is because all five ness and personal use. You can divide yourthe standard mileage rate in 2010 to claim un- vehicles are used in Maureen's business at the expense based on the miles driven for eachreimbursed employee business expenses. purpose.same time. She must use actual expenses for all
For more information about depreciation in- vehicles.
cluded in the standard mileage rate, see Excep- Example. You are a sales representative
tion under Methods of depreciation  under for a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000Interest. If you are an employee, you cannotDepreciation Deduction, later. miles during the year: 12,000 miles for businessdeduct any interest paid on a car loan. This
and 8,000 miles for personal use. You can claimapplies even if you use the car 100% for busi-Standard mileage rate not allowed. You only 60% (12,000 ÷  20,000) of the cost of oper-ness as an employee.cannot use the standard mileage rate if you: ating your car as a business expense.However, if you are self-employed and use
• Use the car for hire (such as a taxi), your car in your business, you can deduct that Employer-provided vehicle. If you use a ve-part of the interest expense that represents your• Use five or more cars at the same time (as hicle provided by your employer for business
business use of the car. For example, if you usein fleet operations), purposes, you can deduct your actual un-
your car 60% for business, you can deduct 60% reimbursed car expenses. You cannot use the• Claimed a depreciation deduction for the of the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). You standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided bycar using any method other than straight cannot deduct the part of the interest expense Your Employer in chapter 6.line, for example, MACRS (as discussed that represents your personal use of the car.later under Depreciation Deduction), Interest on car loans. If you are an employee,If you use a home equity loan to you cannot deduct any interest paid on a car• Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis- purchase your car, you may be able to loan. This interest is treated as personal interestcussed later) on the car, deduct the interest. See Publication
TIP and is not deductible. If you are self-employed936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, for• Claimed the special depreciation allow- and use your car in that business, see Interest,more information.ance on the car, earlier, under Standard Mileage Rate.
• Claimed actual car expenses after 1997
Personal property taxes. If you itemize your Taxes paid on your car. If you are an em-for a car you leased, or
ployee, you can deduct personal property taxesdeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can• Are a rural mail carrier who received a paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enterdeduct on line 8 state and local personal prop-qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mail the amount paid on line 8 of Schedule A (Formerty taxes on motor vehicles. You can take thiscarriers, earlier.) 1040).deduction even if you use the standard mileage
rate or if you do not use the car for business. Sales taxes. Generally, sales taxes on yourFive or more cars. If you own or lease five If you are self-employed and use your car in car are part of your car's basis and are recov-or more cars that are used for business at the
your business, you can deduct the business part ered through depreciation, discussed later.same time, you cannot use the standard mile-
of state and local personal property taxes onage rate for the business use of any car. How-
Fines and collateral. You cannot deduct finesmotor vehicles on Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ,ever, you may be able to deduct your actual
you pay or collateral you forfeit for traffic viola-or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize yourexpenses for operating each of the cars in your
tions.deductions, you can include the remainder ofbusiness. See Actual Car Expenses , later, for
your state and local personal property taxes oninformation on how to figure your deduction. Casualty and theft losses. If your car is dam-the car on Schedule A (Form 1040).You are not using five or more cars for busi- aged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able toness at the same time if you alternate using (use deduct part of the loss not covered by insurance.Parking fees and tolls. In addition to usingat different times) the cars for business. See Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, andthe standard mileage rate, you can deduct anyThe following examples illustrate the rules Thefts, for information on deducting a loss onbusiness-related parking fees and tolls. (Parkingfor when you can and cannot use the standard your car.fees you pay to park your car at your place ofmileage rate for five or more cars.
work are nondeductible commuting expenses.) Depreciation and section 179 deductions.
Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and
Sale, trade-in, or other disposition. If youthree cars and two vans that she alternates improvements, is a capital expense. Because
sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car,using for calling on her customers. She can use the benefits last longer than 1 year, you gener-
you may have a gain or loss on the transactionthe standard mileage rate for the business mile- ally cannot deduct a capital expense. However,
or an adjustment to the basis of your new car.age of the three cars and the two vans because you can recover this cost through the section
she does not use them at the same time. See Disposition of a Car, later. 179 deduction (the deduction allowed by section
Page 16 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 17 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Limit for sport utility and certain other ve-179 of the Internal Revenue Code), special de- ready and available for a specific use, whether in
hicles. For sport utility and certain other vehi-preciation allowance, and depreciation deduc- a trade or business, a tax-exempt activity, a
cles placed in service in 2010, the portion of thetions. Depreciation allows you to recover the personal activity, or for the production of in-
vehicle's cost taken into account in figuring yourcost over more than 1 year by deducting part of it come. Even if you are not using the property, it is
section 179 deduction is limited to $25,000. Thiseach year. The section 179 deduction , special in service when it is ready and available for its
rule applies to any four-wheeled vehicle prima-depreciation allowance , and depreciation de- specific use.
rily designed or used to carry passengers overductions are discussed later. A car first used for personal purposes cannot
public streets, roads, or highways, that is notGenerally, there are limits on these deduc- qualify for the deduction in a later year when its
subject to any of the passenger automobile lim-tions. Special rules apply if you use your car use changes to business.
its explained under Depreciation Limits , later,50% or less in your work or business.
Example. In 2009 you bought a new car and and that is rated at no more than 14,000 poundsYou can claim a section 179 deduction and
used it for personal purposes. In 2010, you be- gross vehicle weight. However, the $25,000 limituse a depreciation method other than straight
gan to use it for business. Changing its use to does not apply to any vehicle:line only if you do not use the standard mileage
business use does not qualify the cost of yourrate to figure your business-related car ex- • Designed to have a seating capacity ofcar for a section 179 deduction in 2010. How-penses in the year you first place a car in serv- more than nine persons behind theever, you can claim a depreciation deduction forice. driver's seat,the business use of the car starting in 2010. SeeIf you claim either a section 179 deduction or
• Equipped with a cargo area of at least 6Depreciation Deduction, later.use a depreciation method other than straight
feet in interior length that is an open arealine in the year you first place a car in service,
More than 50% business use requirement. or is designed for use as an open area butyou cannot use the standard mileage rate on
You must use the property more than 50% for is enclosed by a cap and is not readilythat car in any future year.
business to claim any section 179 deduction. If accessible directly from the passenger
Car defined. For depreciation purposes, a car you used the property more than 50% for busi- compartment, or
is any four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck or ness, multiply the cost of the property by the • That has an integral enclosure, fully en-van) made primarily for use on public streets, percentage of business use. The result is the closing the driver compartment and loadroads, and highways. Its unloaded gross vehicle cost of the property that can qualify for the sec- carrying device, does not have seatingweight must not be more than 6,000 pounds. A tion 179 deduction. rearward of the driver's seat, and has nocar includes any part, component, or other item
body section protruding more than 30 in-physically attached to it or usually included in the Example. Peter purchased a car in April
ches ahead of the leading edge of thepurchase price. 2010 for $19,500 and used it 60% for business.
windshield.A car does not include: The total cost of Peter's car that qualifies for the
section 179 deduction is $11,700 ($19,500 cost• An ambulance, hearse, or combination Limit on total section 179, special depreci-×  60% business use). But see Limit on totalambulance-hearse used directly in a busi- ation allowance, and depreciation deduc-section 179, special depreciation allowance,ness, tion. Generally, the total amount of sectionand depreciation deduction, discussed later. 179, special depreciation allowance, and depre-• A vehicle used directly in the business of ciation deduction you can claim for a qualifiedLimits. There are limits on:transporting persons or property for pay or car you placed in service in 2010 is $11,060.hire, or • The amount of the section 179 deduction, The limit is reduced if your business use of the
• A truck or van that is a qualified nonper- car is less than 100%. See Depreciation Limits,• The section 179 deduction for sport utilitysonal use vehicle. later, for more information.and certain other vehicles, and
Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles. • The total amount of the section 179 de- Example. In the earlier example  under
These are vehicles that by their nature are not duction, special depreciation allowance, More than 50% business use requirement, Peter
likely to be used more than a minimal amount for and depreciation deduction (discussed had a car with a qualifying cost (for purposes of
personal purposes. They include trucks and later) you can claim for a qualified prop- the section 179 deduction) of $11,700. How-
vans that have been specially modified so that erty. ever, Peter's total section 179, special deprecia-
they are not likely to be used more than a mini- tion allowance, and depreciation deduction is
Limit on the amount of the section 179mal amount for personal purposes, such as by limited to $6,636 ($11,060 limit x 60% business
deduction. For 2010, the total amount youinstallation of permanent shelving and painting use).
can choose to deduct under section 179 gener-the vehicle to display advertising or the com-
Cost of car. For purposes of the section 179ally cannot be more than $500,000.pany's name. Delivery trucks with seating only
deduction, the cost of the car does not includeIf the cost of your qualifying section 179for the driver, or only for the driver plus a folding
any amount figured by reference to any otherproperty placed in service in 2010 is overjump seat, are qualified nonpersonal use vehi-
property held by you at any time. For example, if$2,000,000, you must reduce the $500,000 dol-cles.
you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car tolar limit (but not below zero) by the amount ofMore information. See Depreciation De- use in your business, your cost for purposes ofcost over $2,000,000. If the cost of your sectionduction, later, for more information on how to the section 179 deduction does not include your179 property placed in service during 2010 isdepreciate your vehicle. adjusted basis in the car you trade in for the new$2,500,000 or more, you cannot take a section
car. Your cost includes only the cash you paid.179 deduction.
The total amount you can deduct under sec- Basis of car for depreciation. The amountSection 179 Deduction tion 179 each year after you apply the limits of the section 179 deduction reduces your basislisted above cannot be more than the taxableThe section 179 deduction allows you to treat a in your car. If you choose the section 179 deduc-income from the active conduct of any trade orportion or all of the business cost of a car as a tion, you must subtract the amount of the deduc-business during the year.current expense instead of taking depreciation tion from the cost of your car. The resultingIf you are married and file a joint return, youdeductions over a number of years. amount is the basis in your car you use to figureand your spouse are treated as one taxpayer in your depreciation deduction.There is a limit on the total section 179 determining any reduction to the dollar limit,
deduction, special depreciation allow- regardless of which of you purchased the prop- When to choose. If you want to take the sec-ance, and depreciation deduction for
TIP erty or placed it in service. tion 179 deduction, you must make the choice incars, trucks, and vans that may reduce or elimi- If you and your spouse file separate returns, the tax year you both purchase the car and placenate any benefit from claiming the section 179 you are treated as one taxpayer for the dollar it in service for business or work.deduction. See Depreciation Limits, later. limit. You must allocate the dollar limit (after any
You can claim the section 179 deduction reduction) between you. How to choose. Employees use Form 2106 to
only in the year you place the car in service. For For more information on the above section make this choice and report the section 179
this purpose, a car is placed in service when it is 179 deduction limits, see Publication 946. deduction. All others use Form 4562.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 17

Page 18 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
File the appropriate form with either of the 50% bonus and 100% bonus depreciation rules, each year as a recovery of your cost or other
following. will be available on www.irs.gov/pub463 later in basis in your car.
the filing season. You generally need to know the following• Your original tax return filed for the year things about the car you intend to depreciate.Your combined section 179 deduction, spe-the property was placed in service cial depreciation allowance, and regular(whether or not you file it timely). • Your basis in the car.MACRS depreciation deduction is limited to the
• An amended return filed within the time • The date you place the car in service.maximum allowable depreciation deduction for
prescribed by law. An election made on an cars of $11,060 ($3,060 if you elect not to claim • The method of depreciation and recoveryamended return must specify the item of the special depreciation allowance). For trucks period you will use.section 179 property to which the election and vans the first-year limit has increased to
applies and the part of the cost of each $11,160 ($3,160 if you elect not to claim the
Basis. Your basis in a car for figuring depreci-such item to be taken into account. The special depreciation allowance). See Deprecia-
ation is generally its cost. This includes anyamended return must also include any re- tion Limits, later in this chapter.
amount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-sulting adjustments to taxable income.
erty, or services.Qualified car. To be a qualified car (including Generally, you figure depreciation on yourtrucks and vans), the car must meet all of theYou must keep records that show the car, truck, or van using your unadjusted basisfollowing tests.specific identification of each piece of (see Unadjusted basis, later). However, in somequalifying section 179 property. These
CAUTION
! • You purchased the car new on or after situations you will use your adjusted basis (yourrecords must show how you acquired the prop- January 1, 2008, but only if no binding basis reduced by depreciation allowed or allow-erty, the person you acquired it from, and when written contract to acquire the car existed able in earlier years). For one of these situationsyou placed it in service. before January 1, 2008, see Exception under Methods of depreciation,
later.Revoking an election. An election (or any • You placed the car in service in your trade If you change the use of a car from personalspecification made in the election) to take a or business before January 1, 2013, to business, your basis for depreciation is thesection 179 deduction for 2010 can only be • You used the car more than 50% in a lesser of the fair market value or your adjustedrevoked with the Commissioner's approval. qualified business use. basis in the car on the date of conversion. Addi-
Recapture of section 179 deduction. To be tional rules concerning basis are discussed later
eligible to claim the section 179 deduction, you in this chapter under Unadjusted basis.Example. Dan purchased a new car formust use your car more than 50% for business $23,500 in June 2010, and used it 100% in his Placed in service. You generally place a caror work in the year you acquired it. If your busi- business. The car is qualified property. Dan's in service when it is available for use in yourness use of the car is 50% or less in a later tax unadjusted basis is $23,500. Dan chooses not work or business, in an income-producing activ-year during the recovery period, you have to to claim any section 179 deduction but he does ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation beginsrecapture (include in income) in that later year choose to claim the special depreciation allow- when the car is placed in service for use in yourany excess depreciation. Any section 179 de- ance. Dan figures his special allowance to be work or business or for the production of income.duction claimed on the car is included in calcu- $11,750 ($23,500 x 50%). For purposes of computing depreciation, iflating the excess depreciation. For information Dan chooses the MACRS 200% declining you first start using the car only for personal useon this calculation, see Excess depreciation , balance method and figures his regular depreci- and later convert it to business use, you placelater in this chapter under Car Used 50% or Less ation deduction under MACRS (discussed later) the car in service on the date of conversion.for Business. to be $2,350 (($23,500 − $11,750) x 20%). The
Car placed in service and disposed of intotal section 179, special depreciation allow-Dispositions. If you dispose of a car on which
the same year. If you place a car in serviceance, and MACRS depreciation deduction isyou had claimed the section 179 deduction, the
and dispose of it in the same tax year, you$14,100 ($11,750 + $2,350). However, Dan'samount of that deduction is treated as a depreci-
cannot claim any depreciation deduction for thatdepreciation deduction is limited to $11,060.ation deduction for recapture purposes. You
car.Therefore, Dan reports $11,060 as depreciationtreat any gain on the disposition of the property
for his car in 2010. See Depreciation Limits ,as ordinary income up to the amount of the Methods of depreciation. Generally, you fig-later.section 179 deduction and any allowable depre- ure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac-ciation (unless you establish the amount actually celerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS).allowed). For information on the disposition of a Election not to claim the special depreciation MACRS is discussed later in this chapter.car, see Disposition of a Car, later. allowance. You can elect not to claim the spe-
Exception. If you used the standard mile-cial depreciation allowance for your car, truck, or
age rate in the first year of business use andvan, that is qualified property. If you make this
change to the actual expenses method in a laterSpecial Depreciation Allowance election, it applies to all 5-year property placed
year, you cannot depreciate your car under thein service during the year.
You may be able to claim the special deprecia- MACRS rules. You must use straight line depre-To make the election, attach a statement totion allowance for your car, truck, or van, if it is ciation over the estimated remaining useful lifeyour timely filed return (including extensions)qualified property and was placed in service in of the car.indicating the class of property (5-year for cars)2010. For vehicles purchased before Septem- To figure depreciation under the straight linefor which you are making the election and thatber 9, 2010, the allowance is an additional de- method, you must reduce your basis in the caryou are electing not to claim the special depreci-preciation deduction of 50% of the car's (but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for allation allowance for qualified property acquireddepreciable basis (after any section 179 deduc- miles for which you used the standard mileageafter December 31, 2008.tion, but before figuring your regular deprecia- rate. The rate per mile varies depending on the
Unless you elect not to claim the spe-tion deduction under MACRS). If you purchased year(s) you used the standard mileage rate. For
cial depreciation allowance, you mustthe vehicle after September 8, 2010, and placed the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustment
reduce the car's adjusted basis by theit in service before January 1, 2012, the addi-
CAUTION
! when you used the standard mileage rate under
amount of the allowance, even if the allowancetional depreciation allowance increases to 100% Disposition of a Car, later.
was not claimed.of depreciable basis. The special depreciation This reduction of basis is in addition to those
allowance applies only for the first year the car is basis adjustments described later under Unad-
placed in service. To qualify for the allowance justed basis. You must use your adjusted basis
more than 50% of the use of the car must be in a Depreciation Deduction in your car to figure your depreciation deduction.
qualified business use (as defined under Depre- For additional information on the straight line
If you use actual car expenses to figure yourciation Deduction, later. method of depreciation, see Publication 946.
deduction for a car you own and use in your
business, you can claim a depreciation deduc-Note. Additional information with respect to More-than-50%-use test. Generally, you
tion: that is, you can deduct a certain amountPublication 463, including the application of the must use your car more than 50% for qualified
Page 18 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 19 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business use (defined next) during the year to for that period. Your business use for the year is depreciation deduction for the new car be-
use MACRS. You must meet this ginning with the date you placed it in serv-40% (80% ×  6/12).
more-than-50%-use test each year of the recov- ice. You make this election by completing
ery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car. Form 2106, Part II, Section D. This methodLimits. The amount you can claim for section
If your business use is 50% or less, you must is explained later, beginning at Effect of179, special depreciation allowance, and depre-
use the straight line method to depreciate your trade-in on basis.ciation deductions may be limited. The maxi-
car. This is explained later under Car Used 50% mum amount you can claim depends on the year 2. If you do not make the election describedor Less for Business. in which you placed your car in service. You in (1), you must figure depreciation sepa-have to reduce the maximum amount if you did rately for the remaining basis of the old carQualified business use. A qualified business not use the car exclusively for business. See and for any additional amount you paid foruse is any use in your trade or business. It does Depreciation Limits, later. the new car. You must apply two deprecia-not include use for the production of income
tion limits (see Depreciation Limits, later).(investment use). However, you do combine Unadjusted basis. You use your unadjusted The limit that applies to the remaining ba-your business and investment use to compute basis (often referred to as your basis or your sis of the old car generally is the amountyour depreciation deduction for the tax year. basis for depreciation) to figure your deprecia- that would have been allowed had you notUse of your car by another person. Do not tion using the MACRS depreciation chart, ex- traded in the old car. The limit that appliestreat any use of your car by another person as plained later under Modified Accelerated Cost to the additional amount you paid for theuse in your trade or business unless that use Recovery System (MACRS) . Your unadjusted new car generally is the limit that appliesmeets one of the following conditions. basis for figuring depreciation is your original for the tax year, reduced by the deprecia-
basis increased or decreased by certain tion allowance for the remaining basis of• It is directly connected with your business.
amounts. the old car. You must use Form 4562 to• It is properly reported by you as income to compute your depreciation deduction. YouTo figure your unadjusted basis, begin withthe other person (and, if you have to, you cannot use Form 2106, Part II, Section D.your car's original basis, which generally is itswithhold tax on the income). This method is explained in Publicationcost. Cost includes sales taxes (see Sales taxes
946.earlier), destination charges, and dealer prepa-• It results in a payment of fair market rent.
ration. Increase your basis by any substantialThis includes any payment to you for the If you elect to use the method described inimprovements you make to your car, such asuse of your car. (1), you must do so on a timely filed tax returnadding air conditioning or a new engine. De- (including extensions). Otherwise, you must usecrease your basis by any section 179 deduction, the method described in (2).Business use changes. If you used your car special depreciation allowance, gas guzzler tax,more than 50% in qualified business use in the Effect of trade-in on basis. The discussionclean fuel vehicle deduction, and alternative mo-year you placed it in service, but 50% or less in a that follows applies to trade-ins of cars in 2010,tor vehicle credit.later year (including the year of disposition), you where the election was made to treat the trans-See Form 8910 for information on the alter-have to change to the straight line method of action as a tax-free disposition of the old car andnative motor vehicle credit.depreciation. See Qualified business use 50% the purchase of the new car. For information onor less in a later year  under Car Used 50% or If your business use later falls to 50% how to figure depreciation for cars involved in aLess for Business, later. or less, you may have to recapture like-kind exchange (trade-in) in 2010, for which
(include in your income) any excess the election was not made, see Publication 946
CAUTION
!Property does not cease to be used
depreciation. See Car Used 50% or Less for and Regulations section 1.168(i)-6(d)(3).more than 50% in qualified business
Business, later, for more information.use by reason of a transfer at death.
TIP Traded car used only for business. If youIf you acquired the car by gift or inheritance, trade in a car you used only in your business forsee Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for infor-Use for more than one purpose. If you use another car that will be used only in your busi-mation on your basis in the car.your car for more than one purpose during the ness, your original basis in the new car is your
tax year, you must allocate the use to the vari- adjusted basis in the old car, plus any additionalImprovements. A major improvement to aous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile- amount you pay for the new car.car is treated as a new item of 5-year recoveryage. Figure the percentage of qualified business property. It is treated as placed in service in theuse by dividing the number of miles you drive Example 1. Paul trades in a car that has anyear the improvement is made. It does not mat-your car for business purposes during the year adjusted basis of $5,000 for a new car. In addi-ter how old the car is when the improvement isby the total number of miles you drive the car tion, he pays cash of $20,000 for the new car.added. Follow the same steps for depreciatingduring the year for any purpose. His original basis of the new car is $25,000 (histhe improvement as you would for depreciating
$5,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus thethe original cost of the car. However, you mustChange from personal to business use. If $20,000 cash paid). Paul's unadjusted basis istreat the improvement and the car as a wholeyou change the use of a car from 100% personal $25,000 unless he claims the section 179 de-when applying the limits on the depreciationuse to business use during the tax year, you duction, special depreciation allowance, or hasdeductions. Your car's depreciation deductionmay not have mileage records for the time other increases or decreases to his original ba-for the year (plus any section 179 deduction,before the change to business use. In this case, sis, discussed under Unadjusted basis, earlier.special depreciation allowance, and deprecia-you figure the percentage of business use for
tion on any improvements) cannot be more thanthe year as follows. Example 2. In September 2007, Marcia pur-the depreciation limit that applies for that year.
chased a car for $26,000 and placed it in service1. Determine the percentage of business use See Depreciation Limits, later.
for 100% use in her business. Marcia did notfor the period following the change. Do this
claim a section 179 deduction. Marcia's unad-by dividing business miles by total miles Car trade-in. If you traded one car (the ªold justed basis for the car was $26,000. For 2007driven during that period. carº) in on another car (the ªnew carº) in 2010, through 2009, Marcia figured her depreciationthere are two ways you can treat the transaction.2. Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction. deduction using the MACRS depreciation chart
The numerator (top number) is the number for those years.1. You can elect to treat the transaction as aof months the car is used for business and tax-free disposition of the old car and the In September 2010, Marcia traded that car inthe denominator (bottom number) is 12. purchase of the new car. If you make this and paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be used
election, you treat the old car as disposed 100% in her business. Marcia is allowed
of at the time of the trade-in. The deprecia- one-half of the MACRS depreciation amountExample. You use a car only for personal
ble basis of the new car is the adjusted figured for 2010 for her old car. (See Dispositionpurposes during the first 6 months of the year.
basis of the old car (figured as if 100% of of a Car, later.)During the last 6 months of the year, you drive
the car's use had been for business pur-the car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000 Marcia figures her basis in the new car as
poses) plus any additional amount youmiles are for business. This gives you a busi- follows.
paid for the new car. You then figure yourness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷  15,000)
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 19

Page 20 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cost of old car $26,000 Adjusted basis of old van before through depreciation deductions the cost of
trade-in adjustment $ 8,544Less total depreciation allowed: property used in a trade or business or to pro-
2010Ð($26,000 ×  .1152) ×  1/2 duce income.(Limit: $1,775) $1,498 Trade-in adjustment: The maximum amount you can deduct is2009Ð($26,000 ×  .192) Depreciation at 100% business use: limited, depending on the year you placed your(Limit: $2,850) 2,850 2010Ð($19,500 ×  .1152) ×  1/2
car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later.2008Ð($26,000 ×  .32) (Limit: $1,875) $ 1,123
(Limit: $4,900) 4,900 2009Ð($19,500 ×  .1152) Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars are2007Ð($26,000 ×  .20) (Limit: $1,875) 1,875 classified as 5-year property. You actually de-(Limit: $3,060) 3,060 2008Ð($19,500 ×  .192) preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over aTotal depreciation allowed ±12,308 (Limit: $3,150) 3,150
period of 6 calendar years. This is because your2007Ð($19,500 ×  .32)
car is generally treated as placed in service inAdjusted basis of old car and basis of (Limit: $5,200) 5,200
part of new car that can be treated as the middle of the year, and you claim deprecia-2006Ð($19,500 ×  .20)
newly purchased MACRS property $ 13,692 (Limit: $3,260) 3,260 tion for one-half of both the first year and the
Total $14,608 sixth year.
Additional basis (cash paid) for new Less: Actual depreciation 
Depreciation deduction for certain Indiancar that is treated as newly purchased allowed −10,956
reservation property. Shorter recovery peri-MACRS property +14,200 Excess of 100% over actual $ 3,652
ods are provided under MACRS for qualifiedLess: Lesser of excess amountTotal basis of new car $27,892 Indian reservation property placed in service on($3,652) or adjusted basis Indian reservations after 1993 and before 2012.of old van ($8,544) − 3,652
The recovery that applies for a business-use car
Traded car used partly in business. If you is 3 years instead of 5 years. However, theUnadjusted basis of part of new van 
trade in a car you used partly in your business that can be treated as newly depreciation limits, discussed later, will still ap-
for a new car you will use in your business, you purchased MACRS property $ 4,892 ply.
must make a ªtrade-inº adjustment for the per- For more information on the qualifications forAdditional basis (cash paid) for new sonal use of the old car. This adjustment has the this shorter recovery period and the percent-van that is treated as newly effect of reducing your basis in your old car, but ages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc-purchased MACRS property $12,500not below zero, for purposes of figuring your tion, see chapter 4 of Publication 946.depreciation deduction for the new car. (This
Depreciation methods. You can use oneadjustment is not used, however, when you de- Example 2. Rob paid $21,000 for a new car of the following methods to depreciate your car.termine the gain or loss on the later disposition that he placed in service in 2007. He used it
of the new car. See Publication 544, Sales and partly for business in 2007 (9,600 business • The 200% declining balance methodOther Dispositions of Assets, for information on miles of 15,000 total miles), 2008 (12,000 busi- (200% DB) over a 5-year recovery periodhow to report the disposition of your car.) ness miles of 16,000 total miles), and 2009 that switches to the straight line methodTo figure the unadjusted basis of your new (14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He used the when that method provides an equal orcar for depreciation, first add to your adjusted standard mileage rate in those years to claim the greater deduction.basis in the old car any additional amount you business use of his car. (See Depreciation ad- • The 150% declining balance methodpay for the new car. Then subtract from that total justment when you used the standard mileage (150% DB) over a 5-year recovery periodthe excess, if any, of: rate under Disposition of a Car, later.) that switches to the straight line methodOn January 3, 2010, Rob traded in this car1. The total of the amounts that would have when that method provides an equal orand paid an additional $10,000 for his new car.been allowable as depreciation during the greater deduction.Rob figures the unadjusted basis for his new cartax years before the trade if 100% of the as shown next. • The straight line method (SL) over ause of the car had been business and in- 5-year recovery period.vestment use, over Cost of old car $21,000
Less: Total depreciation allowed:2. The total of the amounts actually allowed If you use Table 4-1  (discussed later2009Ð14,400 mi. ×  .21 $3,024as depreciation during those years. 2008Ð12,000 mi. ×  .21 2,520 under MACRS depreciation chart ) to
2007Ð 9,600 mi. ×  .19 1,824 − 7,368For information about figuring depreciation, see determine your depreciation rate for
TIP
Adjusted basis of old carModified Accelerated Cost Recovery System 2010, you do not need to determine in what year
before trade-in adjustment $13,632(MACRS), which follows Example 2, later. using the straight line method provides an equal
or greater deduction. This is because the chartTrade-in adjustment:Example 1. In March, Mark traded his 2006 has the switch to the straight line method builtDepreciation at 100% business use:van (placed in service in June 2006) for a new into its rates.2009Ð18,000 mi. ×  .21 $3,7802010 model. He used the old van 75% for busi- 2008Ð16,000 mi. ×  .21 3,360 Before choosing a method, you may wish toness and he used the new van 75% for business 2007Ð15,000 mi. ×  .19 2,850 consider the following facts.in 2010. Mark claimed actual expenses (includ- Total $9,990
• Using the straight line method providesing $10,956 depreciation expense) for the busi- Less: Actual depreciation 
equal yearly deductions throughout the re-allowed − 7,368ness use of the old van since 2006. He did not
Excess of 100% over actual $2,622 covery period.claim a section 179 deduction for the old or the
new van. Less: Lesser of excess amount • Using the declining balance methods pro-Mark paid $19,500 for the 2006 van in June ($2,622) or adjusted basis vides greater deductions during the earlier of old car ($13,632) − 2,6222006. He paid an additional $12,500 when he recovery years with the deductions gener-acquired the 2010 van. Mark was allowed 1/2 of ally getting smaller each year.Unadjusted basis of part of new car the depreciation deduction amount (which is in-
that can be treated as newly cluded in the $10,956 depreciation expense to- purchased MACRS property $11,010 MACRS depreciation chart. A 2010 MACRStal) for his old van for 2010, the year of
Depreciation Chart and instructions are includeddisposition, as explained later under Disposition Additional basis (cash paid) for new in this chapter as Table 4-1. Using this table willof a Car. car that is treated as newly make it easy for you to figure the 2010 deprecia-Mark figures the unadjusted basis for depre- purchased MACRS property  $10,000 tion deduction for your car. A similar chart ap-ciating his new van as shown next.
pears in the Instructions for Form 2106.
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery SystemCost of old van $19,500 You may have to use the tables in(MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost Re-Less: Total depreciation allowed on Publication 946 instead of using thiscovery System (MACRS) is the name given tothe business cost of old van 
MACRS Depreciation Chart.from 2006±2010 −10,956 the tax rules for getting back (recovering)
CAUTION
!
Page 20 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 21 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4-1.  2010 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2010.)
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below to find the For cars placed in service before 2010, you must use the same
depreciation method and percentage to use for your 2010 return. method you used on last year's return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line method. (See
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the car in service. Car Used 50% or Less for Business.)
Then select the depreciation method and percentage from column (a), (b),
or (c) following the rules explained in this chapter. Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in the
chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for 2010. (Also
see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the same
year, you may have to use the Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1ÐDec. 31 percentage for your car.
CAUTION
!
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of that year and 2) the basis
of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in service after September is not more than
40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the entire year, use the percentage for Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30 for
figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of Publication 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2010 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2010, both used 100% in your
business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1ÐSept. 30, 2010, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the $20,000 basis of the
property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in service during the year (40% ×
($32,000 + 20,000) = $20,800).
(a) (b) (c)
200% Declining 150% Declining Straight Line Date Placed In Service Balance (200% DB)1 Balance (150% DB)1 (SL)
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2010 200 DB  5.0% 150 DB  3.75% SL  2.5%
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2010 200 DB 20.0 150 DB 15.0 SL 10.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2009 200 DB 38.0 150 DB 28.88 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2009 200 DB 32.0 150 DB 25.5 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2008 200 DB 22.8 150 DB 20.21 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2008 200 DB 19.2 150 DB 17.85 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2007 200 DB 13.68 150 DB 16.4 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2007 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2006 200 DB 10.94 150 DB 16.41 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2006 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2005 200 DB  9.58 150 DB 14.35 SL 17.5
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2005 200 DB  5.76 150 DB  8.33 SL 10.0
 Prior to 20052
1 You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
2 If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to claim depreciation. See 
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
You must use the Depreciation Tables  in c. Your basis in the property you placed in recovery period, figure the depreciation without
Publication 946 rather than the 2010 MACRS service from October through Decem- the chart using your adjusted basis in the car at
Depreciation Chart in this publication if any one ber (excluding nonresidential real prop- the end of the year of the adjustment and over
of the following four conditions applies to you. erty, residential rental property, and the remaining recovery period. See Figuring the
property placed in service and disposed Deduction Without Using the Tables in chapter 41. You file your return on a fiscal year basis. of in the same year) was more than of Publication 946.40% of your total bases in all property2. You file your return for a short tax year In future years, do not use the chart inyou placed in service during the year.(less than 12 months). this edition of the publication. Instead,
3. During the year, all the following conditions use the chart in the publication or the4. You placed qualified property in service on
TIP
apply. form instructions for those future years.an Indian reservation.
a. You placed some property in service Disposition of car during recovery period.Depreciation in future years. If you usefrom January through September. If you dispose of the car before the end of thethe percentages from the chart, you generally
recovery period, you are generally allowed a halfb. You placed some property in service must continue to use them for the entire recov-
year of depreciation in the year of dispositionfrom October through December. ery period of your car. However, you cannot
unless you purchased the car during the lastcontinue to use the chart if your basis in your car
quarter of a year. See Depreciation deductionis adjusted because of a casualty. In that case,
for the year of the adjustment and the remaining for the year of disposition under Disposition of a
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 21

Page 22 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
MaximumCar, later, for information on how to figure the and investment purposes. See Reduction for
 Depreciation Deductiondepreciation allowed in the year of disposition. personal use later.
 for Cars
How to use the 2010 chart. To figure your Example. Marie purchased a car in Junedepreciation deduction for 2010, find the per- Date 4th & 2010 for $20,000 to use exclusively in her busi-Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Latercentage in the column of the chart based on the ness. She does not claim the section 179 deduc-In Service Year Year Year Yearsdate that you first placed the car in service and tion, but she does claim the special deprecationthe depreciation method that you are using. Mul- 2010 $11,0601 $4,900 $2,950 $1,775 allowance, and she chooses the 200% DBtiply the unadjusted basis of your car (defined method of depreciation.2008±2009  10,9602  4,800  2,850  1,775earlier) by that percentage to determine the Marie first figures her special depreciation2007 3,060 4,900 2,850 1,775amount of your depreciation deduction. If you allowance to be $10,000 ($20,000 x 50%). Marieprefer to figure your depreciation deduction with- 2006 2,960 4,800 2,850 1,775 next figures her car's unadjusted basis to beout the help of the chart, see Publication 946. $10,000 ($20,000 ± $10,000).2005 2,960 4,700 2,850 1,675
Marie's MACRS depreciation (using the rateYour deduction cannot be more than 2004 10,6102 4,800 2,850 1,675 from Table 4-1) is $2,000 ($10,000 (unadjustedthe maximum depreciation limit for
5/06/2003± 10,7103 4,900 2,950 1,775 basis) ×  20%). Marie's total section 179, specialcars. See Depreciation Limits, later.
CAUTION
!
12/31/2003 depreciation allowance, and MACRS deprecia-
tion deduction is $12,000 ($10,000 + $2,000).1/01/2003± 7,6604 4,900 2,950 1,775Example. Phil bought a used truck in Febru- However, the maximum amount she can deduct5/05/2003ary 2009 to use exclusively in his landscape for depreciation is $11,060. (See the Maximum2001±2002 7,6604 4,900 2,950 1,775business. He paid $9,200 for the truck with no Depreciation Deduction for Cars table earlier.)trade-in. Phil did not claim any section 179 de- 2000 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775
duction, the truck did not qualify for the special Reduction for personal use. The deprecia-1$3,060 if the car is not qualified property or if you electdepreciation allowance, and he chose to use the tion limits are reduced based on your percent-not to claim the special depreciation allowance.
200% DB method to get the largest depreciation age of personal use. If you use a car less than2$2,960 if the car is not qualified property or if you electdeduction in the early years. 100% in your business or work, you must deter-not to claim the special depreciation allowance.
Phil used the MACRS depreciation chart in mine the depreciation deduction limit by multi-3$7,660 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $3,060 if2009 to find his percentage. The unadjusted plying the limit amount by the percentage ofthe car is not qualified property or if you elect not to
basis of his truck equals its cost because Phil business and investment use during the taxclaim any special depreciation allowance.
used it exclusively for business. He multiplied year.4$3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the car
the unadjusted basis of his truck, $9,200, by the is not qualified property, or you elect not to claim the Section 179 deduction. The section 179 de-special depreciation allowance.percentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2009 duction is treated as a depreciation deduction. Ifdepreciation deduction of $1,840. you place a car that is not a truck or van inIn 2010, Phil used the truck for personal Trucks and vans. For 2010, the maximum service in 2010, use it only for business, andpurposes when he repaired his father's cabin. depreciation deductions for trucks and vans are choose the section 179 deduction, the specialHis records show that the business use of his generally higher than those for cars. A truck or deprecation allowance, and the depreciation de-truck was 90% in 2010. Phil used Table 4-1 to van is a passenger automobile that is classified duction for that car for 2010 is limited to $11,060.find his percentage. Reading down the first col- by the manufacturer as a truck or van and ratedumn for the date placed in service and across to at 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less. Example. On September 4, 2010, Jackthe 200% DB column, he locates his percent- For trucks and vans placed in service before bought a used car for $10,000 and placed it inage, 32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis of service. He used it 80% for his business, and he2003, use the Maximum Depreciation Deductionhis truck, $8,280 ($9,200 cost ×  90% business chooses to take a section 179 deduction for thefor Cars table.use), by 32% to figure his 2010 depreciation car. The car is not qualified property for pur-deduction of $2,650. Maximum poses of the special depreciation allowance.Depreciation Deduction Before applying the limit, Jack figures hisfor Trucks and Vans
maximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000.Depreciation Limits This is the cost of his qualifying property (up toDate 4th &
the maximum $500,000 amount) multiplied by Placed 1st 2nd 3rd LaterThere are limits on the amount you can deduct
In Service Year Year Year Years his business use ($10,000 ×  80%).for depreciation of your car, truck, or van. The
Jack then figures that his section 179 deduc-section 179 deduction and special deprecation 2010 $11,1601 $5,100 $3,050 $1,875
tion for 2010 is limited to $2,448 (80% ofallowance are treated as depreciation for pur- 2009  11,0601  4,900 2,950 1,775 $3,060). He then figures his unadjusted basis ofposes of the limits. The maximum amount you
2008 11,1601 5,100 3,050 1,875 $5,552 (($10,000 ×  80%) − $2,448) for determin-can deduct each year depends on the year you
ing his depreciation deduction. Jack hasplace the car in service. These limits are shown 2007 3,260 5,200 3,050 1,875
reached his maximum depreciation deductionin the following tables. 2005±2006 3,260 5,200 3,150 1,875 for 2010. For 2011, Jack will use his unadjusted
basis of $5,552 to figure his depreciation deduc-2004 10,9101 5,300 3,150 1,875
tion.2003 11,0102 5,400 3,250 1,975
Deductions in years after the recovery pe-1If the special depreciation allowance does not apply or
you make the election not to claim the special riod. If the depreciation deductions for your
depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,160 for car are reduced under the passenger automo-2010, $3,060 for 2009, $3,160 for 2008, $3,260 for bile limits (discussed earlier), you will have unre-2004, and $3,360 for 2003.
covered basis in your car at the end of the2If the truck or van was acquired before 5/06/03, the truck recovery period. If you continue to use your caror van is qualified property, and you claim the special
for business, you can deduct that unrecovereddepreciation allowance for the truck or van, the
maximum deduction is $7,960. basis (subject to depreciation limits) after the
recovery period ends.
Car used less than full year. The deprecia- Unrecovered basis. This is your cost or
tion limits are not reduced if you use a car for other basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuel
less than a full year. This means that you do not vehicle deduction, alternative motor vehicle
reduce the limit when you either place a car in credit, electric vehicle credit, gas guzzler tax,
service or dispose of a car during the year. and depreciation (including any special depreci-
However, the depreciation limits are reduced if ation allowance unless you elect not to claim it)
you do not use the car exclusively for business and section 179 deductions that would have
Page 22 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 23 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
been allowable if you had used the car 100% for income any excess depreciation, discussedCar Used 50% or Less
next.business and investment use. for Business
Excess depreciation. You must includeThe recovery period. For 5-year property, If you use your car 50% or less for qualified any excess depreciation in your gross incomeyour recovery period is 6 calendar years. A part business use  (defined earlier under Deprecia- and add it to your car's adjusted basis for theyear's depreciation is allowed in the first calen- tion Deduction ) either in the year the car is first tax year in which you do not use the cardar year, a full year's depreciation is allowed in placed in service or in a later year, special rules more than 50% in qualified business use. Useeach of the next 4 calendar years, and a part apply. The rules that apply in these two situa- Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig-year's depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen- tions are explained in the following paragraphs. ure and report the excess depreciation in yourdar year. (For this purpose, ªcarº was defined earlier gross income.under Actual Car Expenses and includes certainUnder MACRS, your recovery period is the Excess depreciation is: trucks and vans.)same whether you use declining balance or
straight line depreciation. You determine your 1. The amount of the depreciation deductionsQualified business use 50% or less in yearunrecovered basis in the 7th year after you allowable for the car (including any sectionplaced in service. If you use your car 50% orplaced the car in service. 179 deduction claimed and any special de-less for qualified business use, the following
preciation allowance claimed) for tax yearsrules apply.How to treat unrecovered basis. If you
in which you used the car more than 50%continue to use your car for business after the • You cannot take the section 179 deduc- in qualified business use, minusrecovery period, you can claim a depreciation tion.deduction in each succeeding tax year until you 2. The amount of the depreciation deductions
• You cannot take the special depreciation that would have been allowable for thoserecover your basis in the car. The maximum
allowance. years if you had not used the car moreamount you can deduct each year is determined
than 50% in qualified business use for theby the date you placed the car in service and • You must figure depreciation using the
year you placed it in service. This meansyour business-use percentage. For example, no straight line method over a 5-year recov-
the amount of depreciation figured usingdeduction is allowed for a year you use your car ery period. You must continue to use the
the straight line method.100% for personal purposes. straight line method even if your percent-
age of business use increases to more
Example. In April 2004, Bob bought and than 50% in a later year. Example. In September 2006, you bought a
placed in service a car he used exclusively in his car for $20,500 and placed it in service. You did
Instead of making the computation yourself,business. The car cost $31,500. Bob did not not claim the section 179 deduction. You used
you can use column (c) of Table 4-1 to find theclaim a section 179 deduction, but he did claim the car exclusively in qualified business use for
percentage to use.the special depreciation allowance for the car. 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009. For those years,
you used the appropriate MACRS DepreciationHe continued to use the car 100% in his busi-
Example. In May 2010, Dan bought a car Chart to figure depreciation deductions totalingness throughout the recovery period (2004
for $17,500. He used it 40% for his consulting $12,385 ($2,960 for 2006, $4,800 for 2007,through 2009). For those years, Bob used Table
business. Because he did not use the car more $2,850 for 2008, and $1,775 for 2009) under the4-1 and the Maximum Depreciation Deduction than 50% for business, Dan cannot take any 200% DB method.for Cars table (as explained earlier) to compute section 179 deduction or special depreciation During 2010, you used the car 30% for busi-his depreciation deductions during the recovery allowance, and he must use the straight line ness and 70% for personal purposes. Since youperiod. Bob's depreciation deductions were sub- method over a 5-year recovery period to recover did not meet the more-than-50%-use test, youject to the depreciation limits so he will have the cost of his car. must switch from the 200% DB depreciationunrecovered basis at the end of the recovery Dan deducts $700 in 2010. This is the lesser method to the straight line depreciation methodperiod as shown in the following table. of: for 2010, and include in gross income for 2010
your excess depreciation determined as follows.MACRS Deprec. 1. $700 (($17,500 cost ×  40% business use)Year % Amount Limit Allowed ×  10% recovery percentage (from column Total depreciation claimed: $12,3852004 30.00* $ 9,450 (c), Table 4-1)), or (MACRS 200% DB method)20.00 4,410 $10,610 $ 10,610 Minus total depreciation allowable:2. $1,224 ($3,060 maximum limit ×  40% busi-2005 32.00 7,056 4,800 4,800 (Straight line method)2006 19.20 4,234 2,850 2,850 ness use). 2006Ð10% of $20,500 ... . $2,0502007 11.52 2,540 1,675 1,675 (Limit: $2,960)2008 11.52 2,540 1,675 1,675 2007Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 4,100Qualified business use 50% or less in a later2009 5.76 1,270 1,675 1,270 (Limit: $4,800)year. If you use your car more than 50% inTotal $31,500 $22,880 2008Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 2,850qualified business use in the tax year it is placed*30-percent special depreciation allowance. (Limit: $2,850)in service but the business use drops to 50% or 2009Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 1,775 10,775less in a later year, you can no longer use anAt the end of 2009, Bob had an unrecovered (Limit: $1,775)
accelerated depreciation method for that car. Excess depreciation $1,610basis in the car of $8,620 ($31,500 ± $22,880).
For the year the business use drops to 50%If Bob continued to use the car 100% for busi-
In 2010, using Form 4797, you figure andor less and all later years in the recovery period,ness in 2010 and later years, he can claim a
report the $1,610 excess depreciation you mustyou must use the straight line depreciationdepreciation deduction equal to the lesser of include in your gross income. Your adjustedmethod over a 5-year recovery period. In addi-$1,675 or his remaining unrecovered basis. basis in the car is also increased by $1,610.tion, for the year your business use drops toIf Bob's business use of the car was less Your 2010 depreciation is $1,230 ($20,500 (un-50% or less, you must recapture (include in yourthan 100% during any year, his depreciation adjusted basis) ×  30% (business use percent-gross income) any excess depreciation  (dis-deduction would be less than the maximum age) ×  20% (from column (c) of Table 4-1 on thecussed later). You also increase the adjustedamount allowable for that year. However, in de- line for Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2006)). However,basis of your car by the same amount.termining his unrecovered basis in the car, he your depreciation deduction is limited to $533
would still reduce his original basis by the maxi- ($1,775 x 30% business use).Example. In June 2007, you purchased a
mum amount allowable as if the business use car for exclusive use in your business. You met
had been 100%. For example, if Bob had used the more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 years Leasing a Carhis car 60% for business instead of 100%, his of the recovery period (2007 through 2009) but
allowable depreciation deductions would have failed to meet it in the fourth year (2010). You If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in
been $13,728 ($22,880 ×  60%), but he still determine your depreciation for 2010 using 20% your business, you can use the standard mile-
would have to reduce his basis by $22,880 to (from column (c) of Table 4-1 ). You also will age rate or actual expenses to figure your de-
determine his unrecovered basis. have to determine and include in your gross ductible expense. This section explains how to
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 23

Page 24 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
figure actual expenses for a leased car, truck, or specified in the lease agreement, use that 2010, Will closed his business and went to work
van. amount as the fair market value. for a company where he is not required to use a
car for business. Using Appendix A-5, Will com-Figuring the inclusion amount. InclusionDeductible payments. If you choose to use puted his inclusion amount for 2009 and 2010 asamounts are listed in Appendix A  for cars, inactual expenses, you can deduct the part of shown in the following table and reduced hisAppendix B for trucks and vans, and in Appendixeach lease payment that is for the use of the deductions for lease payments by thoseC for electric cars leased after August 5, 1997,vehicle in your business. You cannot deduct any amounts.and before 2007. If the fair market value of thepart of a lease payment that is for personal use vehicle is $100,000 or less, use the appropriate Tax Dollar Business Inclusionof the vehicle, such as commuting. appendix (depending on the year you first year amount Proration use amountYou must spread any advance payments placed the vehicle in service) to determine the 2009 $ 53 138/365 100% $ 20over the entire lease period. You cannot deduct inclusion amount. If the fair market value is more 2010 117 309/365 100%   99any payments you make to buy a car, truck, or than $100,000, see the Revenue Procedure(s)van even if the payments are called lease pay- identified in the footnote of the appendices forments. Leased car changed from personal to busi-the inclusion amount.
If you lease a car, truck, or van for 30 days or ness use. If you lease a car for personal useFor each tax year during which you lease the
more, you may have to reduce your lease pay- and, in a later year, change it to business use,car for business, determine your inclusion
ment deduction by an ªinclusion amount.º you must determine the car's fair market valueamount by following these three steps.
on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-
1. Locate the appendix that applies to you. sion amount using the rules explained earlier
Inclusion Amounts To find the inclusion amount, do the follow- under Figuring the inclusion amount . Use the
ing. fair market value on the date of conversion.If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in
your business for a lease term of 30 days or a. Find the line that includes the fair mar- Example. In March 2008, Janice leased amore, you may have to include an inclusion ket value of the car on the first day of car for 4 years for personal use. On June 1,amount in your income for each tax year you the lease term. 2010, she started working as a self-employedlease the vehicle. To do this, you do not add an advertising consultant and started using theb. Go across the line to the column for theamount to income. Instead, you reduce your leased car for business purposes. Her recordstax year in which the car is used underdeduction for your lease payment. (This reduc- show that her business use for June 1 throughthe lease to find the dollar amount. Fortion has an effect similar to the limit on the December 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusionthe last tax year of the lease, use thedepreciation deduction you would have on the amount for 2010, Janice obtained an appraisaldollar amount for the preceding year.vehicle if you owned it.) from an independent car leasing company that
The inclusion amount is a percentage of part showed the fair market value of her 2008 car on2. Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) forof the fair market value of the leased vehicle June 1, 2010, was $21,650. Using Appendixthe number of days of the lease term in-multiplied by the percentage of business and A-6, Janice computed her inclusion amount forcluded in the tax year.investment use of the vehicle for the tax year. It 2010 as shown in the following table.3. Multiply the prorated amount from (2) byis prorated for the number of days of the lease
the percentage of business and investmentterm in the tax year. Tax Dollar Business Inclusion
use for the tax year. This is your inclusion year amount Proration use amountThe inclusion amount applies to each tax
amount.year that you lease the vehicle if the fair market 2010 $13 214/365 60% $5
value (defined next) when the lease began was
more than the amounts shown in the following Example. On January 17, 2010, you leased Reporting inclusion amounts.    For informa-tables. a car for 3 years and placed it in service for use tion on reporting inclusion amounts, employeesin your business. The car had a fair market value should see Car rentals under Completing FormsCars of $32,250 on the first day of the lease term. You 2106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6. Sole proprietors(Except for Trucks and Vans) use the car 75% for business and 25% for per- should see the instructions for Schedule Csonal purposes during each year of the lease. (Form 1040) and farmers should see the instruc-Year Lease Began Fair Market Value Assuming you continue to use the car 75% for tions for Schedule F (Form 1040).business, you use Appendix A-6 to arrive at the2008±2010  18,500
following inclusion amounts for each year of the2007 15,500
2005±2006 15,200 lease:
2004 17,500
Disposition of a Car2003  18,000 Tax Dollar Business Inclusion
1999±2002  15,500 year amount Proration use amount
If you dispose of your car, you may have a2010 $ 34 349/365 75% $24Trucks and Vans taxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion of2011 74 365/365 75% 56
any gain that is due to depreciation (including2012 111 366/366 75% 83
any section 179 deduction, clean-fuel vehicleYear Lease Began Fair Market Value 2013 132 16/365 75% 4
deduction, and special depreciation allowance)2010 $19,000 For each year of the lease that you deduct lease that you claimed on the car will be treated aspayments, you must reduce your deduction by2009 18,500 ordinary income. However, you may not have tothe inclusion amount computed for that year.2008 19,000 recognize a gain or loss if you dispose of the car2007 16,400 because of a casualty, theft, or trade-in.Leased car changed from business to per-2005±2006 16,700 sonal use. If you lease a car for business use This section gives some general information2004 18,000 and, in a later year, change it to personal use, about dispositions of cars. For information on2003  18,500
follow the rules explained earlier under Figuring how to report the disposition of your car, see
the inclusion amount. For the tax year in which Publication 544.
Fair market value. Fair market value is the you stop using the car for business, use the
price at which the property would change hands Casualty or theft. For a casualty or theft, adollar amount for the previous tax year. Prorate
between a buyer and a seller, neither having to gain results when you receive insurance or otherthe dollar amount for the number of days in the
buy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl- reimbursement that is more than your adjustedlease term that fall within the tax year.
edge of all the necessary facts. Sales of similar basis in your car. If you then spend all of the
property around the same date may be helpful in Example. On August 16, 2009, Will leased proceeds to acquire replacement property (a
figuring the fair market value of the property. a car with a fair market value of $38,500 for 3 new car or repairs to the old car) within a speci-
Figure the fair market value on the first day of years. He used the car exclusively in his own fied period of time, you do not recognize any
the lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car is data processing business. On November 5, gain. Your basis in the replacement property is
Page 24 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 25 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
its cost minus any gain that is not recognized. Figure your depreciation deduction for the full is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-
See Publication 547 for more information. ever, if you prepare a record on a computer, it isyear using the rules explained in this chapter
considered an adequate record.and deduct 50% of that amount with your otherTrade-in. When you trade in an old car for a actual car expenses.new one, the transaction is considered a What Are AdequateIf you used a Date Placed in Service line forlike-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is Oct. 1 ÐDec. 31, you can deduct a percentage Records?recognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of of the depreciation amount figured for the fullPublication 544.) In a trade-in situation, your You should keep the proof you need in an ac-year. The percentage you use is determined bybasis in the new property is generally your ad- count book, diary, log, statement of expense,the month you disposed of the car. Figure yourjusted basis in the old property plus any addi- trip sheets, or similar record. You should alsodepreciation deduction for the full year using thetional amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis, keep documentary evidence that, together withrules explained in this chapter and multiply theearlier.) your record, will support each element of anresult by the percentage from the following table
expense.Depreciation adjustment when you used the for the month that you disposed of the car.
standard mileage rate. If you used the stan-
Documentary evidence. You generally mustdard mileage rate for the business use of your Month Percentage
have documentary evidence, such as receipts,car, depreciation was included in that rate. The Jan., Feb., March ........... . 12.5% canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-rate of depreciation that was allowed in the stan- April, May, June ............ . 37.5% penses.dard mileage rate is shown in the chart that July, Aug., Sept. ............ . 62.5%
follows. You must reduce your basis in your car Oct., Nov., Dec. ............ . 87.5% Exception. Documentary evidence is not(but not below zero) by the amount of this depre- needed if any of the following conditions apply.ciation. Do not use this table if you are a fiscal • You have meals or lodging expensesIf your basis is reduced to zero (but not below year filer. See Sale or Other Disposi- while traveling away from home for whichzero) through the use of the standard mileage tion Before the Recovery Period Ends
CAUTION
! you account to your employer under anrate, and you continue to use your car for busi- in chapter 4 of Publication 946. accountable plan, and you use a per diemness, no adjustment (reduction) to the standard
allowance method that includes mealsmileage rate is necessary. Use the full standard
and/or lodging. (Accountable plans andmileage rate (50 cents per mile for 2010) for
per diem allowances are discussed inbusiness miles driven.
chapter 6.)These rates do not apply for any year in
• Your expense, other than lodging, is lesswhich the actual expenses method
than $75.was used. 5.
TIP
• You have a transportation expense forDepreciation which a receipt is not readily available.Year(s) Rate per Mile
2010 $.23 Recordkeeping Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-
2008±2009 .21 dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if it2007 .19 shows the amount, date, place, and essentialIf you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-2005±2006 .17 character of the expense.portation expenses, you must be able to prove2003±2004 .16 For example, a hotel receipt is enough to2001±2002 .15 (substantiate) certain elements of expense. This support expenses for business travel if it has all2000 .14 chapter discusses the records you need to keep of the following information.to prove these expenses.
Example. In 2005, you bought a car for ex- • The name and location of the hotel.If you keep timely and accurate rec-clusive use in your business. The car cost
ords, you will have support to show the • The dates you stayed there.$22,500. From 2005 through 2010, you used the
IRS if your tax return is ever examined.standard mileage rate to figure your car expense
RECORDS • Separate amounts for charges such asYou will also have proof of expenses that yourdeduction. You drove your car 14,100 miles in lodging, meals, and telephone calls.employer may require if you are reimbursed2005, 16,300 miles in 2006, 15,600 miles in
under an accountable plan. These plans are2007, 16,700 miles in 2008, 15,100 miles in A restaurant receipt is enough to prove andiscussed in chapter 6 under Reimbursements.2009, and 14,900 miles in 2010. Your deprecia- expense for a business meal if it has all of thetion is figured as follows. following information.
Year Miles x Rate Depreciation • The name and location of the restaurant.
2005 14,100 ×  .17 $ 2,397 • The number of people served.How To Prove2006 16,300 ×  .17 2,771
• The date and amount of the expense.2007 15,600 ×  .19 2,964 Expenses2008 16,700 ×  .21 3,507 If a charge is made for items other than food and2009 15,100 ×  .21 3,171 beverages, the receipt must show that this is theTable 5-1 is a summary of records you need to2010 14,900 ×  .23 3,427 case.prove each expense discussed in this publica-Total depreciation $18,237
tion. You must be able to prove the elements Canceled check. A canceled check, to-At the end of 2010, your adjusted basis in the car listed across the top portion of the chart. You gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-is $4,263 ($22,500 − $18,237). prove them by having the information and re- tablishes the cost. However, a canceled check
ceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed inDepreciation deduction for the year of dispo- by itself does not prove a business expense
the first column.sition. If you deduct actual car expenses and without other evidence to show that it was for a
you dispose of your car before the end of its business purpose.You cannot deduct amounts that yourecovery period, you are allowed a reduced de- approximate or estimate.preciation deduction for the year of disposition. Duplicate information. You do not have to
CAUTION
!
To figure the reduced depreciation deduction record information in your account book or other
for a car disposed of in 2010, first determine the record that duplicates information shown on a
You should keep adequate records to provedepreciation deduction for the full year using receipt as long as your records and receipts
your expenses or have sufficient evidence thatTable 4-1. complement each other in an orderly manner.
will support your own statement. You must gen-If you used a Date Placed in Service line for You do not have to record amounts your
erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30, you can deduct one-half of employer pays directly for any ticket or other
ered adequate. This is because written evidencethe depreciation amount figured for the full year. travel item. However, if you charge these items
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 25

Page 26 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to your employer, through a credit card or other- each case. If the business purpose of an ex- What If I Have Incomplete
wise, you must keep a record of the amounts pense is clear from the surrounding circum- Records?you spend. stances, then you do not need to give a written
explanation. If you do not have complete records to prove anTimely-kept records. You should record the
element of an expense, then you must prove theelements of an expense or of a business use at Example. If you are a sales representative element with:or near the time of the expense or use and who calls on customers on an established salessupport it with sufficient documentary evidence. • Your own written or oral statement con-route, you do not have to give a written explana-A timely-kept record has more value than a taining specific information about the ele-tion of the business purpose for traveling thatstatement prepared later when generally there is ment, androute. You can satisfy the requirements by re-a lack of accurate recall. cording the length of the delivery route once, theYou do not need to write down the elements • Other supporting evidence that is sufficientdate of each trip at or near the time of the trips,of every expense on the day of the expense. If to establish the element.and the total miles you drove the car during theyou maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac- tax year. You could also establish the date ofcounts for use during the week, the log is consid- If the element is the description of a gift, or theeach trip with a receipt, record of delivery, orered a timely-kept record. cost, time, place, or date of an expense, theother documentary evidence.If you give your employer, client, or customer supporting evidence must be either direct evi-
an expense account statement, it can also be dence or documentary evidence. Direct evi-Confidential information. You do not need toconsidered a timely-kept record. This is true if dence can be written statements or the oralput confidential information relating to an ele-you copy it from your account book, diary, log, testimony of your guests or other witnesses set-ment of a deductible expense (such as thestatement of expense, trip sheets, or similar ting forth detailed information about the element.place, business purpose, or business relation-record. Documentary evidence can be receipts, paidship) in your account book, diary, or other re-
bills, or similar evidence.cord. However, you do have to record theProving business purpose. You must gener-
If the element is either the business relation-information elsewhere at or near the time of theally provide a written statement of the business
ship of your guests or the business purpose ofexpense and have it available to fully prove thatpurpose of an expense. However, the degree of
element of the expense.proof varies according to the circumstances in the amount spent, the supporting evidence can
Table 5-1.  How to Prove Certain Business Expenses
If you have THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements . . .
expenses for . .
.
Amount Time Place or Business Purpose
Description Business Relationship
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area of Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the
expense for travel, and returned your travel (name of business benefit gained or expected to be gained.
lodging, and meals. for each trip city, town, or other  
Incidental expenses may and number designation). Relationship: N/A
be totaled in reasonable of days spent
categories such as taxis, on business.
fees and tips, etc.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address or Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the
expense. Incidental entertainment. location of place of business benefit gained or expected to be gained. 
expenses such as taxis, (Also see entertainment. Type of For entertainment, the nature of the business
telephones, etc., may be Business entertainment if not discussion or activity. If the entertainment was directly
totaled on a daily basis. Purpose.) otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the date, place,
(Also see Business nature, and duration of the business discussion, and
Purpose.) the identities of the persons who took part in both the
business discussion and the entertainment activity.
 
Relationship: Occupations or other information (such as
names, titles, or other designations) about the
recipients that shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that you or your
employee was present if the entertainment was a
business meal.
Gifts Cost of the gift. Date of the Description of the gift.
gift.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
expense. For car expense. For destination.  
expenses, the cost of the car expenses, Relationship: N/A
car and any the date of
improvements, the date the use of the
you started using it for car.
business, the mileage for
each business use, and
the total miles for the
year.
Page 26 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 27 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
be circumstantial rather than direct. For exam- the total cost (but not more than face value) by means you must keep records that support your
ple, the nature of your work, such as making the number of games or performances in the deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years from
deliveries, provides circumstantial evidence of series. You must keep records to show whether the date you file the income tax return on which
the use of your car for business purposes. In- you use each ticket as a gift or entertainment. the deduction is claimed. A return filed early is
voices of deliveries establish when you used Also, you must be able to prove the cost of considered filed on the due date. For a more
the car for business. nonluxury box seat tickets if you rent a skybox or complete explanation of how long to keep rec-
other private luxury box for more than one event. ords, see Publication 583, Starting a Business
Sampling. You can keep an adequate record See Entertainment tickets in chapter 2. and Keeping Records.
for parts of a tax year and use that record to You must keep records of the business useCombining items. You can make one dailyprove the amount of business or investment use of your car for each year of the recovery period.entry in your record for reasonable categories offor the entire year. You must demonstrate by See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 underexpenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephoneother evidence that the periods for which an Depreciation Deduction.calls, or other incidental travel costs. Mealsadequate record is kept are representative of
should be in a separate category. You can in-the use throughout the tax year. Reimbursed for expenses. Employees whoclude tips for meal-related services with the give their records and documentation to theircosts of the meals.Example. You use your car to visit the of- employers and are reimbursed for their ex-Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-fices of clients, meet with suppliers and other penses generally do not have to keep copies ofing the course of a single event are considered asubcontractors, and pick up and deliver items to this information. However, you may have tosingle expense. For example, if during entertain-clients. There is no other business use of the prove your expenses if any of the following con-ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately forcar, but you and your family use the car for ditions apply.each serving of refreshments, the total expensepersonal purposes. You keep adequate records
• You claim deductions for expenses thatfor the refreshments is treated as a single ex-during the first week of each month that show
are more than reimbursements.pense.that 75% of the use of the car is for business.
Invoices and bills show that your business use • Your expenses are reimbursed under aCar expenses. You can account for severalcontinues at the same rate during the later nonaccountable plan.uses of your car that can be considered part of aweeks of each month. Your weekly records are single use, such as a round trip or uninterrupted • Your employer does not use adequate ac-representative of the use of the car each month business use, with a single record. Minimal per- counting procedures to verify expense ac-and are sufficient evidence to support the per- sonal use, such as a stop for lunch on the way counts.centage of business use for the year. between two business stops, is not an interrup-
• You are related to your employer as de-tion of business use.Exceptional circumstances. You can satisfy fined under Per Diem and Car Allowances,the substantiation requirements with other evi- in chapter 6.Example. You make deliveries at severaldence if, because of the nature of the situation in different locations on a route that begins and Reimbursements, adequate accounting , andwhich an expense is made, you cannot get a ends at your employer's business premises and nonaccountable plans are discussed in chapterreceipt. This applies if all the following are true. that includes a stop at the business premises 6.• You were unable to obtain evidence for an between two deliveries. You can account for
element of the expense or use that com- these using a single record of miles driven. Examples of Recordspletely satisfies the requirements ex- Gift expenses. You do not always have toplained earlier under What Are Adequate Examples of records that show the informationrecord the name of each recipient of a gift. ARecords. you need to keep for different types of expensesgeneral listing will be enough if it is evident that
• You are unable to obtain evidence for an are included in this publication as Table 6-2 andyou are not trying to avoid the $25 annual limit
element that completely satisfies the two Table 6-3. They are part of the illustrated exam-on the amount you can deduct for gifts to any
rules listed earlier under What if I Have ples shown at the end of chapter 6.one person. For example, if you buy a large
Incomplete Records. number of tickets to local high school basketball
games and give one or two tickets to each of• You have presented other evidence for the many customers, it is usually enough to record aelement that is the best proof possible general description of the recipients.under the circumstances.
Allocating total cost. If you can prove the
total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-Destroyed records. If you cannot produce a 6.not prove how much it cost for each person whoreceipt because of reasons beyond your control,
participated in the event, you may have to allo-you can prove a deduction by reconstructing
cate the total cost among you and your guestsyour records or expenses. Reasons beyond
on a pro rata basis. To do so, you must establishyour control include fire, flood, and other casu- How To Reportthe number of persons who participated in thealty.
event.
This chapter explains where and how to reportAn allocation would be needed, for example,Separating and Combining the expenses discussed in this publication. Itif you did not have a business relationship with
discusses reimbursements and how to treatExpenses all of your guests. See Allocating between busi-
them under accountable and nonaccountableness and nonbusiness in chapter 2.This section explains when expenses must be plans. It also explains rules for independent con-
If your return is examined. If your return iskept separate and when expenses can be com- tractors and clients, fee-basis officials, certain
examined, you may have to provide additionalbined. performing artists, Armed Forces reservists, and
information to the IRS. This information could be certain disabled employees. The chapter ends
Separating expenses. Each separate pay- needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy or with illustrations of how to report travel, enter-
ment is generally considered a separate ex- reliability of information contained in your rec- tainment, gift, and car expenses on Forms 2106
pense. For example, if you entertain a customer ords, statements, testimony, or documentary and 2106-EZ.
or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the evidence before a deduction is allowed.
dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-
ets are two separate expenses. You must record How Long To Keepthem separately in your records. Where To ReportRecords and Receipts
Season or series tickets. If you buy sea-
son or series tickets for business use, you must You must keep records as long as they may be This section provides general information on
treat each ticket in the series as a separate item. needed for the administration of any provision of where to report the expenses discussed in this
To determine the cost of individual tickets, divide the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this publication.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 27

Page 28 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Self-employed. You must report your income in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only business actual expenses on line 23 of Section C and
and expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form expense you are claiming is for gifts, and the include the entire value of the em-
1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched- Special Rules  discussed later do not apply to ployer-provided car on line 25. Complete the
ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not you, do not complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. rest of the form.
use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your deductible
Less than full value included in your income.If you claim car or truck expenses, you must gifts directly on line 21 of Schedule A (Form
If less than the full annual lease value of the carprovide certain information on the use of your 1040).
was included on your Form W-2, this means thatvehicle. You provide this information on Sched- Statutory employees. If you received a your Form W-2 only includes the value of yourule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Form 4562. Form W-2 and the ªStatutory employeeº box in personal use of the car. Do not enter this valueIf you file Schedule C: box 13 was checked, report your income and on your Form 2106; it is not deductible.
• Report your travel expenses, except expenses related to that income on Schedule C If you paid any actual costs (that your em-
meals, on line 24a, or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form ployer did not provide or reimburse you for) to
2106 or 2106-EZ. operate the car, you can deduct the business• Report your deductible meals (actual cost Statutory employees include full-time life in- portion of those costs. Examples of costs thator standard meal allowance) and enter- surance salespersons, certain agent or commis- you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com-tainment on line 24b, sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain plete Form 2106, Part II, Sections A and C.
• Report your gift expenses and transporta- homeworkers. Enter your actual costs on line 23 of Section C
tion expenses, other than car expenses, and leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of the If you are entitled to a reimbursementon line 27, and form.from your employer but you do not
• Report your car expenses on line 9. Com- claim it, you cannot claim a deduction
CAUTION
!
plete Part IV of the form unless you have for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-
to file Form 4562 for depreciation or amor- bursement applies.
Reimbursementstization.
Reimbursement for personal expenses. If
This section explains what to do when you re-your employer reimburses you for nondeduct-If you file Schedule C-EZ, report the total of all
ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any ofible personal expenses, such as for vacationbusiness expenses on line 2. You can only in-
the employee business expenses discussed intrips, your employer must report the reimburse-clude 50% of your meals and entertainment in
this publication.ment as wage income in box 1 of your Formthat total. If you include car expenses, you must
If you received an advance, allowance, orW-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.also complete Part III of the form.
reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-If you file Schedule F: Income-producing property. If you have port this amount and your expenses depends on• Report your car expenses on line 12. At- travel or transportation expenses related to in- whether the reimbursement was paid to youtach Form 4562 and provide information come-producing property, report your deducti- under an accountable plan or a nonaccountableon the use of your car in Part V of Form ble expenses on the form appropriate for that plan.4562. activity. This section explains the two types of plans,For example, if you have rental real estate how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-• Report all other business expenses dis- income and expenses, report your expenses on ing the amount of your expenses, and the taxcussed in this publication on line 34. You Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss. treatment of your reimbursements and ex-can only include 50% of your meals and See Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop- penses. It also covers rules for independententertainment on that line. erty, for more information on the rental of real contractors.See your forms instructions for more information estate. If you have deductible invest-
on how to complete your tax return. ment-related transportation expenses, report No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed
them on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23. or given an allowance for your expenses if you
Both self-employed and an employee. If are paid a salary or commission with the under-
you are both self-employed and an employee, standing that you will pay your own expenses. InVehicle Provided byyou must keep separate records for each busi- this situation, you have no reimbursement orYour Employerness activity. Report your business expenses for allowance arrangement, and you do not have to
self-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F read this section on reimbursements. Instead,If your employer provides you with a car, you(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later,may be able to deduct the actual expenses ofbusiness expenses for your work as an em- for information on completing your tax return.operating that car for business purposes. Theployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed amount you can deduct depends on the amount Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. Anext. that your employer included in your income and reimbursement or other expense allowance ar-the business and personal miles you drove dur-Employees. If you are an employee, you gen- rangement is a system or plan that an employering the year. You cannot use the standard mile-erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-age rate.travel, transportation, and entertainment ex- penses, advances, reimbursements, and
penses. However, you can use the shorter Form amounts charged to the employer for employeeValue reported on Form W-2. Your employer2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all of business expenses. Arrangements include percan figure and report either the actual value ofthe following conditions. diem and car allowances.your personal use of the car or the value of the
A per diem allowance is a fixed amount ofcar as if you used it only for personal purposes• You are an employee deducting expenses
daily reimbursement your employer gives you(100% income inclusion). Your employer mustattributable to your job.
for your lodging, meals, and incidental expensesseparately state the amount if 100% of the an-• You were not reimbursed by your em- when you are away from home on business.nual lease value was included in your income. Ifployer for your expenses (amounts in- (The term ªincidental expensesº  is defined inyou are unsure of the amount included on yourcluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not chapter 1 under Standard Meal Allowance.) AForm W-2, ask your employer.considered reimbursements). car allowance is an amount your employer gives
Full value included in your income. You can you for the business use of your car.• If you claim car expenses, you use the deduct the value of the business use of an em- Your employer should tell you what methodstandard mileage rate. ployer-provided car if your employer reported of reimbursement is used and what records you
100% of the value of the car in your income. On must provide.For more information on how to report your your 2010 Form W-2, the amount of the valueexpenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see will be included in box 1, Wages, tips, other Employers. If you are an employer and youCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later. compensation, and box 12. reimburse employee business expenses, how
Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse- To claim your expenses, complete Form you treat this reimbursement on your em-
ments (or the reimbursements were all included 2106, Part II, Sections A and C. Enter your ployee's Form W-2 depends in part on whether
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 29 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you have an accountable plan. Reimburse- the rules for accountable plans are treated as allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-
ments treated as paid under an accountable quirements for the amount of your expenseshaving been reimbursed under a nonaccount-
plan, as explained next, are not reported as pay. only if all the following conditions apply.able plan (discussed later).
Reimbursements treated as paid under nonac- • Your employer reasonably limits paymentsReimbursement of nondeductible ex-countable plans, as explained later, are reported of your expenses to those that are ordi-penses. You may be reimbursed under youras pay. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em- nary and necessary in the conduct of theemployer's accountable plan for expenses re-ployer's Tax Guide, for information on employee trade or business.lated to that employer's business, some of whichpay.
are deductible as employee business expenses • The allowance is similar in form to and not
and some of which are not deductible. The reim- more than the federal rate (defined later).Accountable Plans bursements you receive for the nondeductible
• You prove the time (dates), place, andexpenses do not meet rule (1) for accountableTo be an accountable plan, your employer's business purpose of your expenses toplans, and they are treated as paid under areimbursement or allowance arrangement must your employer (as explained in Table 5-1)nonaccountable plan.include all of the following rules. within a reasonable period of time.
1. Your expenses must have a business con- Example. Your employer's plan reimburses • You are not related to your employer (as
nection Ð that is, you must have paid or you for travel expenses while away from home defined next). If you are related to your
incurred deductible expenses while per- on business and also for meals when you work employer, you must be able to prove your
forming services as an employee of your late at the office, even though you are not away expenses to the IRS even if you have al-
employer. ready adequately accounted to your em-from home. The part of the arrangement that
ployer and returned any excessreimburses you for the nondeductible meals2. You must adequately account to your em-
reimbursement.when you work late at the office is treated asployer for these expenses within a reason-
paid under a nonaccountable plan.able period of time. If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allow-
ance practices are not based on reasonablyThe employer makes the decision3. You must return any excess reimburse-
accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-whether to reimburse employeesment or allowance within a reasonable pe-
ognition of cost differences in different areas forunder an accountable plan or a nonac-riod of time.
TIP
per diem amounts), you will not be considered tocountable plan. If you are an employee whoªAdequate accountingº  and ªreturning ex- have accounted to your employer. In this case,receives payments under a nonaccountablecess reimbursementsº are discussed later. you must be able to prove your expenses to theplan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-An excess reimbursement or allowance is IRS.ments under an accountable plan by voluntarilyany amount you are paid that is more than the accounting to your employer for the expensesbusiness-related expenses that you adequately Related to employer. You are related to yourand voluntarily returning excess reimburse-accounted for to your employer. employer if: ments to the employer.The definition of reasonable period of time
depends on the facts and circumstances of your 1. Your employer is your brother or sister,
situation. However, regardless of the facts and half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-
Adequate Accountingcircumstances of your situation, actions that tor, or lineal descendant,
take place within the times specified in the fol- 2. Your employer is a corporation in whichOne of the rules for an accountable plan is thatlowing list will be treated as taking place within a you own, directly or indirectly, more thanyou must adequately account to your employerreasonable period of time. 10% in value of the outstanding stock, orfor your expenses. You adequately account by
• You receive an advance within 30 days of giving your employer a statement of expense, 3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-the time you have an expense. an account book, a diary, or a similar record in duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,
which you entered each expense at or near the• You adequately account for your ex- a trust, and your employer.
time you had it, along with documentary evi-penses within 60 days after they were paid You may be considered to indirectly own stock,dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage,or incurred. for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in aand other employee business expenses. (See• You return any excess reimbursement corporation, partnership, estate, or trust thatTable 5-1 in chapter 5 for details you need towithin 120 days after the expense was owns the stock or if a member of your family orenter in your record and documents you need topaid or incurred. your partner owns the stock.prove certain expenses.) A per diem or car al-
• You are given a periodic statement (at lowance satisfies the adequate accounting re- The federal rate. The federal rate can be fig-least quarterly) that asks you to either re- quirement under certain conditions. See Per ured using any one of the following methods.turn or adequately account for outstanding diem and Car Allowances, later.
advances and you comply within 120 days 1. For per diem amounts:You must account for all amounts you re-of the statement. ceived from your employer during the year as a. The regular federal per diem rate.advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This
Employee meets accountable plan rules. If includes amounts you charged to your employer b. The standard meal allowance.
you meet the three rules for accountable plans, by credit card or other method. You must give c. The high-low rate.your employer should not include any reim- your employer the same type of records and
bursements in your income in box 1 of your supporting information that you would have to 2. For car expenses:Form W-2. If your expenses equal your reim- give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deduction
bursement, you do not complete Form 2106. on your return. You must pay back the amount of a. The standard mileage rate.You have no deduction since your expenses any reimbursement or other expense allowance b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).and reimbursement are equal. for which you do not adequately account or that
is more than the amount for which you ac-If your employer included reimburse-
For per diem amounts, use the rate inments in box 1 of your Form W-2 and counted.
effect for the area where you stop foryou meet all the rules for accountable
TIP
sleep or rest.plans, ask your employer for a corrected Form
TIP
Per Diem and Car AllowancesW-2.
Regular federal per diem rate. The regular
If your employer reimburses you for your ex- federal per diem rate is the highest amount thatAccountable plan rules not met. Even
penses using a per diem or a car allowance, you the federal government will pay to its employeesthough you are reimbursed under an accounta-
can generally use the allowance as proof for the for lodging, meals, and incidental expenses (orble plan, some of your expenses may not meet
meals and incidental expenses only) while theyall the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet all amount of your expenses. A per diem or car
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

Page 30 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 6-1.  Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, used consistently during October, November,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements and December for all employees. Employers
who did not use the high-low method during the
IF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee first 9 months of 2010 cannot begin to use it
other expense allowance) reports on Form W-2: reports on before 2011. For more information, see Reve- arrangement is under:  Form 2106: * nue Procedure 2010-39, which can be found on
the Internet at www.irs.gov/irb/2010-42_IRB/An accountable plan with:
ar13.html. Also see Publication 1542 (available
Actual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount. on the Internet at IRS.gov).
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned. Prorating the standard meal allowance on
partial days of travel. The standard meal al-Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as No amount. lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If youAdequate accounting and return of wages in box 1. travel for part of a day, such as on the days youexcess both required but excess not depart and return, you must prorate the full-dayreturned. M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-
Per diem or mileage allowance up to No amount. All expenses and ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or
the federal rate: Adequate reimbursements only if the high-low rate.
accounting made and excess excess expenses are You can use either of the following methodsreturned. claimed. Otherwise, form is to figure the federal M&IE for that day.not filed.
1. Method 1:Per diem or mileage allowance up to The excess amount as No amount.
the federal rate: Adequate wages in box 1. The a. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of theaccounting and return of excess both amount up to the federal standard meal allowance amount forrequired but excess not returned. rate is reported only in box that day.12Ðit is not reported in
box 1. b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of the
standard meal allowance amount forPer diem or mileage allowance The excess amount as All expenses (and the preceding day.exceeds the federal rate:  Adequate wages in box 1. The reimbursements reported on
accounting up to the federal rate only amount up to the federal Form W-2, box 12) only if 2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-and excess not returned. rate is reported only in box expenses in excess of the
lowance using any method you consist-12Ðit is not reported in federal rate are claimed.
ently apply in accordance with reasonablebox 1. Otherwise, form is not filed.
business practice. For example, an em-
A nonaccountable plan with: ployer can treat 2 full days of per diem
(that includes M&IE) paid for travel awayEither adequate accounting or return The entire amount as All expenses.
from home from 9 a.m. of one day to 5of excess, or both, not required by wages in box 1.
p.m. of the next day as being no more thanplan.
the federal rate. This is true even though a
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount as All expenses. federal employee would be limited to a re-
wages in box 1. imbursement of M&IE for only 11/2 days of
the federal M&IE rate.* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.
The standard mileage rate. This is a set
rate per mile that you can use to compute yourare traveling away from home in a particular such as when you stay with friends or rela-
deductible car expenses. For 2010, the standardarea. The rates are different for different loca- tives or sleep in the cab of your truck.
mileage rate for the cost of operating your car fortions. Your employer should have these rates • Figures the allowance on a basis similar to business use is 50 cents per mile.available. (Employers can get Publication 1542, that used in computing your compensa-which gives the rates in the continental United Fixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is antion, such as number of hours worked orStates for the current year. Publication 1542 is allowance your employer may use to reimbursemiles traveled.available on the Internet at IRS.gov.) your car expenses. Under this method, your
employer pays an allowance that includes aThe standard meal allowance. The stan- High-low rate. This is a simplified method
combination of payments covering fixed and va-dard meal allowance (discussed in chapter 1) is of computing the federal per diem rate for travel
riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate tothe federal rate for meals and incidental ex- within the continental United States. It elimi- cover your variable operating costs (such aspenses (M&IE). The rate for most small localities nates the need to keep a current list of the per gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover yourin the United States is $46 a day. Most major diem rate for each city. fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-cities and many other localities qualify for higher Under the high-low method, the per diem ments), insurance, etc.). If your employerrates. The rates for localities within the continen- amount for travel during January through Sep- chooses to use this method, your employer willtal United States are listed in Publication 1542. tember of 2010 is $258 (including $65 for M&IE) request the necessary records from you.You can also find this information on the Internet for certain high-cost locations. All other areasat www.gsa.gov. have a per diem amount of $163 (including $52 Reporting your expenses with a per diem orYou receive an allowance only for meals and for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542 car allowance. If your reimbursement is in theincidental expenses when your employer does on the Internet, which gives the areas eligible for form of an allowance received under an ac-one of the following. the $258 per diem amount under the high-low countable plan, the following facts affect your
method for all or part of this period.) reporting.• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in
kind). Effective October 1, 2010, the per diem • The federal rate.
rate for certain high-cost locations de-• Reimburses you, based on your receipts, • Whether the allowance or your actual ex-creased to $233 (including $65 forfor the actual cost of your lodging.
CAUTION
! penses were more than the federal rate.M&IE). The rate for all other locations decreased• Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your to $160 (including $52 for M&IE). However, an The following discussions explain where to re-lodging. employer can continue to use the rates de- port your expenses depending upon how the
scribed in the preceding paragraph for the re- amount of your allowance compares to the fed-• Does not have a reasonable belief that
eral rate.mainder of 2010 if those rates and locations areyou had (or will have) lodging expenses,
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 31 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Allowance less than or equal to the federal 2106 and deduct those excess expenses. You than the standard mileage rate, she would com-
rate. If your allowance is less than or equal to must report on Form 2106 your reimbursements plete Form 2106 and report her total expenses
the federal rate, the allowance will not be in- up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of your and reimbursement (shown in box 12 of her
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do not Form W-2) and all your expenses. You should Form W-2). She would then claim the excess
need to report the related expenses or the allow- be able to prove these amounts to the IRS. expenses as an itemized deduction.
ance on your return if your expenses are equal
to or less than the allowance. Example 1.  Laura lives and works in Aus-
However, if your actual expenses are more tin. In July her employer sent her to Albuquerque Returning Excess
than your allowance, you can complete Form for 4 days on business. Laura's employer paid Reimbursements
2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched- the hotel directly for her lodging and reimbursed
Under an accountable plan, you are required toule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex- Laura $65 a day ($260 total) for meals and
return any excess reimbursement or other ex-penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the incidental expenses. Laura's actual meal ex-
total amount of your expenses and reimburse- pense allowances for your business expensespenses were not more than the federal rate for
ments for the entire year. If you are using the to the person paying the reimbursement or al-Albuquerque, which is $56 per day.standard meal allowance or the standard mile- lowance. Excess reimbursement means anyHer employer included the $36 that wasage rate, you do not have to prove that amount. amount for which you did not adequately ac-more than the federal rate (($65 − $56) ×  4) in count within a reasonable period of time. Forbox 1 of Laura's Form W-2. Her employer showsExample 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-day example, if you received a travel advance and$224 ($56 a day ×  4) in box 12 of her Form W-2.business trip to Denver. The federal rate for you did not spend all the money on busi-This amount is not included in Laura's income.Denver is $224 per day. As required by his ness-related expenses or you do not have proofLaura does not have to complete Form 2106;employer's accountable plan, he accounts for of all your expenses, you have an excess reim-however, she must include the $36 in her grossthe time (dates), place, and business purpose of bursement.income as wages (by reporting the total amountthe trip. His employer reimburses him $224 a
ªAdequate accountingº and ªreasonable pe-day ($448 total) for living expenses. Jeremy's shown in box 1 of her Form W-2).
riod of timeº were discussed earlier in this chap-living expenses in Denver are not more than
ter.Example 2. Joe also lives in Austin and$224 a day.
works for the same employer as Laura. In MayJeremy's employer does not include any of
Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-the employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 daysthe reimbursement on his Form W-2 and Jeremy
vance if your employer provides you with anand paid the hotel directly for Joe's hotel bill. Thedoes not deduct the expenses on his return.
expense allowance before you actually have theemployer reimbursed Joe $75 a day for his
Example 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-day expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-meals and incidental expenses. The federal rate
business trip to Boston. Matt's employer uses for San Diego is $71 a day. pected to be no more than your expense. Under
the high-low method to reimburse employees. an accountable plan, you are required to ade-Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses
Since Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is given quately account to your employer for this ad-totaled $380. His employer's accountable plan
an advance of $258 a day ($516 total) for his vance and to return any excess within awill not pay more than $75 a day for travel to San
lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Matt's reasonable period of time.Diego, so Joe does not give his employer theactual expenses totaled $700. records that prove that he actually spent $380. If you do not adequately account for or do not
Since Matt's $700 of expenses are more However, he does account for the time, place, return any excess advance within a reasonablethan his $516 advance, he includes the excess and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe's period of time, the amount you do not accountexpenses when he itemizes his deductions. Matt only business trip this year. for or return will be treated as having been paidcompletes Form 2106 (showing all of his ex- Joe was reimbursed $300 ($75 ×  4 days), under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).penses and reimbursements). He must also al- which is $16 more than the federal rate of $284locate his reimbursement between his meals Unproved amounts. If you do not prove($71 ×  4 days). The employer includes the $16and other expenses as discussed later under that you actually traveled on each day for whichas income on Joe's Form W-2 in box 1. TheCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-employer also enters $284 in box 12 of Joe's ing the elements described in Table 5-1 ), youForm W-2.Example 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles in must return this unproved amount of the travelJoe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-2010 for business. Under her employer's ac- advance within a reasonable period of time. Ifductible expenses. He enters the total of hiscountable plan, she accounts for the time you do not do this, the unproved amount will beactual expenses for the year ($380) on Form(dates), place, and business purpose of each considered paid under a nonaccountable plan2106. He also enters the reimbursements thattrip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowance (discussed later).of 40 cents a mile. were not included in his income ($284). His total
Per diem allowance more than federal rate.deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is $96.Since Nicole's $5,000 expense computed
If your employer's accountable plan pays you anAfter he figures the 50% limit on his un-under the standard mileage rate (10,000 ×  50
allowance that is higher than the federal rate,reimbursed meals and entertainment, he willcents) is more than her $4,000 reimbursement
you do not have to return the difference between(10,000 miles ×  40 cents), she itemizes her include the balance, $48, as an itemized deduc-
deductions to claim the excess expense. Nicole the two rates for the period you can prove busi-tion.
completes Form 2106 (showing all her ex- ness-related travel expenses. However, the dif-
Example 3. Debbie drives 10,000 miles forpenses and reimbursements) and enters $1,000 ference will be reported as wages on your Form
($5,000 − $4,000) as an itemized deduction. business in 2010. Under her employer's ac- W-2. This excess amount is considered paid
countable plan, she gets reimbursed 60 cents a under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).Allowance more than the federal rate. If mile, which is more than the standard mileageyour allowance is more than the federal rate, rate. Her total reimbursement is $6,000. Example.  Your employer sends you on ayour employer must include the allowance
5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2010Debbie's employer must include the reim-amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your
and gives you a $400 ($80 ×  5 days) advance tobursement amount up to the standard mileageForm W-2. This amount is not taxable. However,
rate, $5,000 (10,000 ×  50 cents), in box 12 of her cover your meals and incidental expenses. Thethe excess allowance will be included in box 1 of
Form W-2. That amount is not taxable. Her em- federal per diem for meals and incidental ex-your Form W-2. You must report this part of your
ployer must also include $1,000 ($6,000 − penses for Phoenix is $71. Your trip lasts only 3allowance as if it were wage income.
$5,000) in box 1 of her Form W-2. This is the days. Under your employer's accountable plan,If your actual expenses are less than or
reimbursement that is more than the standard you must return the $160 ($80 ×  2 days) ad-equal to the federal rate, you do not complete
mileage rate. vance for the 2 days you did not travel. For the 3Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses on
your return. days you did travel you do not have to return the If Debbie's expenses are equal to or less
$27 difference between the allowance you re-than the standard mileage rate, she would notHowever, if your actual expenses are more
ceived and the federal rate for Phoenix (($80 −complete Form 2106. If her expenses are morethan the federal rate, you can complete Form
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

Page 32 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$71) ×  3 days). However, the $27 will be re- the 50% limit on entertainment in this case. YouRules for Independent
ported on your Form W-2 as wages. can deduct the reimbursements or allowancesContractors and Clients as payment for services if they are ordinary and
necessary business expenses. However, youNonaccountable Plans This section provides rules for independent con-
must file Form 1099-MISC to report amountstractors who incur expenses on behalf of a client
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or paid to the independent contractor if the total ofor customer. The rules cover the reporting and
expense allowance arrangement that does not the reimbursements and any other fees is $600substantiation of certain expenses discussed in
meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier or more during the calendar year.this publication, and they affect both indepen-
under Accountable Plans. dent contractors and their clients or customers.
In addition, even if your employer has an You are considered an independent contrac-
accountable plan, the following payments will be tor if you are self-employed and you perform
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable services for a customer or client. Completing Formsplan:
2106 and 2106-EZ• Excess reimbursements you fail to return Accounting to Your Clientto your employer, and 
This section briefly describes how employeesIf you received a reimbursement or an allow-• Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 6-1ance for travel, entertainment, or gift expensespenses related to your employer's busi- explains what the employer reports on Formthat you incurred on behalf of a client, youness. See Reimbursement of W-2 and what the employee reports on Formshould provide an adequate accounting of thesenondeductible expenses, earlier, under 2106. The instructions for the forms have moreexpenses to your client. If you do not account toAccountable Plans. information on completing them.your client for these expenses, you must include
An arrangement that repays you for business any reimbursements or allowances in income. If you are self-employed, do not fileexpenses by reducing the amount reported as You must keep adequate records of these ex- Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report youryour wages, salary, or other pay will be treated penses whether or not you account to your client expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F
CAUTION
!as a nonaccountable plan. This is because you for these expenses. (Form 1040). See the instructions for the formare entitled to receive the full amount of your pay If you do not separately account for and seek that you must file.whether or not you have any business ex- reimbursement for meals and entertainment in
penses. connection with providing services for a client, Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use theyou are subject to the 50% limit on those ex-If you are not sure if the reimbursement or shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employeepenses. See 50% Limit  in chapter 2.expense allowance arrangement is an account- business expenses. You can use this form if you
able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em- Adequate accounting. As a self-employed meet all the following conditions.ployer. person, you adequately account by reporting • You are an employee deducting ordinaryyour actual expenses. You should follow the and necessary expenses attributable toReporting your expenses under a nonac- recordkeeping rules in chapter 5. your job.countable plan. Your employer will combine
How to report. For information on how tothe amount of any reimbursement or other ex- • You were not reimbursed by your em-report expenses on your tax return, seepense allowance paid to you under a nonac- ployer for your expenses (amounts in-Self-employed at the beginning of this chapter.countable plan with your wages, salary, or other cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are notpay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 considered reimbursements).of your Form W-2. Required Records for • If you are claiming car expenses, you areYou must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ Clients or Customers using the standard mileage rate.and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-
penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en- If you are a client or customer, you generally do
tertainment. Your meal and entertainment not have to keep records to prove the reimburse- Car expenses. If you used a car to perform
expenses will be subject to the 50% limit  dis- ments or allowances you give, in the course of your job as an employee, you may be able to
cussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expenses your business, to an independent contractor for deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-
will be subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- travel or gift expenses incurred on your behalf. ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and then
gross-income limit that applies to most miscella- However, you must keep records if: claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A.neous itemized deductions. Car expenses using the standard mileage rate• You reimburse the contractor for entertain-
can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com-ment expenses incurred on your behalf,Example 1. Kim's employer gives her pleting Part II and Part I, line 1.and$1,000 a month ($12,000 total for the year) for
Information on use of cars. If you claimher business expenses. Kim does not have to • The contractor adequately accounts to you
provide any proof of her expenses to her em- any deduction for the business use of a car, youfor these expenses.
ployer, and Kim can keep any funds that she must answer certain questions and provide in-
does not spend. formation about the use of the car. The informa-Contractor adequately accounts. If the con- tion relates to the following items.Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac- tractor adequately accounts to you for entertain-countable plan. Her employer will include the ment expenses, you (the client or customer) • Date placed in service.$12,000 on Kim's Form W-2 as if it were wages. must keep records documenting each element • Mileage (total, business, commuting, andIf Kim wants to deduct her business expenses, of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. Use other personal mileage).she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and your records as proof for a deduction on your taxitemize her deductions. return. If entertainment expenses are accounted • Percentage of business use.
for separately, you are subject to the 50% limit • After-work use.Example 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month by on entertainment. If the contractor adequatelyhis employer. On days that he travels away from accounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you do • Use of other vehicles.home on business, his employer designates $50 not have to report the amounts on an information • Whether you have evidence to support thea day of his salary as paid to reimburse his travel return. deduction.expenses. Because his employer would pay Ke-
vin his monthly salary whether or not he was Contractor does not adequately account.  If • Whether or not the evidence is written.traveling away from home, the arrangement is a the contractor does not adequately account to
Employees must complete Form 2106, Part II,nonaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a day you for allowances or reimbursements of enter-
Section A, or Form 2106-EZ, Part II, to providedesignated by his employer is treated as paid tainment expenses, you do not have to keep
this information.under an accountable plan. records of these items. You are not subject to
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 33 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. EnterStandard mileage rate. If you claim a de- Meal and entertainment expenses. Show
the result here and in Columnthe full amount of your expenses for busi-duction based on the standard mileage rate in-
B, line 7 .............. . 3,703ness-related meals and entertainment on Formstead of your actual expenses, you must 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter2106, line 5, Column B. Include meals whilecomplete Form 2106, Part II, Section B. The the result here and in Columnaway from your tax home overnight and otheramount on line 22 (Section B) is carried to Form A, line 7 .............. . $3,297business meals and entertainment. Enter 50%2106, Part I, line 1. In addition, on Part 1, line 2,
On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297of the line 8, Column B, meal and entertainmentyou can deduct parking fees and tolls that apply
($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) inexpenses on line 9, Column B.to the business use of the car. If you file Form
Column A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in Column2106-EZ, complete Part I, line 1, for the standard If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the full B.mileage rate and line 2 for parking fees and tolls. amount of your meals and entertainment on the
line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total bySee Standard Mileage Rate  in chapter 4 for After you complete the form. After you have
50%. Enter the result on line 5.information on using this rate. completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, follow
the directions on that form to deduct your ex-Hours of service limits. If you are subjectActual expenses. If you claim a deduction penses on the appropriate line of your tax return.to the Department of Transportation's ªhours ofbased on actual car expenses, you cannot use For most taxpayers, this is line 21 of Schedule Aserviceº limits (as explained earlier under Indi-Form 2106-EZ. You must complete Form 2106, (Form 1040). However, if you are a governmentviduals subject to ªhours of serviceº limits  inPart II, Section C. In addition, unless you lease official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist,chapter 2), use 80% instead of 50% for mealsyour car, you must complete Section D to show an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em-while away from your tax home.your depreciation deduction and any section ployee with impairment-related work expenses,179 deduction you claim see Special Rules, later.Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 7If you are still using a car that is fully depreci- (you cannot use Form 2106-EZ) the amounts Limits on employee business expenses.ated, continue to complete Section C. Since you your employer (or third party) reimbursed you Your employee business expenses may be sub-have no depreciation deduction, enter zero on that were not reported to you in box 1 of your ject to either of the limits described next. Theyline 28. In this case, do not complete Section D. Form W-2. This includes any amount reported are figured in the following order on the specified
Car rentals. If you claim car rental ex- under code L in box 12 of Form W-2. form.
penses on Form 2106, line 24a, you may have to Allocating your reimbursement. If you 1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer-reduce that expense by an inclusion amount as were reimbursed under an accountable plan and tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-described in chapter 4. If so, you can show your want to deduct excess expenses that were not ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, youcar expenses and any inclusion amount as fol- reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim- figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 oflows. bursement. This is necessary when your em- Form 2106-EZ. (See 50% Limit in chapter 2.)
ployer pays your reimbursement in the following1. Compute the inclusion amount without tak- 2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-manner:ing into account your business use per- tions. If you are an employee, deduct your
centage for the tax year. • Pays you a single amount that covers employee business expenses (as figured on
meals and/or entertainment, as well as Form 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 21 of Schedule A2. Report the inclusion amount from (1) on other business expenses, and (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de-Form 2106, Part II, line 24b.
ductions, including employee business ex-• Does not clearly identify how much is for3. Report on line 24c the net amount of car penses, are subject to a 2%-of-adjusted-deductible meals and/or entertainment.rental expenses (total car rental expenses gross-income limit. This limit is figured on line 26
minus the inclusion amount computed in You must allocate that single payment so that of Schedule A (Form 1040).
(1)). you know how much to enter on Form 2106, line
7, Column A and Column B. Special RulesThe net amount of car rental expenses will be
adjusted on Form 2106, Part II, line 27, to reflect Example. Rob's employer paid him an ex- This section discusses special rules that applythe percentage of business use for the tax year. pense allowance of $12,000 this year under an only to Armed Forces reservists, government
accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con- officials who are paid on a fee basis, performingTransportation expenses. Show your trans- sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for meals, artists, and disabled employees with impair-portation expenses that did not involve overnight entertainment, and car expenses. The employer ment-related work expenses.travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or on did not clearly show how much of the $7,000
Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on this was for the cost of deductible meals and enter-
line business expenses you have for parking tainment. Rob actually spent $14,000 during the Armed Forces Reservists Travelingfees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper- year ($5,500 for airfare, $4,500 for meals and More Than 100 Miles From Homeating your car or expenses of commuting be- entertainment, and $4,000 for car expenses).
tween your home and work. If you are a member of a reserve component ofSince the airfare allowance was clearly iden-
the Armed Forces of the United States and youtified, Rob knows that $5,000 of the paymentEmployee business expenses other than travel more than 100 miles away from home ingoes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. Tomeals and entertainment. Show your other connection with your performance of services asallocate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses theemployee business expenses on Form 2106, a member of the reserves, you can deduct yourworksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.
lines 3 and 4, Column A, or Form 2106-EZ, lines travel expenses as an adjustment to gross in-His completed worksheet follows.
3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals and come rather than as a miscellaneous itemized
entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex- Reimbursement Allocation Worksheet deduction. The amount of expenses you can
penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui- (Keep for your records) deduct as an adjustment to gross income is
tion and books), office-in-the-home expenses, limited to the regular federal per diem rate (for
1. Enter the total amount ofand trade and professional publications. lodging, meals, and incidental expenses) andreimbursements your employer the standard mileage rate (for car expenses)If line 4 expenses are the only ones you gave you that were not reported plus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. Seeare claiming, you received no reim- to you in box 1 of Form W-2 .. . $7,000 Per Diem and Car Allowances  earlier for more2. Enter the total amount of yourbursements (or the reimbursements
TIP information. Any expenses in excess of theseexpenses for the periodswere all included in box 1 of your Form W-2), amounts can be claimed only as a miscellane-covered by this reimbursement 8,500and the Special Rules  discussed later do not 3. Of the amount on line 2, enter ous itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit.apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or your total expense for meals2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on Member of a reserve component. You are aand entertainment ........ . 4,500
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. List the type member of a reserve component of the Armed4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the
and amount of each expense on the dotted lines Forces of the United States if you are in theresult as a decimal (rounded to
and include the total on line 21. at least three places) ...... .  .529 Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Page 34 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Guard Reserve; the Army National Guard of the 1. During the tax year, you perform services dotted line next to line 28. Enter your employee
United States; the Air National Guard of the in the performing arts as an employee for business expenses that are unrelated to your
United States; or the Reserve Corps of the Pub- at least two employers. disability from Form 2106, line 10, or Form
lic Health Service. 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),2. You receive at least $200 each from any line 21.How to report. If you have reserve-related two of these employers.
Impairment-related work expenses are yourtravel that takes you more than 100 miles from 3. Your related performing-arts business ex- allowable expenses for attendant care at yourhome, you should first complete Form 2106 or penses are more than 10% of your gross workplace and other expenses in connectionForm 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses for income from the performance of those with your workplace that are necessary for youreserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to services. to be able to work.the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or
Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040, 4. Your adjusted gross income is not more You are disabled if you have:
line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on than $16,000 before deducting these busi- • A physical or mental disability (for exam-Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, and ness expenses. ple, blindness or deafness) that function-deduct the balance as an itemized deduction on ally limits your being employed, orSchedule A (Form 1040), line 21. Special rules for married persons. If you are
You cannot deduct expenses of travel that • A physical or mental impairment (for ex-married, you must file a joint return unless you
does not take you more than 100 miles from ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatlived apart from your spouse at all times during
home as an adjustment to gross income. In- substantially limits one or more of yourthe tax year. If you file a joint return, you must
stead, you must complete Form 2106 or figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separately major life activities, such as performing
2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an for both you and your spouse. However, require- manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), ment (4) applies to your and your spouse's com- ing, learning, or working.
line 21. bined adjusted gross income.
You can deduct impairment-related expensesWhere to report. If you meet all of the above as business expenses if they are:requirements, you should first complete FormOfficials Paid on a Fee Basis • Necessary for you to do your work satis-2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your per-
factorily,Certain fee-basis officials can claim their em- forming-arts-related expenses from Form 2106,
ployee business expenses whether or not they line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on • For goods and services not required oritemize their other deductions on Schedule A Form 1040, line 24. used, other than incidentally, in your per-(Form 1040). If you do not meet all of the above require- sonal activities, andFee-basis officials are persons who are em- ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-
ployed by a state or local government and who penses as an adjustment to gross income. • Not specifically covered under other in-
are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They Instead, you must complete Form 2106 or come tax laws.
can deduct their business expenses in perform- 2106-EZ and deduct your employee business
ing services in that job as an adjustment to gross expenses as an itemized deduction on Schedule Example 1. You are blind. You must use aincome rather than as a miscellaneous itemized A (Form 1040), line 21. reader to do your work. You use the reader bothdeduction. during your regular working hours at your placeIf you are a fee-basis official, include your of work and outside your regular working hoursImpairment-Related Workemployee business expenses from Form 2106, away from your place of work. The reader'sline 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Expenses of Disabled Employees services are only for your work. You can deductForm 1040, line 24. your expenses for the reader as business ex-If you are an employee with a physical or mental
penses.disability, your impairment-related work ex-
penses are not subject to theExpenses of Certain Example 2. You are deaf. You must use a2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that appliesPerforming Artists sign-language interpreter during meetings whileto most other employee business expenses. Af-
you are at work. The interpreter's services areIf you are a performing artist, you may qualify to ter you complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, enter
used only for your work. You can deduct yourdeduct your employee business expenses as an your impairment-related work expenses from
expenses for the interpreter as business ex-adjustment to gross income rather than as a Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on
penses.miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify, Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28, and identify
you must meet all of the following requirements. the type and amount of this expense on the
Page 34 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 35 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
David first figures his special depreciation amount in Part II, Section C, and multiplies it byIllustrated Examples
allowance to be $8,575 ($24,500 ×  70% ×  50%). the 70% business use. He adds this amount
David's depreciation limit for 2010 is reduced ($3,479) to the depreciation deduction ($7,742)The following examples illustrate the reporting of
because his business use is less than 100%. He and reports the total ($11,221) on Part I, line 1.travel, entertainment, gift, and transportation ex-
figures his reduced limit to be $7,742 (2010 His other transportation expenses for park-penses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Business
depreciation limit ($11,060 (from the Maximum ing fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,320. He entersuse of a car is shown using actual car expenses
Depreciation Deduction for Cars table shown in this amount on Part I, line 2. David's employerin Example 1 and the standard mileage rate in
chapter 4) ×  70%)). David notes that his special reimbursed him a total of $4,800 for his car andExample 2. Sample records that prove some of
allowance ($8,575) exceeds his depreciation transportation expenses. This amount was paidthe claimed expenses are also shown.
limit ($7,742) for 2010. He then figures his unad- from an accountable plan and was not shown on
justed basis to be $9,408 ($24,500 ×  70% ± David's Form W-2. However, since he is claim-Example 1. David Pine purchased a new
$7,742). David figures his MACRS depreciation ing expenses that are more than his reimburse-car for $24,500 (not including sales tax) on Jan-
deduction to be $1,882 ($9,408 (unadjusted ba- ments, he must show the entire reimbursementuary 5, 2010. In 2010, he used the car 70% for
sis) x 20%). David figures his total depreciation amount on Part I, Column A, line 7. Since Davidbusiness purposes. A sample page from David's
deduction to be $9,624 ($7,742 (special allow- had no meal or entertainment expenses, he en-logbook is illustrated in Table 6-2. He records his
ance) + $1,882 (MACRS depreciation)). How- ters his excess deductible expenses ($7,741) onbusiness mileage (but not his personal miles)
ever, David's depreciation deduction is limited Part I, line 10. He can deduct these expensesand expenses daily.
by the maximum depreciation limit to $7,742. He (subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeDavid uses Form 2106 to claim actual car
enters the appropriate amounts in Part II, Sec- limit) on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21, if heexpenses. He completes Part II, Section A, as
tion D. itemizes his deductions.shown later on his illustrated form. He does not
His other car expenses included $4,970 forclaim the section 179 deduction but he does
gas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters thisclaim the special depreciation allowance. He
uses the MACRS double declining balance
method (200% DB) to determine his deprecia-
tion deduction.
Table 6-2.  Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name: David Pine
Odometer Readings Expenses
Destination  Type
 (City, Town, or Business Miles  (Gas, oil, tolls,
Date Area) Purpose  Start  Stop  this trip etc.) Amount
5/31/10
6/1/10 Local Sales calls 8,097 8,188 91 Gas $ 25.50
(St. Louis)
6/2/10 Indianapolis Sales calls 8,211 8,486 275 Parking 6.50
6/3/10 Louisville See Bob Smith 8,486 8,599 113 Gas/Repair flat 30.00
(Pot. Client) tire 105.00
6/4/10 Return to 8,599 8,875 276 Gas 27.50
St. Louis
6/5/10 Local Sales calls 8,914 9,005 91
(St. Louis)
6/6/10
Weekly 8,097 9,005 846 $ 194.50
Total
Total 6,236 $1,935.00
Year-to-Date
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

Page 36 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form  2106 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service  (99) 
Employee Business Expenses 
a See separate instructions.
a Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
OMB No. 1545-0074 
2010 
Attachment   
Sequence No.    129 
Your name Occupation in which you incurred expenses Social security number
Part I                     Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements 
Step 1  Enter Your Expenses 
Column A   
Other Than Meals   
and Entertainment 
Column B   
Meals and   
Entertainment 
1 Vehicle expense from line 22 or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See 
instructions.) .................. 1 
2 Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that 
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work . 2 
3 Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, 
airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and entertainment .  3 
4 Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not  include 
meals and entertainment .............. 4 
5 Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions) ..... 5 
6 Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the 
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5 ...... 6 
         Note:  If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8. 
Step 2  Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1 
7 Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not 
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements 
reported under code “L” in box 12 of your Form W-2 (see 
instructions) ................... 7 
Step 3  Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR) 
8 Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if  line 7
is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as  income on
Form 1040, line 7 (or on Form 1040NR, line 8) .......  8 
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct 
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form 2106 to 
your return. 
9 In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply line
8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of Transportation
(DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred while
away from home on business by 80% (.80) instead of 50%. For 
details, see instructions.) ..............
9 
10 Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21 (or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR), line 9). (Armed Forces 
reservists,  qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or local government officials, and individuals 
with  disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter the total.) .....  a
10 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11700N Form 2106 (2010) 
David Pine Sales 559
11,221
1,320
12,541
4,800
7,741
7,741
7,741
00 9559
Page 36 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 37 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2106 (2010) Page  2 
Part II                     Vehicle Expenses 
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you   
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (a)  Vehicle 1 (b)  Vehicle 2 
11 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service ......... 11 / / / / 
12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2010 ......... 12 miles miles 
13 Business miles included on line 12 ............. 13 miles miles 
14 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12 ......... 14 % % 
15 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance .......... 15 miles miles 
16 Commuting miles included on line 12 ............ 16 miles miles 
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 . .  17 miles miles 
18 Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours? ............. Yes No
19 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use? ...........  Yes No
20 Do you have evidence to support your deduction? .................. Yes No
21 If “Yes,” is the evidence written? ........................ Yes No
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or Section C.) 
22 Multiply line 13 by 50¢ (.50). Enter the result here and on line 1 ........... 22 
Section C—Actual Expenses   (a)  Vehicle 1       (b)  Vehicle 2       
23 Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle 
insurance, etc. ......
23 
24a Vehicle rentals ......  24a 
b Inclusion amount (see instructions) . 24b 
c Subtract line 24b from line 24a . 24c 
25 Value of employer-provided vehicle 
(applies only if 100% of annual 
lease value was included on Form 
W-2—see instructions)
....  25 
26 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25. . .  26 
27 Multiply line 26 by the percentage 
on line 14 . . . .....  27 
28 Depreciation (see instructions) . 28 
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total  
here and on line 1 ..... 29 
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles  (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C for the vehicle.) 
   (a)  Vehicle 1       (b)  Vehicle 2       
30 Enter cost or other basis (see  
instructions) ....... 30 
31 Enter section 179 deduction and 
special allowance (see instructions) 31 
32 Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see  
instructions if you claimed the  
section 179 deduction or special 
allowance)........  32 
33 Enter depreciation method and  
percentage (see instructions) .  33 
34 Multiply line 32 by the percentage  
on line 33 (see instructions) . . 34 
35 Add lines 31 and 34 ....  35 
36 Enter the applicable limit explained  
in the line 36 instructions . . . 36 
37 Multiply line 36 by the percentage 
on line 14 ........  37 
38 Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 
37. If you skipped lines 36 and 37, 
enter the amount from line 35. 
Also enter this  amount on line 28 
above ......... 38 
Form 2106 (2010) 
151 0
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600
√
√
√
√
4,970
4,970
3,479
7,742
11,221
24,500
7,742
9,408
200 DB 20%
1,882
9,624
11,060
7,742
7,742
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 37

Page 38 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Type of Expense AmountExample 2. Bill Wilson is an employee of Bill records his expenses and other pertinent
information in his Weekly Traveling ExpenseFashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a Parking fees and tolls .......... . $  520
and Entertainment Record, shown in Table 6-3.typical travel week, Bill leaves his home on Long Car expenses ............... . 10,000
He obtains receipts for his expenses for lodgingIsland on Monday morning and drives to Albany Meals .................... . 3,861
Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning .... . 18,318and for any other expenses of $75 or more.to exhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to prospec-
Entertainment ............... . 3,250During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000tive customers. Then he drives to Troy to show
Gifts, education, etc. .......... . 650miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.Fashion's new line of merchandise to Town De-
Total $36,599Following the instructions for Form 2106-EZ,partment Store, an old customer. While in Troy,
Part II, he answers all the questions and figureshe talks with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for Bill received an allowance of $33,000
his car expense to be $10,000 (20,000 ×  50Town Department Store, to discuss the new line. ($2,750 per month) to help offset his expenses.
cents per mile).He later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to Bill did not have to account to his employer for
His total employee business expenses aredinner to discuss Attire Co.'s buying Fashion's the reimbursement and the $33,000 was in-
shown in the following table.new line of clothing. cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W-2.
Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2007. Because Bill's reimbursement was included
He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex- in his income and he is using the standard mile-
pense purposes. He records his total mileage, age rate for his car expenses, he files Form
business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the 2106-EZ with his tax return.
year.
Page 38 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 39 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
Table 6-3.  Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
From: August 2, 2010 To: August 8, 2010 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
1. Travel Expenses:
Airlines
Excess Baggage
Bus ±  Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
2.  Meals and Lodging: 
Breakfast 8 75 8 00 8 25 9 00 34 00
 Lunch 9 75 10 00 10 25 10 25 10 50 50 75
 Dinner 22 00 20 25 21 50 63 75
 Hotel and Motel 111 00 111 00 111 00 97 00 430 00(Detail in Schedule B)
3.  Entertainment 130 00 130 00
(Detail in Schedule C)
4. Other Expenses: 
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph 5 50 4 00 9 50
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room 75 00 75 00 150 00
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s) 150 00 150 00 300 00
Trade Shows
5. Car Expenses:  (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls 8 00 6 00 6 00 20 00
6. Other (Identify)
Total 156 25 375 00 375 75 251 50 29 50 1,158 50
Note:  Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A ±  Car
Mileage: End 57,600 57,620 57,650 57,660 57,840
Start 57,445 57,600 57,620 57,650 57,660
Total 155 20 30 10 180 395
Business Mileage 155 20 30 10 170 385
Schedule B ±  Lodging
Name Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern HotelHotel 
or
City Albany Albany Albany TroyMotel
Schedule C ±  Entertainment
Date Item Place Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
August 6, 2010 Bar John's Steak House 55 00 Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.
Dinner Troy 75 00
 WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Travel and transportation expenses ... . N/A
Other reimbursements ........... .
TOTAL .................... .
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 39

Page 40 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form  2106-EZ
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service   (99)
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses
a Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment 
Sequence No.  129A
Your name Occupation in which you incurred expenses Social security number
You Can Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
• You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is 
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for 
your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
• You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not 
considered reimbursements for this purpose).
• If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2010.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2010 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year  
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
Part I Figure Your Expenses
1 Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multiply line 8a by 50¢ 
(.50) .............................. 1 
2 Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight 
travel or commuting to and from work ................... 2 
3 Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc. Do 
not include meals and entertainment .................... 3 
4 Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and 
entertainment ........................... 4 
5 Meals and entertainment expenses:   $ ×  50% (.50). (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred 
while away from home on business by 80% (.80) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.) 5 
6 Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21 (or 
on Schedule A (Form 1040NR), line 9). (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local 
government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the
instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.) ............ 6 
Part II Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7 When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) a /            /
8 Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2010, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
a Business b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
9 Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours? .............. Yes No
10 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use? ............ Yes No
11a Do you have evidence to support your deduction? ................... Yes No
b If “Yes,” is the evidence written? ......................... Yes No
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2010)
Bill Wilson Sales 555
10,000
520
18,318
650
7,111
3,556
33,044
1
20,000 2,600 2,400
√
√
√
√
00 5555
3 2007
Page 40 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 41 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
clinics can provide multilingual information • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)
about taxpayer rights and responsibilities. For published in the last few years.How To Get Tax Help more information, see Publication 4134, Low • Figure your withholding allowances usingIncome Taxpayer Clinic List. This publication isYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, the withholding calculator online at www.available at IRS.gov, by callingorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques- irs.gov/individuals.1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or at yourtions, and get information from the IRS in sev- • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed bylocal IRS office.eral ways. By selecting the method that is best using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT)for you, you will have quick and easy access to Assistant.Free tax services. Publication 910, IRStax help.
Guide to Free Tax Services, is your guide to IRS • Sign up to receive local and national taxservices and resources. Learn about free taxContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The news by email.information from the IRS, including publications,Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde-
• Get information on starting and operatingservices, and education and assistance pro-pendent organization within the IRS. We help
a small business.grams. The publication also has an index of overtaxpayers who are experiencing economic
100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax information)harm, such as not being able to provide necessi-
you can listen to on the telephone. The majorityties like housing, transportation, or food; taxpay-
of the information and services listed in this Phone. Many services are available byers who are seeking help in resolving tax
publication are available to you free of charge. If phone. problems with the IRS; and those who believe
there is a fee associated with a resource orthat an IRS system or procedure is not working
service, it is listed in the publication.as it should. Here are seven things every tax- • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-payer should know about TAS: Accessible versions of IRS published prod- tions. Call 1-800-TAX -FORMucts are available on request in a variety of (1-800-829-3676) to order current-year• The Taxpayer Advocate Service is your alternative formats for people with disabilities. forms, instructions, and publications, andvoice at the IRS.
prior-year forms and instructions. You• Our service is free, confidential, and tai- Free help with your return. Free help in pre- should receive your order within 10 days.lored to meet your needs. paring your return is available nationwide from
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withIRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income• You may be eligible for our help if you your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed tohave tried to resolve your tax problem help low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun- • Solving problems. You can getthrough normal IRS channels and have seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed face-to-face help solving tax problemsgotten nowhere, or you believe an IRS to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-procedure just isn't working as it should. tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronic sistance Centers. An employee can ex-• We help taxpayers whose problems are filing and all volunteers will let you know about plain IRS letters, request adjustments tocausing financial difficulty or significant credits and deductions you may be entitled to your account, or help you set up a pay-cost, including the cost of professional claim. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, call ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-representation. This includes businesses 1-800-829-1040. tance Center for an appointment. To findas well as individuals. As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-
Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near- tacts or look in the phone book under• Our employees know the IRS and how to
est AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or United States Government, Internal Reve-navigate it. If you qualify for our help, we'll
visit AARP's website at nue Service.assign your case to an advocate who will
www.aarp.org/money/taxaide.listen to your problem, help you under- • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessFor more information on these programs, gostand what needs to be done to resolve it, to TTY/TDD equipment, callto IRS.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in theand stay with you every step of the way 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toupper right-hand corner.until your problem is resolved. order forms and publications.
Internet. You can access the IRS web-• We have at least one local taxpayer advo- • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-site at IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 dayscate in every state, the District of Colum- ten to pre-recorded messages coveringa week to:bia, and Puerto Rico. You can call your
 various tax topics.local advocate, whose number is in your • E-file your return. Find out about commer- • Refund information. To check the status ofphone book, in Pub. 1546, Taxpayer Ad- cial tax preparation and e-file services your 2010 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 orvocate ServiceÐYour Voice at the IRS, available free to eligible taxpayers. 1-800-829-4477 (automated refund infor-and on our website at www.irs.gov/advo-
• Check the status of your 2010 refund. Go mation 24 hours a day, 7 days a week).cate. You can also call our toll-free line at
to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Re- Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS ac-1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD
fund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS knowledges receipt of your e-filed return,1-800-829-4059.
acknowledges receipt of your e-filed re- or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper re-• You can learn about your rights and re- turn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper turn. If you filed Form 8379 with your re-sponsibilities as a taxpayer by visiting our return. If you filed Form 8379 with your turn, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filedonline tax toolkit at www.taxtoolkit.irs.gov. return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you electronically). Have your 2010 tax returnYou can get updates on hot tax topics by filed electronically). Have your 2010 tax available so you can provide your socialvisiting our YouTube channel at www.you- return available so you can provide your security number, your filing status, and thetube.com/tasnta and our Facebook page social security number, your filing status, exact whole dollar amount of your refund.at www.facebook.com/YourVoiceAtIRS, or and the exact whole dollar amount of your If you check the status of your refund andby following our tweets at www.twitter. refund. are not given the date it will be issued,com/YourVoiceAtIRS. please wait until the next week before• Download forms, including talking tax checking back.Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). forms, instructions, and publications.
The Low Income Taxpayer Clinic program • Other refund information. To check the• Order IRS products online.serves individuals who have a problem with the status of a prior-year refund or amended
IRS and whose income is below a certain level. • Research your tax questions online. return refund, call 1-800-829-1040.
LITCs are independent from the IRS. Most • Search publications online by topic orLITCs can provide representation before the Evaluating the quality of our telephonekeyword.IRS or in court on audits, tax collection disputes, services. To ensure IRS representatives give
and other issues for free or a small fee. If an • Use the online Internal Revenue Code, accurate, courteous, and professional answers,
individual's native language is not English, some regulations, or other official guidance. we use several methods to evaluate the quality
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 41

Page 42 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of our telephone services. One method is for a days to schedule an in-person appoint- • Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax
second IRS representative to listen in on or ment at your convenience. If you have an forms.
record random telephone calls. Another is to ask ongoing, complex tax account problem or • Internal Revenue Bulletins.some callers to complete a short survey at the a special need, such as a disability, an
end of the call. appointment can be requested. All other • Toll-free and email technical support.
issues will be handled without an appoint- • Two releases during the year.Walk-in. Many products and services ment. To find the number of your local ± The first release shipped the beginningare available on a walk-in basis. office, go to 
of January 2011.
www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the
± The final release will ship the beginningphone book under United States Govern-• Products. You can walk in to many post of March 2011.ment, Internal Revenue Service.offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up
certain forms, instructions, and publica- Purchase the DVD from National Technicaltions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery Mail. You can send your order for
Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/stores, copy centers, city and county gov- forms, instructions, and publications to
cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or callernment offices, credit unions, and office the address below. You should receive
1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30supply stores have a collection of products a response within 10 days after your request is
available to print from a CD or photocopy (plus a $6 handling fee).received.
from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS
offices and libraries have the Internal Rev- Internal Revenue Service
enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail- Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
Appendicesable for research purposes.
DVD for tax products. You can order
• Services. You can walk in to your local Publication 1796, IRS Tax Products There are fifteen appendices.Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- DVD, and obtain:
 Appendices A-1 through A-6 show the leaseness day for personal, face-to-face tax
• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub- inclusion amounts that you may need to report ifhelp. An employee can explain IRS letters,
lications. you leased a car (other than a truck or van, or anrequest adjustments to your tax account,
or help you set up a payment plan. If you electric car) for 30 days or more. The tables are• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-
need to resolve a tax problem, have ques- numbered.tions.
tions about how the tax law applies to your Appendices B-1 through B-6 show the lease• Tax Map: an electronic research tool andindividual tax return, or you are more com-
inclusion amounts that you may need to report iffinding aid.fortable talking with someone in person,
you leased a truck or van.visit your local Taxpayer Assistance • Tax law frequently asked questions.
Center where you can spread out your Appendices C-1 through C-3 show the lease• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-records and talk with an IRS representa- inclusion amounts that you may need to report ifsponse system.tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec- you leased an electric car before 2007.essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the If any of these apply to you, use the appendixcan call your local Center and leave a U.S. Code.
for the year you first leased the car. (See chaptermessage requesting an appointment to re-
solve a tax account issue. A representa- 4.)
tive will call you back within 2 business
Page 42 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 43 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 2001 through 2005
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 2001 Beginning in 2002 Beginning in 2003 Beginning in 2004 Beginning in 2005
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 15,200 $ 15,500 $  0 $  0 $  0 $  0 $  13
15,500 15,800 11 6 0 0 19
15,800 16,100 22 13 0 0 26
16,100 16,400 33 19 0 0 32
16,400 16,700 44 26 0 0 39
16,700 17,000 56 31 0 0 44
17,000 17,500 70 40 0 0 52
17,500 18,000 89 50 0 48 63
18,000 18,500 107 61 45 56 73
18,500 19,000 125 72 53 65 83
19,000 19,500 143 82 61 73 94
19,500 20,000 162 93 69 81 104
20,000 20,500 181 103 77 89 115
20,500 21,000 199 114 85 97 125
21,000 21,500 217 123 92 106 135
21,500 22,000 236 134 100 114 146
22,000 23,000 263 150 111 126 161
23,000 24,000 300 171 127 142 182
24,000 25,000 337 192 143 159 202
25,000 26,000 373 213 158 176 223
26,000 27,000 410 234 174 192 244
27,000 28,000 447 255 189 209 265
28,000 29,000 484 276 204 225 285
29,000 30,000 520 296 221 242 306
30,000 31,000 557 318 236 257 326
31,000 32,000 594 338 251 274 348
32,000 33,000 631 360 267 291 367
33,000 34,000 667 381 283 307 389
34,000 35,000 705 402 298 323 409
35,000 36,000 741 422 314 340 430
36,000 37,000 778 443 330 357 451
37,000 38,000 815 464 346 373 471
38,000 39,000 851 485 361 389 491
39,000 40,000 888 506 376 405 512
40,000 41,000 925 527 391 423 533
41,000 42,000 962 549 407 438 554
42,000 43,000 998 570 423 455 575
43,000 44,000 1,036 590 438 471 595
44,000 45,000 1,072 611 454 488 616
45,000 46,000 1,108 632 470 504 636
46,000 47,000 1,145 653 486 520 657
47,000 48,000 1,183 674 501 538 678
48,000 49,000 1,219 695 516 554 699
49,000 50,000 1,256 717 532 570 719
50,000 51,000 1,293 737 548 586 740
51,000 52,000 1,330 758 563 603 760
52,000 53,000 1,366 779 578 619 781
53,000 54,000 1,403 800 594 636 802
54,000 55,000 1,439 821 610 652 823
55,000 56,000 1,476 842 626 669 844
56,000 57,000 1,514 863 641 685 864
57,000 58,000 1,550 883 656 701 884
58,000 59,000 1,586 905 672 718 905
59,000 60,000 1,624 925 688 734 925
60,000 62,000 1,678 957 711 759 957
62,000 64,000 1,752 999 743 792 998
64,000 66,000 1,825 1,041 773 825 1,039
66,000 68,000 1,900 1,083 805 857 1,081
68,000 70,000 1,972 1,125 835 890 1,123
70,000 72,000 2,047 1,166 867 923 1,163
72,000 74,000 2,120 1,208 898 956 1,204
74,000 76,0002 2,193 1,250 930 990 1,247
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,501, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-09.pdf.
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-05.pdf.
For 2003, Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
For 2004, Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html
For 2005, Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 43

Page 44 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,200 $ 15,500 $ 4  $ 6 $ 10 $ 10 $ 10
15,500 15,800 6 10 16 18 18
15,800 16,100 8 15 22 25 28
16,100 16,400 9 19 29 33 36
16,400 16,700 11 24 35 40 45
16,700 17,000 13 28 42 48 53
17,000 17,500 16 34 50 58 66
17,500 18,000 19 41 61 71 80
18,000 18,500 23 48 71 84 95
18,500 19,000 26 55 82 96 110
19,000 19,500 29 62 93 109 125
19,500 20,000 32 70 103 122 139
20,000 20,500 36 76 114 135 154
20,500 21,000 39 84 124 148 168
21,000 21,500 42 91 135 160 184
21,500 22,000 45 98 146 173 198
22,000 23,000 50 109 162 192 220
23,000 24,000 57 123 183 218 250
24,000 25,000 63 138 204 243 279
25,000 26,000 70 152 225 269 309
26,000 27,000 76 166 247 294 339
27,000 28,000 83 181 268 319 368
28,000 29,000 90 195 289 345 397
29,000 30,000 96 209 311 371 426
30,000 31,000 103 223 332 397 455
31,000 32,000 109 238 353 422 485
32,000 33,000 116 252 374 448 515
33,000 34,000 122 267 395 473 545
34,000 35,000 129 281 417 498 574
35,000 36,000 135 295 439 523 604
36,000 37,000 142 309 460 549 633
37,000 38,000 148 324 481 575 662
38,000 39,000 155 338 502 601 691
39,000 40,000 161 353 523 626 721
40,000 41,000 168 367 545 651 750
41,000 42,000 175 381 566 677 780
42,000 43,000 181 396 587 702 810
43,000 44,000 188 410 608 728 839
44,000 45,000 194 424 630 753 869
45,000 46,000 201 438 651 779 898
46,000 47,000 207 453 672 805 927
47,000 48,000 214 467 694 830 956
48,000 49,000 220 482 715 855 986
49,000 50,000 227 496 736 881 1,016
50,000 51,000 233 510 758 906 1,045
51,000 52,000 240 525 778 932 1,075
52,000 53,000 246 539 800 958 1,104
53,000 54,000 253 553 821 984 1,133
54,000 55,000 259 568 842 1,009 1,163
55,000 56,000 266 582 864 1,034 1,192
56,000 57,000 273 596 885 1,060 1,221
57,000 58,000 279 611 906 1,085 1,251
58,000 59,000 286 625 927 1,111 1,281
59,000 60,000 292 639 949 1,136 1,311
60,000 62,000 302 661 981 1,174 1,354
62,000 64,000 315 690 1,023 1,225 1,413
64,000 66,000 328 718 1,066 1,276 1,473
66,000 68,000 341 747 1,108 1,328 1,531
68,000 70,000 354 776 1,151 1,378 1,590
70,000 72,000 367 804 1,194 1,429 1,649
72,000 74,000 380 833 1,236 1,481 1,707
74,000 76,000 393 862 1,278 1,532 1,767
76,000 78,000 407 890 1,321 1,583 1,825
78,000 80,000 420 919 1,363 1,634 1,884
80,000 85,000 443 969 1,438 1,723 1,987
85,000 90,000 475 1,041 1,544 1,851 2,135
90,000 95,000 508 1,112 1,651 1,978 2,282
95,000 100,0002 541 1,184 1,757 2,106 2,429
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 44 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 45 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2007
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,000 $ 15,800 $ 2  $ 5 $ 11 $ 11 $ 13
15,800 16,100 4 10 17 19 22
16,100 16,400 6 14 24 28 31
16,400 16,700 9 18 31 35 41
16,700 17,000 11 23 37 43 50
17,000 17,500 13 29 46 54 62
17,500 18,000 17 37 56 68 77
18,000 18,500 20 44 68 81 93
18,500 19,000 24 51 80 94 108
19,000 19,500 27 59 90 108 124
19,500 20,000 30 67 101 121 139
20,000 20,500 34 74 113 134 154
20,500 21,000 37 82 123 148 170
21,000 21,500 41 89 135 161 185
21,500 22,000 44 97 146 174 201
22,000 23,000 49 108 163 194 224
23,000 24,000 56 123 185 221 255
24,000 25,000 63 138 207 248 285
25,000 26,000 70 153 229 275 316
26,000 27,000 77 168 251 302 347
27,000 28,000 83 183 274 328 378
28,000 29,000 90 198 296 355 409
29,000 30,000 97 213 318 382 439
30,000 31,000 104 228 341 408 470
31,000 32,000 111 243 363 435 501
32,000 33,000 118 258 385 461 532
33,000 34,000 125 273 407 488 563
34,000 35,000 131 288 430 515 593
35,000 36,000 138 303 452 542 624
36,000 37,000 145 318 474 568 656
37,000 38,000 152 333 496 595 686
38,000 39,000 159 348 519 621 717
39,000 40,000 166 363 541 648 748
40,000 41,000 172 378 564 674 779
41,000 42,000 179 393 586 701 810
42,000 43,000 186 408 608 728 840
43,000 44,000 193 423 630 755 871
44,000 45,000 200 438 652 782 902
45,000 46,000 207 453 674 809 933
46,000 47,000 213 468 697 835 964
47,000 48,000 220 483 719 862 995
48,000 49,000 227 498 742 888 1,025
49,000 50,000 234 513 764 915 1,056
50,000 51,000 241 528 786 942 1,087
51,000 52,000 278 543 808 969 1,117
52,000 53,000 254 558 831 995 1,148
53,000 54,000 261 573 853 1,022 1,179
54,000 55,000 268 588 875 1,049 1,210
55,000 56,000 275 603 897 1,076 1,241
56,000 57,000 282 618 920 1,102 1,271
57,000 58,000 289 633 942 1,128 1,303
58,000 59,000 296 648 964 1,155 1,334
59,000 60,000 302 663 987 1,182 1,364
60,000 62,000 313 685 1,020 1,222 1,411
62,000 64,000 326 716 1,064 1,276 1,472
64,000 66,000 340 746 1,108 1,329 1,534
66,000 68,000 354 775 1,154 1,382 1,595
68,000 70,000 367 806 1,198 1,435 1,657
70,000 72,000 381 836 1,242 1,489 1,719
72,000 74,000 395 865 1,287 1,543 1,780
74,000 76,000 408 896 1,331 1,596 1,842
76,000 78,000 422 926 1,376 1,649 1,903
78,000 80,000 436 955 1,421 1,703 1,965
80,000 85,000 460 1,008 1,498 1,796 2,074
85,000 90,000 494 1,083 1,610 1,929 2,228
90,000 95,000 528 1,158 1,721 2,063 2,382
95,000 100,0002 562 1,233 1,833 2,196 2,536
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2007-30 (2007-18 IRB 1104), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-18_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 45

Page 46 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2008
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 20 $ 42 $ 62 $ 73 $ 84
19,000 19,500 22 47 71 83 94
19,500 20,000 25 53 78 93 106
20,000 20,500 27 58 87 102 117
20,500 21,000 30 63 95 112 128
21,000 21,500 32 69 103 122 139
21,500 22,000 34 75 111 131 151
22,000 23,000 38 83 123 146 167
23,000 24,000 43 94 139 165 190
24,000 25,000 48 105 155 185 212
25,000 26,000 53 115 172 204 235
26,000 27,000 58 126 188 223 257
27,000 28,000 63 137 204 243 279
28,000 29,000 68 148 220 262 302
29,000 30,000 73 159 236 282 324
30,000 31,000 78 107 252 301 347
31,000 32,000 83 181 268 321 368
32,000 33,000 88 192 284 340 391
33,000 34,000 93 202 301 359 414
34,000 35,000 98 213 317 379 436
35,000 36,000 103 224 333 398 459
36,000 37,000 108 235 349 418 481
37,000 38,000 113 246 365 437 503
38,000 39,000 118 257 381 457 525
39,000 40,000 123 268 397 476 548
40,000 41,000 128 279 413 495 571
41,000 42,000 133 289 430 515 593
42,000 43,000 137 301 446 534 615
43,000 44,000 142 312 462 553 638
44,000 45,000 147 323 478 573 659
45,000 46,000 152 333 495 592 682
46,000 47,000 157 344 511 611 705
47,000 48,000 162 355 527 631 727
48,000 49,000 167 366 543 650 750
49,000 50,000 172 377 559 670 772
50,000 51,000 177 388 575 689 794
51,000 52,000 182 399 591 709 816
52,000 53,000 187 410 607 728 839
53,000 54,000 192 420 624 747 862
54,000 55,000 197 431 640 767 884
55,000 56,000 202 442 657 785 906
56,000 57,000 207 453 673 805 928
57,000 58,000 212 464 689 824 951
58,000 59,000 217 475 705 844 973
59,000 60,000 222 486 721 863 996
60,000 62,000 229 502 746 892 1,029
62,000 64,000 239 524 778 931 1,074
64,000 66,000 249 546 810 970 1,118
66,000 68,000 259 567 843 1,008 1,164
68,000 70,000 269 589 875 1,047 1,209
70,000 72,000 279 611 907 1,086 1,253
72,000 74,000 289 633 939 1,125 1,298
74,000 76,000 299 654 972 1,164 1,342
76,000 78,000 309 676 1,004 1,203 1,387
78,000 80,000 319 698 1,036 1,242 1,432
80,000 85,000 336 736 1,093 1,309 1,511
85,000 90,000 361 791 1,173 1,406 1,623
90,000 95,000 386 845 1,255 1,503 1,734
95,000 100,0002 410 900 1,335 1,600 1,846
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2008-22 (2008-12 IRB 658), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-12_IRB/ar18.html.
Page 46 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 47 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2009
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 9 $ 19 $ 28 $ 34 $ 38
19,000 19,500 10 21 32 38 43
19,500 20,000 11 24 36 42 48
20,000 20,500 12 27 39 46 54
20,500 21,000 13 29 43 51 58
21,000 21,500 15 31 47 55 64
21,500 22,000 16 34 50 60 68
22,000 23,000 17 38 56 66 76
23,000 24,000 20 42 64 75 86
24,000 25,000 22 47 71 84 96
25,000 26,000 24 52 78 93 107
26,000 27,000 26 58 85 101 117
27,000 28,000 29 62 93 110 127
28,000 29,000 31 67 100 119 138
29,000 30,000 33 72 108 128 147
30,000 31,000 35 77 115 137 157
31,000 32,000 38 82 122 146 167
32,000 33,000 40 87 129 155 178
33,000 34,000 42 92 137 163 188
34,000 35,000 44 97 144 172 199
35,000 36,000 47 102 151 181 208
36,000 37,000 49 107 159 189 219
37,000 38,000 51 112 166 199 228
38,000 39,000 53 117 173 208 239
39,000 40,000 56 122 180 216 250
40,000 41,000 58 127 188 225 259
41,000 42,000 60 132 195 234 269
42,000 43,000 62 137 203 242 280
43,000 44,000 65 141 210 252 290
44,000 45,000 67 146 218 260 300
45,000 46,000 69 151 225 269 311
46,000 47,000 71 157 232 278 320
47,000 48,000 74 161 240 286 331
48,000 49,000 76 166 247 296 340
49,000 50,000 78 171 255 304 351
50,000 51,000 80 176 262 313 361
51,000 52,000 83 181 269 322 371
52,000 53,000 85 186 276 331 381
53,000 54,000 87 191 284 339 392
54,000 55,000 89 196 291 349 401
55,000 56,000 92 201 298 357 412
56,000 57,000 94 206 306 365 423
57,000 58,000 96 211 313 375 432
58,000 59,000 98 216 320 384 442
59,000 60,000 101 221 327 393 452
60,000 62,000 104 228 339 406 467
62,000 64,000 109 238 353 424 488
64,000 66,000 113 248 368 441 509
66,000 68,000 118 258 382 459 529
68,000 70,000 122 268 397 476 550
70,000 72,000 127 277 413 493 570
72,000 74,000 131 288 427 511 590
74,000 76,000 136 297 442 529 610
76,000 78,000 140 307 457 546 631
78,000 80,000 145 317 471 564 651
80,000 85,000 152 335 497 595 686
85,000 90,000 164 359 534 639 737
90,000 95,000 175 384 570 683 789
95,000 100,0002 186 409 607 727 839
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2009-24 (2009-17 IRB 885), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-17_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 47

Page 48 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2010
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 7 $ 15 $ 22 $ 26 $ 31
19,000 19,500 8 17 25 30 35
19,500 20,000 9 19 29 34 39
20,000 20,500 10 21 32 38 44
20,500 21,000 11 23 35 42 48
21,000 21,500 12 26 38 45 53
21,500 22,000 13 28 41 50 57
22,000 23,000 14 31 46 56 63
23,000 24,000 16 36 52 63 73
24,000 25,000 18 40 59 71 81
25,000 26,000 20 44 66 78 90
26,000 27,000 22 49 71 86 100
27,000 28,000 24 53 78 94 108
28,000 29,000 26 57 85 101 118
29,000 30,000 28 61 92 109 126
30,000 31,000 30 66 97 117 135
31,000 32,000 32 70 104 125 144
32,000 33,000 34 74 111 132 153
33,000 34,000 36 79 117 140 161
34,000 35,000 38 83 123 148 171
35,000 36,000 40 87 130 156 179
36,000 37,000 42 92 136 163 188
37,000 38,000 44 96 143 170 198
38,000 39,000 46 100 149 179 206
39,000 40,000 48 105 155 186 215
40,000 41,000 50 109 162 194 224
41,000 42,000 52 113 169 201 233
42,000 43,000 54 118 174 210 241
43,000 44,000 56 122 181 217 251
44,000 45,000 58 126 188 225 259
45,000 46,000 60 131 194 232 269
46,000 47,000 61 135 201 240 277
47,000 48,000 63 140 207 248 286
48,000 49,000 65 144 213 256 295
49,000 50,000 67 148 220 263 304
50,000 51,000 69 153 226 271 313
51,000 52,000 71 157 232 279 322
52,000 53,000 73 161 239 287 331
53,000 54,000 75 166 245 294 340
54,000 55,000 77 170 252 302 348
55,000 56,000 79 174 258 310 358
56,000 57,000 81 178 265 318 366
57,000 58,000 83 183 271 325 375
58,000 59,000 85 187 278 333 384
59,000 60,000 87 191 284 341 393
60,000 62,000 90 198 294 352 406
62,000 64,000 94 207 306 368 424
64,000 66,000 98 215 320 382 443
66,000 68,000 102 224 332 398 460
68,000 70,000 106 232 346 413 478
70,000 72,000 110 241 358 429 496
72,000 74,000 114 250 371 444 513
74,000 76,000 118 258 384 460 531
76,000 78,000 122 267 396 476 549
78,000 80,000 126 276 409 491 566
80,000 85,000 132 291 432 518 598
85,000 90,000 142 313 464 556 643
90,000 95,000 152 334 497 594 687
95,000 100,0002 162 356 528 634 731
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2010-18 (2010-9 IRB 427), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2010-09_IRB/ar04.html.
Page 48 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 49 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2001 through 2005
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 2001 Beginning in 2002 Beginning in 2003 Beginning in 2004 Beginning in 2005
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 15,500 $ 15,800 $  11 $  6 $  0 $  0 $  0
15,800 16,100 22 13 0 0 0
16,100 16,400 33 19 0 0 0
16,400 16,700 44 26 0 0 0
16,700 17,000 56 31 0 0 11
17,000 17,500 70 40 0 0 20
17,500 18,000 89 50 0 0 30
18,000 18,500 107 61 0 30 40
18,500 19,000 125 72 29 38 51
19,000 19,500 143 82 36 47 61
19,500 20,000 162 93 44 55 71
20,000 20,500 181 103 52 63 81
20,500 21,000 199 114 60 72 92
21,000 21,500 217 123 67 80 103
21,500 22,000 236 134 75 88 113
22,000 23,000 263 150 86 100 129
23,000 24,000 300 171 102 117 149
24,000 25,000 337 192 118 133 169
25,000 26,000 373 213 133 149 190
26,000 27,000 410 234 149 166 210
27,000 28,000 447 255 165 183 231
28,000 29,000 484 276 180 198 253
29,000 30,000 520 296 196 215 272
30,000 31,000 557 318 212 231 294
31,000 32,000 594 338 227 248 314
32,000 33,000 631 360 242 264 335
33,000 34,000 667 381 258 281 355
34,000 35,000 705 402 273 298 376
35,000 36,000 741 422 289 314 397
36,000 37,000 778 443 305 330 418
37,000 38,000 815 464 320 346 438
38,000 39,000 851 485 336 364 459
39,000 40,000 888 506 352 379 480
40,000 41,000 925 527 367 396 500
41,000 42,000 962 549 383 412 521
42,000 43,000 998 570 398 429 542
43,000 44,000 1,036 590 414 445 562
44,000 45,000 1,072 611 429 462 583
45,000 46,000 1,108 632 445 479 603
46,000 47,000 1,145 653 460 495 624
47,000 48,000 1,183 674 476 511 645
48,000 49,000 1,219 695 492 527 666
49,000 50,000 1,256 717 507 544 687
50,000 51,000 1,293 737 523 560 707
51,000 52,000 1,330 758 538 577 728
52,000 53,000 1,366 779 554 593 748
53,000 54,000 1,403 800 570 610 769
54,000 55,000 1,439 821 585 626 789
55,000 56,000 1,476 842 601 643 811
56,000 57,000 1,514 863 617 659 830
57,000 58,000 1,550 883 632 675 852
58,000 59,000 1,586 905 647 691 873
59,000 60,000 1,624 925 663 708 893
60,000 62,000 1,678 957 687 733 924
62,000 64,000 1,752 999 717 766 966
64,000 66,000 1,825 1,041 749 798 1,007
66,000 68,000 1,900 1,083 780 832 1,048
68,000 70,000 1,972 1,125 811 864 1,089
70,000 72,000 2,047 1,166 842 897 1,131
72,000 74,000 2,120 1,208 873 931 1,172
74,000 76,0002 2,193 1,250 905 963 1,213
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,501, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-09.pdf.
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-05.pdf.
For 2003, Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
For 2004, Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html.
For 2005, Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 49

Page 50 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,700 $ 17,000 $ 4  $ 8 $ 12 $ 14 $ 16
17,000 17,500 6 14 20 24 29
17,500 18,000 9 21 31 37 43
18,000 18,500 13 28 42 49 58
18,500 19,000 16 36 52 62 72
19,000 19,500 19 43 63 75 87
19,500 20,000 23 50 73 88 102
20,000 20,500 26 57 84 101 116
20,500 21,000 29 64 95 113 131
21,000 21,500 32 72 105 126 146
21,500 22,000 36 78 116 139 161
22,000 23,000 41 89 132 158 183
23,000 24,000 47 104 153 183 213
24,000 25,000 54 118 174 209 242
25,000 26,000 60 132 196 235 271
26,000 27,000 67 146 217 261 300
27,000 28,000 73 161 238 286 330
28,000 29,000 80 175 260 311 359
29,000 30,000 86 190 281 336 389
30,000 31,000 93 204 302 362 418
31,000 32,000 99 219 323 388 447
32,000 33,000 106 233 344 413 478
33,000 34,000 112 247 366 439 506
34,000 35,000 119 261 387 465 536
35,000 36,000 125 276 408 490 566
36,000 37,000 132 290 430 515 595
37,000 38,000 139 304 451 541 624
38,000 39,000 145 319 472 566 654
39,000 40,000 152 333 493 592 684
40,000 41,000 158 347 515 618 712
41,000 42,000 165 362 536 642 743
42,000 43,000 171 376 557 669 772
43,000 44,000 178 390 579 694 801
44,000 45,000 184 405 600 719 831
45,000 46,000 191 419 621 745 860
46,000 47,000 197 434 642 770 890
47,000 48,000 204 448 663 796 919
48,000 49,000 210 462 685 822 948
49,000 50,000 217 476 707 847 977
50,000 51,000 224 490 728 872 1,008
51,000 52,000 230 505 749 898 1,037
52,000 53,000 237 519 770 924 1,066
53,000 54,000 243 534 791 949 1,096
54,000 55,000 250 548 813 974 1,125
55,000 56,000 256 563 833 1,000 1,155
56,000 57,000 263 577 855 1,025 1,184
57,000 58,000 269 591 877 1,051 1,213
58,000 59,000 276 605 898 1,077 1,243
59,000 60,000 282 620 919 1,102 1,272
60,000 62,000 292 641 951 1,141 1,316
62,000 64,000 305 670 994 1,191 1,375
64,000 66,000 318 699 1,036 1,242 1,435
66,000 68,000 331 728 1,078 1,293 1,494
68,000 70,000 344 756 1,121 1,345 1,552
70,000 72,000 358 784 1,164 1,395 1,612
72,000 74,000 371 813 1,206 1,447 1,670
74,000 76,000 384 842 1,249 1,497 1,729
76,000 78,000 397 871 1,291 1,548 1,788
78,000 80,000 410 899 1,334 1,600 1,846
80,000 85,000 433 949 1,409 1,688 1,950
85,000 90,000 465 1,021 1,515 1,816 2,098
90,000 95,000 498 1,093 1,621 1,944 2,244
95,000 100,0002 531 1,164 1,728 2,071 2,392
1 For the last year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 50 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 51 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-3. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2007
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,400 $ 16,700 $ 2  $ 4 $ 8 $ 10 $ 11
16,700 17,000 4 9 15 17 21
17,000 17,500 6 15 24 28 33
17,500 18,000 10 22 35 42 48
18,000 18,500 13 30 46 55 64
18,500 19,000 17 37 57 69 79
19,000 19,500 20 45 68 82 94
19,500 20,000 24 52 80 95 109
20,000 20,500 27 60 90 109 125
20,500 21,000 30 67 102 122 141
21,000 21,500 34 75 113 135 156
21,500 22,000 37 82 124 149 171
22,000 23,000 42 94 140 169 194
23,000 24,000 49 109 163 195 225
24,000 25,000 56 123 186 222 256
25,000 26,000 63 138 208 249 286
26,000 27,000 70 153 230 276 317
27,000 28,000 77 168 252 302 349
28,000 29,000 83 184 274 329 379
29,000 30,000 90 199 296 356 410
30,000 31,000 97 214 318 383 440
31,000 32,000 104 228 342 408 472
32,000 33,000 111 243 364 435 503
33,000 34,000 118 258 386 462 534
34,000 35,000 125 273 408 489 564
35,000 36,000 131 289 430 515 595
36,000 37,000 138 304 452 542 626
37,000 38,000 145 318 475 569 657
38,000 39,000 152 333 497 596 688
39,000 40,000 159 348 520 622 718
40,000 41,000 166 363 542 649 749
41,000 42,000 172 379 563 676 780
42,000 43,000 179 397 586 702 811
43,000 44,000 186 409 608 729 842
44,000 45,000 193 423 631 756 872
45,000 46,000 200 438 653 783 903
46,000 47,000 207 453 675 810 934
47,000 48,000 213 469 697 836 965
48,000 49,000 220 484 719 863 996
49,000 50,000 227 499 741 890 1,026
50,000 51,000 234 514 764 916 1,057
51,000 52,000 241 528 787 943 1,088
52,000 53,000 248 543 809 969 1,119
53,000 54,000 254 559 831 996 1,150
54,000 55,000 261 574 853 1,023 1,180
55,000 56,000 268 589 875 1,050 1,211
56,000 57,000 275 604 897 1,076 1,243
57,000 58,000 282 618 920 1,103 1,273
58,000 59,000 289 633 943 1,129 1,304
59,000 60,000 296 648 965 1,156 1,335
60,000 62,000 306 671 998 1,196 1,381
62,000 64,000 319 701 1,043 1,249 1,443
64,000 66,000 333 731 1,087 1,303 1,504
66,000 68,000 347 761 1,131 1,357 1,566
68,000 70,000 361 791 1,176 1,410 1,627
70,000 72,000 374 821 1,221 1,463 1,689
72,000 74,000 388 851 1,265 1,517 1,751
74,000 76,000 402 881 1,309 1,570 1,813
76,000 78,000 415 911 1,354 1,624 1,874
78,000 80,000 429 941 1,399 1,676 1,936
80,000 85,000 453 994 1,476 1,770 2,044
85,000 90,000 487 1,069 1,587 1,904 2,198
90,000 95,000 521 1,144 1,699 2,037 2,352
95,000 100,0002 555 1,219 1,810 2,171 2,506
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2007-30 (2007-18 IRB 1104), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-18_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 51

Page 52 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-4. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2008
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 19,000 $ 19,500 $ 17 $ 37 $ 54 $ 65 $ 73
19,500 20,000 20 42 63 73 85
20,000 20,500 22 48 70 84 96
20,500 21,000 25 53 79 93 107
21,000 21,500 27 59 86 103 118
21,500 22,000 30 64 95 112 130
22,000 23,000 33 72 107 128 146
23,000 24,000 38 83 123 147 168
24,000 25,000 43 94 139 166 191
25,000 26,000 48 105 155 186 213
26,000 27,000 53 116 171 205 236
27,000 28,000 58 127 187 225 258
28,000 29,000 63 138 204 243 280
29,000 30,000 68 148 221 263 302
30,000 31,000 73 159 237 282 325
31,000 32,000 78 170 253 301 348
32,000 33,000 83 181 269 321 370
33,000 34,000 88 192 285 340 393
34,000 35,000 93 203 301 360 414
35,000 36,000 98 214 317 379 437
36,000 37,000 103 225 333 399 459
37,000 38,000 108 235 350 418 482
38,000 39,000 113 246 366 437 505
39,000 40,000 118 257 382 457 526
40,000 41,000 123 268 398 476 549
41,000 42,000 128 279 414 496 571
42,000 43,000 133 290 430 515 594
43,000 44,000 137 301 447 534 616
44,000 45,000 142 312 463 553 639
45,000 46,000 147 323 479 573 661
46,000 47,000 152 334 495 592 684
47,000 48,000 157 345 511 612 705
48,000 49,000 162 356 527 631 728
49,000 50,000 167 366 544 651 750
50,000 51,000 172 377 560 670 773
51,000 52,000 177 388 576 689 796
52,000 53,000 182 399 592 709 817
53,000 54,000 187 410 608 728 840
54,000 55,000 192 421 624 748 862
55,000 56,000 197 432 640 767 885
56,000 57,000 202 443 656 787 907
57,000 58,000 207 453 673 806 929
58,000 59,000 212 464 689 825 952
59,000 60,000 217 475 705 845 974
60,000 62,000 224 492 729 874 1,008
62,000 64,000 234 513 762 913 1,052
64,000 66,000 244 535 794 951 1,098
66,000 68,000 254 557 826 990 1,142
68,000 70,000 264 579 858 1,029 1,187
70,000 72,000 274 600 892 1,067 1,232
72,000 74,000 284 622 924 1,106 1,276
74,000 76,000 294 644 956 1,145 1,321
76,000 78,000 304 666 988 1,184 1,366
78,000 80,000 314 687 1,021 1,222 1,411
80,000 85,000 331 726 1,077 1,290 1,489
85,000 90,000 356 780 1,158 1,387 1,601
90,000 95,000 381 835 1,238 1,484 1,713
95,000 100,0002 405 889 1,320 1,581 1,825
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2008-22 (2008-12 IRB 658), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-12_IRB/ar18.html.
Page 52 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 53 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-5. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2009
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 8 $ 17 $ 25 $ 30 $ 35
19,000 19,500 9 19 29 35 40
19,500 20,000 10 22 33 38 45
20,000 20,500 11 25 36 43 50
20,500 21,000 12 27 40 48 55
21,000 21,500 13 30 43 52 60
21,500 22,000 15 32 47 56 66
22,000 23,000 16 36 52 64 72
23,000 24,000 18 41 60 72 83
24,000 25,000 21 45 68 81 93
25,000 26,000 23 50 75 90 103
26,000 27,000 25 56 82 98 114
27,000 28,000 27 61 89 107 124
28,000 29,000 30 65 97 116 134
29,000 30,000 32 70 104 125 144
30,000 31,000 34 75 112 134 154
31,000 32,000 36 80 119 143 164
32,000 33,000 39 85 126 151 175
33,000 34,000 41 90 134 160 184
34,000 35,000 43 95 141 169 195
35,000 36,000 45 100 148 178 205
36,000 37,000 48 105 155 187 215
37,000 38,000 50 110 163 195 226
38,000 39,000 52 115 170 204 236
39,000 40,000 55 120 177 213 246
40,000 41,000 57 125 185 221 256
41,000 42,000 59 130 192 231 266
42,000 43,000 61 135 199 240 276
43,000 44,000 64 139 207 249 286
44,000 45,000 66 144 215 257 296
45,000 46,000 68 149 222 266 307
46,000 47,000 70 155 229 274 317
47,000 48,000 73 159 237 283 327
48,000 49,000 75 164 244 292 338
49,000 50,000 77 169 251 301 348
50,000 51,000 79 174 259 310 357
51,000 52,000 82 179 266 318 368
52,000 53,000 84 184 273 328 378
53,000 54,000 86 189 281 336 388
54,000 55,000 88 194 288 345 399
55,000 56,000 91 199 295 354 408
56,000 57,000 93 204 302 363 419
57,000 58,000 95 209 310 371 429
58,000 59,000 97 214 317 381 439
59,000 60,000 100 219 324 389 450
60,000 62,000 103 226 336 402 465
62,000 64,000 107 236 351 420 485
64,000 66,000 112 246 365 438 505
66,000 68,000 116 256 380 455 526
68,000 70,000 121 266 394 473 546
70,000 72,000 125 276 409 491 566
72,000 74,000 130 286 423 509 586
74,000 76,000 134 296 438 526 607
76,000 78,000 139 305 454 543 627
78,000 80,000 143 316 467 561 648
80,000 85,000 151 333 493 592 684
85,000 90,000 163 357 531 635 735
90,000 95,000 174 382 567 680 785
95,000 100,0002 185 407 604 724 836
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2009-24 (2009-17 IRB 885), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-17_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 53

Page 54 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-6. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2010
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 19,000 $ 19,500 $ 7 $ 15 $ 21 $ 26 $ 29
19,500 20,000 8 17 25 29 34
20,000 20,500 9 19 28 33 38
20,500 21,000 10 21 31 37 43
21,000 21,500 11 23 35 41 47
21,500 22,000 12 25 38 45 51
22,000 23,000 13 29 42 51 58
23,000 24,000 15 33 49 58 67
24,000 25,000 17 37 56 66 76
25,000 26,000 19 42 62 73 85
26,000 27,000 21 46 68 82 93
27,000 28,000 23 50 75 89 103
28,000 29,000 25 55 81 97 111
29,000 30,000 27 59 88 104 121
30,000 31,000 29 63 94 113 129
31,000 32,000 31 68 100 120 138
32,000 33,000 33 72 107 127 148
33,000 34,000 35 76 114 135 156
34,000 35,000 37 81 119 143 165
35,000 36,000 39 85 126 151 174
36,000 37,000 41 89 133 158 183
37,000 38,000 43 94 139 166 191
38,000 39,000 45 98 145 174 201
39,000 40,000 47 102 152 182 209
40,000 41,000 49 106 159 189 218
41,000 42,000 51 111 164 198 227
42,000 43,000 53 115 171 205 236
43,000 44,000 55 119 178 213 245
44,000 45,000 57 124 184 220 254
45,000 46,000 59 128 190 228 263
46,000 47,000 60 133 197 235 272
47,000 48,000 62 137 203 244 280
48,000 49,000 64 142 209 251 290
49,000 50,000 66 146 216 259 298
50,000 51,000 68 150 223 266 308
51,000 52,000 70 154 229 275 316
52,000 53,000 72 159 235 282 325
53,000 54,000 74 163 242 290 334
54,000 55,000 76 167 249 297 343
55,000 56,000 78 172 254 305 352
56,000 57,000 80 176 261 313 361
57,000 58,000 82 180 268 320 370
58,000 59,000 84 185 274 328 378
59,000 60,000 86 189 280 336 388
60,000 62,000 89 195 291 347 401
62,000 64,000 93 204 303 363 418
64,000 66,000 97 213 315 379 436
66,000 68,000 101 221 329 394 454
68,000 70,000 105 230 341 410 472
70,000 72,000 109 239 354 424 490
72,000 74,000 113 247 367 440 508
74,000 76,000 117 256 380 455 526
76,000 78,000 121 264 393 471 543
78,000 80,000 125 273 406 486 561
80,000 85,000 131 289 428 513 592
85,000 90,000 141 310 461 552 636
90,000 95,000 151 332 492 591 681
95,000 100,0002 161 353 525 629 726
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2010-18 (2010-9 IRB 427), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2010-09_IRB/ar04.html.
Page 54 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 55 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2001 through 2005
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 2001 Beginning in 2002 Beginning in 2003 Beginning in 2004 Beginning in 2005
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 45,000 $ 46,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 25
46,000 47,000 0 12 0 0 45
47,000 48,000 46 33 0 0 66
48,000 49,000 83 54 0 0 86
49,000 50,000 119 74 0 0 107
50,000 51,000 157 96 0 0 127
51,000 52,000 193 117 0 0 148
52,000 53,000 230 138 0 0 169
53,000 54,000 266 159 124 147 190
54,000 55,000 304 180 140 164 210
55,000 56,000 340 201 156 180 231
56,000 57,000 377 222 171 197 252
57,000 58,000 414 242 187 213 272
58,000 59,000 451 264 203 229 293
59,000 60,000 487 284 218 245 314
60,000 62,000 543 316 241 270 345
62,000 64,000 616 358 273 303 386
64,000 66,000 690 400 304 336 427
66,000 68,000 763 442 334 369 469
68,000 70,000 837 484 366 402 510
70,000 72,000 910 525 397 435 551
72,000 74,000 984 567 428 468 593
74,000 76,000 1,057 609 460 500 634
76,000 78,000 1,131 652 491 534 675
78,000 80,000 1,204 693 521 566 717
80,000 85,000 1,332 767 576 624 789
85,000 90,000 1,517 871 655 706 892
90,000 95,000 1,701 976 732 788 995
95,000 100,0002 1,885 1,081 810 870 1,099
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-09.pdf.
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-05.pdf.
For 2003, Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
For 2004, Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html.
For 2005, Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 55

Page 56 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-2. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 45,000 $ 46,000 $ 4  $ 8 $ 11 $ 12 $ 12
46,000 47,000 10 22 33 37 42
47,000 48,000 17 36 54 63 72
48,000 49,000 24 51 74 89 101
49,000 50,000 30 65 96 114 131
50,000 51,000 37 79 118 139 160
51,000 52,000 43 94 139 165 189
52,000 53,000 50 108 160 190 219
53,000 54,000 56 123 181 216 248
54,000 55,000 63 137 202 242 277
55,000 56,000 69 151 224 267 307
56,000 57,000 76 165 245 293 337
57,000 58,000 82 180 266 318 367
58,000 59,000 89 194 288 343 396
59,000 60,000 95 209 309 369 425
60,000 62,000 105 230 341 407 470
62,000 64,000 118 259 383 459 528
64,000 66,000 131 288 425 510 587
66,000 68,000 144 316 469 560 646
68,000 70,000 158 345 510 612 705
70,000 72,000 171 373 554 662 764
72,000 74,000 184 402 596 713 823
74,000 76,000 197 431 638 765 881
76,000 78,000 210 459 682 815 940
78,000 80,000 223 488 724 866 1,000
80,000 85,000 246 538 798 956 1,103
85,000 90,000 278 610 905 1,083 1,250
90,000 95,000 311 682 1,011 1,211 1,397
95,000 100,0002 344 753 1,118 1,338 1,544
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 56 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 57 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Car rentals ................. . 24 Excess reimbursements  (See Interest on car loans ....... . 16
Reimbursements)Form 2106 ................ . 33 Itinerants .................... . 3``Hours of service'' limits ... . 12
Extravagant expenses .... . 5, 12Car, defined ................ . 17Form 2106 ................ . 33
Car, truck, or van50% limit on meals .......... . 5 Lrentals ................ . 23-24 F Lavish or extravagantCasualty and theft losses: Fair market value of car .... . 24 expenses .............. . 5, 12A Cars ...................... . 16 Farmers: Leasing a car, truck, orAccountable plans ...... . 29-32 Depreciation ............ . 24 Form 1040, Schedule F .... . 28 van .................... . 23-24Accounting to employer .... . 29 Charitable organizations: Federal crime investigations or Luxury private boxes atBenefit events for ......... . 12Adequate accounting ....... . 29 prosecutions: entertainment events ..... . 12Sports events to benefit .... . 12Independent contractors ... . 32 Federal employees engaged Luxury water travel .......... . 8Club dues .................. . 13Adequate records .......... . 25 in ....................... . 4
Commuting expenses ...... . 15Advertising: Federal rate for per diem .... . 6, MCar display ............... . 15 Conventions ............. . 9, 10 29
MACRS (Modified AcceleratedExpenses ................. . 12 Country clubs .............. . 13 Fee-basis officials .......... . 34 Cost RecoverySigns, display racks, or other Cruise ships ................ . 9 Fees you pay ............... . 15 System) .................. . 20promotional material to be Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) 2010 chart (Table 4-1) ..... . 21used on recipient's business allowance ................ . 30premises ............... . 13 Main place of business orD Form 1040, Schedule C ..... . 28 work ...................... . 3Airline clubs ............... . 13 Daily business mileage and Form 1040, Schedule F ..... . 28 Married taxpayers:Allocating costs ...... . 4, 12, 27 expense log (Table Form 2106 ........ . 17, 28, 32-39 Performing artists ......... . 346-2) ...................... . 35Allowance  (See
Form 2106-EZ .......... . 32, 39 Meal expenses .............. . 5Reimbursements) Depreciation of car  (See also
Form 4562 .................. . 28 50% limit .................. . 11Section 179 deductions) ... . 16Armed forces:
Form 4797 .................. . 23 Determination of applicabilityAdjustment for using standardAssigned overseas ......... . 3
(Figure A) ............ . 11Form W-2:mileage rate ............ . 25Assistance  (See Tax help)
Exceptions .............. . 11Employer-providedBasis ..................... . 18Associated Actual cost method ......... . 5vehicles ................ . 28Sales taxes ............. . 16entertainment ............ . 10 Form 2106 ................ . 33Reimbursement of personalUnrecovered basis ...... . 23Athletic clubs .............. . 13 Major cities with higherexpenses ............... . 28Casualty or theft, effect .... . 24
allowances .............. . 6Statutory employees ....... . 28Deduction ............. . 16, 25
Standard meal allowance ... . 5,Excess depreciation ....... . 23 Free tax services ........... . 41B 6, 30Modified Accelerated CostBasis of car  (See also Meals,Recovery SystemDepreciation of car) ....... . 18 G entertainment-related .... . 12(MACRS) ............... . 20Bona fide business Gifts ....................... . 13Section 179 deduction ..... . 22 Mileage rate  (See Standardpurpose ................... . 5 $25 limit .................. . 13Trade-in, effect ........ . 19, 25 mileage rate)Box seats at entertainment Combining for recordkeepingTrucks and vans .......... . 22 Military  (See Armed forces)events ................... . 12 purposes ............... . 27Directly-related Missing children, photographsReporting requirements .... . 28Business travel ............. . 6 entertainment ............. . 9 of ......................... . 2Outside U.S. ............... . 7 Golf clubs .................. . 13Disabled employees: Modified Accelerated CostBusiness use of car ........ . 16 Gulf Opportunity Zone:Impairment-related work Recovery SystemMore-than-50%-use Qualified property ......... . 18expenses ............... . 34 (MACRS) ................. . 20test. .................... . 18 Special depreciationDocumentary evidence ..... . 25 2010 chart (Table 4-1) ..... . 21Qualified business use ..... . 19 allowance ............... . 18
More information  (See Tax help)
E HC NEmployer-provided Hauling tools ............... . 15Canceled checks: Nonaccountable plans ..... . 32vehicles .................. . 16 Help  (See Tax help)As evidence of business Reporting requirements .... . 28 High-low rate method ...... . 30expenses ............... . 25
Entertainment OHome office ................ . 15Car expenses ........... . 15-24 expenses ........... . 9-12, 13 Office in the home .......... . 15Actual expenses .......... . 16 Hotel clubs ................. . 13
50% limit .................. . 11Allowances for ......... . 29-31 Officials paid on feeDetermination of applicabilityBusiness and personal basis ..................... . 34I(Figure A) ............ . 11use ..................... . 16 Overseas travel:Impairment-related workAssociated test ............ . 10Combining expenses ...... . 27 Conventions ............... . 9expenses ................ . 34Deductible ............. . 12-13Disposition of car .......... . 24 Meal allowance ............ . 6Incidental expenses:Summary (Table 2-1) .... . 12Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) Part of trip outside U.S. ..... . 7Defined .................... . 5Directly-related test ......... . 9allowance ............... . 30 Gifts ...................... . 13Entertainment, defined ..... . 12Form 2106 ................ . 32 No meals, incidentals PForm 2106 ................ . 33Leasing a car, truck, or only ..................... . 6Tickets (See Tickets) Parking fees ............ . 15, 16van .................. . 23-24
Income-producingEntertainment facilities: Per diem allowances .... . 29-31Mileage rate (See Standard
property .................. . 28Expenses for use of ....... . 13 Defined ................... . 28mileage rate)
Incomplete records ......... . 26 Federal rate for ............ . 29Taxes paid on car ......... . 16 Estimates of expenses ..... . 25
Traffic tickets .............. . 16 Indefinite job assignment ... . 4 Performing artists .......... . 34Exceptions to the 50%
Car pools .................. . 15 Limit ..................... . 11 Independent contractors ... . 32 Personal property taxes .... . 16
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 57

Page 58 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Personal trips ............... . 6 Reimbursements ....... . 28-32 Modified Accelerated Cost Travel expenses ........... . 3-9
Outside U.S. ............... . 8 Recovery System (MACRS) Another individualReservists:
2010 chart (Table 4-1) ... . 21 accompanyingPlaced in service, cars ..... . 18 Transportation
Proving expenses (Table taxpayer ................. . 4expenses ............... . 14Probationary work period ... . 4
5-1) .................... . 26 Away from home ........... . 3Traveling more than 100 milesProving business Reporting reimbursements Deductible ............... . 4-9from home .............. . 33purpose .................. . 26 (Table 6-1) .............. . 30 Summary of (TableReturning excessPublic transportation: Transportation expenses, 1-1) ................... . 5reimbursements .......... . 31Outside of U.S. travel ....... . 7 determination of deductibility Defined .................... . 3Rural mail carriers ......... . 15Publications  (See Tax help) (Figure B) ............... . 14 Going home on days off .... . 4
Travel expenses, determination In U.S. ..................... . 6
SR of deductibility (Table Lodging .................... . 6
Section 179 deduction: 1-1) ..................... . 5 Luxury water travel ......... . 8Recordkeeping
Amended return ........... . 18 Weekly travel expense and Outside U.S. ............... . 7requirements .......... . 25-27
Deduction ................. . 17 entertainment record (Table Travel to family home ....... . 3Adequate records ......... . 25
Limits ..................... . 17 6-3) .................... . 39Daily business mileage and Trucks and vans:
Self-employed persons ..... . 11expense log (Table Tax help .................... . 41 Depreciation .............. . 22
Reporting requirements .... . 286-2) .................... . 35 Transportation workers .... . 12Tax home, determination
Destroyed records ......... . 27 Skyboxes .................. . 12 Transportation workers'of ......................... . 3
How to prove expenses (Table expenses ................ . 6Special depreciation Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 41
5-1) .................... . 26 allowance ................ . 18 TTY/TDD information ....... . 41Temporary jobIncomplete records ........ . 26 Spouse, expenses for .... . 4, 13 Two places of work ......... . 14assignments .............. . 4Reimbursed expenses ..... . 27 Standard meal allowance .... . 5, Temporary work location ... . 14Sampling to prove 6, 30 Tickets ................. . 12, 13 Uexpenses ............... . 27 Standard mileage rate ... . 2, 15, Season or series tickets ... . 27 UnclaimedSeparating and combining 30 Traffic violations ........... . 16 reimbursements .......... . 28expenses ............... . 27 Depreciation adjustment for Tools: Unions:Three-year period of using ................... . 25 Hauling tools .............. . 15 Trips from union hall to place ofretention ................ . 27 Form 2106 ................ . 33 Trade association work .................... . 15Weekly travel expense and Statutory employees ....... . 28 meetings ................. . 12entertainment record (Table Unrecovered basis of car ... . 23
Trade-in of car ......... . 19, 256-3) .................... . 39
T Traffic tickets .............. . 16Reimbursements ........ . 28-32 VTables and figures: Transients ................... . 3Accountable plans ......... . 29 Volunteers .................. . 250% limit determination (FigureExcess ............... . 31, 32 Transportation
A) ...................... . 11Form 2106 ................ . 33 expenses ............. . 14-25
WDaily business mileage andNonaccountable plans ..... . 32 Car expenses .......... . 15-24
expense log (TableNondeductible expenses ... . 29 Weekly travel expense andDeductible (Figure B) ...... . 14
6-2) .................... . 35Personal expenses ........ . 28 entertainment record (Tablefive or more cars .......... . 16
Entertainment expenses,Recordkeeping ............ . 27 6-3) ...................... . 39Form 2106 ................ . 33
determination of deductibilityReporting (Table 6-1) ...... . 30 Transportation workers ..... . 6, ■(Table 2-1) .............. . 10Unclaimed ................ . 28 12
Maximum depreciationReporting Travel advance  (See alsodeduction for carsrequirements .......... . 27-39 Reimbursements) ..... . 28, 31table ................... . 22Per diem or car
allowance ............... . 30
Page 58 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 59 of 59 of Publication 463 8:14 - 25-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: NEWIND01 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax For
Individuals
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2011
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2011
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
El Impuesto Federal sobre los
Ingresos Para Personas Fisicas
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850(EN/SP)
17(SP)
El Proceso de Cobro del IRS594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544(SP)
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (American Opportunity, and
Lifetime Learning Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Business Expenses535
Sch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends
Sch L Standard Deduction for Certain Filers
Sch M Making Work Pay
Hechos Fortuitos Desastres y Robos547(SP)
Registro de Pérdidas por Hechos
Fortuitos (Imprevistos), Desastres
y Robos (Propiedad de Uso
Personal)
584(SP)
Poder Legal y Declaración del Representante
2848(SP)
Solicitud de Prórroga Automática para
Presentar la Declaración del Impuesto
sobre el Ingreso Personal de los Estados
Unidos
4868(SP)
Solicitud para un Plan de Pagos a Plazos9465(SP)
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 59