Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 7 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\USERS\xcgcb\documents\2007 Publications\Pub 463\07p463.sgm (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 ContentsCat. No. 11081L
What’s New ..................... 2
Department
Reminder ...................... 2of the
Travel,Treasury Introduction ..................... 2
Internal 1. Travel ....................... 2Revenue Entertainment, Traveling Away From Home ........ 3Service
Tax Home ................. 3
Tax Home Different FromGift, and Car Family Home ............ 3
Temporary Assignment or Job ...... 4
What Travel Expenses AreExpenses Deductible? ................ 4
Meals .................... 5
Travel in the United States ...... 6
Travel Outside the UnitedFor use in preparing States ................. 7
Luxury Water Travel .......... 8
Conventions ............... 92007 Returns
2. Entertainment .................. 9
Directly-Related Test ............ 9
Associated Test ................ 10
50% Limit .................... 11
Exceptions to the 50% Limit ..... 11
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Deductible? ............. 12
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Not Deductible? .......... 13
3. Gifts ........................ 13
4. Transportation ................. 14
Car Expenses ................. 15
Standard Mileage Rate ........ 15
Actual Car Expenses ......... 16
Leasing a Car .............. 24
Disposition of a Car ............. 24
5. Recordkeeping ................. 25
How To Prove Expenses .......... 25
What Are Adequate
Records? .............. 25
What If I Have Incomplete
Records? .............. 26
Separating and Combining
Expenses .............. 27
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts ...... 27
Examples of Records ......... 27
6. How To Report ................. 27
Where To Report ............... 27
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer .............. 28
Reimbursements ............... 28
Accountable Plans ........... 29
Nonaccountable Plans ........ 32
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients ..... 32
Completing Forms 2106 and
2106-EZ .................. 32
Special Rules .............. 33
Illustrated Examples .......... 34
7. How To Get Tax Help ............ 40Get forms and other information
Appendices ..................... 41faster and easier by:
Index .......................... 56
Internet • www.irs.gov

Page 2 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(such as the use of a qualified nonpersonal use You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (TheWhat’s New vehicle). asterisk must be included in the address.)
Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-A working condition fringe benefit is any
Standard mileage rate. For 2007, the stan- ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-property or service provided to you by your em-
dard mileage rate for the cost of operating your ally to each email, we do appreciate yourployer for which you could deduct the cost as an
car for business use is 481/2 cents per mile. feedback and will consider your comments asemployee business expense if you had paid for
we revise our tax products.Car expenses and use of the standard mile- it.
age rate are explained in chapter 4. A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is one Ordering forms and publications. Visitthat is not likely to be used more than minimally www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andLimit on depreciation and section 179 deduc- for personal purposes because of its design. publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to thetion. For 2007, the first-year limit on deprecia- See Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles  under address below and receive a response within 10tion and section 179 deduction for most vehicles Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4. days after your request is received.has increased to $3,060. For trucks and vans, For information on how to report your car
the first-year limit remains $3,260. There is no expenses that your employer did not provide or
longer a higher limit for electric cars. Deprecia- National Distribution Centerreimburse you for (such as when you pay for gas
tion limits are explained in chapter 4. P.O. Box 8903and maintenance for a car your employer pro-
Bloomington, IL 61702-8903vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employer
in chapter 6.
Tax questions. If you have a tax question,Who does not need to use this publication.Reminder check the information available on www.irs.govPartnerships, corporations, trusts, and employ- or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxers who reimburse their employees for business questions sent to either of the above addresses.Photographs of missing children. The Inter- expenses should refer to their tax form instruc-nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the tions and chapter 11 of Publication 535, Busi-National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- Useful Itemsness Expenses, for information on deductingdren. Photographs of missing children selected You may want to see:travel, meals, and entertainment expenses.
by the Center may appear in this publication on If you are an employee, you will not need to
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can Publicationread this publication if all of the following are
help bring these children home by looking at the true. ❏ 225 Farmer’s Tax Guidephotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
• You fully accounted to your employer for ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
your work-related expenses.
❏ 535 Business Expenses
• You received full reimbursement for your
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertyexpenses.
Introduction ❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates• Your employer required you to return any
excess reimbursement and you did so.You may be able to deduct the ordinary and Form (and Instructions)necessary business-related expenses you have • There is no amount shown with a code “L”for: ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemizedin box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and
DeductionsTax Statement.• Travel,
❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or LossIf you meet all of these conditions, there is no• Entertainment, From Businessneed to show the expenses or the reimburse-• Gifts, or ments on your return. If you would like more ❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit
information on reimbursements and accounting• Transportation. From Business
to your employer, see chapter 6.An ordinary expense is one that is common and ❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss
accepted in your field of trade, business, or From FarmingIf you meet these conditions and your
profession. A necessary expense is one that is employer included reimbursements on ❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenseshelpful and appropriate for your business. An your Form W-2 in error, ask your em-
TIP
❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employeeexpense does not have to be required to be ployer for a corrected Form W-2.
Business Expensesconsidered necessary.
Volunteers. If you perform services as a ❏ 4562 Depreciation and AmortizationThis publication explains: volunteer worker for a qualified charity, you may See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help, forbe able to deduct some of your costs as a• What expenses are deductible, information about getting these publications andcharitable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Ex-• How to report them on your return, forms. penses in Giving Services in Publication 526,
Charitable Contributions, for information on the• What records you need to prove your ex-
expenses you can deduct.penses, and
• How to treat any expense reimbursements Comments and suggestions. We welcome
you may receive. your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions. 1.You can write to us at the following address:Who should use this publication. You
should read this publication if you are an em-
ployee or a sole proprietor who has busi- Internal Revenue Service
ness-related travel, entertainment, gift, or TravelIndividual Forms and Publications Branch
transportation expenses. SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526Users of employer-provided vehicles. If If you temporarily travel away from your taxWashington, DC 20224an employer-provided vehicle was available for home, you can use this chapter to determine if
your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener- you have deductible travel expenses.
ally, your employer must include the value of the We respond to many letters by telephone. This chapter discusses:
use or availability in your income as pay. How- Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in- • Traveling away from home,ever, there are exceptions if the use of the vehi- clude your daytime phone number, including the
cle qualifies as a working condition fringe benefit area code, in your correspondence. • Temporary assignment or job, and
Page 2 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 3 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• What travel expenses are deductible. A naval officer assigned to permanent duty business requires you to be away from that
aboard a ship that has regular eating and living home.It also discusses the standard meal allowance, facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travelrules for travel inside and outside the United 3. You have not abandoned the area in whichexpense purposes.States, luxury water travel, and deductible con- both your historical place of lodging and
vention expenses. your claimed main home are located; youTax Home have a member or members of your family
Travel expenses defined. For tax purposes, living at your main home; or you often useTo determine whether you are traveling awaytravel expenses are the ordinary and necessary that home for lodging.from home, you must first determine the locationexpenses of traveling away from home for your of your tax home. If you satisfy all three factors, your tax homebusiness, profession, or job. Generally, your tax home is your regular is the home where you regularly live. If youAn ordinary expense is one that is common place of business or post of duty, regardless of satisfy only two factors, you may have a taxand accepted in your field of trade, business, or where you maintain your family home. It in-profession. A necessary expense is one that is home depending on all the facts and circum-cludes the entire city or general area in whichhelpful and appropriate for your business. An stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are anyour business or work is located.expense does not have to be required to be itinerant; your tax home is wherever you workIf you have more than one regular place ofconsidered necessary. and you cannot deduct travel expenses.business, your tax home is your main place ofYou will find examples of deductible travel business. See Main place of business or work,expenses in Table 1-1, later. Example 1. You are single and live in Bos-later. ton in an apartment you rent. You have workedIf you do not have a regular or a main place for your employer in Boston for a number ofof business because of the nature of your work, years. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-monththen your tax home may be the place where youTraveling Away From executive training program. You do not expect toregularly live. See No main place of business or
return to work in Boston after you complete yourwork, later.Home training. If you do not have a regular place of busi-
During your training, you do not do any workness or post of duty and there is no place whereYou are traveling away from home if: you regularly live, you are considered an itiner- in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and
• Your duties require you to be away from ant (a transient) and your tax home is wherever on-the-job training throughout the United States.
the general area of your tax home (defined you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claim a You keep your apartment in Boston and return to
later) substantially longer than an ordinary travel expense deduction because you are it frequently. You use your apartment to conduct
day’s work, and never considered to be traveling away from your personal business. You also keep up your
home. community contacts in Boston. When you com-• You need to sleep or rest to meet the
plete your training, you are transferred to Losdemands of your work while away from Main place of business or work. If you havehome. Angeles.more than one place of work, consider the fol-
You do not satisfy factor (1) because you didlowing when determining which one is your mainThis rest requirement is not satisfied by merely
not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-place of business or work.napping in your car. You do not have to be away
cause you had duplicate living expenses. Youfrom your tax home for a whole day or from dusk • The total time you ordinarily spend in each also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-to dawn as long as your relief from duty is long place. don your apartment in Boston as your mainenough to get necessary sleep or rest.
• The level of your business activity in each home, you kept your community contacts, and
place.Example 1. You are a railroad conductor. you frequently returned to live in your apartment.
You leave your home terminal on a regularly You have a tax home in Boston.• Whether your income from each place isscheduled round-trip run between two cities and significant or insignificant.return home 16 hours later. During the run, you Example 2. You are an outside salesperson
have 6 hours off at your turnaround point where with a sales territory covering several states.
Example. You live in Cincinnati where youyou eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get Your employer’s main office is in Newark, but
have a seasonal job for 8 months each year andnecessary sleep before starting the return trip. you do not conduct any business there. Your
earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months inYou are considered to be away from home. work assignments are temporary, and you haveMiami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000. no way of knowing where your future assign-Cincinnati is your main place of work becauseExample 2. You are a truck driver. You ments will be located. You have a room in youryou spend most of your time there and earnleave your terminal and return to it later the married sister’s house in Dayton. You stay theremost of your income there.same day. You get an hour off at your turn- for one or two weekends a year, but you do noaround point to eat. Because you are not off to work in the area. You do not pay your sister forNo main place of business or work. Youget necessary sleep and the brief time off is not the use of the room.may have a tax home even if you do not have aan adequate rest period, you are not traveling
regular or main place of work. Your tax home You do not satisfy any of the three factorsaway from home.
may be the home where you regularly live. listed earlier. You are an itinerant and have noMembers of the Armed Forces. If you are a tax home.Factors used to determine tax home. Ifmember of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-
you do not have a regular or main place ofnent duty assignment overseas, you are not Tax Home Different Frombusiness or work, use the following three factorstraveling away from home. You cannot deduct
to determine where your tax home is. Family Homeyour expenses for meals and lodging. You can-
not deduct these expenses even if you have to 1. You perform part of your business in the If you (and your family) do not live at your taxmaintain a home in the United States for your area of your main home and use that home (defined earlier), you cannot deduct thefamily members who are not allowed to accom- home for lodging while doing business in cost of traveling between your tax home andpany you overseas. If you are transferred from the area. your family home. You also cannot deduct theone permanent duty station to another, you may
cost of meals and lodging while at your taxhave deductible moving expenses, which are 2. You have living expenses at your main
home. See Example 1 that follows.explained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses. home that you duplicate because your
Chapter 1 Travel Page 3

Page 4 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception for federal crime investigations orIf you are working temporarily in the same Going home on days off. If you go back to
prosecutions. If you are a federal employee your tax home from a temporary assignment oncity where you and your family live, you may be
participating in a federal crime investigation or your days off, you are not considered away fromconsidered as traveling away from home. See
prosecution, you are not subject to the one-year home while you are in your hometown. YouExample 2, below.
rule. This means you may be able to deduct cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-
Example 1. You are a truck driver and you travel expenses even if you are away from your ing there. However, you can deduct your travel
and your family live in Tucson. You are em- expenses, including meals and lodging, whiletax home for more than one year provided you
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in traveling between your temporary place of workmeet the other requirements for deductibility.
and your tax home. You can claim these ex-Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you return For you to qualify, the Attorney General (or
penses up to the amount it would have cost youto your home terminal in Phoenix and spend one his or her designee) must certify that you are
to stay at your temporary place of work.night there before returning home. You cannot traveling:
If you keep your hotel room during your visitdeduct any expenses you have for meals and • For the federal government, home, you can deduct the cost of your hotellodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from
room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is • In a temporary duty status, and
penses of returning home up to the amount youyour tax home. • To investigate or prosecute, or provide would have spent for meals had you stayed at
support services for the investigation or your temporary place of work.Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts-
prosecution of a federal crime.burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The Probationary work period. If you take a jobrest of the year you work for the same employer that requires you to move, with the understand-in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants Determining temporary or indefinite. You ing that you will keep the job if your work isand sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the must determine whether your assignment is satisfactory during a probationary period, the jobsame whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti- temporary or indefinite when you start work. If is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourmore. you expect an assignment or job to last for one expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-year or less, it is temporary unless there areBecause you spend most of your working bationary period.facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,
An assignment or job that is initially temporarythat city is your tax home. You cannot deduct
may become indefinite due to changed circum-any expenses you have for meals and lodging
stances. A series of assignments to the samethere. However, when you return to work in What Travel Expenseslocation, all for short periods but that togetherPittsburgh, you are away from your tax home
cover a long period, may be considered an in-even though you stay at your family home. You Are Deductible?definite assignment.can deduct the cost of your roundtrip between
Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct The following examples illustrate whether an Once you have determined that you are travel-your part of your family’s living expenses for assignment or job is temporary or indefinite. ing away from your tax home, you can determinemeals and lodging while you are living and work- what travel expenses are deductible.ing in Pittsburgh. Example 1. You are a construction worker. You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. You penses you have when you travel away from
are a member of a trade union in Los Angeles home on business. The type of expense you can
that helps you get work in the Los Angeles area. deduct depends on the facts and your circum-
Because of a shortage of work, you took a job onTemporary stances.
a construction project in Fresno. Your job was Table 1-1 summarizes travel expenses you
scheduled to end in 8 months. The job actuallyAssignment or Job may be able to deduct. You may have other
lasted 10 months. deductible travel expenses that are not covered
You may regularly work at your tax home and You realistically expected the job in Fresno there, depending on the facts and your circum-
also work at another location. It may not be to last 8 months. The job actually did last less stances.
practical to return to your tax home from this than 1 year. The job is temporary and your tax When you travel away from home onother location at the end of each work day. home is still in Los Angeles. business, you should keep records of
all the expenses you have and anyRECORDS
Example 2. The facts are the same as inTemporary assignment vs. indefinite assign- advances you receive from your employer. YouExample 1, except that you realistically ex-ment. If your assignment or job away from can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otherpected the work in Fresno to last 18 months. Theyour main place of work is temporary, your tax written record to keep track of your expenses.job actually was completed in 10 months.home does not change. You are considered to The types of expenses you need to record,be away from home for the whole period you are Your job in Fresno is indefinite because you along with supporting documentation, are de-away from your main place of work. You can realistically expected the work to last longer than scribed in Table 5-1 (see chapter 5).deduct your travel expenses if they otherwise 1 year, even though it actually lasted less than 1
qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary year. You cannot deduct any travel expenses Separating costs. If you have one expenseassignment in a single location is one that is you had in Fresno because Fresno became your that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,realistically expected to last (and does in fact tax home. and other services (such as lodging or transpor-last) for one year or less. tation), you must allocate that expense betweenExample 3. The facts are the same as inHowever, if your assignment or job is indefi- the cost of meals and entertainment and the costExample 1, except that you realistically ex-nite, the location of the assignment or job be- of other services. You must have a reasonablepected the work in Fresno to last 9 months. Aftercomes your new tax home and you cannot basis for making this allocation. For example,
8 months, however, you were asked to remaindeduct your travel expenses while there. An you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-
for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15assignment or job in a single location is consid- cludes one or more meals in its room charge.
months).ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last
Travel expenses for another individual. If afor more than one year, whether or not it actually Initially, you realistically expected the job in
spouse, dependent, or other individual goes withlasts for more than one year. Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, due
you (or your employee) on a business trip or to ato changed circumstances occurring after 8If your assignment is indefinite, you must
business convention, you generally cannot de-months, it was no longer realistic for you toinclude in your income any amounts you receive
duct his or her travel expenses.expect that the job in Fresno would last for onefrom your employer for living expenses, even if
year or less. You can only deduct your travelthey are called travel allowances and you ac- Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-
expenses for the first 8 months. You cannotcount to your employer for them. You may be penses of someone who goes with you if that
deduct any travel expenses you had after thatable to deduct the cost of relocating to your new person:
time because Fresno became your tax hometax home as a moving expense. See Publication
when the job became indefinite.521 for more information. 1. Is your employee,
Page 4 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 5 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
50% limit on meals. You can figure yourTable 1-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
meals expense using either of the following
methods.This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home
for business purposes. • Actual cost.
• The standard meal allowance.IF you have
expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of... Both of these methods are explained below. But,
regardless of the method you use, you generallytransportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed costbusiness destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you are
riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your of your meals.
cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise If you are reimbursed for the cost of yourShips (under Conventions) for additional rules and limits. meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on
taxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you between: whether your employer’s reimbursement plan
bus, and airport was accountable or nonaccountable. If you are• The airport or station and your hotel, and
limousine not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether• The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, your
the unreimbursed meal expense is for businessbusiness meeting place, or your temporary work location.
travel or business entertainment. Chapter 2 dis-
baggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your regular cusses the 50% limit in more detail, and chaptershipping and temporary work locations. 6 discusses accountable and nonaccountable
plans.car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home on
business. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileage
rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a car
Actual Costwhile away from home on business, you can deduct only the
business-use portion of the expenses. You can use the actual cost of your meals to
lodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long figure the amount of your expense before reim-
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform your bursement and application of the 50% deduction
duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages, taxes, and limit. If you use this method, you must keep
related tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits. records of your actual cost.
cleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes business
Standard Meal Allowance
communication by fax machine or other communication devices.
Generally, you can use the “standard meal al-
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. lowance” method as an alternative to the actual
cost method. It allows you to use a set amountother other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
for your daily meals and incidental expensesbusiness travel. These expenses might include transportation to or
(M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac-from a business meal, public stenographer’s fees, computer rental
tual costs. The set amount varies depending onfees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer.
where and when you travel. In this publication,
“standard meal allowance” refers to the federal
rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount of2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the Jerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A
standard meal allowance . If you use the stan-travel, and single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct the
dard meal allowance, you still must keep rec-total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the ords to prove the time, place, and businessbut only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he usestravel expenses. purpose of your travel. See the recordkeepingpublic transportation, he can deduct only his rules for travel in chapter 5.fare.Business associate. If a business associ-
Incidental expenses. The term “incidental ex-ate travels with you and meets the conditions in
penses” means:
Meals(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel
expenses you have for that person. A business • Fees and tips given to porters, baggageYou can deduct the cost of meals in either of theassociate is someone with whom you could rea- carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewardsfollowing situations.sonably expect to actively conduct business. A or stewardesses and others on ships, and
business associate can be a current or prospec- hotel servants in foreign countries,• It is necessary for you to stop for substan-
tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier, tial sleep or rest to properly perform your • Transportation between places of lodgingemployee, agent, partner, or professional advi- duties while traveling away from home on or business and places where meals aresor. business. taken, if suitable meals can be obtained at
Bona fide business purpose. A bona fide the temporary duty site, and• The meal is business-related entertain-
business purpose exists if you can prove a real ment. • Mailing costs associated with filing travelbusiness purpose for the individual’s presence. vouchers and payment of em-Business-related entertainment is discussed inIncidental services, such as typing notes or as- ployer-sponsored charge card billings.chapter 2. The following discussion deals onlysisting in entertaining customers, are not
with meals that are not business-related enter-enough to make the expenses deductible. Incidental expenses do not include expenses for
tainment. laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg-
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi- ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephone
Lavish or extravagant. You cannot deductness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is calls.
expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-not Jerry’s employee. Linda occasionally types
gant. An expense is not considered lavish ornotes, performs similar services, and accompa- Incidental expenses only method. You can
extravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsnies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per- use an optional method (instead of actual cost)
and circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-formance of these services does not establish for deducting incidental expenses only. The
lowed merely because they are more than athat her presence on the trip is necessary to the amount of the deduction is $3 a day for inciden-
fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-conduct of Jerry’s business. Her expenses are tal expenses paid or incurred for travel away
not deductible. taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts. from home in 2007. You can use this method
Chapter 1 Travel Page 5

Page 6 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Standard meal allowance for areas outsideonly if you did not pay or incur any meal ex- Friday (the days she departed and returned),
the continental United States. The standardpenses. You cannot use this method on any day and the full daily rate for Thursday.
meal allowance rates above do not apply tothat you use the standard meal allowance. This Under Method 2 , Jen could also use any
travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other locationmethod is subject to the proration rules for par- method that she applies consistently and that is
outside the continental United States. The De-tial days. See Travel for days you depart and in accordance with reasonable business prac-
return, later in this chapter. partment of Defense establishes per diem rates tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of the
for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American Sa- standard meal allowance even though a federalFederal employees should refer to the moa, Guam, Midway, the Northern Mariana Is- employee would have to use Method 1 and beFederal Travel Regulations at www. lands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake Island and limited to only 21/2 days.gsa.gov. Click on “Federal Travel Reg-CAUTION
!
other non-foreign areas outside the continentalulation (FTR)” for changes affecting claims for United States. The Department of State estab-reimbursement of these expenses. Travel in the United Stateslishes per diem rates for all other foreign areas.
50% limit may apply. If you use the standard The following discussion applies to travel in theYou can access per diem rates formeal allowance method for meal expenses and United States. For this purpose, the Unitednon-foreign areas outside the conti-you are not reimbursed or you are reimbursed States includes the 50 states and the District ofnental United States at:under a nonaccountable plan, you can generally Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-http://perdiem.hqda.pentagon.mil/perdiem/deduct only 50% of the standard meal allow- penses depends on how much of your trip wasperdiemrates.html. You can access all other for-ance. If you are reimbursed under an accounta- business related and on how much of your tripeign per diem rates at:ble plan and you are deducting amounts that are occurred within the United States. See Part ofwww.state.gov/travelandbusiness.more than your reimbursements, you can de- Trip Outside the United States, later.
duct only 50% of the excess amount. The 50% Special rate for transportation workers.
limit is discussed in more detail in chapter 2, and You can use a special standard meal allowance
accountable and nonaccountable plans are dis- if you work in the transportation industry. You Trip Primarily for Business
cussed in chapter 6. are in the transportation industry if your work:
You can deduct all of your travel expenses ifThere is no optional standard lodging • Directly involves moving people or goods your trip was entirely business related. If youramount similar to the standard meal by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or trip was primarily for business and, while at yourallowance. Your allowable lodging ex- truck, andCAUTION
!
business destination, you extended your stay forpense deduction is your actual cost. a vacation, made a personal side trip, or had• Regularly requires you to travel away from
other personal activities, you can deduct yourhome and, during any single trip, usuallyWho can use the standard meal allowance.
business-related travel expenses. These ex-involves travel to areas eligible for differ-You can use the standard meal allowance
penses include the travel costs of getting to andent standard meal allowance rates.whether you are an employee or self-employed,
from your business destination and any busi-and whether or not you are reimbursed for your If this applies to you, you can claim a standard ness-related expenses at your business desti-traveling expenses. meal allowance of $52 a day ($58 for travel nation.Use of the standard meal allowance for other outside the continental United States) from Jan-
travel. You can use the standard meal allow- uary 1, 2007, through December 31, 2007. Example. You work in Atlanta and take a
ance to figure your meal expenses when you business trip to New Orleans. On your wayUsing the special rate for transportation work-travel in connection with investment and other home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.ers eliminates the need for you to determine theincome-producing property. You can also use it You spend $1,070 for the 9 days you are awaystandard meal allowance for every area whereto figure your meal expenses when you travel for from home for travel, meals, lodging, and otheryou stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to usequalifying educational purposes. You cannot travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-the special rate for any trip, you must use theuse the standard meal allowance to figure the bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, andspecial rate (and not use the regular standardcost of your meals when you travel for medical your total cost would have been $920. You canmeal allowance rates) for all trips you take thator charitable purposes. deduct $920 for your trip, including the cost ofyear.
round-trip transportation to and from New Orle-Amount of standard meal allowance. The
ans. The deduction for your meals is subject tostandard meal allowance is the federal M&IE Travel for days you depart and return. For
the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.rate. For travel in 2007, the rate for most small both the day you depart for and the day you
localities in the United States is $39 a day from return from a business trip, you must prorate the
January 1, 2007, through December 31, 2007. standard meal allowance (figure a reduced
Trip Primarily forMost major cities and many other localities in amount for each day). You can do so by one of
Personal Reasonsthe United States are designated as high-cost two methods.
areas, qualifying for higher standard meal al- • Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan- If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,lowances. These rates are listed in Publication dard meal allowance. such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is a1542, which is available on the Internet at www.
nondeductible personal expense. However, youirs.gov. • Method 2: You can prorate using any can deduct any expenses you have while at yourmethod that you consistently apply andYou can also find this information (or- destination that are directly related to your busi-that is in accordance with reasonable busi-ganized by state) on the Internet at ness.ness practice.www.gsa.gov . Click on “Per Diem A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be aRates,” then select “2007” for the period January vacation even if the promoter advertises that it is1, 2007 – September 30, 2007, and select Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-“2008” for the period October 1, 2007 – Decem- as a convention planner. In March, her employer dental business activities during a trip, such asber 31, 2007. However, you can apply the rates sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingin effect before October 1, 2007, for expenses of attend a planning seminar. She left her home in with general subjects, will not change what isall travel within the United States for 2007 in- New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and really a vacation into a business trip.stead of the updated rates. You must consist- arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After
ently use either the rates for the first 9 months of spending two nights there, she flew back to New
2007 or the updated rates for the period of Octo- Orleans on Friday and arrived back home at Part of Trip Outsideber 1, 2007, through December 31, 2007. 8:00 p.m. Jen’s employer gave her a flat amount the United Statesto cover her expenses and included it with herIf you travel to more than one location in one
wages. If part of your trip is outside the United States,day, use the rate in effect for the area where you
use the rules described later in this chapterUnder Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days ofstop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-
under Travel Outside the United States for thatthe standard meal allowance for Washington,tation industry, however, see Special rate for
part of the trip. For the part of your trip that isDC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andtransportation workers, later.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 7 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
inside the United States, use the rules for travel your trip does not, by itself, mean that you have round-trip plane fare and 16  days of meals (sub-
in the United States. Travel outside the United substantial control over arranging your trip. ject to the 50% limit), lodging, an d other related
States does not include travel from one point in expenses.You do not have substantial control over
the United States to another point in the United your trip if you: Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid-States. The following discussion can help you eration. Your trip is considered entirely for• Are an employee who was reimbursed ordetermine whether your trip was entirely within business if you can establish that a personalpaid a travel expense allowance,the United States. vacation was not a major consideration, even if• Are not related to your employer, and you have substantial control over arranging thePublic transportation. If you travel by public
trip.• Are not a managing executive.transportation, any place in the United States
where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a
“Related to your employer” is defined later inpoint in the United States. Once the vehicle
Travel Primarily for Businesschapter 6 under Per Diem and Car Allowances.leaves the last scheduled stop in the United
A “managing executive” is an employee whoStates on its way to a point outside the United If you travel outside the United States primarilyhas the authority and responsibility, without be-States, you apply the rules under Travel Outside for business but spend some of your time oning subject to the veto of another, to decide onthe United States. other activities, you generally cannot deduct allthe need for the business travel. of your travel expenses. You can only deduct theExample. You fly from New York to Puerto A self-employed person generally has sub- business portion of your cost of getting to andRico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return stantial control over arranging business trips. from your destination. You must allocate theto New York nonstop. The flight from New York Exception 2 - Outside United States no costs between your business and other activitiesto Miami is in the United States, so only the flight more than a week. Your trip is considered to determine your deductible amount. Seefrom Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United entirely for business if you were outside the Travel allocation rules, later.States. Because there are no scheduled stops United States for a week or less, combiningbetween Puerto Rico and New York, all of the You do not have to allocate your travelbusiness and nonbusiness activities. One weekreturn trip is outside the United States. expenses if you meet one of the fourmeans seven consecutive days. In counting the exceptions listed earlier under Travel
TIP
days, do not count the day you leave the UnitedPrivate car. Travel by private car in the United considered entirely for business. In those cases,States, but do count the day you return to theStates is travel between points in the United you can deduct the total cost of getting to andUnited States.States, even though you are on your way to a from your destination.destination outside the United States.
Example. You traveled to Brussels primarily Travel allocation rules. If your trip outside thefor business. You left Denver on Tuesday andExample. You travel by car from Denver to United States was primarily for business, youflew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew fromMexico City and return. Your travel from Denver must allocate your travel time on a day-to-dayNew York to Brussels, arriving the next morning.to the border and from the border back to Den- basis between business days and nonbusinessOn Thursday and Friday, you had business dis-ver is travel in the United States, and the rules in days. The days you depart from and return to thecussions, and from Saturday until Tuesday, youthis section apply. The rules under Travel United States are both counted as days outsidewere sightseeing. You flew back to New York,Outside the United States apply to your trip from the United States.arriving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday,the border to Mexico City and back to the border. To figure the deductible amount of youryou flew back to Denver. round-trip travel expenses, use the followingAlthough you were away from your home in fraction. The numerator (top number) is the totalTravel Outside Denver for more than a week, you were not number of business days outside the Unitedthe United States outside the United States for more than a week. States. The denominator (bottom number) is theThis is because the day you depart does not total number of travel days outside the UnitedIf any part of your business travel is outside the count as a day outside the United States. States.United States, some of your deductions for the You can deduct your cost of the round-tripcost of getting to and from your destination may Counting business days. Your businessflight between Denver and Brussels. You canbe limited. For this purpose, the United States days include transportation days, days youralso deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels forincludes the 50 states and the District of Colum- presence was required, days you spent on busi-Thursday and Friday while you conducted busi-bia. ness, and certain weekends and holidays.ness. However, you cannot deduct the cost ofHow much of your travel expenses you can your stay in Brussels from Saturday through Transportation day. Count as a businessdeduct depends in part upon how much of your Tuesday because those days were spent on day any day you spend traveling to or from atrip outside the United States was business re- nonbusiness activities. business destination. However, if because of alated.
Exception 3 - Less than 25% of time on nonbusiness activity you do not travel by a direct
personal activities. Your trip is considered route, your business days are the days it would
Travel Entirely for Business or entirely for business if: take you to travel a reasonably direct route to
your business destination. Extra days for sideConsidered Entirely for Business • You were outside the United States for trips or nonbusiness activities cannot bemore than a week, andYou can deduct all your travel expenses of get- counted as business days.
ting to and from your business destination if your • You spent less than 25% of the total time Presence required. Count as a businesstrip is entirely for business or considered entirely you were outside the United States on day any day your presence is required at afor business. nonbusiness activities. particular place for a specific business purpose.
Travel entirely for business. If you travel For this purpose, count both the day your trip Count it as a business day even if you spend
outside the United States and you spend the began and the day it ended. most of the day on nonbusiness activities.
entire time on business activities, you can de- Day spent on business. If your principalduct all of your travel expenses. Example. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo, activity during working hours is pursuit of yourwhere you spent 14 days on business and 5 trade or business, count the day as a businessTravel considered entirely for business. days on personal matters. You then flew back to day. Also, count as a business day any day youEven if you did not spend your entire time on Seattle. You spent one day flying in each direc- are prevented from working because of circum-business activities, your trip is considered en- tion. stances beyond your control.tirely for business if you meet at least one of the Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of yourfollowing four exceptions. total time abroad was for nonbusiness activities, Certain weekends and holidays. Count
Exception 1 - No substantial control. you can deduct as travel expenses what it would weekends, holidays, and other necessary
Your trip is considered entirely for business if have cost you to make the trip if you had not standby days as business days if t hey fall be-
you did not have substantial control over arrang- engaged in any nonbusiness activity. The tween business days. But if they follow your
ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing of amount you can deduct is the cost of the business meetings or activity and you remain at
Chapter 1 Travel Page 7

Page 8 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your business destination for nonbusiness or Dublin and back to New York ($450 + $200 + conferences are directed toward specific occu-
personal reasons, do not count them as busi- $500 = $1,150). pations or professions. It is up to each partici-
ness days. pant to seek out specialists and organizationalYour deductible air travel expense is $819
settings appropriate to his or her occupational($1,150 − $331).
Example 1. Your tax home is New York interests.
City. You travel to Quebec, where you have a Nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond Three-hour sessions are held each day over
business appointment on Friday. You have an- business destination. If you had a vacation a 5-day period at each of the selected overseas
other appointment on the following Monday. Be- or other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond facilities where participants can meet with indi-
cause your presence was required on both your business destination, you must allocate vidual practitioners. These sessions are com-
Friday and Monday, they are business days. part of your travel expenses to the nonbusiness posed of a variety of activities including
Because the weekend is between business activity. workshops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill de-
days, Saturday and Sunday are counted as velopment, and exercises. Professional confer-The part you must allocate is the amount it
business days. This is true even though you use ence directors schedule and conduct thewould have cost you to travel between the point
the weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, or sessions. Participants can choose those ses-where travel outside the United States begins
other nonbusiness activity. sions they wish to attend.and your business destination and a return to
You can participate in this program since youthe point where travel outside the United States
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you had no are a member of the alumni association. Youends.
business in Quebec after Friday, but stayed until and your family take one of the trips. You spendYou determine the nonbusiness portion of
Monday before starting home, Saturday and about 2 hours at each of the planned sessions.that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The
Sunday would be nonbusiness days. The rest of the time you go touring and sightsee-numerator of the fraction is the number of non-
ing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1business days during your travel outside theNonbusiness activity on the way to or from week.United States and the denominator is the totalyour business destination. If you stopped Your travel expenses for the trip are notnumber of days you spend outside the Unitedfor a vacation or other nonbusiness activity ei- deductible since the trip was primarily a vaca-States.ther on the way from the United States to your tion. However, registration fees and any otherNone of your travel expenses for nonbusi-business destination, or on the way back to the incidental expenses you have for the fiveness activities at, near, or beyond your businessUnited States from your business destination, planned sessions you attended that are directlydestination are deductible.you must allocate part of your travel expenses to related and beneficial to your business are de-
the nonbusiness activity. ductible business expenses. These expensesExample. Assume that the dates are theThe part you must allocate is the amount it should be specifically stated in your records tosame as in the previous example but that in-would have cost you to travel between the point ensure proper allocation of your deductible busi-stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you flywhere travel outside the United States begins ness expenses.to Venice, Italy, for a vacation.and your nonbusiness destination and a return You cannot deduct any part of the cost ofto the point where travel outside the United
Luxury Water Travelyour trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris.States ends. In addition, you cannot deduct 7/18 of the airfareYou determine the nonbusiness portion of If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or otherand other expenses from New York to Paris andthat expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The form of luxury water transportation for businessback to New York.numerator of the fraction is the number of non- purposes, there is a daily limit on the amountYou can deduct 11/18 of the round-trip planebusiness days during your travel outside the you can deduct. The limit is twice the highestfare and other travel expenses from New York toUnited States and the denominator is the total federal per diem rate allowable at the time ofParis, plus your meals (subject to the 50% limit),number of days you spend outside the United your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem islodging, and any other business expenses youStates. the amount paid to federal government employ-had in Paris. (Assume these expenses total ees for daily living expenses when they travel$900). If the round-trip plane fare and otherExample. You live in New York. On May 4 away from home, but in the United States, fortravel-related expenses (such as food during theyou flew to Paris to attend a business confer- business purposes.)trip) are $800 from New York to Paris, you canence that began on May 5. The conference deduct travel costs of $489 ( 11/18 × $800), plusended at noon on May 14. That evening you flew Daily limit on luxury water travel. The high-the full $900 for the expenses you had in Paris.to Dublin where you visited with friends until the est federal per diem rate allowed and the daily
afternoon of May 21, when you flew directly limit for luxury water travel in 2007 is shown inOther methods. You can use another methodhome to New York. The primary purpose for the the following table.of counting business days if you establish that ittrip was to attend the conference. more clearly reflects the time spent on other Highest Daily LimitIf you had not stopped in Dublin, you would than business activities outside the United 2007 Federal on Luxuryhave arrived home the evening of May 14. You States. Dates Per Diem Water Traveldid not meet any of the exceptions that would
Jan. 1 –  March 31 $365 $730allow you to consider your travel entirely for
business. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are April 1 –  April 30 289 578Travel Primarily for Personalbusiness days and May 15 through May 21 (7 Reasons May 1 –  May 31 278 556days) are nonbusiness days.
June 1 –  August 31 288 576You can deduct the cost of your meals (sub- If you travel outside the United States primarily
ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other busi- for vacation or for investment purposes, the en- Sept. 1 –  Sept. 30 338 676
ness-related travel expenses while in Paris. tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personal Oct. 1 –  Nov. 30 375 750You cannot deduct your expenses while in expense. If you spend some time attending brief
Dec. 1 –  Dec. 31 381 762Dublin. You also cannot deduct 7/18 of what it professional seminars or a continuing education
would have cost you to travel round-trip between program, you can deduct your registration fees
New York and Dublin. and other expenses you have that are directly Example. Caroline, a travel agent, traveled
You paid $450 to fly from New York to Paris, related to your business. by ocean liner from New York to London, Eng-
$200 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $500 to fly land, on business in May. Her expense for the
from Dublin back to New York. Round trip airfare Example. The university from which you 6-day cruise was $3,900. Caroline’s deduction
from New York to Dublin would have been $850. graduated has a continuing education program for the cruise cannot exceed $3,336 (6 days ×
You figure the deductible part of your air for members of its alumni association. This pro- $556 daily limit).
travel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of the gram consists of trips to various foreign coun-
round-trip fare and other expenses you would tries where academic exercises and Meals and entertainment. If your expenses
have had in traveling directly between New York conferences are set up to acquaint individuals in for luxury water travel include  separately stated
and Dublin ($850 × 7/18 = $331) from your total most occupations with selected facilities in sev- amounts for meals or entertainment, those
expenses in traveling from New York to Paris to eral regions of the world. However, none of the amounts are subject to the 50% li mit on meals
Page 8 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 9 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and entertainment before you apply the daily 2. The cruise ship is a vessel registered inConventions Held Outside
limit. For a discussion of the 50% limit, see the United States.the North American Area
chapter 2. 3. All of the cruise ship’s ports of call are inYou cannot deduct expenses for attending a the United States or in possessions of theExample. In the previous example, Caro- convention, seminar, or similar meeting held United States.line’s luxury water travel had a total cost of outside the North American area unless:
$3,900. Of that amount, $1,700 was separately 4. You attach to your return a written state-• The meeting is directly related to yourstated as meals and entertainment. Caroline, ment signed by you that includes informa-trade or business, andwho is self-employed, is not reimbursed for any tion about:
of her travel expenses. Caroline figures her de- • It is as reasonable to hold the meeting
a. The total days of the trip (not includingductible travel expenses as follows. outside the North American area as in it. the days of transportation to and from
If the meeting meets these requirements, you the cruise ship port),Meals and entertainment ...... $1,700
also must satisfy the rules for deducting ex-50% limit ................ × .50 b. The number of hours each day that youAllowable meals & entertainment $  850 penses for business trips in general, discussed devoted to scheduled business activi-Other travel expenses ....... +  2,200 earlier under Travel Outside the United States. ties, andAllowable cost before the daily limit .... $3,050
North American area. The North AmericanDaily limit for May 2007 ...... $5 5 6 c. A program of the scheduled business
Times number of days ....... × 6 area includes the following locations. activities of the meeting.
Maximum luxury water travel deduction $3,336
American Samoa Johnston Island 5. You attach to your return a written state-Amount of allowable deduction ..... $3,050 Antigua and Barbuda Kingman Reef ment signed by an officer of the organiza-Aruba Marshall IslandsCaroline’s deduction for her cruise is limited to tion or group sponsoring the meeting thatBahamas Mexico$3,050, even though the limit on luxury water includes:Baker Island Micronesiatravel is higher.
Barbados Midway Islands a. A schedule of the business activities ofNot separately stated. If your meal or en- Bermuda Netherlands Antilles 1
each day of the meeting, andCanada Northern Marianatertainment charges are not separately stated or
Costa Rica Islandsare not clearly identifiable, you do not have to b. The number of hours you attended the
Dominica Palauallocate any portion of the total charge to meals scheduled business activities.Dominican Republic Palmyra Atollor entertainment. Grenada Puerto Rico
Guam Saint Lucia 2
Guyana Trinidad and TobagoExceptions Honduras USA
Howland Island U.S. Virgin Islands
The daily limit on luxury water travel (discussed Jamaica Wake Islandearlier) does not apply to expenses you have to Jarvis Island
attend a convention, seminar, or meeting on 1For expenses in attending a convention that began after
2.March 21, 2007.board a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships  under
2Not included in the North American area with respect toConventions Held Outside the North American conventions that began after April 4, 2007, except withArea. respect to nonrefundable contractual obligations in
existence on that date.
EntertainmentConventions The North American area also includes U.S.
islands, cays, and reefs that are possessions ofYou can deduct your travel expenses when you You may be able to deduct business-relatedthe United States and not part of the fifty statesattend a convention if you can show that your entertainment expenses you have for entertain-or the District of Columbia.attendance benefits your trade or business. You ing a client, customer, or employee. The rules
cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam- and definitions are summarized in Table 2-1.Reasonableness test. The following factorsily. You can deduct entertainment expensesare taken into account to determine if it wasIf the convention is for investment, political, only if they are both ordinary and necessary andreasonable to hold the meeting outside thesocial, or other purposes unrelated to your trade meet one of the following tests.North American area.or business, you cannot deduct the expenses.
• Directly-related test.• The purpose of the meeting and the activi-Your appointment or election as a dele-
• Associated test.ties taking place at the meeting.gate does not, in itself, determine
whether you can deduct travel ex-CAUTION
!
Both of these tests are explained later.• The purposes and activities of the spon-penses. You can deduct your travel expenses soring organizations or groups. An ordinary expense is one that is commononly if your attendance is connected to your own
and accepted in your field of trade, business, or• The homes of the active members of thetrade or business.
profession. A necessary expense is one that issponsoring organizations and the places
Convention agenda. The convention agenda helpful and appropriate for your business. Anat which other meetings of the sponsoring
or program generally shows the purpose of the expense does not have to be required to beorganizations or groups have been or willconvention. You can show your attendance at considered necessary.be held.the convention benefits your trade or business
The amount you can deduct for enter-• Other relevant factors you may present.by comparing the agenda with the official duties
tainment expenses may be limited.and responsibilities of your position. The agenda
Generally, you can deduct only 50% ofCAUTION
!
does not have to deal specifically with your offi- Cruise Ships your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enough
This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.if the agenda is so related to your position that it You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of your
shows your attendance was for business pur- expenses of attending conventions, seminars,
poses. or similar meetings held on cruise ships. All
ships that sail are considered cruise ships.
Directly-Related TestYou can deduct these expenses only if all of
the following requirements are met.
To meet the directly-related test for entertain-
1. The convention, seminar, or meeting is di- ment expenses (including entertainment-related
rectly related to your trade or business. meals), you must show that:
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 9

Page 10 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2–1  When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
Associated TestGeneral rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client,
customer, or employee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or Even if your expenses do not meet the di-the associated test. rectly-related test, they may meet the associ-
ated test.Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide
To meet the associated test for entertain-entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes meals
ment expenses (including entertainment-relatedprovided to a customer or client.
meals), you must show that the entertainment is:• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your
field of business, trade, or profession. • Associated with the active conduct of your
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, trade or business, and
Tests to be met Directly-related test • Directly before or after a substantial busi-
ness discussion (defined later).• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business,
and Associated with trade or business. Gener-You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment ally, an expense is associated with the activeperiod, and conduct of your trade or business if you canYou had more than a general expectation of getting income or some show that you had a clear business purpose forother specific business benefit. having the expense. The purpose may be to get
new business or to encourage the continuationAssociated test
of an existing business relationship.• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business Substantial business discussion. Whetherdiscussion. a business discussion is substantial depends on
the facts of each case. A business discussionOther rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment will not be considered substantial unless youexpense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
can show that you actively engaged in the dis-• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the cussion, meeting, negotiation, or other businesscircumstances.
transaction to get income or some other specific• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed business benefit.entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit).
The meeting does not have to be for any
specified length of time, but you must show that
the business discussion was substantial in rela-
• The main purpose of the combined busi- • Entertainment in a hospitality room at a tion to the meal or entertainment. It is not neces-ness and entertainment was the active convention where business goodwill is sary that you devote more time to business thanconduct of business, created through the display or discussion to entertainment. You do not have to discussof business products.• You did engage in business with the per- business during the meal or entertainment.
son during the entertainment period, and • Entertainment that is mainly a price rebate Meetings at conventions. You are consid-on the sale of your products (such as a• You had more than a general expectation ered to have a substantial business discussion ifrestaurant owner providing an occasionalof getting income or some other specific you attend meetings at a convention or similarfree meal to a loyal customer).business benefit at some future time. event, or at a trade or business meeting spon-
sored and conducted by a business or profes-• Entertainment of a clear business nature
Business is generally not considered to be the sional organization. However, your reason foroccurring under circumstances where
attending the convention or meeting must be tomain purpose when business and entertainment there is no meaningful personal or social
further your trade or business. The organizationare combined on hunting or fishing trips, or on relationship between you and the persons
that sponsors the convention or meeting mustyachts or other pleasure boats. Even if you show entertained. An example is entertainment
schedule a program of business activities that isthat business was the main purpose, you gener- of business and civic leaders at the open- the main activity of the convention or meeting.ally cannot deduct the expenses for the use of ing of a new hotel or play when the pur-
an entertainment facility. See Entertainment fa- pose is to get business publicity rather Directly before or after business discussion.cilities under What Entertainment Expenses Are than to create or maintain the goodwill of If the entertainment is held on the same day asNot Deductible? later in this chapter. the persons entertained. the business discussion, it is considered to beYou must consider all the facts, including the held directly before or after the business discus-nature of the business transacted and the rea- sion.Expenses not considered directly related.sons for conducting business during the enter- If the entertainment and the business discus-Entertainment expenses generally are not con-tainment. It is not necessary to devote more time sion are not held on the same day, you mustsidered directly related if you are not there or into business than to entertainment. However, if consider the facts of each case to see if thesituations where there are substantial distrac-the business discussion is only incidental to the associated test is met. Among the facts to con-tions that generally prevent you from activelyentertainment, the entertainment expenses do sider are the place, date, and duration of theconducting business. The following are exam-not meet the directly-related test. business discussion. If you or your businessples of situations where there are substantial
associates are from out of town, you must alsodistractions.
consider the dates of arrival and departure, andYou do not have to show that business • A meeting or discussion at a nightclub, the reasons the entertainment and the discus-income or other business benefit actu-
theater, or sporting event. sion did not take place on the same day.ally resulted from each entertainment
TIP
expense. • A meeting or discussion during what is
Example. A group of business associatesessentially a social gathering, such as a comes from out of town to your place of busi-cocktail party.Clear business setting. If the entertainment ness to hold a substantial business discussion.
• A meeting with a group that includes per-takes place in a clear business setting and is for If you entertain those business guests on the
sons who are not business associates atyour business or work, the expenses are consid- evening before the business discussion, or on
places such as cocktail lounges, countryered directly related to your business or work. the evening of the day following the business
The following situations are examples of enter- clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacation discussion, the entertainment generally is con-
tainment in a clear business setting. resorts. sidered to be held directly before or after the
Page 10 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 11 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
have to determine the amount of meal and en-
tertainment expenses that would be deductible
under the other rules discussed in this publica-
tion.
Example 1. You spend $200 for a busi-
ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount is not
allowable because it is lavish and extravagant,
the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit.
Your deduction cannot be more than $45 (50% ×
$90).
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You
paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face
value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction
cannot be more than $80 (50% × $160).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
Figure A can help you determine if the 50% limit
applies to you.
Expenses not subject to 50% limit. Your
meal or entertainment expense is not subject to
the 50% limit if the expense meets one of the
following exceptions.
1 - Employee’s reimbursed expenses. If
you are an employee, you are not subject to the
50% limit on expenses for which your employer
reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
2 - Self-employed. If you are
self-employed, your deductible meal and enter-
tainment expenses are not subject to the 50%
limit if all of the following requirements are met.
• You have these expenses as an indepen-
dent contractor.
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
• Your customer or client reimburses you ordiscussion. The expense meets the associated Included expenses. Expenses subject to the
gives you an allowance for these ex-test. 50% limit include:
penses in connection with services you• Taxes and tips relating to a business meal perform.or entertainment activity,
• You provide adequate records of these ex-• Cover charges for admission to a night-50% Limit penses to your customer or client. (Seeclub, chapter 5.)
In general, you can deduct only 50% of your • Rent paid for a room in which you hold a
business-related meal and entertainment ex- In this case, your client or customer is subjectdinner or cocktail party, and
penses. (If you are subject to the Department of to the 50% limit on the expenses.• Amounts paid for parking at a sportsTransportation’s “hours of service” limits, you
arena.can deduct a higher percentage. See Individuals Example. You are a self-employed attorney
subject to “hours of service” limits, later.) who adequately accounts for meal and enter-However, the cost of transportation to and from
The 50% limit applies to employees or their tainment expenses to a client who reimbursesa business meal or a business-related entertain-
employers, and to self-employed persons (in- you for these expenses. You are not subject toment activity is not subject to the 50% limit.
cluding independent contractors) or their clients, the directly-related or associated test, nor are
depending on whether the expenses are reim- you subject to the 50% limit. If the client canApplication of 50% limit. The 50% limit onbursed. deduct the expenses, the client is subject to themeal and entertainment expenses applies if the 50% limit.Figure A summarizes the general rules expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-explained in this section. If you (the contractor) have expenses forered by one of the exceptions discussed later. meals and entertainment related to providingThe 50% limit applies to business meals or The 50% limit also applies to certain meal services for a client but do not adequately ac-entertainment expenses you have while: and entertainment expenses that are not busi- count for and seek reimbursement from the cli-• Traveling away from home (whether eat- ness related. It applies to meal and entertain- ent for those expenses, you are subject to theing alone or with others) on business, ment expenses you have for the production of directly-related or associated test and to theincome, including rental or royalty income. It 50% limit.• Entertaining customers at your place of also applies to the cost of meals included inbusiness, a restaurant, or other location, 3 - Advertising expenses. You are not sub-deductible educational expenses.or ject to the 50% limit if you provide meals, enter-
tainment, or recreational facilities to the general• Attending a business convention or recep- When to apply the 50% limit. You apply the
public as a means of advertising or promotingtion, business meeting, or business lunch- 50% limit after determining the amount that
goodwill in the community. For example, neithereon at a club. would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 11

Page 12 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the expense of sponsoring a television or radio taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter- organizations include business leagues, cham-
show nor the expense of distributing free food tainment-related meal, you or your employee bers of commerce, real estate boards, trade
and beverages to the general public is subject to must be present when the food or beverages are associations, and professional a ssociations.
the 50% limit. provided. Entertainment tickets. Generally, you cannot
4 - Sale of meals or entertainment. You You cannot claim the cost of your meal deduct more than the face value of an entertain-
are not subject to the 50% limit if you actually both as an entertainment expense and ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. For
sell meals, entertainment, goods and services, as a travel expense. example, you cannot deduct service fees youCAUTION
!
or use of facilities to the public. For example, if pay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount
Meals sold in the normal course of youryou run a nightclub, your expense for the enter- over the face value of the tickets you pay to
business are not considered entertain-tainment you furnish to your customers, such as scalpers.
ment.a floor show, is not subject to the 50% limit.
TIP
Exception for events that benefit charita-
ble organizations. Different rules apply when5 - Charitable sports event. You are not Deduction may depend on your type of the cost of a ticket to a sports event benefits asubject to the 50% limit if you pay for a package business. Your kind of business may deter- charitable organization. You can take into ac-deal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita- mine if a particular activity is considered enter- count the full cost you pay for the ticket, even if itble sports event. For the conditions the sports tainment. For example, if you are a dress is more than the face value, if all of the followingevent must meet, see Exception for events that designer and have a fashion show to introduce conditions apply.benefit charitable organizations under What En- your new designs to store buyers, the showtertainment Expenses Are Deductible?, later. generally is not considered entertainment. This • The event’s main purpose is to benefit a
is because fashion shows are typical in your qualified charitable organization.Individuals subject to “hours of service” lim-
business. But, if you are an appliance distributorits. You can deduct a higher percentage of • The entire net proceeds go to the charity.and hold a fashion show for the spouses of youryour meal expenses while traveling away from
retailers, the show generally is considered en- • The event uses volunteers to perform sub-your tax home if the meals take place during or
tertainment. stantially all the event’s work.incident to any period subject to the Department
of Transportation’s “hours of service” limits. The Separating costs. If you have one expensepercentage is 75% for 2007. The 50% limit on entertainment doesthat includes the costs of entertainment, andIndividuals subject to the Department of not apply to any expense for a packageother services (such as lodging or transporta-Transportation’s “hours of service” limits include deal that includes a ticket to such ation), you must allocate that expense between
TIP
the following persons. charitable sports event.the cost of entertainment and the cost of other
services. You must have a reasonable basis for• Certain air transportation workers (such as
making this allocation. For example, you mustpilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and Example 1. You purchase tickets to a golf
allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-control tower operators) who are under tournament organized by the local volunteer fire
tainment in its lounge on the same bill with yourFederal Aviation Administration regula- company. All net proceeds will be used to buy
room charge.tions. new fire equipment. The volunteers will run the
tournament. You can deduct the entire cost ofTaking turns paying for meals or entertain-• Interstate truck operators and bus drivers the tickets as a business expense if they other-ment. If a group of business acquaintanceswho are under Department of Transporta- wise qualify as an entertainment expense.take turns picking up each others’ meal or enter-tion regulations.
tainment checks without regard to whether any• Certain railroad employees (such as engi- Example 2.  You purchase tickets to a col-business purposes are served, no member ofneers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- lege football game through a ticket broker. Afterthe group can deduct any part of the expense.ers, and control operations personnel) having a business discussion, you take a client
who are under Federal Railroad Adminis- Lavish or extravagant expenses. You can- to the game. Net proceeds from the game go to
tration regulations. not deduct expenses for entertainment that are colleges that qualify as charitable organizations.
lavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid- However, since the colleges also pay individuals• Certain merchant mariners who are under ered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable to perform services, such as coaching andCoast Guard regulations. considering the facts and circumstances. Ex- recruiting, you can only use the face value of the
penses will not be disallowed just because they tickets in determining your business deduction.
are more than a fixed dollar amount or take Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes. Ifplace at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs, you rent a skybox or other private luxury box foror resorts.What Entertainment more than one event at the same sports arena,
Allocating between business and nonbusi- you generally cannot deduct more than the priceExpenses ness. If you entertain business and nonbusi- of a nonluxury box seat ticket.
ness individuals at the same event, you must To determine whether a skybox has beenAre Deductible? divide your entertainment expenses between rented for more than one event, count each
business and nonbusiness. You can deduct only game or other performance as one event. ForThis section explains different types of entertain- the business part. If you cannot establish the example, renting a skybox for a series of playoffment expenses that you may be able to deduct. part of the expense for each person participat- games is considered renting it for more than one
ing, allocate the expense to each participant onEntertainment. Entertainment includes any event. All skyboxes you rent in the same arena,
a pro rata basis.activity generally considered to provide enter- along with any rentals by related parties, are
tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples considered in making this determination.
Example. You entertain a group of individu-include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so- Related parties include:
als that includes yourself, three business pros-cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at • Family members (spouses, ancestors, andpects, and seven social guests. Only 4/11 of thesporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish- lineal descendants),expense qualifies as a business entertainmenting, vacation, and similar trips.
expense. You cannot deduct the expenses forEntertainment also may include meeting per- • Parties who have made a reciprocal ar-
the seven social guests because those costs aresonal, living, or family needs of individuals, such rangement involving the sharing of
nonbusiness expenses.as providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to skyboxes,
customers or their families. Trade association meetings. You can de- • Related corporations,
A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter- duct entertainment expenses that are directly • A partnership and its principal partners,tainment includes the cost of a meal you provide related to and necessary for attending business andto a customer or client, whether the meal is a meetings or conventions of certain exempt orga-
part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal nizations if the expenses of your attendance are • A corporation and a partnership with com-
expense includes the cost of food, beverages, related to your active trade or business. These mon ownership.
Page 12 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 13 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seat beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that indirect gift to the customer. This rule does n ot
skybox at Team Stadium for three baseball you provided during entertainment at a facility. apply if you have a bona fide, indepen dent busi-
games. The cost of regular nonluxury box seats These are not expenses for the use of an enter- ness connection with that family m ember and
at each event is $30 a seat. You can deduct tainment facility. However, these expenses are the gift is not intended for the custo mer’s even-
(subject to the 50% limit) $900 ((10 seats × $30 subject to the directly-related and associated tual use.
each) × 3 events). tests and to the 50% limit, all discussed earlier. If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of
you are treated as one taxpayer. It does notFood and beverages in skybox seats. If Expenses for spouses. You generally cannot matter whether you have separate businesses,expenses for food and beverages are separately deduct the cost of entertainment for your spouse are separately employed, or whether each ofstated, you can deduct these expenses in addi- or for the spouse of a customer. However, you you has an independent connection with thetion to the amounts allowable for the skybox, can deduct these costs if you can show that you recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-subject to the requirements and limits that apply. had a clear business purpose, rather than a ship and the partners are treated as one tax-The amounts separately stated for food and personal or social purpose, for providing the payer.beverages must be reasonable. You cannot in- entertainment.
flate the charges for food and beverages to Example. Bob Jones sells products to Localavoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals. Example. You entertain a customer. The Company. He and his wife, Jan, gave Local
cost is an ordinary and necessary business ex- Company three cheese packages to thank them
pense and is allowed under the entertainment for their business. They paid $80 for each pack-
rules. The customer’s spouse joins you because age, or $240 total. Three of Local Company’s
it is impractical to entertain the customer withoutWhat Entertainment executives took the packages home for their
the spouse. You can deduct the cost of enter- families’ use. Bob and Jan have no independentExpenses Are Not taining the customer’s spouse. If your spouse business relationship with any of the executives’
joins the party because the customer’s spouse other family members. They can deduct a totalDeductible? is present, the cost of the entertainment for your of $75 ($25 limit × 3) for the cheese packages.
spouse is also deductible.
This section explains different types of entertain- Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as
Gift or entertainment. Any item that might bement expenses that you generally may not be engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,
considered either a gift or entertainment gener-able to deduct. and mailing, are generally not included in deter-
ally will be considered entertainment. However, mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25
Club dues and membership fees. You can- if you give a customer packaged food or bever- limit.
not deduct dues (including initiation fees) for ages that you intend the customer to use at a A cost is incidental only if it does not add
membership in any club organized for: later date, treat it as a gift. substantial value to the gift. For example, the
If you give a customer tickets to a theater cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-• Business, performance or sporting event and you do not go ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for
• Pleasure, with the customer to the performance or event, packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the
you have a choice. You can treat the tickets as value of the basket is substantial compared to• Recreation, or either a gift or entertainment, whichever is to the value of the fruit.• Other social purpose. your advantage.
Exceptions. The following items are not con-You can change your treatment of the ticketsThis rule applies to any membership organiza- sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. at a later date by filing an amended return.tion if one of its principal purposes is either: Generally, an amended return must be filed 1. An item that costs $4 or less and:• To conduct entertainment activities for within 3 years from the date the original return
members or their guests, or was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax a. Has your name clearly and permanently
was paid, whichever is later. imprinted on the gift, and• To provide members or their guests with
If you go with the customer to the event, youaccess to entertainment facilities, dis- b. Is one of a number of identical itemsmust treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-cussed later. you widely distribute. Examples includement expense. You cannot choose, in this case,
pens, desk sets, and plastic bags andto treat the tickets as a gift.The purposes and activities of a club, not its cases.name, will determine whether or not you can
deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid 2. Signs, display racks, or other promotionalto: material to be used on the business prem-
ises of the recipient.• Country clubs,
• Golf and athletic clubs, Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be3. considered either a gift or entertainment gener-• Airline clubs,
ally will be considered entertainment. However,• Hotel clubs, and if you give a customer packaged food or bever-
ages that you intend the customer to use at aGifts• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-
later date, treat it as a gift.cumstances generally considered to be
If you give a customer tickets to a theaterconducive to business discussions. If you give gifts in the course of your trade or
performance or sporting event and you do not gobusiness, you can deduct all or part of the cost.
with the customer to the performance or event,This chapter explains the limits and rules forEntertainment facilities. Generally, you can- you have a choice. You can treat the cost of thededucting the costs of gifts.not deduct any expense for the use of an enter- tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-tainment facility. This includes expenses for $25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25 ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.depreciation and operating costs such as rent, for business gifts you give directly or indirectly to You can change your treatment of the ticketsutilities, maintenance, and protection. each person during your tax year. A gift to a at a later date by filing an amended return.An entertainment facility is any property you company that is intended for the eventual per- Generally, an amended return must be filedown, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples sonal use or benefit of a particular person or a within 3 years from the date the original returninclude a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, limited class of people will be considered an was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxswimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, indirect gift to that particular person or to the was paid, whichever is later.airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a individuals within that class of people who re-  If you go with the customer to the event, youvacation resort. ceive the gift. must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
Out-of-pocket expenses. You can deduct If you give a gift to a member of a customer’s ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,
out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and family, the gift is generally considered to be an to treat the cost of the tickets a s a gift expense.
Chapter 3 Gifts Page 13

Page 14 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
home and you commute to a temporary work
location in the same trade or business, you can
deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last (and does in fact
last) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo-
rary unless there are facts and circumstances
that would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last for more than 1 year
or if there is no realistic expectation that the
employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
ployment is not temporary, regardless of
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.
If employment at a work location initially is
realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,
but at some later date the employment is realisti-
cally expected to last more than 1 year, that
employment will be treated as temporary (un-
less there are facts and circumstances that
would indicate otherwise) until your expectation
changes. It will not be treated as temporary after
the date you determine it will last more than 1
year.
If the temporary work location is beyond the
general area of your regular place of work and
you stay overnight, you are traveling away from
home. You may have deductible travel ex-
penses as discussed in chapter 1.
No regular place of work. If you have no
regular place of work but ordinarily work in the
metropolitan area where you live, you can de-
duct daily transportation costs between home
and a temporary work site outside that metropol-
itan area.
Generally, a metropolitan area includes the
area within the city limits and the suburbs that
are considered part of that metropolitan area.
You cannot deduct daily transportation costs
between your home and temporary work sites
within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
ductible commuting expenses.
Two places of work. If you work at two places
in one day, whether or not for the same em-
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Neve
r de
ductible
on a day off fromregular
 or 
main job
Deductible if y
ou have a
regular o
r m
ain job
at a
nother location Always deductible
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home. )
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
from one workplace to the other. However, if for• Going to a business meeting away from
some personal reason you do not go directlyyour regular workplace.
from one location to the other, you cannot de-
• Getting from your home to a temporary duct more than the amount it would have cost4. workplace when you have one or more you to go directly from the first location to the
regular places of work. These temporary second.
workplaces can be either within the area Transportation expenses you have in goingof your tax home or outside that area. between home and a part-time job on a day offTransportation from your main job are commuting expenses.Transportation expenses do not include ex-
You cannot deduct them.penses you have while traveling away fromThis chapter discusses expenses you can de- home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-
duct for business transportation when you are Armed Forces reservists. A meeting of anpenses which are discussed in chapter 1. How-
Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place ofnot traveling away from home as defined in ever, if you use your car while traveling away
business if the meeting is held on a day on whichchapter 1. These expenses include the cost of from home overnight, use the rules in this chap-
you work at your regular job. You can deduct thetransportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the ter to figure your car expense deduction. See
expense of getting from one workplace to theCar Expenses, later.cost of driving and maintaining your car.
other as just discussed under Two places ofTransportation expenses include the ordi- work.Illustration of transportation expenses.nary and necessary costs of all of the following. You usually cannot deduct the expense if theFigure B illustrates the rules that apply for de-
reserve meeting is held on a day on which you• Getting from one workplace to another in ducting transportation expenses when you have
do not work at your regular job. In this case, youra regular or main job away from your home. Youthe course of your business or profession
transportation generally is a nondeductible com-may want to refer to it when deciding whetherwhen you are traveling within the city or
muting expense. However, you can deduct youryou can deduct your transportation expenses.general area that is your tax home. Tax transportation expenses if the location of thehome is defined in chapter 1. Temporary work location. If you have one or meeting is temporary and you have one or more
• Visiting clients or customers. more regular work locations away from your regular places of work.
Page 14 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 15 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol- Office in the home. If you have an office in  For more information on alternative motor vehi-
cles, see Form 8910, Alternative Motor Vehicleitan area but not at any specific location and the your home that qualifies as a principal place of
Credit.reserve meeting is held at a temporary location business, you can deduct your daily transporta-
outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct tion costs between your home and another work Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mailyour transportation expenses. location in the same trade or business. (See carrier, you may be able to treat the qualifiedIf you travel away from home overnight to Publication 587, Business Use of Your Home, reimbursement you received as your allowableattend a guard or reserve meeting, you can for information on determining if your home of- expense. Because the qualified reimbursementdeduct your travel expenses. These expenses fice qualifies as a principal place of business.) is treated as paid under an accountable plan,are discussed in chapter 1. your employer should not include the reimburse-If you travel more than 100 miles away from Examples of deductible transportation. The ment in your income.home in connection with your performance of following examples show when you can deduct If your vehicle expenses are more than theservices as a member of the reserves, you may transportation expenses based on the location amount of your reimbursement, you can deductbe able to deduct some of your reserve-related of your work and your home. the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-travel costs as an adjustment to gross income duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You mustrather than as an itemized deduction. For more Example 1. You regularly work in an office complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Forminformation, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav- in the city where you live. Your employer sends 1040, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.eling More Than 100 Miles From Home  under you to a one-week training session at a different A “qualified reimbursement” is the reim-Special Rules, in chapter 6. office in the same city. You travel directly from bursement you receive that meets both of the
your home to the training location and return following conditions.Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily • It is given as an equipment maintenancethe costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, round-trip transportation between your home allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.or of driving a car between your home and your and the training location. Postal Service.main or regular place of work. These costs are
personal commuting expenses. You cannot de- Example 2. Your principal place of business • It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-duct commuting expenses no matter how far lective bargaining agreement. Any lateris in your home. You can deduct the cost ofyour home is from your regular place of work. agreement cannot increase the qualifiedround-trip transportation between your qualify-You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if reimbursement amount by more than theing home office and your client’s or customer’syou work during the commuting trip. rate of inflation.place of business.
See your employer for information on your reim-Example. You sometimes use your cell Example 3. You have no regular office, and bursement.phone to make business calls while commuting you do not have an office in your home. In thisto and from work. Sometimes business associ- case, the location of your first business contact If you are a rural mail carrier and re-ates ride with you to and from work, and you is considered your office. Transportation ex- ceived a qualified reimbursement, youhave a business discussion in the car. These penses between your home and this first contact cannot use the standard mileage rate.activities do not change the trip from personal to CAUTION
!
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-business. You cannot deduct your commuting portation expenses between your last businessexpenses. Standard Mileage Ratecontact and your home are also nondeductible
Parking fees. Fees you pay to park your car commuting expenses. Although you cannot de-
You may be able to use the standard mileageat your place of business are nondeductible duct the costs of these trips, you can deduct the
rate to figure the deductible costs of operatingcommuting expenses. You can, however, de- costs of going from one client or customer to your car for business purposes. For 2007, theduct business-related parking fees when visiting another. standard mileage rate for the cost of operatinga customer or client.
your car for business use is 481/2 cents per mile.Advertising display on car. Putting display
If you use the standard mileage rate formaterial that advertises your business on your
a year, you cannot deduct your actualcar does not change the use of your car from Car Expenses
car expenses for that year. You cannotpersonal use to business use. If you use this car
CAUTION
!
deduct depreciation, lease payments, mainte-for commuting or other personal uses, you still If you use your car for business purposes, you
nance and repairs, gasoline (including gasolinecannot deduct your expenses for those uses. ordinarily can deduct car expenses. You gener-
taxes), oil, insurance, or vehicle registrationally can use one of the two following methods toCar pools. You cannot deduct the cost of fees. See Choosing the standard mileage ratefigure your deductible expenses.using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not and Standard mileage rate not allowed, later.include payments you receive from the passen- • Standard mileage rate. You generally can use the standard mileagegers in your income. These payments are con- • Actual car expenses. rate whether or not you are reimbursed andsidered reimbursements of your expenses. whether or not any reimbursement is more orHowever, if you operate a car pool for a profit, If you use actual expenses to figure your de- less than the amount figured using the standardyou must include payments from passengers in mileage rate. See chapter 6 for more informationduction for a car you lease, there are rules thatyour income. You can then deduct your car on reimbursements.affect the amount of your lease payments thatexpenses (using the rules in this publication). you can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later. Choosing the standard mileage rate. If youHauling tools or instruments. Hauling In this publication, “car” includes a van, want to use the standard mileage rate for a cartools or instruments in your car while commuting pickup, or panel truck. For the definition of “car” you own, you must choose to use it in the firstto and from work does not make your car ex- for depreciation purposes, see Car defined year the car is available for use in your business.penses deductible. However, you can deduct under Actual Car Expenses, later. Then in later years, you can choose to use eitherany additional costs you have for hauling tools or the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.instruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow You may be entitled to a tax credit for If you want to use the standard mileage ratewith your car). an alternative motor vehicle that you for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire
place in service during the year. TheUnion members’ trips from a union hall. If lease period. For leases that began on or before
TIP
vehicle must meet certain requirements, andyou get your work assignments at a union hall December 31, 1997, the standard mileage rate
you do not have to use it in your business toand then go to your place of work, the costs of must be used for the entire portion of the lease
qualify for the credit. However, you must reducegetting from the union hall to your place of work period (including renewals) that is after 1997.
your basis for depreciation of the alternativeare nondeductible commuting expenses. Al- You must make the choice to use the stan-
motor vehicle by the amount of the credit youthough you need the union to get your work dard mileage rate by the due date (including
claim. See Depreciation Deduction, later, underassignments, you are employed where you extensions) of your return. You cannot revoke
work, not where the union hall is located. Actual Car Expenses. the choice. However, in later years, you can
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 15

Page 16 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
switch from the standard mileage rate to the Example 4. Maureen owns a car and four Business and personal use. If you use your
vans that are used in her housecleaning busi- car for both business and personal purposes,actual expenses method. If you change to the
ness. Her employees use the vans and she uses you must divide your expenses between busi-actual expenses method in a later year, but
the car to travel to various customers. Maureen ness and personal use. You can divide yourbefore your car is fully depreciated, you have to
cannot use the standard mileage rate for the car expense based on the miles driven for eachestimate the remaining useful life of the car and
or the vans. This is because all five vehicles are purpose.use straight line depreciation.
used in Maureen’s business at the same time.For more information about depreciation in- Example. You are a sales representativeShe must use actual expenses for all vehicles.cluded in the standard mileage rate, see Excep- for a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000tion under Methods of depreciation  under Interest. If you are an employee, you cannot miles during the year: 12,000 miles for businessDepreciation Deduction, later. deduct any interest paid on a car loan. This and 8,000 miles for personal use. You can claim
applies even if you use the car 100% for busi- only 60% (12,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of oper-
Standard mileage rate not allowed. You ness as an employee. ating your car as a business expense.
cannot use the standard mileage rate if you: However, if you are self-employed and use Employer-provided vehicle. If you use a ve-your car in your business, you can deduct that• Use the car for hire (such as a taxi), hicle provided by your employer for businesspart of the interest expense that represents your purposes, you can deduct your actual un-• Use five or more cars at the same time (as business use of the car. For example, if you use reimbursed car expenses. You cannot use thein fleet operations), your car 60% for business, you can deduct 60% standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided byof the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). You• Claimed a depreciation deduction for the Your Employer in chapter 6.cannot deduct the part of the interest expensecar using any method other than straight that represents your personal use of the car. Interest on car loans. If you are an employee,line, for example, MACRS (as discussed
you cannot deduct any interest paid on a carlater under Depreciation Deduction), If you use a home equity loan to
loan. This interest is treated as personal interestpurchase your car, you may be able to• Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis- and is not deductible. If you are self-employeddeduct the interest. See Publication
TIP
cussed later) on the car, and use your car in that business, see Interest,936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, for
earlier, under Standard Mileage Rate.more information.• Claimed the special depreciation allow-
ance on the car, Taxes paid on your car. If you are an em-
Personal property taxes. If you itemize your ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes• Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enterfor a car you leased, or deduct on line 7 state and local personal prop- the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Form
• Are a rural mail carrier who received a erty taxes on motor vehicles. You can take this 1040).
deduction even if you use the standard mileagequalified reimbursement. (See Rural mail
Sales taxes. Generally, sales taxes on yourrate or if you do not use the car for business.carriers, earlier.) car are part of your car’s basis and are recov-If you are self-employed and use your car in
ered through depreciation, discussed later.your business, you can deduct the business partFive or more cars. If you own or lease five
However, to the extent the car is not used in yourof state and local personal property taxes onor more cars that are used for business at the trade or business, you can choose to deduct themotor vehicles on Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ,same time, you cannot use the standard mile- nonbusiness part of the sales tax deduction onor Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize yourage rate for the business use of any car. How- Schedule A (Form 1040). You can only choosedeductions, you can include the remainder ofever, you may be able to deduct your actual to deduct state and local sales taxes as anyour state and local personal property taxes onexpenses for operating each of the cars in your itemized deduction if you choose not to deductthe car on Schedule A (Form 1040).business. See Actual Car Expenses,  later, for state and local income taxes.information on how to figure your deduction. Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using Fines and collateral. You cannot deduct finesYou are not using five or more cars for busi- the standard mileage rate, you can deduct any you pay or collateral you forfeit for traffic viola-ness at the same time if you alternate using (use business-related parking fees and tolls. (Parking tions.at different times) the cars for business. fees that you pay to park your car at your place
The following examples illustrate the rules of work are nondeductible commuting ex- Casualty and theft losses. If your car is dam-
for when you can and cannot use the standard penses.) aged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able to
mileage rate for five or more cars. deduct part of the loss that is not covered by
Sale, trade-in, or other disposition. If you insurance. See Publication 547, Casualties, Di-
Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car, sasters, and Thefts, for information on deducting
you may have a gain or loss on the transactionthree cars and two vans that she alternates a loss on your car.
or an adjustment to the basis of your new car.using for calling on her customers. She can use Depreciation and section 179 deductions.See Disposition of a Car, later.the standard mileage rate for the business mile- Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax andage of the three cars and the two vans because improvements, is a capital expense. Becauseshe does not use them at the same time. Actual Car Expenses the benefits last longer than one year, you gen-
erally cannot deduct a capital expense. How-If you do not use the standard mileage rate, youExample 2. Tony and his employees use ever, you can recover this cost through themay be able to deduct your actual car expenses.his four pickup trucks in his landscaping busi- section 179 deduction (the deduction allowed byness. During the year, he traded in two of his old If you qualify to use both methods, you section 179 of the Internal Revenue Code) andtrucks for two newer ones. Tony can use the may want to figure your deduction both depreciation deductions. Depreciation allowsstandard mileage rate for the business mileage ways to see which gives you a larger you to recover the cost over more than one year
TIP
of all six of the trucks he owned during the year. deduction. by deducting part of it each year. The section
179 deduction and the depreciation deductionActual car expenses include:Example 3. Chris owns a repair shop and are discussed later.an insurance business. He and his employees Depreciation Lease Registration Generally, there are limits on these deduc-
use his two pickup trucks and van for the repair Licenses payments fees tions. Special rules apply if you use your car
Gas Insurance Repairsshop. Chris alternates using his two cars for the 50% or less in your work or business.Oil Garage rent Tiresinsurance business. No one else uses the cars You can claim a section 179 deduction andTolls Parking feesfor business purposes. Chris can use the stan- use a depreciation method other than straight
dard mileage rate for the business use of the If you have fully depreciated a car that you line only if you do not use the standard mileage
pickup trucks, van, and the cars because he still use in your business, you can continue to rate to figure your business-related car ex-
never has more than four vehicles used for busi- claim your other actual car expenses. Continue penses in the year you first place a car in serv-
ness at the same time. to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5. ice.
Page 16 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 17 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you claim either a section 179 deduction or However, you can claim a depreciation deduc- • Designed to have a seating capacity of
use a depreciation method other than straight tion for the business use of the car. See Depreci- more than nine persons behind the
line in the year you first place a car in service, ation Deduction, later. driver’s seat,
you cannot use the standard mileage rate on • Equipped with a cargo area of at least 6that car in any future year. More than 50% business use requirement. feet in interior length that is an open area
You must use the property more than 50% for or is designed for use as an open area but
business to claim any section 179 deduction. If is enclosed by a cap and is not readilyCar defined. For depreciation purposes, a car
you used the property more than 50% for busi- accessible directly from the passengeris any four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck or
ness, multiply the cost of the property by the compartment, orvan) that is made primarily for use on public
percentage of business use. The result is thestreets, roads, and highways. Its unloaded gross • That has an integral enclosure, fully en-cost of the property that can qualify for the sec-vehicle weight (gross vehicle weight in the case closing the driver compartment and loadtion 179 deduction.of a truck or van) must not be more than 6,000 carrying device, does not have seatingpounds. A car includes any part, component, or rearward of the driver’s seat, and has noExample. Peter purchased a car in Aprilother item that is physically attached to it or is body section protruding more than 30 in-2007 for $19,500 and he used it 60% for busi-usually included in the purchase price. ches ahead of the leading edge of theness. The total cost of Peter’s car that qualifies windshield.A car does not include: for the section 179 deduction is $11,700
($19,500 cost × 60% business use). But see• An ambulance, hearse, or combination Limit on total section 179 and depreciationLimit on total section 179 and depreciation de-ambulance-hearse used directly in a busi- deductions. Generally, the total amount ofductions, discussed later.ness, section 179 and depreciation deductions that
you can claim for a qualified car that you placed• A vehicle used directly in the business of
in service in 2007 is $3,060. The limit is reducedLimits. There are limits on:transporting persons or property for pay or
if your business use of the car is less than 100%.hire, or • The amount of the section 179 deduction, See Depreciation Limits, later, for more informa-
• A truck or van that is a qualified nonper- tion.• The section 179 deduction for sport utility
sonal use vehicle. and certain other vehicles, and
Example. In the earlier example under• The total amount of the section 179 de-Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles. More than 50% business use requirement, Peterduction plus the depreciation deductionThese are vehicles that by their nature are not had a car with a qualifying cost (for purposes of(discussed later) you can claim for a quali-likely to be used more than a minimal amount for the section 179 deduction) of $11,700. How-fied property.personal purposes. They include trucks and ever, Peter’s total section 179 and depreciation
vans that have been specially modified so that deduction is limited to $1,836 ($3,060 limit xLimit on the amount of the section 179they are not likely to be used more than a mini- 60% business use).deduction. For 2007, the total amount youmal amount for personal purposes, such as by
can choose to deduct under section 179 gener-installation of permanent shelving and painting Cost of car. For purposes of the section 179ally cannot be more than $125,000.the vehicle to display advertising or the com- deduction, the cost of the car does not includepany’s name. Delivery trucks with seating only If the cost of your qualifying section 179 any amount figured by reference to any otherfor the driver, or only for the driver plus a folding property placed in service in 2007 is over property held by you at any time. For example, ifjump seat are qualified nonpersonal use vehi- $500,000, you must reduce the $125,000 dollar you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car tocles. limit (but not below zero) by the amount of cost use in your business, your cost for purposes ofover $500,000. If the cost of your section 179More information. See Depreciation De- the section 179 deduction does not include yourproperty placed in service during 2007 isduction, later, for more information on how to adjusted basis in the car you trade in for the new$625,000 or more, you cannot take a sectiondepreciate your vehicle. car. Your cost includes only the cash you paid.179 deduction.
Basis of car for depreciation. The amountThe total amount you can deduct under sec-
of the section 179 deduction reduces your basistion 179 each year after you apply the limitsSection 179 Deduction in your car. If you choose the section 179 deduc-listed above cannot be more than the taxable
tion, you must subtract the amount of the deduc-The section 179 deduction allows you to treat income from the active conduct of any trade or
tion from the cost of your car. The resultingpart or all of the business cost of a car as a business during the year.
amount is the basis in your car that you use tocurrent expense rather than taking depreciation If you are married and file a joint return, you figure your depreciation deduction.deductions over a number of years. and your spouse are treated as one taxpayer in
determining any reduction to the dollar limit,The limit on total section 179 and de- When to choose. If you want to take the sec-regardless of which of you purchased the prop-preciation deductions (discussed later) tion 179 deduction, you must make the choice inerty or placed it in service.may reduce or eliminate any benefit
TIP
the tax year you both purchase the car and placefrom claiming the section 179 deduction. If you and your spouse file separate returns, it in service for business or work.you are treated as one taxpayer for the dollarYou can claim the section 179 deduction
limit. You must allocate the dollar limit (after anyonly in the year you place the car in service. For How to choose. Employees use Form 2106 toreduction) between you.this purpose, a car is placed in service when it is make this choice and report the section 179ready and available for a specific use, whether in For more information on the above section deduction. All others use Form 4562.a trade or business, a tax-exempt activity, a 179 deduction limits, see Publication 946. File the appropriate form with either of thepersonal activity, or for the production of in- Limit for sport utility and certain other ve- following.come. Even if you are not using the property, it is hicles. For sport utility and certain other vehi-in service when it is ready and available for its • Your original tax return filed for the yearcles placed in service in 2007, the portion of thespecific use. the property was placed in servicevehicle’s cost taken into account in figuring your (whether or not you file it timely).section 179 deduction is limited to $25,000. ThisA car first used for personal purposes cannot
rule applies to any 4-wheeled vehicle primarily • An amended return filed within the timequalify for the deduction in a later year when its
designed or used to carry passengers over pub- prescribed by law. An election made on anuse changes to business.
lic streets, roads, or highways, that is not subject amended return must specify the item of
to any of the passenger automobile limits ex-Example. In 2006 you bought a new car and section 179 property to which the election
plained under Depreciation Limits,  later, andplaced it in service for personal purposes. This applies and the part of the cost of each
that is rated at no more than 14,000 poundsyear, you began to use it for business. Changing such item to be taken into account. The
gross vehicle weight. However, the $25,000 limitits use to business use does not qualify the cost amended return must also include any re-
does not apply to any vehicle:of your car for a section 179 deduction this year. sulting adjustments to taxable income.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 17

Page 18 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must keep records that show the • You purchased the car on or after August If you change the use of a car from personal
specific identification of each piece of to business, your basis for depreciation is the28, 2005, but only if no binding written
qualifying section 179 property. These lesser of the fair market value or your adjustedcontract to acquire the car existed beforeCAUTION
!
records must show how you acquired the prop- basis in the car on the date of conversion. Addi-August 28, 2005,
erty, the person you acquired it from, and when tional rules concerning basis are discussed later• You placed the car in service in your tradeyou placed it in service. in this chapter under Unadjusted basis.or business in 2007,
Revoking an election. An election (or any • Substantially all of the use of the car is in Placed in service. You generally place a carspecification made in the election) to take a the GO Zone, and in service when it is available for use in yoursection 179 deduction for 2007 can be revoked work or business, in an income-producing activ-• The original use of the car in the GO Zonewithout IRS approval by filing an amended re- ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation beginsbegan with you after August 28, 2005.turn. The amended return must be filed within when the car is placed in service for use in yourUsed cars can be qualified GO Zone prop-the time prescribed by law. The amended return work or business or for the production of income.erty if not previously used within the GOmust also include any resulting adjustment to For purposes of computing depreciation, ifZone. Also, additional capital expenditurestaxable income. Once made, the revocation is you first start using the car only for personal useyou incurred after August 25, 2005, to re-irrevocable. and later convert it to business use, you placecondition or rebuild your car meet the orig-Reduction in business use. To be eligible to the car in service on the date of conversion.inal use test if the original use of the car inclaim the section 179 deduction, you must use the GO Zone began with you. Car placed in service and disposed of inyour car more than 50% for business or work in the same year. If you place a car in servicethe year you acquired it. If your business use of and dispose of it in the same tax year, youExample. Dan purchased a new car forthe car is 50% or less in a later tax year during cannot claim any depreciation deduction for that$13,500 in June 2007, and used it 100% in histhe recovery period, you have to recapture (in- car.business. The car qualifies as GO Zone prop-clude in income) in that later year any excess
erty. Dan’s unadjusted basis is $13,500. Dandepreciation. Any section 179 deduction Methods of depreciation. Generally, you fig-chooses not to claim any section 179 deductionclaimed on the car is included in calculating the ure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac-but he does choose to claim the GO Zone spe-excess depreciation. For information on this cal- celerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS).cial depreciation allowance. Dan figures his spe-culation, see Excess depreciation later in this MACRS is discussed later in this chapter.cial allowance as $6,750 ($13,500 x 50%).chapter under Car Used 50% or Less for Busi-
Dan chooses the MACRS 200% decliningness. Exception. If you used the standard mile-
balance method but does not need to figure his age rate in the first year of business use andDispositions. If you dispose of a car on which regular depreciation deduction under MACRS change to the actual expenses method in a lateryou had claimed the section 179 deduction, the (discussed later) because his special allowance year, you cannot depreciate your car under theamount of that deduction is treated as a depreci- ($6,750) exceeds the maximum depreciation MACRS rules. You must use straight line depre-ation deduction for recapture purposes. You deduction allowed ($3,060) for the first year the ciation over the estimated remaining useful lifetreat any gain on the disposition of the property car is placed in service. Dan reports $3,060 as of the car.as ordinary income up to the amount of the depreciation for his car in 2007. See Deprecia- To figure depreciation under the straight linesection 179 deduction and any allowable depre- tion Limits later. method, you must reduce your basis in the carciation (unless you establish the amount actually
(but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for allallowed). For information on the disposition of a Claiming the GO Zone special depreci- miles for which you used the standard mileagecar, see Disposition of a Car, later. ation allowance may result in a larger rate. The rate per mile varies depending on thedepreciation deduction in the year theCAUTION
!
year(s) you used the standard mileage rate. Forcar is placed in service, but subsequent year the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustmentGulf Opportunity (GO) Zone depreciation deductions may be smaller than if when you used the standard mileage rate underSpecial Depreciation Allowance you had not claimed the GO Zone special depre- Disposition of a Car, later.ciation allowance.
You may be able to claim the special deprecia- This reduction of basis is in addition to those
tion allowance for your car if it qualifies as Gulf basis adjustments described later under Unad-
Opportunity (GO) Zone property and was placed justed basis. You must use your adjusted basisDepreciation Deductionin service in 2007. The allowance is an addi- in your car to figure your depreciation deduction.
tional depreciation deduction of 50% of the car’s For additional information on the straight lineIf you use actual car expenses to figure your
depreciable basis (after any section 179 deduc- method of depreciation, see Publication 946.deduction for a car you own and use in your
tion, but before figuring your regular deprecia- business, you can claim a depreciation deduc-
tion deduction under MACRS). The GO Zone More-than-50%-use test. Generally, yoution: that is, you can deduct a certain amount
special depreciation allowance applies only for must use your car more than 50% for qualifiedeach year as a recovery of your cost or other
the first year the car is placed in service. To business use (defined next) during the year tobasis in your car.
qualify for the allowance more than 50% of the use MACRS. You must meet thisYou generally need to know the followinguse of the car must be in the active conduct of more-than-50%-use test each year of the recov-things about the car you intend to depreciate.your trade or business. ery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car.
• Your basis in the car.See Publication 4492, Information for Tax- If your business use is 50% or less, you mustpayers Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and use the straight line method to depreciate your• The date you place the car in service.Wilma, for the definition of the GO Zone. car. This is explained later under Car Used 50%• The method of depreciation and recoveryYour combined section 179 deduction, GO or Less for Business.period you will use.Zone special depreciation allowance, and regu-
lar MACRS depreciation deduction is limited to Qualified business use. A qualified businessthe maximum allowable depreciation deduction Basis. Your basis in a car for figuring depreci- use is any use in your trade or business. It doesfor cars ($3,060), or trucks and vans ($3,260). ation is generally its cost. This includes any not include use for the production of incomeSee Depreciation Limits, later in this chapter. amount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop- (investment use). However, you do combineYou can elect not to claim the GO Zone erty, or services. your business and investment use to computespecial depreciation allowance for your car. If Generally, you figure depreciation using your your depreciation deduction for the tax year.you make this election for your car, it applies to basis. However, in some situations (such as useall property in the same class placed in service Use of your car by another person. Do notof the straight line method) you will use yourduring the year. treat any use of your car by another person asadjusted basis (your basis reduced by deprecia- use in your trade or business unless that usetion allowed or allowable in earlier years). ForQualified GO Zone car. To be a qualified GO meets one of the following conditions.one of these situations see Exception underZone car, the car must meet all of the following
Methods of depreciation, later. • It is directly connected with your business.tests.
Page 18 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 19 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• It is properly reported by you as income to cost. Cost includes sales taxes (see Sales taxes This method is explained in Publication
the other person (and, if you have to, you earlier), destination charges, and dealer prepa- 946.
withhold tax on the income). ration. Increase your basis by any substantial If you elect to use the method described inimprovements you make to your car, such as• It results in a payment of fair market rent. (1), you must do so on a timely filed tax returnadding air conditioning or a new engine. De-This includes any payment to you for the (including extensions). Otherwise, you must usecrease your basis by any deductible casualtyuse of your car. the method described in (2).loss, section 179 deduction, special deprecia-
tion allowance, gas guzzler tax, clean fuel vehi- Effect of trade-in on basis. The discussion
Business use changes. If you used your car cle deduction, and alternative motor vehicle that follows applies to trade-ins of cars in 2007,
more than 50% in qualified business use in the credit. where the election was made to treat the trans-
year you placed it in service, but 50% or less in a See Form 8910 for information on the alter- action as a tax-free disposition of the old car and
later year (including the year of disposition), you native motor vehicle credit. the purchase of the new car. For information on
have to change to the straight line method of how to figure depreciation for cars involved in aIf your business use later falls to 50%depreciation. See Qualified business use 50% like-kind exchange (trade-in) in 2007, for whichor less, you may have to recaptureor less in a later year under Car Used 50% or the election was not made, see Publication 946(include in your income) any excessCAUTION
!
Less for Business, later. and Temporary Regulations sectiondepreciation. See Car Used 50% or Less for
1.168(i)-6T(d)(3).Property does not cease to be used Business, later, for more information.
more than 50% in qualified business Traded car used only for business. If youIf you acquired the car by gift or inheritance,
use by reason of a transfer at death.
TIP
trade in a car that you used only in your businesssee Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for infor-
for another car that will be used only in yourmation on your basis in the car.
Use for more than one purpose. If you use business, your original basis in the new car isImprovements. A major improvement to ayour car for more than one purpose during the your adjusted basis in the old car, plus anycar is treated as a new item of 5-year recoverytax year, you must allocate the use to the vari- additional amount you pay for the new car.property. It is treated as placed in service in theous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile-
year the improvement is made. It does not mat-age. Figure the percentage of qualified business Example 1. Paul trades in a car that has anter how old the car is when the improvement isuse by dividing the number of miles you drive adjusted basis of $5,000 for a new car. In addi-added. Follow the same steps for depreciatingyour car for business purposes during the year tion, he pays cash of $20,000 for the new car.the improvement as you would for depreciatingby the total number of miles you drive the car His original basis of the new car is $25,000 (histhe original cost of the car. However, you mustduring the year for any purpose. $5,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus thetreat the improvement and the car as a whole $20,000 cash paid). Paul’s unadjusted basis isChange from personal to business use. If when applying the limits on the depreciation $25,000 unless he claims the section 179 de-you change the use of a car from 100% personal deductions. Your car’s depreciation deduction duction, or has other increases or decreases touse to business use during the tax year, you for the year (plus any section 179 deduction, his original basis, discussed under Unadjustedmay not have mileage records for the time special depreciation allowance, and deprecia- basis, earlier.before the change to business use. In this case, tion on any improvements) cannot be more than
you figure the percentage of business use for the depreciation limit that applies for that year. Example 2. In October 2004, Marcia pur-the year as follows. See Depreciation Limits, later. chased a car for $26,000 and placed it in service
for 100% use in her business. Marcia did notCar trade-in. If you traded one car (the “old1. Determine the percentage of business use
claim a section 179 deduction but she did claimcar”) in on another car (the “new car”) in 2007,for the period following the change. Do this
the special depreciation allowance. Marcia’s un-there are two ways you can treat the transaction.by dividing business miles by total miles
adjusted basis for the car was $15,390 ($26,000driven during that period. 1. You can elect to treat the transaction as a − $10,610 (50% special depreciation allowance,2. Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction. tax-free disposition of the old car and the up to the maximum amount allowed)). For 2004The numerator (top number) is the number purchase of the new car. If you make this through 2006, Marcia figured her depreciationof months the car is used for business and election, you treat the old car as disposed deduction using the MACRS depreciation chartthe denominator (bottom number) is 12. of at the time of the trade-in. The deprecia- for those years.
ble basis of the new car is the adjusted In September 2007, Marcia traded that car inbasis of the old car (figured as if 100% ofExample. You use a car only for personal and paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be usedthe car’s use had been for business pur-purposes during the first 6 months of the year. 100% in her business. Marcia is allowedposes) plus any additional amount youDuring the last 6 months of the year, you drive one-half of the MACRS depreciation amountpaid for the new car. You then figure yourthe car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000 figured for 2007 for her old car. (See Dispositiondepreciation deduction for the new car be-miles are for business. This gives you a busi- of a Car, later.)ginning with the date you placed it in serv-ness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷ 15,000) Marcia figures her basis in the new car asice. You make this election by completingfor that period. Your business use for the year is follows.Form 2106, Part II, Section D. This method40% (80% × 6/12).
is explained later, beginning at Effect of Cost of old car $26,000Limits. The amount you can claim for section trade-in on basis. Less total depreciation allowed:179 and depreciation deductions may be limited. 2007 — ($15,390 × .1152) × 1/22. If you do not make the election describedThe maximum amount you can claim depends (Limit: $1,675) $ 886in (1), you must figure depreciation sepa-on the year in which you placed your car in 2006 — ($15,390 × .192)rately for the remaining basis of the old carservice. You have to reduce the maximum (Limit: $2,850) 2,850and for any additional amount you paid foramount if you did not use the car exclusively for 2005 — ($15,390 × .32)the new car. You must apply two deprecia- (Limit: $4,800) 4,800business. See Depreciation Limits, later. tion limits (see Depreciation Limits, later). 2004 — ($26,000 × .50)1
Unadjusted basis. You use your unadjusted The limit that applies to the remaining ba- ($15,390 × .20)
(Limit: $10,610) 10,610basis (often referred to as your basis or your sis of the old car generally is the amount
Total depreciation allowed – 19,146basis for depreciation) to figure your deprecia- that would have been allowed had you not
tion using the MACRS depreciation chart, ex- traded in the old car. The limit that applies
Adjusted basis of old car and basis ofplained later under Modified Accelerated Cost to the additional amount you paid for the part of new car that can be treated asRecovery System (MACRS). Your unadjusted new car generally is the limit that applies newly purchased MACRS property $ 6,854basis for figuring depreciation is your original for the tax year, reduced by the deprecia-
basis increased or decreased by certain tion allowance for the remaining basis of Additional basis (cash paid) for new
amounts. the old car. You must use Form 4562 to car that is treated as newly purchased
To figure your unadjusted basis, begin with compute your depreciation deduction. You MACRS property +14,200
your car’s original basis, which generally is its cannot use Form 2106, Part II, Section D.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 19

Page 20 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Total basis of new car $21,054 2003 — ($19,500 × .50)1 Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars are
($9,750 x .20) classified as 5-year property. You actually de-
1 50% special depreciation allowance ($26,000 × 50% = (Limit: $10,710) 10,710 preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over a$13,000). Unadjusted basis of the car: ($26,000 − Total $17,387 period of 6 calendar years. This is because your$10,610 = $15,390). Regular depreciation: ($15,390 × Less: Actual depreciation.20 = $3,078). Total depreciation ($13,000 + $3,078 = car is generally treated as placed in service inallowed −14,538$16,078) cannot exceed first year limit ($10,610). the middle of the year and you claim deprecia-Excess of 100% over actual $ 2,849
tion for one-half of both the first year and theLess: Lesser of excess amountTraded car used partly in business. If you sixth year.($2,849) or adjusted basistrade in a car that you used partly in your busi-
of old van ($6,460) − 2,849 Depreciation deduction for certain Indianness for a new car that you will use in your
reservation property. Shorter recovery peri-business, you must make a “trade-in” adjust- Unadjusted basis of part of new van ods are provided under MACRS for qualifiedment for the personal use of the old car. This that can be treated as newly Indian reservation property placed in service onadjustment has the effect of reducing your basis purchased MACRS property $ 2,113 Indian reservations after 1993 and before 2008.in your old car, but not below zero, for purposes
The recovery period that applies for a busi-Additional basis (cash paid) for newof figuring your depreciation deduction for the
ness-use car is 3 years instead of 5 years. How-van that is treated as newlynew car. (This adjustment is not used, however,
purchased MACRS property $12,500 ever, the depreciation limits, discussed later, willwhen you determine the gain or loss on the later
still apply.disposition of the new car. See Publication 544, 150% special depreciation allowance ($19,500 x 50% = For more information on the qualifications forSales and Other Dispositions of Assets, for in- $9,750). Unadjusted basis of the car: ($19,500 − $9,750
this shorter recovery period and the percent-= $9,750). Regular depreciation: ($9,750 x .20 =formation on how to report the disposition of
$1,950). Total depreciation ($9,750 + $1,950 = ages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc-your car.) $11,700) cannot exceed first year limit ($10,710). tion, see chapter 4 of Publication 946.To figure the unadjusted basis of your new
car for depreciation, first add to your adjusted Depreciation methods. You can use oneExample 2. Rob paid $21,000 for a new carbasis in the old car any additional amount you of the following methods to depreciate your car.that he placed in service in 2004. He used itpay for the new car. Then subtract from that total • The 200% declining balance methodpartly for business in 2004 (9,600 businessthe excess, if any, of: (200% DB) over a 5-year recovery periodmiles of 15,000 total miles), 2005 (12,000 busi-
that switches to the straight line methodness miles of 16,000 total miles), and 20061. The total of the amounts that would have
(14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He used the when that method provides an equal orbeen allowable as depreciation during the
standard mileage rate in those years to claim the greater deduction.tax years before the trade if 100% of the
business use of his car. (See Depreciation ad-use of the car had been business and in- • The 150% declining balance methodjustment when you used the standard mileagevestment use, over (150% DB) over a 5-year recovery periodrate under Disposition of a Car, later.) that switches to the straight line method2. The total of the amounts actually allowable On January 3, 2007, Rob traded in this car when that method provides an equal oras depreciation during those years. and paid an additional $10,000 for his new car. greater deduction.Rob figures the unadjusted basis for his new carFor information about figuring depreciation, see
as shown next. • The straight line method (SL) over aModified Accelerated Cost Recovery System
5-year recovery period.(MACRS), which follows Example 2, later. Cost of old car $21,000
Less: Total depreciation allowed:Example 1. In March, Mark traded his 2003 If you use Table 4-1 (discussed later2006 — 14,400 mi. × .17 $2,448van (placed in service in June 2003) for a new 2005 — 12,000 mi. × .17 2,040 under MACRS depreciation chart ) to
2007 model. He used the old van 75% for busi- 2004 — 9,600 mi. × .16 1,536 − 6,024 determine your depreciation rate for
TIP
ness and he used the new van 75% for business Adjusted basis of old car 2007, you do not need to determine in what year
before trade-in adjustment $14,976in 2007. Mark claimed actual expenses (includ- using the straight line method provides an equal
ing $14,538 depreciation expense) for the busi- or greater deduction. This is because the chartTrade-in adjustment:ness use of the old van since 2003. He did not has the switch to the straight line method builtDepreciation at 100% business use:claim a section 179 deduction for the old or the into its rates.2006 — 18,000 mi. × .17 $3,060new van. 2005 — 16,000 mi. × .17 2,720 Before choosing a method, you may wish to
Mark paid $19,500 for the 2003 van in June 2004 — 15,000 mi. × .16 2,400 consider the following facts.
2003. He paid an additional $12,500 when he Total $8,180
• Using the straight line method providesLess: Actual depreciationacquired the 2007 van. Mark was allowed 1/2 of
equal yearly deductions throughout the re-allowed − 6,024the depreciation deduction amount (which is in-
Excess of 100% over actual $2,156 covery period.cluded in the $14,538 depreciation expense to-
Less: Lesser of excess amounttal) for his old van for 2007, the year of • Using the declining balance methods pro-
($2,156) or adjusted basisdisposition, as explained later under Disposition vides greater deductions during the earlierof old car ($14,976) − 2,156of a Car. recovery years with the deductions gener-
Mark figures the unadjusted basis for depre- ally getting smaller each year.Unadjusted basis of part of new car
ciating his new van as shown next. that can be treated as newly
purchased MACRS property $12,820 MACRS depreciation chart. A 2007 MACRSCost of old van $19,500
Depreciation Chart and instructions are includedLess: Total depreciation allowed on Additional basis (cash paid) for new in this chapter as Table 4-1. Using this table willthe business cost of old van car that is treated as newly
from 2003 – 2007 −14,538 make it easy for you to figure the 2007 deprecia-purchased MACRS property  $10,000
Adjusted basis of old van before tion deduction for your car. A similar chart ap-
trade-in adjustment $ 4,962 pears in the Instructions for Form 2106.
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System
You may have to use the tables inTrade-in adjustment: (MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost Re-
Depreciation at 100% business use: Publication 946 instead of using thiscovery System (MACRS) is the name given to
2007 — ($9,750 × .1152) × 1/2 MACRS Depreciation Chart.CAUTION
!
the tax rules for getting back (recovering)(Limit: $1,775) $  562 through depreciation deductions the cost of You must use the Depreciation Tables  in2006 — ($9,750 × .1152) property used in a trade or business or to pro- Publication 946 rather than the 2007 MACRS(Limit: $1,775) 1,123 duce income. Depreciation Chart in this publication if any one2005 — ($9,750 × .192)
The maximum amount you can deduct is(Limit: $2,950) 1,872 of the following three conditions applies to you.
limited, depending on the year you placed your2004 — ($9,750 × .32)
(Limit: $4,900) 3,120 car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later. 1. You file your return on a fiscal year basis.
Page 20 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 21 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Maximum2. You file your return for a short tax year the unadjusted basis of his truck, $9,200, by the
Depreciation Deductionpercentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2006(less than 12 months).
for Trucks and Vansdepreciation deduction of $1,840.3. During the year, all of the following condi- In 2007, Phil used the truck for personaltions apply. Date 4th &purposes when he repaired his father’s cabin.  Placed 1st 2nd 3rd LaterHis records show that the business use of hisa. You placed some property in service In Service Year Year Year Yearstruck was 90% in 2007. Phil used Table 4-1 tofrom January through September. 2007 $ 3,260 $5,200 $3,050 $1,875find his percentage. Reading down the first col-
b. You placed some property in service umn for the date placed in service and across to 2005 – 2006 3,260 5,200 3,150 1,875
from October through December. the 200% DB column, he locates his percent- 2004 10,910 1 5,300 3,150 1,875age, 32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis ofc. Your basis in the property you placed in 2003 11,010 2,3 5,400 3,250 1,975his truck, $8,280 ($9,200 cost × 90% businessservice from October through Decem-
use), by 32% to figure his 2007 depreciation 1If the special depreciation allowance does not apply orber (excluding nonresidential real prop- you make the election not to claim the specialdeduction of $2,650.erty, residential rental property, and depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,260.
property placed in service and disposed 2If the special depreciation allowance does not apply orof in the same year) was more than you make the election not to claim the specialDepreciation Limits40% of your total bases in all property depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,360.
you placed in service during the year. 3If the truck or van was acquired before 5/06/03, the truckThere are limits on the amount you can deduct
or van is qualified property, and you claim the specialfor depreciation of your car, truck, or van. The depreciation allowance for the truck or van, thesection 179 deduction is treated as depreciationDepreciation in future years. If you use maximum deduction is $7,960.
for purposes of the limits. The maximum amountthe percentages from the chart, you generally
you can deduct each year depends on the yearmust continue to use them for the entire recov- Exceptions for clean-fuel cars. The ex-
you place the car in service. These limits areery period of your car. However, you cannot ceptions to the depreciation limits for electric
shown in the following tables.continue to use the chart if your basis in your car cars and retrofit parts and components have
is adjusted because of a casualty. In that case, expired. Use the Maximum Depreciation Deduc-Maximum
for the year of the adjustment and the remaining tion for Cars table.Depreciation Deduction
recovery period, figure the depreciation without for Cars Car used less than full year. The deprecia-the chart using your adjusted basis in the car at tion limits are not reduced if you use a car forDate 4th &the end of the year of the adjustment and over less than a full year. This means that you do notPlaced 1st 2nd 3rd Laterthe remaining recovery period. See Figuring the reduce the limit when you either place a car inIn Service Year Year Year YearsDeduction Without Using the Tables in chapter 4 service or dispose of a car during the year.2007 $ 3,060 $4,900 $2,850 $1,775of Publication 946. However, the depreciation limits are reduced if
2006 2,960 4,800 2,850 1,775In future years, do not use the chart in you do not use the car exclusively for business
this edition of the publication. Instead, and investment purposes. See Reduction for2005 2,960 4,700 2,850 1,675
use the chart in the publication or the personal use, later.
TIP
2004 10,610 1 4,800 2,850 1,675form instructions for those future years.
5/06/2003 – 10,710 2 4,900 2,950 1,775 Example. Marie purchased a car in June
Disposition of car during recovery period. 12/31/2003 2007 for $20,000 to use exclusively in her busi-
If you dispose of the car before the end of the ness. She does not claim the section 179 deduc-1/01/2003 – 7,660 3 4,900 2,950 1,775recovery period, you are generally allowed a half 5/05/2003 tion and she chooses the 200% DB method of
year of depreciation in the year of disposition depreciation.2001 – 2002 7,660 3 4,900 2,950 1,775unless you purchased the car during the last Marie’s MACRS depreciation (using the rate
2000 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775quarter of a year. See Depreciation deduction from Table 4-1) is $4,000 ($20,000 × 20%).
for the year of disposition under Disposition of a However, the maximum amount she can deduct1999 3,060 5,000 2,950 1,775
Car, later, for information on how to figure the for depreciation is $3,060. (See the Maximum1998 3,160 5,000 2,950 1,775depreciation allowed in the year of disposition. Depreciation Deduction for Cars table earlier.)
1997 3,160 5,000 3,050 1,775How to use the 2007 chart. To figure your Reduction for personal use. The deprecia-1995 – 1996 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775depreciation deduction for 2007, find the per- tion limits are reduced based on your percent-centage in the column of the chart based on the 1$2,960 if the car is not qualified property or if you elect age of personal use. If you use a car less thannot to claim the special depreciation allowance.date that you first placed the car in service and 100% in your business or work, you must deter-the depreciation method that you are using. Mul- 2$7,660 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $3,060 if mine the depreciation deduction limit by multi-the car is not qualified property or if you elect not totiply the unadjusted basis of your car (defined plying the limit amount by the percentage ofclaim any special depreciation allowance.earlier) by that percentage to determine the business and investment use during the tax3$3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the caramount of your depreciation deduction. If you year.is not qualified property, or you elect not to claim theprefer to figure your depreciation deduction with- special depreciation allowance.
out the help of the chart, see Publication 946. Example. In April 2007, Karl, an outside
dental supply salesman, purchased a new carTrucks and vans. For 2007, the maximumYour deduction cannot be more than for $25,400 to make sales calls in a territory thatdepreciation deductions for trucks and vans andthe maximum depreciation limit for extends 200 miles around his home base. Hepassenger vehicles such as minivans and sportcars. See Depreciation Limits, later.CAUTION
!
uses his car 85% for his business. Karl does notutility vehicles that are built on a truck chassis
claim the section 179 deduction and he choosesare generally higher than those for cars. For
Example. Phil bought a used truck in Febru- the 200% DB method to figure his depreciationtrucks and vans placed in service before 2003,
ary 2006 to use exclusively in his landscape deduction.use the Maximum Depreciation Deduction for
business. He paid $9,200 for the truck with no In 2007, Karl figures his MACRS deprecia-Cars table.
trade-in. Phil did not claim any section 179 de- tion deduction to be $4,318 (($25,400 x 85%) x
duction, the truck did not qualify for any special 20%). However, Karl’s deduction is limited to
depreciation allowance, and he chose to use the $2,601. This is the depreciation limit ($3,060)
200% DB method to get the largest depreciation multiplied by the business use percentage
deduction in the early years. (85%).
Phil used the MACRS depreciation chart in Karl continues to use his car 85% for busi-
2006 to find his percentage. The unadjusted ness. Depreciation in the next 4 years continues
basis of his truck equals its cost because Phil to be subject to deduction limits. Karl figures his
used it exclusively for business. He multiplied depreciation limits for those years as follows.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 21

Page 22 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4-1.
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below
to find the depreciation method and percentage to use for your
2007 return.
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the
car in service. Then select the depreciation method and
percentage from column (a), (b), or (c) following the rules
explained in this chapter.
For cars placed in service before 2007, you must use the same
method you used on last year’s return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line
method. (See Car Used 50% or Less for Business. )
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in
the chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for
2007. (Also see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the
same year, you may have to use the Jan. 1—Sept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1—Dec. 31 percentage for your car.
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of t hat year
and 2) the basis of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in  service
after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the enti re
year, use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30 for figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of
Publication 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2007 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2007, both used 100% in
your business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30, 2007, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the
$20,000 basis of the property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in
service during the year (40% /H11003 ($32,000 + 20,000) = $20,800).
Date Placed In Service 200% Declining
Balance (200% DB)
1
150% Declining
Balance (150% DB)1
Straight Line
(SL)
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2007
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2007
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2006
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2006
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2005
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2005
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2004
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2004
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2003
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2003
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2002
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2002
Prior to 2002
200 DB 5.0%
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
20.0
38.0
32.0
22.8
19.2
13.68
11.52
10.94
11.52
9.58
5.76
150 DB 3.75%
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
15.0
28.88
25.5
20.21
17.85
16.4
16.66
16.41
16.66
14.35
8.33
SL 2.5%
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
10.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
17.5
10.0
(b)(a) (c)
You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to c laim depreciation. See
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
2007 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2007.)
CAUTION
2
1
2
Year Limit x Business Use Depreciation Section 179 deduction. The section 179 de- the maximum $125,000 amount) multiplied by
his business use ($10,000 × 80%).duction is treated as a depreciation deduction. If2008 $4,900 × 85% $4,165
Jack then figures that his section 179 deduc-2009 2,850 × 85% 2,423 you place a car that is not a truck or van in
tion for 2007 is limited to $2,448 (80% of2010, 2011 1,775 × 85% 1,509 service in 2007, use it only for business, and
$3,060). He then has an unadjusted basis ofchoose the section 179 deduction, the combinedIn 2012, using the rate from Table 4-1, Karl’s $5,552 (($10,000 × 80%) − $2,448) for determin-section 179 and depreciation deduction for thatMACRS deduction is $1,244 (($25,400 × 85%) × ing his depreciation deduction. Since he hascar for 2007 is limited to $3,060.5.76%). Since that amount is less than the de- already reached the maximum limit for 2007,
preciation limit of $1,509 ($1,775 × 85%), Karl’s Jack will use the unadjusted basis to figure hisExample. On September 4, 2007, Jackdepreciation deduction for 2012 is $1,244. depreciation deduction for 2008.
bought a used car for $10,000 and placed it inIf Karl continues to use his car for business Deductions in years after the recovery pe-service. He used it 80% for his business and heafter 2012, he can continue to claim a deprecia- riod. If the depreciation limits apply to yourchooses to take a section 179 deduction for thetion deduction for his unrecovered basis. How- car, you may have unrecovered basis in your carcar.ever, he cannot deduct more than $1,775 at the end of the recovery period. If you continue
Before applying the limit, Jack figures hismultiplied by his business use percentage. See to use your car for business, you can deduct that
maximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000.Deductions in years after the recovery period, unrecovered basis (subject to depreciation lim-
later. This is the cost of his qualifying property (up to its) after the recovery period ends.
Page 22 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 23 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Unrecovered basis. This is your cost or ($31,500 – $16,235) in this example. This is failed to meet it in the fourth year (2007). You
other basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuel true even if his actual depreciation deduction for determine your depreciation for 2007 using 20%
vehicle deduction, alternative motor vehicle any year was less than the maximum amount (from column (c) of Table 4-1). You also will
credit, electric vehicle credit, and depreciation shown. have to determine and include in your gross
and section 179 deductions that would have income any excess depreciation, discussed
been allowable if you had used the car 100% for next.
business and investment use. Car Used 50% or Less
Excess depreciation. You must includefor BusinessThe recovery period. For 5-year property, any excess depreciation in your gross incomeyour recovery period is 6 calendar years. A part If you use your car 50% or less for qualified and add it to your car’s adjusted basis for theyear’s depreciation is allowed in the first calen- business use (defined earlier under Deprecia- first tax year in which you do not use the cardar year, a full year’s depreciation is allowed in tion Deduction ) either in the year the car is more than 50% in qualified business use. Useeach of the next 4 calendar years, and a part placed in service or in a later year, special rules Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig-year’s depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen- apply. The rules that apply in these two situa- ure and report the excess depreciation in yourdar year. tions are explained in the following paragraphs. gross income.Under MACRS, your recovery period is the (For this purpose, “car” was defined earliersame whether you use declining balance or Excess depreciation is: under Actual Car Expenses and includes certainstraight line depreciation. You determine your trucks and vans.) 1. The amount of the depreciation deductionsunrecovered basis in the 7th year after you
allowable for the car (including any sectionplaced the car in service. Qualified business use 50% or less in year 179 deduction claimed and any special de-How to treat unrecovered basis. If you placed in service. If you use your car 50% or preciation allowance claimed) for tax yearscontinue to use your car for business after the less for qualified business use, the following in which you used the car more than 50%recovery period, you can claim a depreciation rules apply. in qualified business use, minusdeduction in each succeeding tax year until you
• You cannot take the section 179 deduc-recover your full basis in the car. The maximum 2. The amount of the depreciation deductions
tion.amount you can deduct each year is determined that would have been allowable for those
by the date you placed the car in service and years if you had not used the car more• You must figure depreciation using the
your business-use percentage. For example, no than 50% in qualified business use for thestraight line method over a 5-year recov-
deduction is allowed for a year you use your car year you placed it in service. This meansery period. You must continue to use the100% for personal purposes. the amount of depreciation figured usingstraight line method even if your percent-
age of business use increases to more the straight line method.Example. In May 2001, Bob bought and than 50% in a later year.placed in service a car that he used exclusively
Example. On September 25, 2004, youin his business. The car cost $31,500. Bob did Instead of making the computation yourself, bought a car for $20,500 and placed it in service.not claim a section 179 deduction for the car. He you can use column (c) of Table 4-1 to find thecontinued to use the car 100% in his business You did not claim the section 179 deduction butpercentage to use.throughout the recovery period (2001 through you did claim the 50% special depreciation al-
2006). For those years, Bob used Table 4-1 and lowance. You used the car exclusively in quali-Example. On May 22, 2007, Dan bought athe Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Cars fied business use for 2004, 2005, and 2006. Forcar for $17,500. He used it 40% for his consult-table (as explained earlier) to compute his de- those years, you figured the special depreciationing business. Because he did not use the carpreciation deductions as shown in the following allowance and you used the appropriatemore than 50% for business, Dan cannot taketable. MACRS Depreciation Chart to figure deprecia-any section 179 deduction and he must use the
tion deductions totaling $15,858 ($10,610 forstraight line method over a 5-year recovery pe-MACRS MACRS Maximum Deprec. 2004, $3,280 for 2005, and $1,968 for 2006)riod to recover the cost of his car.Year % Amount Deduction Allowed
under the 200% DB method.Dan deducts $700 in 2007. This is the lesser2001 20.00 $ 6,300 $ 3,060 $ 3,060
of: During 2007, you used the car 30% for busi-2002 32.00 10,080 4,900 4,900
ness and 70% for personal purposes. Since you2003 19.20 6,048 2,950 2,950 1. $700 (($17,500 cost × 40% business use)2004 11.52 3,629 1,775 1,775 did not meet the more-than-50%-use test, you× 10% recovery percentage (from column2005 11.52 3,629 1,775 1,775 must switch from the 200% DB depreciation(c), Table 4-1)), or2006 5.76 1,814 1,775 1,775 method to the straight line depreciation methodTotal $31,500 $16,235 $16,235 2. $1,224 ($3,060 maximum limit × 40% busi- for 2007, and include in gross income for 2007
At the end of 2006, Bob had an unrecovered ness use). your excess depreciation determined as follows.
basis in the car of $15,265. This was the
Total depreciation claimed: $15,858$31,500 original basis of his car less the Qualified business use 50% or less in a later (MACRS 200% DB method)$16,235 depreciation deductions allowed during year. If you use your car more than 50% in Minus total depreciation allowable:the recovery period. (Straight line method)qualified business use in the tax year it is placedBob continued to use the car 100% for busi- 2004 — 50% of $20,500, plusin service but the business use drops to 50% orness in 2007. He can claim a depreciation de- 10% of $10,250 ...... $10,610less in a later year, you can no longer use anduction of $1,775 (the maximum allowed for (Limit: $10,610)accelerated depreciation method for that car.each subsequent year) for the year. If he contin- 2005 — 20% of $10,250 .... 2,050For the year the business use drops to 50%ues to use the car 100% for business in 2008 (Limit: $4,900)
or less and all later years in the recovery period,and later years, Bob can deduct the lesser of 2006 — 20% of $10,250 .... 2,050 14,710
you must use the straight line depreciation (Limit: $2,950)$1,775 or his remaining unrecovered basis in
Excess depreciation $1,148method over a 5-year recovery period. In addi-each of those years until his deductions total the
tion, for the year your business use drops to$13,490 unrecovered basis ($15,265 − $1,775 In 2007, using Form 4797, you figure and50% or less, you must recapture (include in yourclaimed in 2007). report the $1,148 excess depreciation you mustgross income) any excess depreciation (dis-If Bob’s business use of the car was less
include in your gross income. Your adjustedcussed later). You also increase the adjustedthan 100% during any year, his depreciation
basis in the car is also increased by $1,148.basis of your car by the same amount.deduction would be less than the maximum
Your 2007 depreciation deduction is $533amount allowable for that year. However, in de-
($10,250 (unadjusted basis) × 30% (businessExample. In June 2004, you purchased atermining his unrecovered basis in the car, he
use percentage) × 20% (from column (c) of Ta-car for exclusive use in your business. You metwould still reduce his original basis by the maxi-
ble 4-1 on the line for Jan. 1— Sept. 30, 2004)the more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 yearsmum amount allowable. Bob’s unrecovered ba-
of the recovery period (2004 through 2006) but limited to $533 ($1,775 x 30% business use)).sis at the beginning of 2007 would be $15,265
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 23

Page 24 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figuring the inclusion amount. Inclusion in his own data processing business. On No-Leasing a Car
amounts are listed in Appendix A  for cars, in vember 5, 2007, Will closed his business and
Appendix B for trucks and vans, and in Appendix went to work for a company where he is notIf you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in
C for electric cars leased after August 5, 1997, required to use a car for business. Using Appen-your business, you can use the standard mile-
and before 2007. If the fair market value of the dix C-5, Will computed his inclusion amount forage rate or actual expenses to figure your de-
car is $100,000 or less, use the appropriate 2006 and 2007 as shown in the following tableductible expense. This section explains how to
appendix (depending on the year you first and reduced his deductions for lease paymentsfigure actual expenses for a leased car, truck, or
placed the car in service) to determine the inclu- by those amounts.van.
sion amount. If the fair market value is more than
Tax Dollar Business InclusionDeductible payments. If you choose to use $100,000, see the Revenue Procedure(s) identi-
year amount Proration use amountactual expenses, you can deduct the part of fied in the footnote of the appendices for the
each lease payment that is for the use of the car inclusion amount. Revenue Procedures are 2006 $ 89 138/365 100% $ 34
2007 194 309/365 100% 164in your business. You cannot deduct any part of available at most IRS offices and many local
a lease payment that is for personal use of the libraries. You can also find them on the Internet
car, such as commuting. at www.irs.gov. Leased car changed from personal to busi-
ness use. If you lease a car for personal useFor each tax year during which you lease theYou must spread any advance payments
and, in a later year, change it to business use,car for business, determine your inclusionover the entire lease period. You cannot deduct
you must determine the car’s fair market valueamount by following these three steps.any payments you make to buy a car, even if the
on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-payments are called lease payments. 1. Locate the appendix that applies to you. sion amount using the rules explained earlierIf you lease a car for 30 days or more, you To find the inclusion amount, do the follow- under Figuring the inclusion amount. Use themay have to reduce your lease payment deduc- ing. fair market value on the date of conversion.tion by an “inclusion amount.”
a. Find the line that includes the fair mar- Example. In March 2005, Janice leased aket value of the car on the first day of car for 4 years for personal use. On June 1,Inclusion Amounts the lease term. 2007, she started working as a self-employed
advertising consultant and started using theb. Go across the line to the column for theIf you lease a car that you use in your business
leased car for business purposes. Her recordstax year in which the car is used underfor a lease term of 30 days or more, you may
show that her business use for June 1 throughthe lease to find the dollar amount. Forhave to include an inclusion amount in your
December 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusionthe last tax year of the lease, use theincome for each tax year you lease the car. To
amount for 2007, Janice obtained an appraisaldollar amount for the preceding year.do this, you do not add an amount to income.
from an independent car leasing company thatInstead, you reduce your deduction for your
showed the fair market value of her 2005 car on2. Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) forlease payment. (This reduction has an effect
June 1, 2007, was $21,650. Using Appendixthe number of days of the lease term in-similar to the limit on the depreciation deduction
A-6, Janice computed her inclusion amount forcluded in the tax year.you would have on the car if you owned it.)
2007 as shown in the following table.The inclusion amount is a percentage of part 3. Multiply the prorated amount from (2) by
of the fair market value of the leased car multi- the percentage of business and investment Tax Dollar Business Inclusionplied by the percentage of business and invest- use for the tax year. This is your inclusion year amount Proration use amountment use of the car for the tax year. It is prorated amount. 2007 $44 214/365 60% $16for the number of days of the lease term in the
tax year.
Example. On January 17, 2006, you leased Reporting inclusion amounts.    For informa-The inclusion amount applies to each tax a car for 3 years and placed it in service for use tion on reporting inclusion amounts, employeesyear that you lease the car if the fair market in your business. The car had a fair market value should see Car rentals under Completing Formsvalue (defined next) of the car when the lease of $32,250 on the first day of the lease term. You 2106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6. Sole proprietorsbegan was more than the amounts shown in the use the car 75% for business and 25% for per- should see the instructions for Schedule Cfollowing table. sonal purposes during each year of the lease. (Form 1040) and farmers should see the instruc-
Assuming you continue to use the car 75% for tions for Schedule F (Form 1040).Year Lease Began Fair Market Value* business, you use Appendix A-5 to arrive at the
following inclusion amounts for each year of the2007 $15,500
2005 – 2006 15,200 lease:
2004 17,500 Disposition of a Car2003  18,000 Tax Dollar Business Inclusion
1999 – 2002  15,500 year amount Proration use amount
If you dispose of your car, you may have a1997 – 1998 15,800 2006 $116 349/365 75% $ 83 taxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion of1995 – 1996 15,500 2007 252 365/365 75% 189 any gain that is due to depreciation (including1994 14,600 2008 374 366/366 75% 2811993 14,300 any section 179 deduction, clean-fuel vehicle2009 374 16/365 75% 121992 13,700 deduction, and special depreciation allowance)
1991 13,400 For each year of the lease that you deduct lease that you claimed on the car will be treated as
1987 – 1990 12,800 payments, you must reduce your deduction by ordinary income. However, you may not have to
the inclusion amount computed for that year. recognize a gain or loss if you dispose of the car*For 2007, the fair market value for trucks and vans is
because of a casualty, theft, or trade-in.$16,400.
Leased car changed from business to per- This section gives some general information
sonal use. If you lease a car for business use about dispositions of cars. For information onFair market value. Fair market value is the and, in a later year, change it to personal use, how to report the disposition of your car, seeprice at which the property would change hands follow the rules explained earlier under Figuring Publication 544.between a buyer and a seller, neither having to the inclusion amount. For the tax year in which
buy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl- Casualty or theft. For a casualty or theft, ayou stop using the car for business, use the
edge of all the necessary facts. Sales of similar gain results when you receive insurance or otherdollar amount for the previous tax year. Prorate
property around the same date may be helpful in reimbursement that is more than your adjustedthe dollar amount for the number of days in the
figuring the fair market value of the property. basis in your car. If you then spend all of thelease term that fall within the tax year.
Figure the fair market value on the first day of proceeds to acquire replacement property (a
the lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car is Example. On August 16, 2006, Will leased new car or repairs to the old car) within a speci-
specified in the lease agreement, use that an electric car with a fair market value of fied period of time, you do not recognize any
amount as the fair market value. $58,600 for 3 years. He used the car exclusively gain. Your basis in the replacement property is
Page 24 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 25 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
its cost minus any gain that is not recognized. depreciation deduction for the full year using will support your own statement. Y ou must gen-
See Publication 547 for more information. Table 4-1. erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-
ered adequate. This is because written evidenceIf you used a Date Placed in Service line for
Trade-in. When you trade in an old car for a is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-Jan. 1—Sept. 30, you can deduct one-half of
new one, the transaction is considered a ever, if you prepare a record in a computerthe depreciation amount figured for the full year.
like-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is memory device with the aid of a logging pro-Figure your depreciation deduction for the full
recognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of gram, it is considered an adequate record.year using the rules explained in this chapter
Publication 544.) In a trade-in situation, your and deduct 50% of that amount with your other
basis in the new property is generally your ad- actual car expenses. What Are Adequatejusted basis in the old property plus any addi- If you used a Date Placed in Service line for Records?tional amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis, Oct. 1—Dec. 31, you can deduct a percentage
earlier.) of the depreciation amount figured for the full You should keep the proof you need in an ac-
year. The percentage you use is determined by count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-Depreciation adjustment when you used the the month you disposed of the car. Figure your ilar record. You should also keep documentarystandard mileage rate. If you used the stan- depreciation deduction for the full year using the evidence that, together with your record, willdard mileage rate for the business use of your rules explained in this chapter and multiply the support each element of an expense.car, depreciation was included in that rate. The result by the percentage from the following tablerate of depreciation that was allowed in the stan- for the month that you disposed of the car. Documentary evidence. You generally mustdard mileage rate is shown in the chart that have documentary evidence, such as receipts,follows. You must reduce your basis in your car Month Percentage canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-(but not below zero) by the amount of this depre- Jan., Feb., March ............ 12.5% penses.ciation. April, May, June ............. 37.5% Exception. Documentary evidence is notJuly, Aug., Sept. ............. 62.5%These rates do not apply for any year in needed if any of the following conditions apply.Oct., Nov., Dec. ............. 87.5%which the actual expenses method
• You have meals or lodging expenseswas used.
TIP
Do not use this table if you are a fiscal while traveling away from home for whichyear filer. See Sale or Other Disposi-Depreciation you account to your employer under antion Before the Recovery Period EndsYear(s) Rate per Mile CAUTION
!
accountable plan, and you use a per diemin chapter 4 of Publication 946. allowance method that includes meals2007 $.19
2005 – 2006 .17 and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and
2003 – 2004 .16 per diem allowances are discussed in
2001 – 2002 .15 chapter 6.)
2000 .14
• Your expense, other than lodging, is less1994 – 1999 .12
than $75.1992 – 1993 .11 1/2
1989 – 1991 .11 • You have a transportation expense for5.1988 .10 1/2
which a receipt is not readily available.1987 .10
1986 .09
Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-1983 – 1985 .08
Recordkeeping1982 .07 1/2 dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if it
1980 – 1981 .07 shows the amount, date, place, and essential
character of the expense.If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-
For tax years after 1989, the depreciation For example, a hotel receipt is enough toportation expenses, you must be able to prove
rates apply to all business miles. For tax years support expenses for business travel if it has all(substantiate) certain elements of expense. This
before 1990, the depreciation rates apply to the of the following information.chapter discusses the records you need to keep
first 15,000 miles. to prove these expenses. • The name and location of the hotel.
If you keep timely and accurate rec-Example. In 2002, you bought a car for ex- • The dates you stayed there.ords, you will have support to show theclusive use in your business. The car cost
• Separate amounts for charges such asIRS if your tax return is ever examined.$22,500. From 2002 through 2007, you used the
RECORDS
lodging, meals, and telephone calls.You will also have proof of expenses that yourstandard mileage rate to figure your car expense
employer may require if you are reimburseddeduction. You drove your car 14,100 miles in
A restaurant receipt is enough to prove anunder an accountable plan. These plans are2002, 16,300 miles in 2003, 15,600 miles in
expense for a business meal if it has all of thediscussed in chapter 6 under Reimbursements.2004, 16,700 miles in 2005, 15,100 miles in
following information.2006, and 14,900 miles in 2007. Your deprecia-
tion is figured as follows. • The name and location of the restaurant.
• The number of people served.Year Miles x Rate Depreciation How To Prove
2002 14,100 × .15 $ 2,115 • The date and amount of the expense.
2003 16,300 × .16 2,608 Expenses If a charge is made for items other than food and2004 15,600 × .16 2,496
beverages, the receipt must show that this is the2005 16,700 × .17 2,839 Table 5-1 is a summary of records you need to case.2006 15,100 × .17 2,567 prove each expense discussed in this publica-2007 14,900 × .19 2,831 tion. You must be able to prove the elements Canceled check. A canceled check, to-Total depreciation $15,456 listed across the top portion of the chart. You gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-
prove them by having the information and re-At the end of 2007, your adjusted basis in the car tablishes the cost. However, a canceled check
ceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed inis $7,044 ($22,500 − $15,456). by itself does not prove a business expense
the first column. without other evidence to show that it was for a
Depreciation deduction for the year of dispo- business purpose.You cannot deduct amounts that yousition. If you deduct actual car expenses and approximate or estimate.you dispose of your car before the end of its Duplicate information. You do not have toCAUTION
!
recovery period, you are allowed a reduced de- record information in your account book or other
preciation deduction for the year of disposition. record that duplicates information shown on a
To figure the reduced depreciation deduction You should keep adequate records to prove receipt as long as your records and receip ts
for a car disposed of in 2007, first determine the your expenses or have sufficient evidence that complement each other in an ord erly manner.
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 25

Page 26 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You do not have to record amounts your each case. If the business purpose of an ex- What If I Have Incomplete
employer pays directly for any ticket or other pense is clear from the surrounding circum- Records?travel item. However, if you charge these items stances, then you do not need to give a written
to your employer, through a credit card or other- explanation. If you do not have complete records to prove anwise, you must keep a record of the amounts element of an expense, then you must prove theyou spend. Example. If you are a sales representative element with:
who calls on customers on an established salesTimely-kept records. You should record the • Your own written or oral statement con-route, you do not have to give a written explana-elements of an expense or of a business use at taining specific information about the ele-
tion of the business purpose for traveling thator near the time of the expense or use and ment, and
route. You can satisfy the requirements by re-support it with sufficient documentary evidence. • Other supporting evidence that is sufficientA timely-kept record has more value than a cording the length of the delivery route once, the to establish the element.statement prepared later when generally there is date of each trip at or near the time of the trips,
a lack of accurate recall. and the total miles you drove the car during the If the element is the description of a gift, or theYou do not need to write down the elements tax year. You could also establish the date of cost, time, place, or date of an expense, theof every expense on the day of the expense. If each trip with a receipt, record of delivery, or supporting evidence must be either direct evi-you maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac- other documentary evidence. dence or documentary evidence. Direct evi-counts for use during the week, the log is consid- dence can be written statements, or the oralered a timely-kept record. testimony of your guests or other witnesses set-Confidential information. You do not need toIf you give your employer, client, or customer ting forth detailed information about the element.an expense account statement, it can also be put confidential information relating to an ele- Documentary evidence can be receipts, paidconsidered a timely-kept record. This is true if ment of a deductible expense (such as the bills, or similar evidence.you copy it from your account book, diary, state- place, business purpose, or business relation- If the element is either the business relation-ment of expense, or similar record. ship) in your account book, diary, or other re- ship of your guests or the business purpose of
cord. However, you do have to record theProving business purpose. You must gener- the amount spent, the supporting evidence can
information elsewhere at or near the time of theally provide a written statement of the business be circumstantial, rather than direct. For exam-
expense and have it available to fully prove thatpurpose of an expense. However, the degree of ple, the nature of your work, such as making
element of the expense.proof varies according to the circumstances in deliveries, provides circumstantial evidence of
Table 5-1. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have
expenses
for...
Travel
Entertainment
Gifts
Transportation
Amount Time
Place or
Description
Business Purpose and
Business Relationship
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements...
Cost of each separate expense
for travel, lodging, and meals.
Incidental expenses may be
totaled in reasonable categories
such as taxis, fees and tips, etc.
Dates you
left and
returned for
each trip
and number
of days
spent on
business.
Destination or area
of your travel
(name of city, town,
or other
designation).
Cost of each separate expense.
Incidental expenses such as
taxis, telephones, etc., may be
totaled on a daily basis.
Date of
entertainment.
(Also see
Business
Purpose.)
Name and address
or location of place
of entertainment.
Type of
entertainment if not
otherwise apparent.
(Also see Business
Purpose.)
Cost of the gift. Date of the
gift.
Description of the
gift.
Date of the
expense.
For car
expenses,
the date of
the use of
the car.
Your business
destination.
Cost of each separate expense.
For car expenses, the cost of
the car and any improvements,
the date you started using it for
business, the mileage for each
business use, and the total miles
for the year.
Purpose:
 Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 N/A
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship: Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or other
designations) about the recipients that
shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that
you or your employee was present if the
entertainment was a business meal.
For entertainment, the nature of the
business discussion or activity. If the
entertainment was directly before or after a
business discussion: the date, place, nature,
and duration of the business discussion,
and the identities of the persons who took
part in both the business discussion and the
entertainment activity.
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
Relationship: N/A
Page 26 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 27 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the use of your car for business purposes. In- you use each ticket as a gift or entertainment. the deduction is claimed. A return  filed early is
voices of deliveries establish when you used the Also, you must be able to prove the cost of considered filed on the due date. Fo r a more
car for business. nonluxury box seat tickets if you rent a skybox or complete explanation of how long to keep rec-
other private luxury box for more than one event. ords, get Publication 583, Starting a Business
Sampling. You can keep an adequate record See Entertainment tickets in chapter 2. and Keeping Records.
for parts of a tax year and use that record to You must keep records of the business useCombining items. You can make one dailyprove the amount of business or investment use of your car for each year of the recovery period.entry in your record for reasonable categories offor the entire year. You must demonstrate by See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 underexpenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephoneother evidence that the periods for which an Depreciation Deduction.calls, or other incidental travel costs. Mealsadequate record is kept are representative of
should be in a separate category. You can in-the use throughout the tax year. Reimbursed for expenses. Employees whoclude tips for meal-related services with the give their records and documentation to theircosts of the meals.Example. You use your car to visit the of- employers and are reimbursed for their ex-Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-fices of clients, meet with suppliers and other penses generally do not have to keep copies ofing the course of a single event are considered asubcontractors, and pick up and deliver items to this information. However, you may have tosingle expense. For example, if during entertain-clients. There is no other business use of the prove your expenses if any of the following con-ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately forcar, but you and your family use the car for ditions apply.each serving of refreshments, the total expensepersonal purposes. You keep adequate records
• You claim deductions for expenses thatfor the refreshments is treated as a single ex-during the first week of each month that show
are more than reimbursements.pense.that 75% of the use of the car is for business.
Invoices and bills show that your business use • Your expenses are reimbursed under aCar expenses. You can account for severalcontinues at the same rate during the later nonaccountable plan.uses of your car that can be considered part of aweeks of each month. Your weekly records are single use, such as a round trip or uninterrupted • Your employer does not use adequate ac-representative of the use of the car each month business use, with a single record. Minimal per- counting procedures to verify expense ac-and are sufficient evidence to support the per- sonal use, such as a stop for lunch on the way counts.centage of business use for the year. between two business stops, is not an interrup-
• You are related to your employer as de-tion of business use.Exceptional circumstances. You can satisfy fined under Per Diem and Car Allowances,the substantiation requirements with other evi- in chapter 6.Example. You make deliveries at severaldence if, because of the nature of the situation in different locations on a route that begins and Reimbursements, adequate accounting, andwhich an expense is made, you cannot get a ends at your employer’s business premises and nonaccountable plans are discussed in chapterreceipt. This applies if all the following are true. that includes a stop at the business premises 6.• You were unable to obtain evidence for an between two deliveries. You can account for
element of the expense or use that com- these using a single record of miles driven.
Examples of Recordspletely satisfies the requirements ex- Gift expenses. You do not always have toplained earlier under What Are Adequate record the name of each recipient of a gift. A Examples of records that show the informationRecords. general listing will be enough if it is evident that you need to keep for different types of expenses
• You are unable to obtain evidence for an you are not trying to avoid the $25 annual limit are included in this publication as Table 6-2 and
element that completely satisfies the two on the amount you can deduct for gifts to any Table 6-3. They are part of the illustrated exam-
rules listed earlier under What if I Have one person. For example, if you buy a large ples shown at the end of chapter 6.
Incomplete Records. number of tickets to local high school basketball
games and give one or two tickets to each of• You have presented other evidence for the many customers, it is usually enough to record aelement that is the best proof possible general description of the recipients.under the circumstances.
Allocating total cost. If you can prove the
total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-Destroyed records. If you cannot produce a 6.not prove how much it cost for each person whoreceipt because of reasons beyond your control,
participated in the event, you may have to allo-you can prove a deduction by reconstructing
cate the total cost among you and your guestsyour records or expenses. Reasons beyond
on a pro rata basis. To do so, you must establishyour control include fire, flood, and other casu- How To Reportthe number of persons who participated in thealty.
event.
This chapter explains where and how to reportAn allocation would be needed, for example,Separating and Combining the expenses discussed in this publication. Itif you did not have a business relationship with
discusses reimbursements and how to treatExpenses all of your guests. See Allocating between busi-
them under accountable and nonaccountableness and nonbusiness in chapter 2.This section explains when expenses must be plans. It also explains rules for independent con-
If your return is examined. If your return iskept separate and when expenses can be com- tractors and clients, fee-basis officials, certain
examined, you may have to provide additionalbined. performing artists, Armed Forces reservists, and
information to the IRS. This information could be certain disabled employees. The chapter endsSeparating expenses. Each separate pay- needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy or with illustrations of how to report travel, enter-ment is generally considered a separate ex- reliability of information contained in your rec- tainment, gift, and car expenses on Forms 2106pense. For example, if you entertain a customer ords, statements, testimony, or documentary and 2106-EZ.or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the evidence before a deduction is allowed.
dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-
ets are two separate expenses. You must record How Long To Keepthem separately in your records. Where To ReportRecords and Receipts
Season or series tickets. If you buy sea-
son or series tickets for business use, you must You must keep records as long as they may be This section provides general information on
treat each ticket in the series as a separate item. needed for the administration of any provision of where to report the expenses discussed in this
To determine the cost of individual tickets, divide the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this publication.
the total cost (but not more than face value) by means you must keep records that support your
the number of games or performances in the deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years from Self-employed. You must report your income
series. You must keep records to show whether the date you file the income tax return on which and expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ  (Form
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 27

Page 28 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched- Special Rules discussed later do not apply to include the entire value of the em-
ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not you, do not complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. ployer-provided car on line 25. Comp lete the
use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your deductible rest of the form.
If you claim car or truck expenses, you must gifts directly on line 21 of Schedule A (Form Less than full value included in your income.provide certain information on the use of your 1040). If less than the full annual lease value of the carvehicle. You provide this information on Sched- was included on your Form W-2, this means thatStatutory employees. If you received aule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Form 4562. your Form W-2 only includes the value of yourForm W-2 and the “Statutory employee” box inIf you file Schedule C: personal use of the car. Do not enter this valuebox 13 was checked, report your income and
on your Form 2106; it is not deductible.• Report your travel expenses, except expenses related to that income on Schedule C
If you paid any actual costs (that your em-meals, on line 24a, or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form
ployer did not provide or reimburse you for) to2106 or 2106-EZ.• Report your deductible meals (actual cost operate the car, you can deduct the businessStatutory employees include full-time life in-or standard meal allowance) and enter- portion of those costs. Examples of costs thatsurance salespersons, certain agent or commis-tainment on line 24b, you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com-sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain
plete Part II, Sections A and C, of Form 2106.• Report your gift expenses and transporta- homeworkers.
Enter your actual costs on line 23 of Section Ction expenses, other than car expenses,  If you are entitled to a reimbursement and leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of theon line 27, and from your employer but you do not form.• Report your car expenses on line 9. Com- claim it, you cannot claim a deductionCAUTION
!
plete Part IV of the form unless you have for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-
to file Form 4562 for depreciation or amor- bursement applies.
tization. ReimbursementsReimbursement for personal expenses. If
If you file Schedule C-EZ, report the total of all your employer reimburses you for nondeduct- This section explains what to do when you re-business expenses on line 2. You can only in- ible personal expenses, such as for vacation ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any ofclude 50% of your meals and entertainment in trips, your employer must report the reimburse- the employee business expenses discussed inthat total. If you include car expenses, you must ment as wage income in box 1 of your Form this publication.also complete Part III of the form. W-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses. If you received an advance, allowance, orIf you file Schedule F: reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-Income-producing property. If you have• Report your car expenses on line 12. At- port this amount and your expenses depends ontravel or transportation expenses related to in-tach Form 4562 and provide information whether the reimbursement was paid to youcome-producing property, report your deducti-on the use of your car in Part V of Form under an accountable plan or a nonaccountableble expenses on the form appropriate for that4562. plan.activity. This section explains the two types of plans,• Report all other business expenses dis- For example, if you have rental real estate how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-cussed in this publication on line 34. You income and expenses, report your expenses on ing the amount of your expenses, and the taxcan only include 50% of your meals and Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss. treatment of your reimbursements and ex-entertainment on that line. See Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop- penses. It also covers rules for independenterty, for more information on the rental of realSee your forms instructions for more information contractors.estate. If you have deductible invest-on how to complete your tax return. ment-related transportation expenses, report No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed
them on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23. or given an allowance for your expenses if youBoth self-employed and an employee. If are paid a salary or commission with the under-you are both self-employed and an employee, standing that you will pay your own expenses. InVehicle Provided byyou must keep separate records for each busi- this situation, you have no reimbursement orness activity. Report your business expenses for Your Employer allowance arrangement, and you do not have toself-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F read this section on reimbursements. Instead,If your employer provides you with a car, you(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later,may be able to deduct the actual expenses ofbusiness expenses for your work as an em- for information on completing your tax return.operating that car for business purposes. Theployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed
amount you can deduct depends on the amountnext. Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. A
that your employer included in your income and reimbursement or other expense allowance ar-Employees. If you are an employee, you gen- the business and personal miles you drove dur- rangement is a system or plan that an employererally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your ing the year. You cannot use the standard mile- uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-travel, transportation, and entertainment ex- age rate. penses, advances, reimbursements, andpenses. However, you can use the shorter Form amounts charged to the employer for employee2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all of Value reported on Form W-2. Your employer business expenses. Arrangements include perthe following conditions. can figure and report either the actual value of diem and car allowances.your personal use of the car or the value of the A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of• You are an employee deducting expenses car as if you used it only for personal purposes daily reimbursement your employer gives youattributable to your job. (100% income inclusion). Your employer must for your lodging, meals, and incidental expenses• You were not reimbursed by your em- separately state the amount if 100% of the an- when you are away from home on business.ployer for your expenses (amounts in- nual lease value was included in your income. If (The term “incidental expenses” is defined included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not you are unsure of the amount included in your chapter 1 under Standard Meal Allowance.) Aconsidered reimbursements). Form W-2, ask your employer. car allowance is an amount your employer gives
you for the business use of your car.• If you claim car expenses, you use the Full value included in your income. You can Your employer should tell you what methodstandard mileage rate. deduct the value of the business use of an em- of reimbursement is used and what records youployer-provided car if your employer reportedFor more information on how to report your must provide.100% of the value of the car in your income. Onexpenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see your 2007 Form W-2, the amount of the value Employers. If you are an employer and youCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later. will be included in box 1, Wages, tips, other reimburse employee business expenses, how
Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse- compensation, and box 12. you treat this reimbursement on your em-
ments (or the reimbursements were all included To claim your expenses, complete Part II, ployee’s Form W-2 depends in part on whe ther
in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only business Sections A and C, of Form 2106. Enter your you have an accountable plan. Reimburse-
expense you are claiming is for gifts, and the actual expenses on line 23 of Section C and ments treated as paid under an account able
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 29 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
plan, as explained next, are not reported as pay. having been reimbursed under a nonaccount- • Your employer reasonably limits payments
of your expenses to those that are ordi-Reimbursements treated as paid under nonac- able plan (discussed later).
nary and necessary in the conduct of thecountable plans, as explained later, are reported Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- trade or business.as pay. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em- penses. You may be reimbursed under yourployer’s Tax Guide, for information on employee employer’s accountable plan for expenses re- • The allowance is similar in form to and notpay. lated to that employer’s business, some of which more than the federal rate (defined later).
are deductible as employee business expenses • You prove the time (dates), place, andAccountable Plans and some of which are not deductible. The reim- business purpose of your expenses tobursements you receive for the nondeductible your employer (as explained in Table 5-1)To be an accountable plan, your employer’s expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountable within a reasonable period of time.reimbursement or allowance arrangement must plans, and they are treated as paid under ainclude all of the following rules. • You are not related to your employer (asnonaccountable plan.
defined next). If you are related to your1. Your expenses must have a business con- employer, you must be able to prove yourExample. Your employer’s plan reimbursesnection — that is, you must have paid or expenses to the IRS even if you have al-you for travel expenses while away from homeincurred deductible expenses while per- ready adequately accounted to your em-on business and also for meals when you workforming services as an employee of your ployer and returned any excesslate at the office, even though you are not awayemployer. reimbursement.from home. The part of the arrangement that
2. You must adequately account to your em- reimburses you for the nondeductible meals If the IRS finds that an employer’s travel allow-ployer for these expenses within a reason- when you work late at the office is treated as ance practices are not based on reasonablyable period of time. paid under a nonaccountable plan. accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-
ognition of cost differences in different areas for3. You must return any excess reimburse- The employer makes the decision
per diem amounts), you will not be considered toment or allowance within a reasonable pe- whether to reimburse employees
have accounted to your employer. In this case,riod of time. under an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIP
you must be able to prove your expenses to thecountable plan. If you are an employee who“Adequate accounting” and “returning ex- IRS.receives payments under a nonaccountablecess reimbursements” are discussed later. plan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-An excess reimbursement or allowance is Related to employer. You are related to yourments under an accountable plan by voluntarilyany amount you are paid that is more than the employer if: accounting to your employer for the expensesbusiness-related expenses that you adequately and voluntarily returning excess reimburse- 1. Your employer is your brother or sister,accounted for to your employer. ments to the employer. half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-The definition of reasonable period of time
tor, or lineal descendant,depends on the facts and circumstances of your
situation. However, regardless of the facts and 2. Your employer is a corporation in whichAdequate Accountingcircumstances of your situation, actions that you own, directly or indirectly, more than
take place within the times specified in the fol- One of the rules for an accountable plan is that 10% in value of the outstanding stock, or
lowing list will be treated as taking place within a you must adequately account to your employer 3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-reasonable period of time. for your expenses. You adequately account by duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,giving your employer a statement of expense,• You receive an advance within 30 days of a trust, and your employer.an account book, a diary, or a similar record inthe time you have an expense.
which you entered each expense at or near the You may be considered to indirectly own stock,
• You adequately account for your ex- time you had it, along with documentary evi- for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in a
penses within 60 days after they were paid dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage, corporation, partnership, estate, or trust that
or incurred. owns the stock or if a member of your family orand other employee business expenses. (See
your partner owns the stock.Table 5-1 in chapter 5 for details you need to• You return any excess reimbursement
enter in your record and documents you need towithin 120 days after the expense was The federal rate. The federal rate can be fig-prove certain expenses.) A per diem or car al-paid or incurred. ured using any one of the following methods.lowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-
• You are given a periodic statement (at quirement under certain conditions. See Per 1. For per diem amounts:least quarterly) that asks you to either re- diem and Car Allowances, later.
turn or adequately account for outstanding You must account for all amounts you re- a. The regular federal per diem rate.advances and you comply within 120 days ceived from your employer during the year as b. The standard meal allowance.of the statement. advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This
includes amounts you charged to your employer c. The high-low rate.
by credit card or other method. You must giveEmployee meets accountable plan rules. If
your employer the same type of records and 2. For car expenses:you meet the three rules for accountable plans,
supporting information that you would have toyour employer should not include any reim-
a. The standard mileage rate.give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deductionbursements in your income in box 1 of your
on your return. You must pay back the amount ofForm W-2. If your expenses equal your reim- b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
any reimbursement or other expense allowancebursement, you do not complete Form 2106.
for which you do not adequately account or thatYou have no deduction since your expenses
For per diem amounts, use the rate inis more than the amount for which you ac-and reimbursement are equal.
effect for the area where you stop forcounted.If your employer included reimburse- sleep or rest.
TIP
ments in box 1 of your Form W-2 and
you meet all the rules for accountable Regular federal per diem rate. The regular
TIP
Per Diem and Car Allowancesplans, ask your employer for a corrected Form federal per diem rate is the highest amount that
W-2. If your employer reimburses you for your ex- the federal government will pay to its employees
penses using a per diem or a car allowance, you for lodging, meals, and incidental expenses (or
Accountable plan rules not met. Even can generally use the allowance as proof for the meals and incidental expenses only) while they
though you are reimbursed under an accounta- amount of your expenses. A per diem or car are traveling away from home in a particular
ble plan, some of your expenses may not meet allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re- area. The rates are different for different loca-
all the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet all quirements for the amount of your expenses tions. Your employer should have these rates
the rules for accountable plans are treated as only if all of the following conditions apply. available. (Employers can get Publication 1542,
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

Page 30 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
which gives the rates in the continental United You can use either of the following methods Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-day
business trip to Denver. The federal rate forStates for the current year. Publication 1542 is to figure the federal M&IE for that day.
Denver is $176 per day. As required by hisavailable on the Internet at www.irs.gov.)
1. Method 1: employer’s accountable plan, he accounts forThe standard meal allowance. The stan- the time (dates), place, and business purpose ofa. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of thedard meal allowance (discussed in chapter 1) is the trip. His employer reimburses him $176 astandard meal allowance amount forthe federal rate for meals and incidental ex- day ($352 total) for living expenses. Jeremy’spenses (M&IE). The rate for most small localities that day. living expenses in Denver are not more thanin the United States is $39 a day from January 1, $176 a day.b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of thethrough December 31, 2007. Most major cities standard meal allowance amount for Jeremy’s employer does not include any ofand many other localities qualify for higher rates. the reimbursement on his Form W-2 and Jeremythe preceding day.The rates for localities within the continental does not deduct the expenses on his return.United States are listed in Publication 1542. You 2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-can also find this information on the Internet at Example 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-daylowance using any method that you con-www.gsa.gov. business trip to Boston. Matt’s employer usessistently apply and that is in accordanceYou receive an allowance only for meals and the high-low method to reimburse employees.with reasonable business practice. For ex-incidental expenses when your employer does Since Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is givenample, an employer can treat 2 full days ofone of the following. an advance of $246 a day ($492 total) for hisper diem (that includes M&IE) paid for
lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Matt’stravel away from home from 9 a.m. of one• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in
actual expenses totaled $700.kind). day to 5 p.m. of the next day as being no
Since Matt’s $700 of expenses are moremore than the federal rate. This is true• Reimburses you, based on your receipts, than his $492 advance, he includes the excesseven though a federal employee would befor the actual cost of your lodging. expenses when he itemizes his deductions. Mattlimited to a reimbursement of M&IE for
completes Form 2106 (showing all of his ex-• Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your only 11/2 days of the federal M&IE rate.
penses and reimbursements). He must also al-lodging.
locate his reimbursement between his mealsThe standard mileage rate. This is a set• Does not have a reasonable belief that and other expenses as discussed later underrate per mile that you can use to compute youryou had (or will have) lodging expenses, Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.deductible car expenses. For 2007, the standardsuch as when you stay with friends or rela-
mileage rate for the cost of operating your car fortives or sleep in the cab of your truck. Example 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles abusiness use is 481/2 cents per mile. year for business. Under her employer’s ac-• Figures the allowance on a basis similar to
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is an countable plan, she accounts for the timethat used in computing your compensa-
allowance your employer may use to reimburse (dates), place, and business purpose of eachtion, such as number of hours worked or
trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowanceyour car expenses. Under this method, yourmiles traveled.
of 35 cents a mile.employer pays an allowance that includes a
combination of payments covering fixed and va- Since Nicole’s $4,850 expenses computedHigh-low rate. This is a simplified method
under the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles ×riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate toof computing the federal per diem rate for travel
481/2 cents) are more than her $3,500 reim-cover your variable operating costs (such aswithin the continental United States. It elimi-
bursement (10,000 miles × 35 cents), she item-gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover yournates the need to keep a current list of the per
izes her deductions to claim the excessfixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-diem rate for each city.
expenses. Nicole completes Form 2106 (show-ments), insurance, etc.). If your employerUnder the high-low method, the per diem ing all of her expenses and reimbursements)chooses to use this method, your employer willamount for travel during January through Sep- and enters $1,350 ($4,850 − $3,500) as an item-request the necessary records from you.tember of 2007 is $246 (including $58 for M&IE) ized deduction.for certain high-cost locations. All other areas
Reporting your expenses with a per diem orhave a per diem amount of $148 (including $45 Allowance more than the federal rate. If
car allowance. If your reimbursement is in thefor M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542 your allowance is more than the federal rate,
form of an allowance received under an ac-(Revised October 2007) on the Internet, which your employer must include the allowance
countable plan, the following facts affect yourgives the areas eligible for the $246 per diem amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your
reporting.amount under the high-low method for all or part Form W-2. This amount is not taxable. However,
of this period.) the excess allowance will be included in box 1 of• The federal rate. your Form W-2. You must report this part of yourEffective October 1, 2007, the per diem • Whether the allowance or your actual ex- allowance as if it were wage income.rate for certain high-cost locations de- penses were more than the federal rate. If your actual expenses are less than orcreased to $237 (including $58 forCAUTION
!
equal to the federal rate, you do not completeThe following discussions explain where to re-M&IE). The rate for all other locations increased Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses onport your expenses depending upon how theto $152 (including $45 for M&IE). However, an your return.amount of your allowance compares to the fed-employer can continue to use the rates de-
However, if your actual expenses are moreeral rate.scribed in the preceding paragraph for the re-
than the federal rate, you can complete Formmainder of 2007 if those rates and locations are Allowance less than or equal to the federal 2106 and deduct those excess expenses. Youused consistently during October, November, rate. If your allowance is less than or equal to must report on Form 2106 your reimbursementsand December for all employees. Employers the federal rate, the allowance will not be in- up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of yourwho did not use the high-low method during the cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do not Form W-2) and all your expenses. You shouldfirst 9 months of 2007 cannot begin to use it need to report the related expenses or the allow- be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.before 2008. See Revenue Procedure 2007-63 ance on your return if your expenses are equalfor more information. Also see Publication 1542 to or less than the allowance. Example 1.  Laura lives and works in Aus-(available on the Internet at www.irs.gov). tin. Her employer sent her to Albuquerque for 2However, if your actual expenses are more
days on business. Laura’s employer paid thethan your allowance, you can complete FormProrating the standard meal allowance on
hotel directly for her lodging and reimbursed2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-partial days of travel. The standard meal al-
Laura $65 a day ($130 total) for meals andule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If you
incidental expenses. Laura’s actual meal ex-penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS thetravel for part of a day, such as on the days you
penses were not more than the federal rate fortotal amount of your expenses and reimburse-depart and return, you must prorate the full-day
Albuquerque, which is $49 per day.ments for the entire year. If you are using theM&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-
standard meal allowance or the standard mile-ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or Her employer included the $32 that was
age rate, you do not have to prove that amount.the high-low rate. more than the federal rate (($65 − $49) × 2) in
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 31 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
 If Debbie’s expenses are equal to or less
than the standard mileage rate, she would not
complete Form 2106. If her expenses are more
than the standard mileage rate, she would com-
plete Form 2106 and report her total expenses
and reimbursement (shown in box 12 of her
Form W-2). She would then claim the excess
expenses as an itemized deduction.
Returning Excess
Reimbursements
Under an accountable plan, you are required to
return any excess reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowances for your business expenses
to the person paying the reimbursement or al-
lowance. Excess reimbursement means any
amount for which you did not adequately ac-
count within a reasonable period of time. For
example, if you received a travel advance and
you did not spend all the money on busi-
ness-related expenses, or you do not have proof
of all your expenses, you have an excess reim-
bursement.
“Adequate accounting” and “reasonable pe-
riod of time” were discussed earlier in this chap-
ter.
Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-
vance if your employer provides you with an
expense allowance before you actually have the
expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-
pected to be no more than your expense. Under
an accountable plan, you are required to ade-
quately account to your employer for this ad-
vance and to return any excess within a
reasonable period of time.
If you do not adequately account for or do not
return any excess advance within a reasonable
period of time, the amount you do not account
for or return will be treated as having been paid
under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
Unproved amounts. If you do not prove
that you actually traveled on each day for which
you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-
ing the elements described in Table 5-1), you
Table 6-1.
IF the type of reimbursement (or
other expense allowance)
arrangement is under:
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: 
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
THEN the employer
reports on Form W-2:
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but  excess
not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
A nonaccountable plan with:
No reimbursement plan:
Either adequate accounting or
return of excess, or both, not
required by plan
No amount.
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
All expenses and
reimbursements only if
excess expenses are
claimed. Otherwise,
form is not filed.
All expenses.
All expenses.
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.
Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements
AND the employee
reports on
Form 2106: *
Per diem or mileage allowance
exceeds the federal rate:
Adequate accounting up to the
federal rate only and
 excess not
returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
All expenses (and
reimbursements
reported on Form W-2,
box 12) only if expenses
in excess of the federal
rate are claimed.
Otherwise, form is not
filed.
No amount.
must return this unproved amount of the travel
box 1 of Laura’s Form W-2. Her employer shows as income on Joe’s Form W-2 in box 1. The advance within a reasonable period of time. If
$98 ($49 a day × 2) in box 12 of her Form W-2. employer also enters $256 in box 12 of Joe’s you do not do this, the unproved amount will be
This amount is not included in Laura’s income. Form W-2. considered paid under a nonaccountable plan
Laura does not have to complete Form 2106; (discussed later).Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-
however, she must include the $32 in her gross ductible expenses. He enters the total of his Per diem allowance more than federal rate.income as wages (by reporting the total amount actual expenses for the year ($380) on Form If your employer’s accountable plan pays you anshown in box 1 of her Form W-2). 2106. He also enters the reimbursements that allowance that is higher than the federal rate,
were not included in his income ($256). His total you do not have to return the difference betweenExample 2. Joe also lives in Austin and deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is the two rates for the period you can prove busi-works for the same employer as Laura. In May $124. After he figures the 50% limit on his un- ness-related travel expenses. However, the dif-the employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 days reimbursed meals and entertainment, he will ference will be reported as wages on your Formand paid the hotel directly for Joe’s hotel bill. The include the balance, $62, as an itemized deduc- W-2. This excess amount is considered paidemployer reimbursed Joe $75 a day for his tion. under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).meals and incidental expenses. The federal rate
for San Diego is $64 a day. Example 3. Debbie drives 10,000 miles for Example.  Your employer sends you on a
Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses business. Under her employer’s accountable 5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2007
totaled $380. His employer’s accountable plan plan, she gets reimbursed 55 cents a mile, which and gives you a $400 ($80 × 5 days) advance to
will not pay more than $75 a day for travel to San is more than the standard mileage rate. Her total cover your meals and incidental expenses. The
Diego, so Joe does not give his employer the reimbursement is $5,500. federal per diem for meals and incidental ex-
records that prove that he actually spent $380. Debbie’s employer must include the reim- penses for Phoenix is $59. Your trip lasts only 3
However, he does account for the time, place, bursement amount up to the standard mileage days. Under your employer’s accountable plan,
and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe’s rate, $4,850, in box 12 of her Form W-2. That you must return the $160 ($80 × 2 days) ad-
only business trip this year. amount is not taxable. Her employer must also vance for the 2 days you did not travel. You do
Joe was reimbursed $300 ($75 × 4 days), include $650 ($5,500 − $4,850) in box 1 of her not have to return the $63 difference between
which is $44 more than the federal rate of $256 Form W-2. This is the reimbursement that is the allowance you received and the fe deral rate
($64 × 4 days). The employer includes the $44 more than the standard mileage rate. for Phoenix (($80 − $59) × 3 days). However, the
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

Page 32 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$39 will be reported on your Form W-2 as the 50% limit on entertainment in this case. YouRules for Independent
wages. can deduct the reimbursements or allowancesContractors and Clients as payment for services if they are ordinary and
necessary business expenses. However, youThis section provides rules for independent con-Nonaccountable Plans
must file Form 1099-MISC to report amountstractors who incur expenses on behalf of a client
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or paid to the independent contractor if the total ofor customer. The rules cover the reporting and
expense allowance arrangement that does not substantiation of certain expenses discussed in the reimbursements and any other fees is $600
meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier this publication, and they affect both indepen- or more during the calendar year.
under Accountable Plans. dent contractors and their clients or customers.
You are considered an independent contrac-In addition, even if your employer has an
tor if you are self-employed and you performaccountable plan, the following payments will be
services for a customer or client.treated as being paid under a nonaccountable Completing Formsplan:
2106 and 2106-EZ• Excess reimbursements you fail to return Accounting to Your Client
to your employer, and
This section briefly describes how employeesIf you received a reimbursement or an allow-• Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 6-1ance for travel, entertainment, or gift expensespenses related to your employer’s busi- explains what the employer reports on Formthat you incurred on behalf of a client, youness. See Reimbursement of W-2 and what the employee reports on Formshould provide an adequate accounting of thesenondeductible expenses, earlier, under expenses to your client. If you do not account to 2106. The instructions for the forms have moreAccountable Plans. your client for these expenses, you must include information on completing them.
any reimbursements or allowances in income.An arrangement that repays you for business If you are self-employed, do not fileYou must keep adequate records of these ex-expenses by reducing the amount reported as Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report yourpenses whether or not you account to your clientyour wages, salary, or other pay will be treated expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or FCAUTION
!
for these expenses.as a nonaccountable plan. This is because you (Form 1040). See the instructions for the formIf you do not separately account for and seekare entitled to receive the full amount of your pay that you must file.reimbursement for meals and entertainment inwhether or not you have any business ex-
connection with providing services for a client,penses.
you are subject to the 50% limit on those ex- Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use theIf you are not sure if the reimbursement or penses. See 50% Limit in chapter 2. shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employeeexpense allowance arrangement is an account-
business expenses. You can use this form if youAdequate accounting. As a self-employedable or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-
meet all of the following conditions.person, you adequately account by reportingployer.
your actual expenses. You should follow the • You are an employee deducting expensesrecordkeeping rules in chapter 5.Reporting your expenses under a nonac- attributable to your job.countable plan. Your employer will combine How to report. For information on how to • You were not reimbursed by your em-the amount of any reimbursement or other ex- report expenses on your tax return, see ployer for your expenses (amounts in-pense allowance paid to you under a nonac- Self-employed at the beginning of this chapter. cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are notcountable plan with your wages, salary, or other
pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 considered reimbursements).
of your Form W-2. Required Records for • If you are claiming car expenses, you areYou must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ Clients or Customers using the standard mileage rate.and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-
penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en- If you are a client or customer, you generally do
Car expenses. If you used a car to performtertainment. Your meal and entertainment not have to keep records to prove the reimburse-
your job as an employee, you may be able toexpenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis- ments or allowances you give, in the course of
deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-cussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expenses your business, to an independent contractor for
will be subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and thentravel or gift expenses incurred on your behalf.
gross-income limit that applies to most miscella- However, you must keep records if: claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A.
neous itemized deductions. Car expenses using the standard mileage rate• You reimburse the contractor for entertain- can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com-ment expenses incurred on your behalf,Example 1. Kim’s employer gives her pleting Part II and Part I, line 1.and$1,000 a month ($12,000 total for the year) for
Information on use of cars. If you claimher business expenses. Kim does not have to • The contractor adequately accounts to you
any deduction for the business use of a car, youprovide any proof of her expenses to her em- for these expenses.
must answer certain questions and provide in-ployer, and Kim can keep any funds that she
formation about the use of the car. The informa-does not spend. Contractor adequately accounts. If the con- tion relates to the following items.Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac- tractor adequately accounts to you for entertain-
countable plan. Her employer will include the • Mileage (total, business, commuting, andment expenses, you (the client or customer)
$12,000 on Kim’s Form W-2 as if it were wages. must keep records documenting each element other personal mileage).If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses, of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. Use • Percentage of business use.she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and your records as proof for a deduction on your tax
itemize her deductions. return. If entertainment expenses are accounted • Date placed in service.
for separately, you are subject to the 50% limit • Use of other vehicles.Example 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month by on entertainment. If the contractor adequatelyhis employer. On days that he travels away from accounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you do • After-work use.home on business, his employer designates $50 not have to report the amounts on an information • Whether you have evidence to support thea day of his salary as paid to reimburse his travel return. deduction.expenses. Because his employer would pay Ke-
vin his monthly salary whether or not he was Contractor does not adequately account.  If • Whether or not the evidence is written.traveling away from home, the arrangement is a the contractor does not adequately account to
Employees must complete Form 2106, Part II,nonaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a day you for allowances or reimbursements of enter-
Section A, or Form 2106-EZ, Part II, to providedesignated by his employer is treated as paid tainment expenses, you do not have to keep
under an accountable plan. this information.records of these items. You are not subject to
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 33 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. EnterStandard mileage rate. If you claim a de- Meal and entertainment expenses. Show
the result here and in Columnduction based on the standard mileage rate in- the full amount of your expenses for busi-
B, line 7 ............... 3,703stead of your actual expenses, you must ness-related meals and entertainment on Form 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Entercomplete Form 2106, Part II, Section B. The 2106, line 5, Column B. Include meals while the result here and in Columnamount on line 22 (Section B) is carried to Form away from your tax home overnight and other A, line 7 ............... $3,297
2106, Part I, line 1. In addition, on Part 1, line 2, business meals and entertainment. Enter 50% On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297you can deduct parking fees and tolls that apply of the line 8, Column B, meal and entertainment ($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) into the business use of the car. If you file Form expenses on line 9, Column B. Column A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in Column2106-EZ, complete Part I, line 1, for the standard If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the full B.mileage rate and line 2 for parking fees and tolls. amount of your meals and entertainment on theSee Standard Mileage Rate in chapter 4 for After you complete the form. After you haveline to the left of line 5 and multiply the total byinformation on using this rate. completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, follow50%. Enter the result on line 5. the directions on that form to deduct your ex-Actual expenses. If you claim a deduction Hours of service limits. If you are subject penses on the appropriate line of your tax return.based on actual expenses, you cannot use to the Department of Transportation’s “hours of For most taxpayers, this is line 21 of Schedule AForm 2106-EZ. You must complete Form 2106, service” limits (as explained earlier under Indi- (Form 1040). However, if you are a governmentPart II, Section C. In addition, unless you lease official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist,viduals subject to “hours of service” limits  inyour car, you must complete Section D to show an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em-chapter 2), use 75% instead of 50% for mealsyour depreciation deduction and any section ployee with impairment-related work expenses,while away from your tax home.179 deduction you can claim. see Special Rules, later.If you are still using a car that is fully depreci-
Limits on employee business expenses.Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 7ated, continue to complete Section C. Since you
Your employee business expenses may be sub-(you cannot use Form 2106-EZ) the amountshave no depreciation deduction, enter zero on
ject to any of the three limits described next.your employer (or third party) reimbursed youline 28. In this case, do not complete Section D.
They are figured in the following order on thethat were not reported to you in box 1 of yourCar rentals. If you claim car rental ex- specified form.Form W-2. This includes any amount reportedpenses on Form 2106, line 24a, you may have to under code L in box 12 of Form W-2. 1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer-reduce that expense by an inclusion amount as tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-described in chapter 4. If so, you can show your Allocating your reimbursement. If you ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, youcar expenses and any inclusion amount as fol- were reimbursed under an accountable plan and figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 oflows. want to deduct excess expenses that were not Form 2106-EZ. (See 50% Limit in chapter 2.)reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-1. Compute the inclusion amount without tak- 2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-bursement. This is necessary when your em-ing into account your business use per- tions. If you are an employee, deduct yourployer pays your reimbursement in the followingcentage for the tax year. employee business expenses (as figured onmanner:
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 21 of Schedule A2. Report the inclusion amount from (1) on • Pays you a single amount that covers (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de-Form 2106, Part II, line 24b. meals and/or entertainment, as well as ductions, including employee business ex-
3. Report on line 24c the net amount of car other business expenses, and penses, are subject to a 2%-of-adjusted-
rental expenses (total car rental expenses gross-income limit. This limit is figured on line 26• Does not clearly identify how much is forminus the inclusion amount computed in of Schedule A (Form 1040).deductible meals and/or entertainment.(1)).
3. Limit on total itemized deductions. IfYou must allocate that single payment so thatThe net amount of car rental expenses will be your adjusted gross income (line 38 of Formyou know how much to enter in Form 2106,adjusted on Form 2106, Part II, line 27, to reflect 1040) is more than $156,400 ($78,200 if you areColumn A and Column B of line 7.the percentage of business use for the tax year. married filing separately), the total of certain
itemized deductions, including employee busi-Example. Rob’s employer paid him an ex-Transportation expenses. Show your trans- ness expenses, may be limited. See your formpense allowance of $12,000 this year under anportation expenses that did not involve overnight instructions for information on how to figure thisaccountable plan. The $12,000 payment con-travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or on limit.sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for enter-Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on this tainment and car expenses. The employer didline business expenses you have for parking Special Rulesnot clearly show how much of the $7,000 was forfees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper- the cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu-ating your car or expenses of commuting be- This section discusses special rules that applyally spent $14,000 during the year ($5,500 for only to Armed Forces reservists, governmenttween your home and work. airfare, $4,500 for entertainment, and $4,000 for officials who are paid on a fee basis, performingcar expenses). artists, and disabled employees with impair-Employee business expenses other than
Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden- ment-related work expenses.meals and entertainment. Show your other
tified, Rob knows that $5,000 of the paymentemployee business expenses on Form 2106,
goes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. ToColumn A, lines 3 and 4, or Form 2106-EZ, lines
Armed Forces Reservists Travelingallocate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses the3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals and
More Than 100 Miles From Homeentertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex- worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.
penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui- His completed worksheet follows. If you are a member of a reserve component oftion and books), office-in-the-home expenses, the Armed Forces of the United States and you1. Enter the total amount ofand trade and professional publications. travel more than 100 miles away from home inreimbursements your employer
If line 4 expenses are the only ones you connection with your performance of services asgave you that were not reported
are claiming, you received no reim- to you in box 1 of Form W-2 . . . $7,000 a member of the reserves, you can deduct your
2. Enter the total amount of yourbursements (or the reimbursements travel expenses as an adjustment to gross in-
TIP
expenses for the periodswere all included in box 1 of your Form W-2), come rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedcovered by this reimbursement 8,500and the Special Rules discussed later do not deduction. The amount of expenses you can3. Of the amount on line 2, enterapply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or deduct as an adjustment to gross income isyour total expense for meals2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on limited to the regular federal per diem rate (forand entertainment ......... 4,500
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. List the type lodging, meals, and incidental expenses) and4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the
and amount of each expense on the dotted lines the standard mileage rate (for car expenses)result as a decimal (rounded to
and include the total on line 21. at least three places) .......  .529 plus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. See
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Page 34 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Per Diem and Car Allowances  earlier for more Special rules for married persons. If you are away from your place of work. The reader’s
information. Any expenses in excess of these married, you must file a joint return unless you services are only for your work. Yo u can deduct
amounts can be claimed only as a miscellane- lived apart from your spouse at all times during your expenses for the reader as bus iness ex-
ous itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit. the tax year. If you file a joint return, you must penses.
figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separately
Member of a reserve component. You are a Example 2. You are deaf. You must use afor both you and your spouse. However, require-
member of a reserve component of the Armed sign-language interpreter during meetings whilement (4) applies to your and your spouse’s com-
Forces of the United States if you are in the you are at work. The interpreter’s services arebined adjusted gross income.
Army, Naval, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast used only for your work. You can deduct your
Where to report. If you meet all of the aboveGuard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the expenses for the interpreter as business ex-
requirements, you should first complete FormUnited States, the Air National Guard of the penses.
2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your per-United States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub-
forming-arts-related expenses from Form 2106,lic Health Service. Illustrated Examples
line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on
How to report. If you have reserve-related Form 1040, line 24. The following examples illustrate the reporting of
travel that takes you more than 100 miles from travel, entertainment, gift, and transportation ex-If you do not meet all of the above require-
home, you should first complete Form 2106 or penses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Businessments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-
Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses for use of a car is shown using actual car expensespenses as an adjustment to gross income.
reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to in Example 1 and the standard mileage rate inInstead, you must complete Form 2106 or
the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or Example 2. Sample records that prove some of2106-EZ and deduct your employee business
Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040, the claimed expenses are also shown.expenses as an itemized deduction on Schedule
line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on A (Form 1040), line 21.
Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, and Example 1. David Pine purchased a new
deduct the balance as an itemized deduction on car for $24,500 (including sales tax) on January
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. 5, 2007. In 2007, he used the car 70% for busi-Impairment-Related Work
ness purposes. A sample page from David’sYou cannot deduct expenses of travel that Expenses of Disabled Employees
logbook is illustrated in Table 6-2. He records hisdoes not take you more than 100 miles from
If you are an employee with a physical or mental business mileage (but not his personal miles)home as an adjustment to gross income. In-
disability, your impairment-related work ex- and expenses daily.stead, you must complete Form 2106 or
penses are not subject to the2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an David uses Form 2106 to claim actual car
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that appliesitemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), expenses. He completes Part II, Section A, as
to most other employee business expenses. Af-line 21. shown later on his illustrated form. He does not
ter you complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, enter claim the section 179 deduction. He uses the
your impairment-related work expenses from MACRS double declining balance method
Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, onOfficials Paid on a Fee Basis (200% DB) to determine his depreciation deduc-
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28, and identify tion.
Certain fee-basis officials can claim their em- the type and amount of this expense on the David’s total depreciation deduction wouldployee business expenses whether or not they dotted line next to line 28. Enter your employee normally be $3,430 ($24,500 (unadjusted basis)itemize their other deductions on Schedule A business expenses that are unrelated to your × 70% (business use) × 20% (from table 4-1)).(Form 1040). disability from Form 2106, line 10, or Form However, it is limited in the first year to $2,142
2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),Fee-basis officials are persons who are em- ($3,060 (from the Maximum Depreciation De-
line 21.ployed by a state or local government and who duction for Cars  table shown in chapter 4) ×
are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They Impairment-related work expenses are your 70%). He enters these amounts in Part II, Sec-
can deduct their business expenses in perform- allowable expenses for attendant care at your tion D.
ing services in that job as an adjustment to gross workplace and other expenses in connection His other car expenses included $5,150 for
income rather than as a miscellaneous itemized with your workplace that are necessary for you gas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters this
deduction. to be able to work. amount in Part II, Section C, and multiplies it by
If you are a fee-basis official, include your the 70% business use. He adds this amountYou are disabled if you have:
employee business expenses from Form 2106, ($3,605) to the depreciation deduction ($2,142)• A physical or mental disability (for exam-line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on and reports the total ($5,747) on Part I, line 1.ple, blindness or deafness) that function-Form 1040, line 24. His other transportation expenses for park-ally limits your being employed, or ing fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,320. He enters
this amount on Part I, line 2. David’s employer• A physical or mental impairment (for ex-
Expenses of Certain reimbursed him a total of $4,800 for his car andample, a sight or hearing impairment) that
Performing Artists transportation expenses. This amount was paidsubstantially limits one or more of your
from an accountable plan and was not shown onmajor life activities, such as performing
If you are a performing artist, you may qualify to David’s Form W-2. However, since he is claim-manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-
deduct your employee business expenses as an ing expenses that are more than his reimburse-ing, learning, or working.
adjustment to gross income rather than as a ments, he must show the entire reimbursement
miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify, amount on Part I, Column A, line 7. Since DavidYou can deduct impairment-related expenses
you must meet all of the following requirements. had no meal or entertainment expenses, he en-as business expenses if they are:
ters his excess deductible expenses ($2,267) on1. During the tax year, you perform services • Necessary for you to do your work satis- Part I, line 10. He can deduct these expensesin the performing arts as an employee for factorily, (subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeat least two employers. • For goods and services not required or limit) on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21, if he
2. You receive at least $200 each from any used, other than incidentally, in your per- itemizes his deductions.
two of these employers. sonal activities, and
Example 2. Bill Wilson is an employee of3. Your related performing-arts business ex- • Not specifically covered under other in- Fashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In apenses are more than 10% of your gross come tax laws. typical travel week, Bill leaves his home on Longincome from the performance of those Island on Monday morning and drives to Albanyservices. Example 1. You are blind. You must use a to exhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to prospec-
reader to do your work. You use the reader both4. Your adjusted gross income is not more tive customers. Then he drives to Troy to show
during your regular working hours at your placethan $16,000 before deducting these busi- Fashion’s new line of merchandise to Town De-
of work and outside your regular working hoursness expenses. partment Store, an old customer. While in Troy,
Page 34 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 35 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
he talks with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for Following the instructions for Form 2106-EZ, Bill received an allowance of $33,000
Town Department Store, to discuss the new line. Part II, he answers all the questions and figures ($2,750 per month) to help offs et his expenses.
He later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to his car expense to be $9,700 (20,000 × 48 1/2 Bill did not have to account to his employer for
dinner to discuss Attire Co.’s buying Fashion’s cents per mile). the reimbursement and the $33,000 was in-
new line of clothing. His total employee business expenses are cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W-2.
Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2004. shown in the following table. Because Bill’s reimbursement was included
He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex- in his income and he is using the standard mile-
Type of Expense Amountpense purposes. He records his total mileage, age rate for his car expenses, he files Form
business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the 2106-EZ with his tax return.
Parking fees and tolls ........... $  5 2 0
year. Bill records his expenses and other perti- Car expenses ................ 9,700
Meals ..................... 3,861nent information in his Weekly Traveling Ex-
Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning ..... 18,318pense and Entertainment Record, shown in
Entertainment ................ 3,250Table 6-3. He obtains receipts for his expenses
Gifts, education, etc. ........... 6 5 0for lodging and for any other expenses of $75 or Total $36,299more.
During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000
miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.
Date
6/3/07
Table 6-2. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name:  David Pine
Destination
(City, Town, or Area)
Business
Purpose Start Stop
Miles
this trip
Type
(Gas, oil, tolls, etc.) Amount
Odometer Readings
6/5/07
6/6/07
6/7/07
6/8/07
6/9/07
Local
(St. Louis)
Indianapolis
Louisville
Return to
St. Louis
Local
(St. Louis)
Weekly
Total
Total
Year-to-Date
Sales calls
Sales calls
See Bob Smith
(Pot. Client)
Sales calls
8,097
8,211
8,486
8,599
8,914
8,097
8,188
8,486
8,599
8,875
9,005
9,005
91
275
113
276
91
846
6,236
Gas
Parking
Gas/Repair
flat tire
Gas
$ 34.50
6.50
36.00
35.50
$ 167.50
$2,313.00
55.00
Expenses
6/4/07
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

Page 36 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
David Pine 559 00 9559Sales
1,320
7,067
4,800
2,267
2,267
2,267
OMB No. 1545-0074Employee Business Expenses2106Form
/H17075See separate instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements
Column BColumn A
Step 1 Enter Your Expenses Meals and
Entertainment
Other Than Meals
and Entertainment
1
Vehicle expense from line 22 or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See
instructions.)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging,
airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not
include meals and entertainment
4
4
5Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions)5
Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5
6
6
Note: If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8.
Step 2 Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1
Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements
reported under code “L” in box 12 of your Form W-2 (see
instructions)
7
7
Step 3 Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR)
8
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if
line 7 is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as
income on Form 1040, line 7 (or on Form 1040NR, line 8)
8
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form 2106 to
your return.
9
9
10
In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply
line 8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal
expenses incurred while away from home on business by 75% (.75)
instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21 (or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR), line 9 ). (Reservists,
qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or local government officials, and individuals with
disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter the total.)
/H1707510
Cat. No. 11700NFor Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see instructions. Form 2106 (2007)
Part I
(99)
2007
5,747
Page 36 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 37 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
/H12011
/H12011
15 0 7
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600
/H12011
5,150
5,150
3,605
2,142
5,747
24,500
17,150
200DB 20%
3,430
3,430
3,060
2,142
2,142
/H12011
Page 2Form 2106 (2007)
Vehicle Expenses
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
//1111 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service
12 milesmiles12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2007
milesmiles1313 Business miles included on line 12
%%1414 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12
milesmiles1515 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance
milesmiles1616 Commuting miles included on line 12
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 milesmiles17
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?18 NoYes
NoYesWas your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?19
NoYes
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?21 NoYes
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?20
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or Section C.)
22 Multiply line 13 by 48.5¢ (.485)
Section C—Actual Expenses (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle
insurance, etc.
23
23
24a24a Vehicle rentals
24bb Inclusion amount (see instructions)
24cc Subtract line 24b from line 24a
Value of employer-provided
vehicle (applies only if 100% of
annual lease value was included
on Form W-2—see instructions)
25
25
2626 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25
Multiply line 26 by the
percentage on line 14
27
27
28Depreciation (see instructions)28
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total
here and on line 1 29
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C for the vehicle.)
(a) Vehicle 1 (b) Vehicle 2
Enter cost or other basis (see
instructions)
30
30
Enter section 179 deduction
(see instructions)
31
31
Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see
instructions if you claimed the
section 179 deduction or
special allowance)
32
32
Enter depreciation method and
percentage (see instructions)
33
33
Multiply line 32 by the percentage
on line 33 (see instructions)
34
34
35Add lines 31 and 3435
Enter the applicable limit explained
in the line 36 instructions
36
36
Multiply line 36 by the
percentage on line 14
37
37
Enter the smaller of line 35
or line 37. If you skipped lines
36 and 37, enter the amount
from line 35. Also enter this
amount on line 28 above
38
38
Part II
//
Form 2106 (2007)
22
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 37

Page 38 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel and transportation expenses
Table 6-3. Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
From: August 6, 2007 To: August 12, 2007 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
Travel Expenses:
Airlines
1.
Excess baggage
Bus - Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
Meals and Lodging:
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Hotel and Motel
(Detail in Schedule B)
Entertainment
(Detail in Schedule C)
Other Expenses:
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s)
Trade Shows
2.
3.
4.
Car Expenses: (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
5.
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls
Other (Identify)
Total
Note: Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A - Car
Mileage: End
Start
Total
Business Mileage
Schedule B - Lodging
Schedule C - Entertainment
Date
6.
Hotel
or
Motel
Name
City
August 10, 2007 Bar
Dinner
Item Place
John’s Steak House
Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
Troy
Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.25 00
50 00
Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern
Hotel
Albany Albany Albany Troy
57,600
57,445
155
155
57,620
57,600
20
57,650
57,620
57,660
57,650
57,840
57,660
30 10 395
170103020
180
385
80 0
148 25 292 00 292 75 182 50 29 50 945 00
20 0060 0 60 0
100 00 100 00
50 0050 00 100 00
200 00
55 0 40 0 95 0
103 00
22 00
97 5
103 00
20 25
10 00
87 5
103 00
21 50
10 25
80 0 82 5
10 25
83 00
75 00
90 0
10 50
34 00
50 75
392 00
63 75
75 00
WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Other reimbursements
TOTAL
N/A
Page 38 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 39 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
9,700
18,318
650
3,556
32,744
1 5 2004
20,000 2,600 2,400
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
7,111
520
OMB No. 1545-0074
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multiply line 8a by 48.5¢
(.485)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and
entertainment
4
4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ × 50% (.50). (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred
while away from home on business by 75% (.75) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21
(or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR, line 9)). (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local
government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the
instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2007)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate
for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2007.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements for this purpose).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2007, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2007 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
2007
1
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 39

Page 40 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internet. You can access the IRS web- and press 1 for automated refund informa-
site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 tion or call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to
days a week to: wait at least 6 weeks from the date you
7. filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-• E-file your return. Find out about commer-
tronically). Have your 2007 tax returncial tax preparation and e-file services
available because you will need to knowavailable free to eligible taxpayers.
your social security number, your filing• Check the status of your 2007 refund.How To Get Tax status, and the exact whole dollar amountClick on Where’s My Refund. Wait at least of your refund.6 weeks from the date you filed your re-
Help turn (3 weeks if you filed electronically). Evaluating the quality of our telephoneHave your 2007 tax return available be- services. To ensure IRS representatives givecause you will need to know your socialYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, accurate, courteous, and professional answers,security number, your filing status, and theorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques- we use several methods to evaluate the qualityexact whole dollar amount of your refund.tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- of our telephone services. One method is for a
• Download forms, instructions, and publica-eral ways. By selecting the method that is best second IRS representative to listen in on ortions.for you, you will have quick and easy access to record random telephone calls. Another is to ask
tax help. some callers to complete a short survey at the• Order IRS products online.
end of the call.• Research your tax questions online.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The Walk-in. Many products and services• Search publications online by topic orTaxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- are available on a walk-in basis.keyword.pendent organization within the IRS whose em-
ployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)
• Products. You can walk in to many posteconomic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- published in the last few years.
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick uping tax problems that have not been resolved • Figure your withholding allowances using certain forms, instructions, and publica-through normal channels, or who believe that an the withholding calculator online at tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, groceryIRS system or procedure is not working as it www.irs.gov/individuals. stores, copy centers, city and county gov-should.
• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed us- ernment offices, credit unions, and officeYou can contact the TAS by calling the TAS ing our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) supply stores have a collection of productstoll-free case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or Assistant. available to print from a CD or photocopyTTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi-
from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRSble for assistance. You can also call or write to • Sign up to receive local and national tax
offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-your local taxpayer advocate, whose phone news by email.
enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenuenumber and address are listed in your local • Get information on starting and operating Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-telephone directory and in Publication 1546, a small business. able for research purposes.Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your Voice at the
IRS. You can file Form 911, Request for Tax- • Services. You can walk in to your localpayer Advocate Service Assistance (And Appli- Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-Phone. Many services are available bycation for Taxpayer Assistance Order), or ask an ness day for personal, face-to-face taxphone.IRS employee to complete it on your behalf. For help. An employee can explain IRS letters,more information, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. request adjustments to your tax account,• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-Taxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP). The or help you set up a payment plan. If youtions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur-TAP listens to taxpayers, identifies taxpayer is- need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-rent-year forms, instructions, andsues, and makes suggestions for improving IRS tions about how the tax law applies to yourpublications, and prior-year forms and in-services and customer satisfaction. If you have individual tax return, or you’re more com-structions. You should receive your ordersuggestions for improvements, contact the TAP, fortable talking with someone in person,within 10 days.toll free at 1-888-912-1227 or go to visit your local Taxpayer Assistance• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withwww.improveirs.org. Center where you can spread out youryour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040. records and talk with an IRS representa-Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs).
• Solving problems. You can get tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-LITCs are independent organizations that pro-
face-to-face help solving tax problems essary, but if you prefer, you can call yourvide low income taxpayers with representation
every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-in federal tax controversies with the IRS for free local Center and leave a message re-
sistance Centers. An employee can ex-or for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide questing an appointment to resolve a tax
plain IRS letters, request adjustments totax education and outreach for taxpayers with account issue. A representative will callyour account, or help you set up a pay-limited English proficiency or who speak English you back within 2 business days to sched-ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-as a second language. Publication 4134, Low ule an in-person appointment at your con-tance Center for an appointment. To findIncome Taxpayer Clinic List, provides informa- venience. To find the number, go to www.the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-tion on clinics in your area. It is available at www. irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phonetacts or look in the phone book underirs.gov or at your local IRS office. book under United States Government, In-United States Government, Internal Reve-
ternal Revenue Service.nue Service.
Free tax services. To find out what services • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessare available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Mail. You can send your order forto TTY/TDD equipment, call forms, instructions, and publications toFree Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to the address below. You should receivepublications and describes other free tax infor- order forms and publications. a response within 10 days after your request ismation services, including tax education and
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis- received.assistance programs and a list of TeleTax top-
ten to pre-recorded messages coveringics.
various tax topics.Accessible versions of IRS published prod- National Distribution Center
ucts are available on request in a variety of P.O. Box 8903• Refund information. To check the status of
alternative formats for people with disabilities. your 2007 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
Page 40 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 41 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CD/DVD for tax products. You can CD for small businesses. Publication
order Publication 1796, IRS Tax Prod- 3207, The Small Business Resource Appendices
ucts CD/DVD, and obtain: Guide CD for 2007, is a must for every
small business owner or any taxpayer about to There are sixteen appendices.• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub- start a business. This year’s CD includes: Appendices A-1 through A-6 show the leaselications.
inclusion amounts that you may need to report if• Helpful information, such as how to pre-• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica- you leased a car (other than a truck or van, or anpare a business plan, find financing fortions. electric car) for 30 days or more. The tables areyour business, and much more.
numbered.• Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD - • All the business tax forms, instructions, Appendices B-1 through B-5 show the leaseShips with the final release. and publications needed to successfully inclusion amounts that you may need to report if
• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and manage a business. you leased a truck or van.
finding aid. Appendices C-1 through C-5 show the lease• Tax law changes for 2007.
inclusion amounts that you may need to report if• Tax law frequently asked questions. • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and you leased an electric car before 2007.
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re- finding aid. If any of these apply to you, use the appendix
sponse system. for the year you first leased the car. (See chapter• Web links to various government agen-
4.)• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax cies, business associations, and IRS orga-
forms. nizations.
• Internal Revenue Bulletins. • “Rate the Product” survey—your opportu-
nity to suggest changes for future editions.• Toll-free and email technical support.
• A site map of the CD to help you navigate• The CD which is released twice during the the pages of the CD with ease.year.
– The first release will ship the beginning • An interactive “Teens in Biz” module that
of January 2008. gives practical tips for teens about starting
– The final release will ship the beginning their own business, creating a business
of March 2008. plan, and filing taxes.
Purchase the CD/DVD from National Techni- An updated version of this CD is available
cal Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/ each year in early April. You can get a free copy
cdorders for $35 (no handling fee) or call by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.
1-877-CDFORMS (1-877-233-6767) toll free to gov/smallbiz.
buy the CD/DVD for $35 (plus a $5 handling
fee). Price is subject to change.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 41

Page 42 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1998 through 2002
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 1998 Beginning in 1999 Beginning in 2000 Beginning in 2001 Beginning in 2002
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 15,500 $ 15,800 $ 0 $ 6 $ 12 $ 11 $ 6
15,800 16,100 14 14 23 22 13
16,100 16,400 25 23 34 33 19
16,400 16,700 36 32 45 44 26
16,700 17,000 47 41 57 56 31
17,000 17,500 62 53 72 70 40
17,500 18,000 80 68 91 89 50
18,000 18,500 99 82 109 107 61
18,500 19,000 117 96 128 125 72
19,000 19,500 136 111 147 143 82
19,500 20,000 154 126 166 162 93
20,000 20,500 173 140 185 181 103
20,500 21,000 191 155 204 199 114
21,000 21,500 209 169 222 217 123
21,500 22,000 228 183 241 236 134
22,000 23,000 255 206 269 263 150
23,000 24,000 292 235 306 300 171
24,000 25,000 329 264 345 337 192
25,000 26,000 366 293 381 373 213
26,000 27,000 403 322 419 410 234
27,000 28,000 439 351 457 447 255
28,000 29,000 477 380 494 484 276
29,000 30,000 513 410 532 520 296
30,000 31,000 550 439 570 557 318
31,000 32,000 587 468 607 594 338
32,000 33,000 624 497 645 631 360
33,000 34,000 661 527 683 667 381
34,000 35,000 697 556 720 705 402
35,000 36,000 735 585 757 741 422
36,000 37,000 771 614 795 778 443
37,000 38,000 808 643 833 815 464
38,000 39,000 845 672 870 851 485
39,000 40,000 882 702 908 888 506
40,000 41,000 919 731 946 925 527
41,000 42,000 955 760 983 962 549
42,000 43,000 992 789 1,021 998 570
43,000 44,000 1,028 819 1,058 1,036 590
44,000 45,000 1,066 848 1,095 1,072 611
45,000 46,000 1,102 877 1,133 1,108 632
46,000 47,000 1,140 906 1,171 1,145 653
47,000 48,000 1,176 935 1,208 1,183 674
48,000 49,000 1,213 964 1,246 1,219 695
49,000 50,000 1,250 993 1,284 1,256 717
50,000 51,000 1,286 1,023 1,321 1,293 737
51,000 52,000 1,324 1,052 1,359 1,330 758
52,000 53,000 1,360 1,081 1,396 1,366 779
53,000 54,000 1,398 1,110 1,433 1,403 800
54,000 55,000 1,434 1,140 1,471 1,439 821
55,000 56,000 1,471 1,169 1,508 1,476 842
56,000 57,000 1,508 1,198 1,546 1,514 863
57,000 58,000 1,544 1,227 1,584 1,550 883
58,000 59,000 1,582 1,256 1,621 1,586 905
59,000 60,000 1,619 1,285 1,659 1,624 925
60,000 62,000 1,674 1,329 1,715 1,678 957
62,000 64,000 1,747 1,387 1,790 1,752 999
64,000 66,000 1,821 1,446 1,865 1,825 1,041
66,000 68,000 1,894 1,504 1,941 1,900 1,083
68,000 70,000 1,968 1,563 2,016 1,972 1,125
70,000 72,000 2,042 1,621 2,092 2,047 1,166
72,000 74,000 2,115 1,679 2,166 2,120 1,208
74,000 76,000
2 2,189 1,738 2,241 2,193 1,250
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,501, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 1998, Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-1 CB 930)
For 1999, Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56)
For 2000, Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 274)
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732)
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450)
If you leased an electric car, use Appendix B.
Page 42 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 43 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,000 $ 18,500 $ 10  $ 22 $ 33 $ 40 $ 45
18,500 19,000 12 26 39 46 53
19,000 19,500 14 30 44 53 61
19,500 20,000 15 34 50 59 69
20,000 20,500 17 37 56 66 77
20,500 21,000 19 41 61 73 85
21,000 21,500 21 45 66 80 92
21,500 22,000 22 49 72 87 100
22,000 23,000 25 54 81 97 111
23,000 24,000 28 62 92 110 127
24,000 25,000 32 70 103 123 143
25,000 26,000 35 77 115 137 158
26,000 27,000 39 85 125 151 174
27,000 28,000 42 92 137 165 189
28,000 29,000 46 100 148 178 204
29,000 30,000 49 108 159 191 221
30,000 31,000 52 115 171 205 236
31,000 32,000 56 123 182 218 251
32,000 33,000 59 130 194 231 267
33,000 34,000 63 138 204 245 283
34,000 35,000 66 146 215 259 298
35,000 36,000 70 153 227 272 314
36,000 37,000 73 161 238 285 330
37,000 38,000 77 168 249 299 346
38,000 39,000 80 176 260 313 361
39,000 40,000 83 184 272 326 376
40,000 41,000 87 191 283 340 391
41,000 42,000 90 199 294 353 407
42,000 43,000 94 206 306 366 423
43,000 44,000 97 214 317 380 438
44,000 45,000 101 221 328 394 454
45,000 46,000 104 229 339 407 470
46,000 47,000 108 236 351 420 486
47,000 48,000 111 244 362 434 501
48,000 49,000 115 251 374 447 516
49,000 50,000 118 259 385 460 532
50,000 51,000 121 267 396 474 548
51,000 52,000 125 274 407 488 563
52,000 53,000 128 282 418 502 578
53,000 54,000 132 289 430 515 594
54,000 55,000 135 297 441 528 610
55,000 56,000 139 304 452 542 626
56,000 57,000 142 312 463 556 641
57,000 58,000 146 320 474 569 656
58,000 59,000 149 327 486 582 672
59,000 60,000 152 335 497 596 688
60,000 62,000 158 346 514 616 711
62,000 64,000 165 361 537 642 743
64,000 66,000 171 377 559 670 773
66,000 68,000 178 392 581 697 805
68,000 70,000 185 407 604 724 835
70,000 72,000 192 422 626 751 867
72,000 74,000 199 437 649 778 898
74,000 76,000 206 452 672 804 930
76,000 78,000 213 467 694 832 960
78,000 80,000 220 483 716 859 991
80,000 85,000 232 509 756 906 1,046
85,000 90,000 249 547 812 973 1,124
90,000 95,000 266 585 868 1,041 1,202
95,000 100,000
2 284 623 924 1,108 1,280
1 For the tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 43

Page 44 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 17,500 $ 18,000 $ 11  $ 23 $ 33 $ 42 $ 48
18,000 18,500 13 26 40 49 56
18,500 19,000 14 31 46 55 65
19,000 19,500 16 35 51 63 73
19,500 20,000 18 39 57 70 81
20,000 20,500 20 43 63 77 89
20,500 21,000 22 47 69 84 97
21,000 21,500 23 51 75 91 106
21,500 22,000 25 55 81 98 114
22,000 23,000 28 61 90 109 126
23,000 24,000 32 69 102 123 142
24,000 25,000 35 77 114 137 159
25,000 26,000 39 85 126 151 176
26,000 27,000 43 93 137 166 192
27,000 28,000 46 101 149 180 209
 28,000 29,000 50 109 161 194 225
29,000 30,000 54 116 174 208 242
30,000 31,000 57 125 185 223 257
31,000 32,000 61 133 197 237 274
32,000 33,000 64 141 209 251 291
33,000 34,000 68 149 221 265 307
34,000 35,000 72 157 232 280 323
35,000 36,000 75 165 244 294 340
36,000 37,000 79 173 256 308 357
37,000 38,000 83 181 268 322 373
38,000 39,000 86 189 280 337 389
39,000 40,000 90 197 292 351 405
40,000 41,000 94 204 304 365 423
41,000 42,000 97 213 316 379 438
42,000 43,000 101 221 327 394 455
43,000 44,000 105 228 340 408 471
44,000 45,000 108 237 351 422 488
45,000 46,000 112 245 363 436 504
46,000 47,000 115 253 375 451 520
47,000 48,000 119 261 387 464 538
48,000 49,000 123 269 398 479 554
49,000 50,000 126 277 411 493 570
50,000 51,000 130 285 422 508 586
51,000 52,000 134 292 435 522 603
52,000 53,000 137 301 446 536 619
53,000 54,000 141 309 458 550 636
54,000 55,000 145 316 471 564 652
55,000 56,000 148 325 482 578 669
56,000 57,000 152 333 493 593 685
57,000 58,000 155 341 506 607 701
58,000 59,000 159 349 517 622 718
59,000 60,000 163 357 529 636 734
60,000 62,000 168 369 547 657 759
62,000 64,000 176 384 571 686 792
64,000 66,000 183 401 594 714 825
66,000 68,000 190 417 618 743 857
68,000 70,000 197 433 642 771 890
70,000 72,000 205 448 666 800 923
72,000 74,000 212 465 689 828 956
74,000 76,000 219 481 713 856 990
76,000 78,000 227 496 738 884 1,022
78,000 80,000 234 513 760 914 1,055
80,000 85,000 247 540 803 963 1,112
85,000 90,000 265 580 862 1,035 1,194
90,000 95,000 283 621 921 1,105 1,277
95,000 100,000
2 301 661 980 1,177 1,359
1 For the tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
Page 44 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 45 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,200 $ 15,500 $ 3  $ 6 $ 9 $ 11 $ 13
15,500 15,800 4 9 13 17 19
15,800 16,100 5 12 18 22 26
16,100 16,400 7 15 22 27 32
16,400 16,700 8 18 27 32 39
16,700 17,000 9 21 32 38 44
17,000 17,500 11 25 38 45 52
17,500 18,000 14 30 45 54 63
18,000 18,500 16 35 52 63 73
18,500 19,000 18 40 60 72 83
19,000 19,500 20 46 67 80 94
19,500 20,000 23 50 75 90 104
20,000 20,500 25 55 82 99 115
20,500 21,000 27 61 89 108 125
21,000 21,500 30 65 97 117 135
21,500 22,000 32 70 105 125 146
22,000 23,000 35 78 116 139 161
23,000 24,000 40 88 131 156 182
24,000 25,000 44 98 146 175 202
25,000 26,000 49 108 161 192 223
26,000 27,000 54 118 175 211 244
27,000 28,000 58 128 191 228 265
28,000 29,000 63 138 205 247 285
29,000 30,000 67 149 220 264 306
30,000 31,000 72 159 234 283 326
31,000 32,000 77 168 250 300 348
32,000 33,000 81 179 265 318 367
33,000 34,000 86 189 279 336 389
34,000 35,000 90 199 295 354 409
35,000 36,000 95 209 309 372 430
36,000 37,000 99 219 325 389 451
37,000 38,000 104 229 339 408 471
38,000 39,000 109 239 354 426 491
39,000 40,000 113 249 370 443 512
40,000 41,000 118 259 384 462 533
41,000 42,000 122 269 400 479 554
42,000 43,000 127 279 414 497 575
43,000 44,000 132 289 429 515 595
44,000 45,000 136 299 444 533 616
45,000 46,000 141 309 459 551 636
46,000 47,000 145 320 473 569 657
47,000 48,000 150 329 489 587 678
48,000 49,000 154 340 504 604 699
49,000 50,000 159 350 518 623 719
50,000 51,000 164 360 533 640 740
51,000 52,000 168 370 548 659 760
52,000 53,000 173 380 563 676 781
53,000 54,000 177 390 578 694 802
54,000 55,000 182 400 593 712 823
55,000 56,000 186 410 609 729 844
56,000 57,000 191 420 623 748 864
57,000 58,000 196 430 638 766 884
58,000 59,000 200 440 653 784 905
59,000 60,000 205 450 668 802 925
60,000 62,000 212 465 691 828 957
62,000 64,000 221 485 721 864 998
64,000 66,000 230 506 750 900 1,039
66,000 68,000 239 526 780 935 1,081
68,000 70,000 248 546 810 971 1,123
70,000 72,000 258 566 839 1,008 1,163
72,000 74,000 267 586 869 1,044 1,204
74,000 76,000 276 606 899 1,079 1,247
76,000 78,000 285 626 930 1,114 1,288
78,000 80,000 294 646 960 1,150 1,329
80,000 85,000 310 682 1,011 1,213 1,402
85,000 90,000 333 732 1,086 1,303 1,504
90,000 95,000 356 782 1,161 1,392 1,608
95,000 100,000
2 379 832 1,236 1,481 1,712
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759).
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 45

Page 46 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,200 $ 15,500 $ 4  $ 6 $ 10 $ 10 $ 10
15,500 15,800 6 10 16 18 18
15,800 16,100 8 15 22 25 28
16,100 16,400 9 19 29 33 36
16,400 16,700 11 24 35 40 45
16,700 17,000 13 28 42 48 53
17,000 17,500 16 34 50 58 66
17,500 18,000 19 41 61 71 80
18,000 18,500 23 48 71 84 95
18,500 19,000 26 55 82 96 110
19,000 19,500 29 62 93 109 125
19,500 20,000 32 70 103 122 139
20,000 20,500 36 76 114 135 154
20,500 21,000 39 84 124 148 168
21,000 21,500 42 91 135 160 184
21,500 22,000 45 98 146 173 198
22,000 23,000 50 109 162 192 220
23,000 24,000 57 123 183 218 250
24,000 25,000 63 138 204 243 279
25,000 26,000 70 152 225 269 309
26,000 27,000 76 166 247 294 339
27,000 28,000 83 181 268 319 368
28,000 29,000 90 195 289 345 397
29,000 30,000 96 209 311 371 426
30,000 31,000 103 223 332 397 455
31,000 32,000 109 238 353 422 485
32,000 33,000 116 252 374 448 515
33,000 34,000 122 267 395 473 545
34,000 35,000 129 281 417 498 574
35,000 36,000 135 295 439 523 604
36,000 37,000 142 309 460 549 633
37,000 38,000 148 324 481 575 662
38,000 39,000 155 338 502 601 691
39,000 40,000 161 353 523 626 721
40,000 41,000 168 367 545 651 750
41,000 42,000 175 381 566 677 780
42,000 43,000 181 396 587 702 810
43,000 44,000 188 410 608 728 839
44,000 45,000 194 424 630 753 869
45,000 46,000 201 438 651 779 898
46,000 47,000 207 453 672 805 927
47,000 48,000 214 467 694 830 956
48,000 49,000 220 482 715 855 986
49,000 50,000 227 496 736 881 1,016
50,000 51,000 233 510 758 906 1,045
51,000 52,000 240 525 778 932 1,075
52,000 53,000 246 539 800 958 1,104
53,000 54,000 253 553 821 984 1,133
54,000 55,000 259 568 842 1,009 1,163
55,000 56,000 266 582 864 1,034 1,192
56,000 57,000 273 596 885 1,060 1,221
57,000 58,000 279 611 906 1,085 1,251
58,000 59,000 286 625 927 1,111 1,281
59,000 60,000 292 639 949 1,136 1,311
60,000 62,000 302 661 981 1,174 1,354
62,000 64,000 315 690 1,023 1,225 1,413
64,000 66,000 328 718 1,066 1,276 1,473
66,000 68,000 341 747 1,108 1,328 1,531
68,000 70,000 354 776 1,151 1,378 1,590
70,000 72,000 367 804 1,194 1,429 1,649
72,000 74,000 380 833 1,236 1,481 1,707
74,000 76,000 393 862 1,278 1,532 1,767
76,000 78,000 407 890 1,321 1,583 1,825
78,000 80,000 420 919 1,363 1,634 1,884
80,000 85,000 443 969 1,438 1,723 1,987
85,000 90,000 475 1,041 1,544 1,851 2,135
90,000 95,000 508 1,112 1,651 1,978 2,282
95,000 100,000
2 541 1,184 1,757 2,106 2,429
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645).
Page 46 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 47 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2007
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,000 $ 15,800 $ 2  $ 5 $ 11 $ 11 $ 13
15,800 16,100 4 10 17 19 22
16,100 16,400 6 14 24 28 31
16,400 16,700 9 18 31 35 41
16,700 17,000 11 23 37 43 50
17,000 17,500 13 29 46 54 62
17,500 18,000 17 37 56 68 77
18,000 18,500 20 44 68 81 93
18,500 19,000 24 51 80 94 108
19,000 19,500 27 59 90 108 124
19,500 20,000 30 67 101 121 139
20,000 20,500 34 74 113 134 154
20,500 21,000 37 82 123 148 170
21,000 21,500 41 89 135 161 185
21,500 22,000 44 97 146 174 201
22,000 23,000 49 108 163 194 224
23,000 24,000 56 123 185 221 255
24,000 25,000 63 138 207 248 285
25,000 26,000 70 153 229 275 316
26,000 27,000 77 168 251 302 347
27,000 28,000 83 183 274 328 378
28,000 29,000 90 198 296 355 409
29,000 30,000 97 213 318 382 439
30,000 31,000 104 228 341 408 470
31,000 32,000 111 243 363 435 501
32,000 33,000 118 258 385 461 532
33,000 34,000 125 273 407 488 563
34,000 35,000 131 288 430 515 593
35,000 36,000 138 303 452 542 624
36,000 37,000 145 318 474 568 656
37,000 38,000 152 333 496 595 686
38,000 39,000 159 348 519 621 717
39,000 40,000 166 363 541 648 748
40,000 41,000 172 378 564 674 779
41,000 42,000 179 393 586 701 810
42,000 43,000 186 408 608 728 840
43,000 44,000 193 423 630 755 871
44,000 45,000 200 438 652 782 902
45,000 46,000 207 453 674 809 933
46,000 47,000 213 468 697 835 964
47,000 48,000 220 483 719 862 995
48,000 49,000 227 498 742 888 1,025
49,000 50,000 234 513 764 915 1,056
50,000 51,000 241 528 786 942 1,087
51,000 52,000 278 543 808 969 1,117
52,000 53,000 254 558 831 995 1,148
53,000 54,000 261 573 853 1,022 1,179
54,000 55,000 268 588 875 1,049 1,210
55,000 56,000 275 603 897 1,076 1,241
56,000 57,000 282 618 920 1,102 1,271
57,000 58,000 289 633 942 1,128 1,303
58,000 59,000 296 648 964 1,155 1,334
59,000 60,000 302 663 987 1,182 1,364
60,000 62,000 313 685 1,020 1,222 1,411
62,000 64,000 326 716 1,064 1,276 1,472
64,000 66,000 340 746 1,108 1,329 1,534
66,000 68,000 354 775 1,154 1,382 1,595
68,000 70,000 367 806 1,198 1,435 1,657
70,000 72,000 381 836 1,242 1,489 1,719
72,000 74,000 395 865 1,287 1,543 1,780
74,000 76,000 408 896 1,331 1,596 1,842
76,000 78,000 422 926 1,376 1,649 1,903
78,000 80,000 436 955 1,421 1,703 1,965
80,000 85,000 460 1,008 1,498 1,796 2,074
85,000 90,000 494 1,083 1,610 1,929 2,228
90,000 95,000 528 1,158 1,721 2,063 2,382
95,000 100,000
2 562 1,233 1,833 2,196 2,536
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2007-30 (2007-18 IRB 1104).
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 47

Page 48 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 7  $ 14 $ 22 $ 24 $ 29
19,000 19,500 8 18 27 32 36
19,500 20,000 10 22 33 38 44
20,000 20,500 12 26 38 45 52
20,500 21,000 14 29 44 52 60
21,000 21,500 15 34 49 59 67
21,500 22,000 17 37 55 66 75
22,000 23,000 20 43 63 76 86
23,000 24,000 23 51 74 89 102
24,000 25,000 27 58 86 102 118
25,000 26,000 30 66 97 116 133
26,000 27,000 33 73 109 129 149
27,000 28,000 37 81 119 143 165
28,000 29,000 40 89 130 157 180
29,000 30,000 44 96 142 170 196
30,000 31,000 47 104 153 183 212
31,000 32,000 51 111 165 196 227
32,000 33,000 54 119 176 210 242
33,000 34,000 58 126 187 224 258
34,000 35,000 61 134 198 238 273
35,000 36,000 65 141 210 251 289
36,000 37,000 68 149 221 264 305
37,000 38,000 71 157 232 278 320
38,000 39,000 75 164 243 292 336
39,000 40,000 78 172 254 305 352
40,000 41,000 82 179 266 318 367
41,000 42,000 85 187 277 332 383
42,000 43,000 89 194 289 345 398
43,000 44,000 92 202 300 358 414
44,000 45,000 96 209 311 373 429
45,000 46,000 99 217 322 386 445
46,000 47,000 102 225 333 400 460
47,000 48,000 106 232 345 413 476
48,000 49,000 109 240 356 426 492
49,000 50,000 113 247 368 439 507
50,000 51,000 116 255 379 453 523
51,000 52,000 120 263 389 467 538
52,000 53,000 123 270 401 480 554
53,000 54,000 127 278 412 493 570
54,000 55,000 130 285 424 507 585
55,000 56,000 134 293 434 521 601
56,000 57,000 137 301 445 534 617
57,000 58,000 140 308 457 548 632
58,000 59,000 144 316 468 561 647
59,000 60,000 147 323 480 575 663
60,000 62,000 152 335 496 595 687
62,000 64,000 159 350 519 622 717
64,000 66,000 166 365 542 648 749
66,000 68,000 173 380 564 676 780
68,000 70,000 180 395 587 702 811
70,000 72,000 187 410 609 730 842
72,000 74,000 194 426 631 757 873
74,000 76,000 201 441 654 783 905
76,000 78,000 208 456 676 811 935
78,000 80,000 215 471 699 837 967
80,000 85,000 227 497 739 885 1,021
85,000 90,000 244 535 795 952 1,099
90,000 95,000 261 573 851 1,020 1,177
95,000 100,000
2 278 611 907 1,088 1,254
1 For the tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
Page 48 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 49 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,000 $ 18,500 $ 7  $ 15 $ 21 $ 26 $ 30
18,500 19,000 9 18 28 33 38
19,000 19,500 11 22 34 40 47
19,500 20,000 13 26 39 48 55
20,000 20,500 14 31 45 54 63
20,500 21,000 16 35 51 61 72
21,000 21,500 18 38 58 68 80
21,500 22,000 20 42 63 76 88
22,000 23,000 23 48 72 87 100
23,000 24,000 26 57 83 101 117
24,000 25,000 30 64 96 115 133
25,000 26,000 34 72 108 129 149
26,000 27,000 37 81 119 143 166
27,000 28,000 41 88 132 157 183
28,000 29,000 44 97 143 172 198
29,000 30,000 48 104 155 187 215
30,000 31,000 52 112 167 201 231
31,000 32,000 55 121 178 215 248
32,000 33,000 59 128 191 229 264
33,000 34,000 63 136 203 243 281
34,000 35,000 66 145 214 257 298
35,000 36,000 70 152 227 271 314
36,000 37,000 74 160 238 286 330
37,000 38,000 77 169 249 301 346
38,000 39,000 81 176 262 314 364
39,000 40,000 84 185 273 329 379
40,000 41,000 88 192 286 343 396
41,000 42,000 92 200 298 357 412
42,000 43,000 95 209 309 371 429
43,000 44,000 99 216 322 385 445
44,000 45,000 103 224 333 400 462
45,000 46,000 106 233 345 413 479
46,000 47,000 110 240 357 428 495
47,000 48,000 114 248 369 442 511
48,000 49,000 117 257 380 457 527
49,000 50,000 121 264 393 471 544
50,000 51,000 125 272 404 486 560
51,000 52,000 128 280 417 499 577
52,000 53,000 132 288 428 514 593
53,000 54,000 135 297 440 527 610
54,000 55,000 139 304 452 542 626
55,000 56,000 143 312 464 556 643
56,000 57,000 146 321 475 571 659
57,000 58,000 150 328 488 585 675
58,000 59,000 154 336 499 600 691
59,000 60,000 157 345 511 613 708
60,000 62,000 163 356 529 635 733
62,000 64,000 170 372 553 663 766
64,000 66,000 177 389 576 692 798
66,000 68,000 185 404 600 720 832
68,000 70,000 192 420 624 749 864
70,000 72,000 199 436 648 777 897
72,000 74,000 206 453 671 805 931
74,000 76,000 214 468 695 834 963
76,000 78,000 221 484 719 863 996
78,000 80,000 228 501 742 891 1,029
80,000 85,000 241 528 785 940 1,087
85,000 90,000 259 568 844 1,012 1,168
90,000 95,000 277 609 902 1,084 1,250
95,000 100,000
2 296 648 962 1,155 1,333
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 49

Page 50 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-3. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,700 $ 17,000 $ 3  $ 6 $ 8 $ 10 $ 11
17,000 17,500 4 10 14 17 20
17,500 18,000 7 15 21 26 30
18,000 18,500 9 20 29 35 40
18,500 19,000 11 25 37 43 51
19,000 19,500 14 30 44 52 61
19,500 20,000 16 35 51 62 71
20,000 20,500 18 40 59 71 81
20,500 21,000 20 45 67 79 92
21,000 21,500 23 50 74 88 103
21,500 22,000 25 55 81 98 113
22,000 23,000 28 63 92 111 129
23,000 24,000 33 73 107 129 149
24,000 25,000 38 83 122 147 169
25,000 26,000 42 93 137 165 190
26,000 27,000 47 103 152 183 210
27,000 28,000 51 113 167 201 231
28,000 29,000 56 123 182 218 253
29,000 30,000 60 133 197 237 272
30,000 31,000 65 143 212 254 294
31,000 32,000 70 153 227 272 314
32,000 33,000 74 163 242 290 335
33,000 34,000 79 173 257 308 355
34,000 35,000 83 184 271 326 376
35,000 36,000 88 193 287 344 397
36,000 37,000 93 203 302 361 418
37,000 38,000 97 214 316 380 438
38,000 39,000 102 223 332 397 459
39,000 40,000 106 234 346 415 480
40,000 41,000 111 244 361 433 500
41,000 42,000 115 254 376 451 521
42,000 43,000 120 264 391 469 542
43,000 44,000 125 274 406 487 562
44,000 45,000 129 284 421 505 583
45,000 46,000 134 294 436 523 603
46,000 47,000 138 304 451 541 624
47,000 48,000 143 314 466 558 645
48,000 49,000 148 324 481 576 666
49,000 50,000 152 334 496 594 687
50,000 51,000 157 344 511 612 707
51,000 52,000 161 355 525 630 728
52,000 53,000 166 364 541 648 748
53,000 54,000 170 375 555 666 769
54,000 55,000 175 385 570 684 789
55,000 56,000 180 394 586 701 811
56,000 57,000 184 405 600 720 830
57,000 58,000 189 415 615 737 852
58,000 59,000 193 425 630 755 873
59,000 60,000 198 435 645 773 893
60,000 62,000 205 450 667 800 924
62,000 64,000 214 470 697 836 966
64,000 66,000 223 490 727 872 1,007
66,000 68,000 232 510 757 908 1,048
68,000 70,000 241 531 786 944 1,089
70,000 72,000 251 550 817 979 1,131
72,000 74,000 260 571 846 1,015 1,172
74,000 76,000 269 591 876 1,051 1,213
76,000 78,000 278 611 906 1,087 1,254
78,000 80,000 287 631 936 1,123 1,296
80,000 85,000 303 666 989 1,185 1,368
85,000 90,000 326 717 1,063 1,274 1,472
90,000 95,000 349 767 1,137 1,365 1,575
95,000 100,000
2 372 817 1,212 1,454 1,678
1 For the last year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759).
Page 50 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 51 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-4. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,700 $ 17,000 $ 4  $ 8 $ 12 $ 14 $ 16
17,000 17,500 6 14 20 24 29
17,500 18,000 9 21 31 37 43
18,000 18,500 13 28 42 49 58
18,500 19,000 16 36 52 62 72
19,000 19,500 19 43 63 75 87
19,500 20,000 23 50 73 88 102
20,000 20,500 26 57 84 101 116
20,500 21,000 29 64 95 113 131
21,000 21,500 32 72 105 126 146
21,500 22,000 36 78 116 139 161
22,000 23,000 41 89 132 158 183
23,000 24,000 47 104 153 183 213
24,000 25,000 54 118 174 209 242
25,000 26,000 60 132 196 235 271
26,000 27,000 67 146 217 261 300
27,000 28,000 73 161 238 286 330
28,000 29,000 80 175 260 311 359
29,000 30,000 86 190 281 336 389
30,000 31,000 93 204 302 362 418
31,000 32,000 99 219 323 388 447
32,000 33,000 106 233 344 413 478
33,000 34,000 112 247 366 439 506
34,000 35,000 119 261 387 465 536
35,000 36,000 125 276 408 490 566
36,000 37,000 132 290 430 515 595
37,000 38,000 139 304 451 541 624
38,000 39,000 145 319 472 566 654
39,000 40,000 152 333 493 592 684
40,000 41,000 158 347 515 618 712
41,000 42,000 165 362 536 642 743
42,000 43,000 171 376 557 669 772
43,000 44,000 178 390 579 694 801
44,000 45,000 184 405 600 719 831
45,000 46,000 191 419 621 745 860
46,000 47,000 197 434 642 770 890
47,000 48,000 204 448 663 796 919
48,000 49,000 210 462 685 822 948
49,000 50,000 217 476 707 847 977
50,000 51,000 224 490 728 872 1,008
51,000 52,000 230 505 749 898 1,037
52,000 53,000 237 519 770 924 1,066
53,000 54,000 243 534 791 949 1,096
54,000 55,000 250 548 813 974 1,125
55,000 56,000 256 563 833 1,000 1,155
56,000 57,000 263 577 855 1,025 1,184
57,000 58,000 269 591 877 1,051 1,213
58,000 59,000 276 605 898 1,077 1,243
59,000 60,000 282 620 919 1,102 1,272
60,000 62,000 292 641 951 1,141 1,316
62,000 64,000 305 670 994 1,191 1,375
64,000 66,000 318 699 1,036 1,242 1,435
66,000 68,000 331 728 1,078 1,293 1,494
68,000 70,000 344 756 1,121 1,345 1,552
70,000 72,000 358 784 1,164 1,395 1,612
72,000 74,000 371 813 1,206 1,447 1,670
74,000 76,000 384 842 1,249 1,497 1,729
76,000 78,000 397 871 1,291 1,548 1,788
78,000 80,000 410 899 1,334 1,600 1,846
80,000 85,000 433 949 1,409 1,688 1,950
85,000 90,000 465 1,021 1,515 1,816 2,098
90,000 95,000 498 1,093 1,621 1,944 2,244
95,000 100,000
2 531 1,164 1,728 2,071 2,392
1 For the last year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645).
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 51

Page 52 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-5. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2007
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,400 $ 16,700 $ 2  $ 4 $ 8 $ 10 $ 11
16,700 17,000 4 9 15 17 21
17,000 17,500 6 15 24 28 33
17,500 18,000 10 22 35 42 48
18,000 18,500 13 30 46 55 64
18,500 19,000 17 37 57 69 79
19,000 19,500 20 45 68 82 94
19,500 20,000 24 52 80 95 109
20,000 20,500 27 60 90 109 125
20,500 21,000 30 67 102 122 141
21,000 21,500 34 75 113 135 156
21,500 22,000 37 82 124 149 171
22,000 23,000 42 94 140 169 194
23,000 24,000 49 109 163 195 225
24,000 25,000 56 123 186 222 256
25,000 26,000 63 138 208 249 286
26,000 27,000 70 153 230 276 317
27,000 28,000 77 168 252 302 349
28,000 29,000 83 184 274 329 379
29,000 30,000 90 199 296 356 410
30,000 31,000 97 214 318 383 440
31,000 32,000 104 228 342 408 472
32,000 33,000 111 243 364 435 503
33,000 34,000 118 258 386 462 534
34,000 35,000 125 273 408 489 564
35,000 36,000 131 289 430 515 595
36,000 37,000 138 304 452 542 626
37,000 38,000 145 318 475 569 657
38,000 39,000 152 333 497 596 688
39,000 40,000 159 348 520 622 718
40,000 41,000 166 363 542 649 749
41,000 42,000 172 379 563 676 780
42,000 43,000 179 397 586 702 811
43,000 44,000 186 409 608 729 842
44,000 45,000 193 423 631 756 872
45,000 46,000 200 438 653 783 903
46,000 47,000 207 453 675 810 934
47,000 48,000 213 469 697 836 965
48,000 49,000 220 484 719 863 996
49,000 50,000 227 499 741 890 1,026
50,000 51,000 234 514 764 916 1,057
51,000 52,000 241 528 787 943 1,088
52,000 53,000 248 543 809 969 1,119
53,000 54,000 254 559 831 996 1,150
54,000 55,000 261 574 853 1,023 1,180
55,000 56,000 268 589 875 1,050 1,211
56,000 57,000 275 604 897 1,076 1,243
57,000 58,000 282 618 920 1,103 1,273
58,000 59,000 289 633 943 1,129 1,304
59,000 60,000 296 648 965 1,156 1,335
60,000 62,000 306 671 998 1,196 1,381
62,000 64,000 319 701 1,043 1,249 1,443
64,000 66,000 333 731 1,087 1,303 1,504
66,000 68,000 347 761 1,131 1,357 1,566
68,000 70,000 361 791 1,176 1,410 1,627
70,000 72,000 374 821 1,221 1,463 1,689
72,000 74,000 388 851 1,265 1,517 1,751
74,000 76,000 402 881 1,309 1,570 1,813
76,000 78,000 415 911 1,354 1,624 1,874
78,000 80,000 429 941 1,399 1,676 1,936
80,000 85,000 453 994 1,476 1,770 2,044
85,000 90,000 487 1,069 1,587 1,904 2,198
90,000 95,000 521 1,144 1,699 2,037 2,352
95,000 100,000
2 555 1,219 1,810 2,171 2,506
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2007-30 (2007-18 IRB 1104).
Page 52 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 53 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1998 through 2002
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 1998 Beginning in 1999 Beginning in 2000 Beginning in 2001 Beginning in 2002
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 46,000 $ 47,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 12
47,000 48,000 23 30 36 46 33
48,000 49,000 60 59 66 83 54
49,000 50,000 96 88 95 119 74
50,000 51,000 134 118 124 157 96
51,000 52,000 171 147 153 193 117
52,000 53,000 207 177 183 230 138
53,000 54,000 244 205 211 266 159
54,000 55,000 281 253 240 304 180
55,000 56,000 318 264 270 340 201
56,000 57,000 355 292 299 377 222
57,000 58,000 391 322 328 414 242
58,000 59,000 428 351 357 451 264
59,000 60,000 465 380 387 487 284
60,000 62,000 520 424 430 543 316
62,000 64,000 594 483 489 616 358
64,000 66,000 668 541 547 690 400
66,000 68,000 741 600 606 763 442
68,000 70,000 815 658 664 837 484
70,000 72,000 888 716 723 910 525
72,000 74,000 962 775 781 984 567
74,000 76,000 1,035 833 838 1,057 609
76,000 78,000 1,109 891 897 1,131 652
78,000 80,000 1,183 949 955 1,204 693
80,000 85,000 1,312 1,052 1,058 1,332 767
85,000 90,000 1,496 1,198 1,204 1,517 871
90,000 95,000 1,681 1,343 1,350 1,701 976
95,000 100,000
2 1,865 1,489 1,495 1,885 1,081
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 1998, Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6)
For 1999, Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56)
For 2000, Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 274)
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732)
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450)
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 53

Page 54 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-2. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 53,000 $ 54,000 $ 28  $ 60 $ 90 $ 108 $ 124
54,000 55,000 31 68 101 121 140
55,000 56,000 35 76 112 134 156
56,000 57,000 38 83 124 148 171
57,000 58,000 42 91 134 162 187
58,000 59,000 45 98 146 175 203
59,000 60,000 49 106 157 188 218
60,000 62,000 54 117 174 209 241
62,000 64,000 61 132 197 235 273
64,000 66,000 68 147 219 263 304
66,000 68,000 75 163 241 290 334
68,000 70,000 81 178 264 317 366
70,000 72,000 88 193 287 343 397
72,000 74,000 95 208 309 371 428
74,000 76,000 102 223 332 397 460
76,000 78,000 109 239 353 425 491
78,000 80,000 116 254 376 452 521
80,000 85,000 128 280 416 499 576
85,000 90,000 145 318 472 566 655
90,000 95,000 162 356 528 634 732
95,000 100,000
2 180 394 584 701 810
Appendix C-3. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 53,000 $ 54,000 $ 33  $ 72 $ 106 $ 127 $ 147
54,000 55,000 37 79 118 142 164
55,000 56,000 40 88 130 155 180
56,000 57,000 44 96 141 170 197
57,000 58,000 48 103 154 184 213
58,000 59,000 51 112 165 199 229
59,000 60,000 55 120 177 213 245
60,000 62,000 60 132 195 234 270
62,000 64,000 68 147 219 263 303
64,000 66,000 75 164 242 291 336
66,000 68,000 82 180 266 320 369
68,000 70,000 90 195 290 348 402
70,000 72,000 97 211 314 377 435
72,000 74,000 104 228 337 405 468
74,000 76,000 111 244 361 434 500
76,000 78,000 119 259 385 462 534
78,000 80,000 126 275 409 491 566
80,000 85,000 139 303 451 540 624
85,000 90,000 157 343 510 612 706
90,000 95,000 175 384 569 682 788
95,000 100,000
3 193 424 628 754 870
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
3 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
Page 54 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 55 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-4. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 45,000 $ 46,000 $ 5  $ 11 $ 18 $ 21 $ 25
46,000 47,000 10 21 33 39 45
47,000 48,000 14 31 48 57 66
48,000 49,000 19 41 63 75 86
49,000 50,000 23 52 77 93 107
50,000 51,000 28 61 93 111 127
51,000 52,000 33 71 108 129 148
52,000 53,000 37 82 122 147 169
53,000 54,000 42 92 137 164 190
54,000 55,000 46 102 152 183 210
55,000 56,000 51 112 167 200 231
56,000 57,000 55 122 182 218 252
57,000 58,000 60 132 197 236 272
58,000 59,000 65 142 212 254 293
59,000 60,000 69 152 227 272 314
60,000 62,000 76 167 250 298 345
62,000 64,000 85 187 280 334 386
64,000 66,000 94 208 309 370 427
66,000 68,000 104 227 339 406 469
68,000 70,000 113 247 369 442 510
70,000 72,000 122 268 398 478 551
72,000 74,000 131 288 428 514 593
74,000 76,000 140 308 458 550 634
76,000 78,000 149 328 489 585 675
78,000 80,000 159 348 518 621 717
80,000 85,000 175 383 571 683 789
85,000 90,000 197 434 645 773 892
90,000 95,000 220 484 720 863 995
95,000 100,000
2 243 534 795 952 1,099
Appendix C-5. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease 1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 45,000 $ 46,000 $ 4  $ 8 $ 11 $ 12 $ 12
46,000 47,000 10 22 33 37 42
47,000 48,000 17 36 54 63 72
48,000 49,000 24 51 74 89 101
49,000 50,000 30 65 96 114 131
50,000 51,000 37 79 118 139 160
51,000 52,000 43 94 139 165 189
52,000 53,000 50 108 160 190 219
53,000 54,000 56 123 181 216 248
54,000 55,000 63 137 202 242 277
55,000 56,000 69 151 224 267 307
56,000 57,000 76 165 245 293 337
57,000 58,000 82 180 266 318 367
58,000 59,000 89 194 288 343 396
59,000 60,000 95 209 309 369 425
60,000 62,000 105 230 341 407 470
62,000 64,000 118 259 383 459 528
64,000 66,000 131 288 425 510 587
66,000 68,000 144 316 469 560 646
68,000 70,000 158 345 510 612 705
70,000 72,000 171 373 554 662 764
72,000 74,000 184 402 596 713 823
74,000 76,000 197 431 638 765 881
76,000 78,000 210 459 682 815 940
78,000 80,000 223 488 724 866 1,000
80,000 85,000 246 538 798 956 1,103
85,000 90,000 278 610 905 1,083 1,250
90,000 95,000 311 682 1,011 1,211 1,397
95,000 100,000
3 344 753 1,118 1,338 1,544
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759).
3 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645).
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 55

Page 56 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Casualty and theft losses: FL
Cars ....................... 1 6‘‘Hours of service’’ limits.... 1 2 Fair market value of car ..... 2 4 Lavish or extravagant
Depreciation ............. 2 4Form 2106 ................. 3 3 expenses ...............5 ,  1 2Farmers:
Charitable organizations:50% limit on meals ........... 5 Leasing a car ................ 2 4Form 1040, Schedule F ..... 2 7
Benefit events for .......... 1 2 Luxury private boxes atFederal crime investigations or
Sports events to benefit ..... 1 2 entertainment events ...... 1 2prosecutions:A Clean-fuel cars .............. 2 1 Luxury water travel ........... 8Federal employees engagedAccountable plans ....... 29-32 Club dues ................... 1 3 i n ........................ 4Accounting to employer ..... 2 9 Comments on publication .... 2 Federal rate for per diem .....6 , MAdequate accounting ........ 2 9 29Commuting expenses ....... 1 5 MACRS (Modified AcceleratedIndependent contractors .... 3 2 Fee-basis officials ........... 3 4Conventions ..............9 ,  1 0 Cost RecoveryAdequate records ........... 2 5 Fees you pay ................ 1 5Country clubs ............... 1 3 System) ................... 2 0Advertising: 2007 chart (Table 4-1) ...... 2 1Fixed and variable rate (FAVR)Cruise ships ................. 9Car display ................ 1 5 allowance ................. 3 0 Main place of business orExpenses .................. 1 1 work ....................... 3Form 1040, Schedule C ...... 2 7Signs, display racks, or D Married taxpayers:Form 1040, Schedule F ..... 2 7 ,promotional material to be Daily business mileage and Performing artists .......... 3 428used on recipient’s business expense log (Table Meal expenses ............... 5Form 2106 ......... 17, 28, 32-35premises ................ 1 3 6-2) ....................... 3 5 50% limit ................... 1 1Form 2106-EZ ........... 32, 35Airline clubs ................ 1 3 Depreciation of car  (See also Determination of applicabilityForm 4562 ................... 2 8Allocating costs ....... 4 ,  12, 27 Section 179 deductions) .... 1 6 (Figure A) ............. 1 1Form 4797 ................... 2 3Allowance  (See Adjustment for using standard Exceptions ............... 1 1Reimbursements) Form W-2:mileage rate ............. 2 5 Actual cost method .......... 5Armed forces: Employer-providedBasis ...................... 1 8 Form 2106 ................. 3 3Assigned overseas .......... 3 vehicles ................. 2 8 Major cities with higherSales taxes .............. 1 6Assistance  (See Tax help) Reimbursement of personal allowances ............... 6Unrecovered basis ....... 2 3 expenses ................ 2 8Associated Standard meal allowance ....5 ,Casualty or theft, effect ..... 2 4entertainment ............. 1 0 Statutory employees ........ 2 8 6, 30Deduction .............. 16, 25Athletic clubs ............... 1 3 Free tax services ............ 4 0 Meals,Excess depreciation ........ 2 3
entertainment-related ..... 1 2Modified Accelerated Cost
Mileage rate  (See StandardRecovery SystemB G mileage rate)(MACRS) ................ 2 0Basis of car  (See also Gifts ........................ 1 3 Military  (See Armed forces)Section 179 deduction ...... 2 2Depreciation of car) ........ 1 8 $25 limit ................... 1 3 Missing children, photographsTrade-in, effect ......... 19, 25Bona fide business Combining for recordkeeping of .......................... 2Trucks and vans ........... 2 1purpose .................... 5 purposes ................ 2 7 Modified Accelerated CostDirectly-relatedBox seats at entertainment Reporting requirements ..... 2 8 Recovery Systementertainment .............. 9events .................... 1 2 Golf clubs ................... 1 3 (MACRS) .................. 2 0Disabled employees:Business travel .............. 6 Gulf Opportunity Zone: 2007 chart (Table 4-1) ...... 2 1Impairment-related workOutside U.S. ................ 7 Qualified property .......... 1 8 More information  (See Tax help)expenses ................ 3 4Business use of car ......... 1 6
Special depreciationDocumentary evidence ...... 2 5More-than-50%-use
allowance ................ 1 8test. ..................... 1 8 N
Qualified business use ...... 1 8 Nonaccountable plans ...... 3 2E HEmployer-provided
OC Hauling tools ................ 1 5vehicles ................... 1 6
Office in the home ........... 1 5Canceled checks: Help  (See Tax help)Reporting requirements ..... 2 8
As evidence of business Officials paid on feeHigh-low rate method ....... 3 0Entertainment
expenses ................ 2 5 basis ...................... 3 4Home office ................. 1 5expenses ............ 9-12, 13
Car expenses ............ 15-24 Overseas travel:50% limit ................... 1 1 Hotel clubs .................. 1 3
Actual expenses ........... 1 6 Conventions ................ 9Determination of applicability
Allowances for .......... 29-31 Meal allowance ............. 6(Figure A) ............. 1 1
Business and personal Part of trip outside U.S. ...... 6IAssociated test ............. 1 0u s e...................... 1 6 Impairment-related workDeductible .............. 12-13Combining expenses ....... 2 7 expenses ................. 3 4Summary (Table 2-1) ..... 1 2 PDisposition of car ........... 2 4 Incidental expenses:Directly-related test .......... 9 Parking fees ............. 15, 16Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) Defined ..................... 5Entertainment, defined ...... 1 2 Per diem allowances ..... 29-31allowance ................ 3 0 Gifts ....................... 1 3Form 2106 ................. 3 3 Defined .................... 2 8Form 2106 ................. 3 2
No meals, incidentals Federal rate for ............. 2 9Tickets (See Tickets)Leasing a car .............. 2 4
only ...................... 5 Performing artists ........... 3 4Entertainment facilities:Mileage rate (See Standard
Income-producingExpenses for use of ........ 1 3 Personal property taxes ..... 1 6mileage rate)
property ................... 2 8Taxes paid on car .......... 1 6 Estimates of expenses ...... 2 5 Personal trips ................ 6
Incomplete records .......... 2 6Traffic tickets ............... 1 6 Outside U.S. ................ 8Exceptions to the 50%
Indefinite job assignment .... 4Car pools ................... 1 5 Limit ...................... 1 1 Placed in service, cars ...... 1 8
Independent contractors .... 3 2Car rentals .................. 2 4 Excess reimbursements  (See Probationary work period .... 4
Form 2106 ................. 3 3 Reimbursements) Interest on car loans ........ 1 6 Proving business
Car, defined ................. 1 7 Extravagant expenses .....5 ,  1 2 Itinerants ..................... 3 purpose ................... 2 6
Page 56 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 57 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Public transportation: Traveling more than 100 miles Proving expenses (Table Travel expenses ............ 2 - 9
Outside of U.S. travel ........ 7 from home ............... 3 3 5-1) ..................... 2 5 Another individual
Reporting reimbursements accompanyingPublications  (See Tax help) Returning excess
(Table 6-1) ............... 3 0 taxpayer .................. 4reimbursements ........... 3 1
Transportation expenses, Away from home ............ 3Rural mail carriers .......... 1 5R determination of deductibility Deductible ................ 4 - 9Recordkeeping (Figure B) ............ 13, 14 Summary of (Tablerequirements ........... 25-27 S Travel expenses, determination 1-1) .................... 5Adequate records .......... 2 5 Section 179 deduction: of deductibility (Table Defined ..................... 3Daily business mileage and Amended return ............ 1 7 1-1) ...................... 5 Going home on days off ..... 4expense log (Table Deduction .................. 1 7 Weekly travel expense and In U.S. ...................... 66-2) ..................... 3 5 Limits ...................... 1 7 entertainment record (Table Lodging ..................... 6Destroyed records .......... 2 7 Self-employed persons ...... 1 1 6-3) ..................... 3 5 Luxury water travel .......... 8How to prove expenses (Table Reporting requirements ..... 2 7 Outside U.S. ................ 7Tax help ..................... 4 05-1) ..................... 2 5 Skyboxes ................... 1 2 Travel to family home ........ 3Tax home, determinationIncomplete records ......... 2 6 Special depreciation Trucks and vans:of .......................... 3Reimbursed expenses ...... 2 7 allowance ................. 1 8 Depreciation ............... 2 1Taxpayer Advocate .......... 4 0Sampling to prove Transportation workers ..... 1 2Spouse, expenses for .....4 ,  1 3 Temporary jobexpenses ................ 2 7 Transportation workers’Standard meal allowance .....5 , assignments ............... 4Separating and combining expenses ................. 66, 30 Temporary work location .... 1 4expenses ................ 2 7 TTY/TDD information ........ 4 0Standard mileage rate .... 2 ,  1 5 , Tickets .................. 12, 13Three-year period of Two places of work .......... 1 430 Season or series tickets .... 2 7retention ................. 2 7
Depreciation adjustment for Traffic violations ............ 1 6Weekly travel expense and
using .................... 2 5entertainment record (Table Tools: UForm 2106 ................. 3 36-3) ..................... 3 5 Hauling tools ............... 1 5 UnclaimedStatutory employees ........ 2 8Reimbursements ......... 28-32 Trade association reimbursements ........... 2 8
Suggestions forAccountable plans .......... 2 9 meetings .................. 1 2 Unions:publication ................. 2Excess ................ 31, 32 Trade-in of car .......... 19, 25 Trips from union hall to place of
Form 2106 ................. 3 3 work ..................... 1 5Traffic tickets ............... 1 6
Nonaccountable plans ...... 3 2 T Unrecovered basis of car .... 2 3Transients .................... 3Nondeductible expenses .... 2 9 Tables and figures: TransportationPersonal expenses ......... 2 8 50% limit determination (Figure expenses .............. 14-25 VRecordkeeping ............. 2 7 A ) ....................... 1 1 Car expenses ........... 15-24 Volunteers ................... 2Reporting (Table 6-1) ....... 3 0 Daily business mileage and Deductible (Figure B) ...... 1 3 ,Unclaimed ................. 2 8 expense log (Table 14Reporting W6-2) ..................... 3 5 five or more cars ........... 1 6requirements ........... 27-35 Entertainment expenses, Weekly travel expense andForm 2106 ................. 3 3Per diem or car determination of deductibility entertainment record (TableTransportation workers ......6 ,allowance ................ 3 0 (Table 2-1) ............... 1 2 6-3) ....................... 3 512Reimbursements ........ 28-32 Modified Accelerated Cost Travel advance  (See also ■Reservists: Recovery System (MACRS) Reimbursements) ...... 28, 31Transportation 2007 chart (Table 4-1) .... 2 1
expenses ................ 1 4
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 57

Page 58 of 58 of Publication 463 9:31 - 20-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2008
Highlights of 2007 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2008
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
ServiceU.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Que es lo que Debemos Saber sobre
el Proceso de Cobro del IRS
594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (Hope and Lifetime Learning
Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Page 58 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help