Contents
Important Changes ............................1
Important Reminders.........................2
Introduction ........................................2
Who Must File.....................................2
Who Should File.................................4
Filing Status........................................4
Exemptions .........................................7
Standard Deduction...........................16
2000 Standard Deduction Tables ...17
How To Get Tax Help.........................18
Index ....................................................20
Important Changes
Who must file.Generally, the amount of in-
come you can receive before you must file a
return has increased. Table 1 shows the filing
requirements for most taxpayers.
Exemption amount. The amount you can
deduct for each exemption has increased
from $2,750 in 1999 to $2,800 in 2000.
Exemption phaseout. You will lose all or
part of the benefit of your exemptions if your
adjusted gross income is above a certain
amount. The amount at which this phaseout
begins depends on your filing status. For
2000, the phaseout begins at $96,700 for
married persons filing separately; $128,950
for single individuals; $161,150 for heads of
household; and at $193,400 for married per-
sons filing jointly. See Phaseout of Ex-
emptions, later.
Standard deduction. The standard de-
duction for taxpayers who do not itemize de-
ductions on Schedule A of Form 1040 is
higher in 2000 than it was in 1999. The
amount depends on your filing status. The
2000 Standard Deduction Tables are shown
later as Tables 7, 8, and 9.
Itemized deductions.The amount you can
deduct for itemized deductions is limited if
your adjusted gross income is more than
$128,950 ($64,475 if you are married filing
separately). See Who Should Itemize, later.
Paid preparer authorization.Beginning with
your return for 2000, you can check a box and
authorize the IRS to discuss your tax return
with the paid preparer who signed it. If you
check the “Yes” box in the signature area of
your return, the IRS can call your paid
preparer to answer any questions that may
arise during the processing of your return.
Also, you are authorizing your paid preparer
to perform certain actions. See your income
tax package for details.
Photographs of missing children. The
Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner
with the National Center for Missing and Ex-
ploited Children. Photographs of missing
children selected by the Center may appear
in this publication on pages that would other-
wise be blank. You can help bring these
Department
of the
Treasury
Internal
Revenue
Service
Publication 501
Cat. No. 15000U
Exemptions,
Standard
Deduction,
and Filing
Information
For use in preparing
2000 Returns


children home by looking at the photographs
and calling 1–800–THE–LOST (1–800–843–
5678) if you recognize a child.
Important Reminders
Social security number for dependents.
You must list either the social security number
(SSN), individual taxpayer identification num-
ber (ITIN), or adoption taxpayer identification
number (ATIN) of every person for whom you
claim an exemption.
If you do not list the dependent's SSN,
ITIN, or ATIN, the exemption may be disal-
lowed. See Social Security Numbers for De-
pendents, later.
Election to report child's unearned income
on parent's return.You may be able to in-
clude your child's interest and dividend in-
come on your tax return by using Form 8814,
Parents' Election To Report Child's Interest
and Dividends. If you choose to do this, your
child will not file a return.
Introduction
This publication discusses some tax rules that
affect every person who may have to file a
federal income tax return. It answers some
basic questions: who must file; who should
file; what filing status to use; how many ex-
emptions to claim; and the amount of the
standard deduction.
The first section of this publication ex-
plains who must file an income tax return. If
you have little or no gross income, reading
this section will help you decide if you have
to file a return.
The second section is about who should
file a return. Reading this section will help you
decide if you should file a return, even if you
are not required to do so.
The third section helps you determine
which filing status to use. Filing status is
important in determining whether you must
file a return, your standard deduction, and
your tax rate. It also helps determine what
credits you may be entitled to.
The fourth section discusses exemptions,
which reduce your taxable income. The dis-
cussions include the social security number
requirement for dependents, the rules for
multiple support agreements, and the rules for
divorced or separated parents.
The fifth section gives the rules and dollar
amounts for the standard deduction — a
benefit for taxpayers who do not itemize their
deductions. This section also discusses the
standard deduction for taxpayers who are
blind or age 65 or older, and special rules for
dependents. In addition, this section should
help you decide whether you would be better
off taking the standard deduction or itemizing
your deductions.
The last section explains how to get tax
help from the IRS.
This publication is for U.S. citizens and
resident aliens only. If you are a resident alien
for the entire year, you must follow the same
tax rules that apply to U.S. citizens. The rules
to determine if you are a resident or nonresi-
dent alien are discussed in chapter 1 of Pub-
lication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Table 1. 2000 Filing Requirements Chart for Most Taxpayers
IF your
filing status
is . . .
AND at the
end of 2000
you were . . .*
THEN file a return if
your gross income
was at least . . .**
Single under 65 $7,200
65 or older $8,300
Head of household under 65 $9,250
65 or older $10,350
Married, filing jointly*** 65 or older (one spouse) $13,800
65 or older (both spouses) $14,650
under 65 (both spouses) $12,950
Married, filing separately any age $2,800
Qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child
under 65 $10,150
65 or older $11,000
* If you turned age 65 on January 1, 2001, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2000.
** Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and
services that is not exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United
States (even if you may exclude part or all of it). Do not include social security benefits unless
you are married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time in 2000.
*** If you didn’t live with your spouse at the end of 2000 (or on the date your spouse died) and
your gross income was at least $2,800, you must file a return regardless of your age.
Nonresident aliens. If you were a nonresi-
dent alien at any time during the year, the
rules and tax forms that apply to you may be
different from those that apply to U.S. citi-
zens. See Publication 519.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and
your suggestions for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web
site at www.irs.gov/help/email2.html.
You can write to us at the following ad-
dress:
Internal Revenue Service
Technical Publications Branch
W:CAR:MP:FP:P
1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would
include your daytime phone number, includ-
ing the area code, in your correspondence.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554559 Survivors, Executors, and Admin-
istrators
/H18554929 Tax Rules for Children and De-
pendents
Form (and Instructions)
/H185541040X Amended U.S. Individual Income
Tax Return
/H185542848 Power of Attorney and Declaration
of Representative
/H185548332 Release of Claim to Exemption for
Child of Divorced or Separated
Parents
/H185548814 Parents' Election To Report
Child's Interest and Dividends
Who Must File
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether
you must file a federal income tax return de-
pends upon your gross income, your filing
status, your age, and whether you are a de-
pendent. For details, see Table 1 and Table
2. You must also file if one of the situations
described in Table 3 applies. The filing re-
quirements apply even if you owe no tax.
You may have to pay a penalty if you are
required to file a return but fail to. If you
wilfully fail to file a return, you may be subject
to criminal prosecution.
For information on what form to use —
Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 1040
— see the instructions in your tax package.
Gross income. Gross income is all income
you receive in the form of money, goods,
property, and services that is not exempt from
tax. If you are married and live with your
spouse in a community property state, half
of any income defined by state law as com-
munity income may be considered yours. For
a list of community property states, see
Community property states under Married
Filing Separately, later.
Self-employed persons. If you are self-
employed in a business that provides services
(where products are not a factor), your gross
income from that business is the gross re-
ceipts. If you are self-employed in a business
involving manufacturing, merchandising, or
mining, your gross income from that business
is the total sales minus the cost of goods sold.
Page 2

To this figure, you add any income from in-
vestments and from incidental or outside op-
erations or sources.
TIP
You must file Form 1040 if you owe
any self-employment tax.
Filing status.Your filing status generally
depends on whether you are single or mar-
ried. In some cases, it depends on other fac-
tors as well. Whether you are single or mar-
ried is determined as of the last day of your
tax year, which is December 31 for most tax-
payers. Filing status is discussed in detail
later in this publication.
Age. Age is a factor in determining if you
must file a return only if you are 65 or older
at the end of your tax year. You are consid-
ered to be age 65 for 2000 if your 65th birth-
day is on or before January 1, 2001.
Filing Requirements
for Most Taxpayers
You must file a return if your gross income for
the year was at least the amount shown on
the appropriate line in Table 1. Dependents
should see Table 2 instead.
Deceased Persons
You must file an income tax return for a de-
cedent (a person who died) if:
1) You are the surviving spouse, executor,
administrator, or legal representative,
and 
2) The decedent met the filing requirements
at the time of his or her death. 
For more information, see Final Return for
Decedent in Publication 559.
U.S. Citizens or
Residents Living Abroad
For purposes of determining whether you
must file a return, you must include in your
gross income all of the income you earned
abroad, including any income you can ex-
clude under the foreign earned income ex-
clusion. For more information on special tax
rules that may apply to you, see Publication
54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident
Aliens Abroad.
Residents of Puerto Rico
Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a
resident of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S.
income tax return if you meet the income re-
quirements. This is in addition to any legal
requirement you may have to file an income
tax return with Puerto Rico.
If you are a resident of Puerto Rico for the
whole year, your U.S. gross income does not
include income from sources within Puerto
Rico. However, include in your U.S. gross in-
come any income you received for your ser-
vices as an employee of the United States
or any U.S. agency. If you receive income
from Puerto Rican sources that is not subject
to U.S. tax, you must reduce your standard
deduction. This also reduces the amount of
income you can have before you must file a
U.S. income tax return.
For more information, see Publication 570,
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income From
U.S. Possessions.
Table 2. 2000 Filing Requirements for Dependents
If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see if you
must file a return.
Single dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
See Exemptions for Dependents to find out if you are a dependent.
In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest and dividends. Earned income
includes wages, tips, and taxable scholarship and fellowship grants.
Caution: If your gross income was $2,800 or more, you usually cannot be claimed as a
dependent unless you were under age 19 or a student under age 24. For details, see 4.
Gross Income Test under Dependency Tests.
PLUS● $700 or
● Your earned income (up to $4,150) plus $250
$1,100 ($2,200 if 65
or older and blind)
The larger of: This amount:
Married dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
PLUS● $700 or $850 ($1,700 if 65
or older and blind)
The larger of: This amount:
● Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and
itemizes deductions.
● Your earned income was over $4,525 ($5,375 if 65 or older and blind),
● Your unearned income was over $1,550 ($2,400 if 65 or over and blind),
● Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and
itemizes deductions.
● Your gross income was more than—
● Your unearned income was over $1,800 ($2,900 if 65 or over and blind),
● Your gross income was more than—
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
● Your earned income was over $5,500 ($6,600 if 65 or older and blind),
● Your earned income was more than $4,400.
● Your unearned income was more than $700.
● Your gross income was more than the larger of—
● $700, or
● Your earned income (up to $4,150) plus $250.
● Your earned income was more than $3,675.
● Your unearned income was more than $700.
● Your gross income was more than the larger of—
● $700, or
● Your earned income (up to $3,425) plus $250.
● Your earned income (up to $3,425) plus $250
Individuals With Income From
U.S. Possessions
If you had income from Guam, the Common-
wealth of Northern Mariana Islands, American
Samoa, or the Virgin Islands, special rules
may apply when determining whether you
must file a U.S. federal income tax return. In
addition, you may have to file a return with the
individual island government. See Publica-
tion 570, for more information.
Dependents
A person who is a dependent may still have
to file a return. This depends on whether the
dependent has earned income, unearned in-
come, or both. For details, see Table 2. A
dependent may also have to file if one of the
situations described inTable 3 applies.
Responsibility of parent.If a dependent
child who must file an income tax return can-
not file it for any reason, such as age, a par-
ent, guardian, or other legally responsible
person must file it for the child. If the child
cannot sign the return, the parent or guardian
must sign the child's name followed by the
words “By (signature), parent (or guardian),
for minor child.”
Earned income. This is salaries, wages,
professional fees, and other amounts re-
ceived as pay for work you actually perform.
Earned income (only for purposes of filing
requirements and the standard deduction)
also includes any part of a scholarship that
you must include in your gross income. See
Publication 520, Scholarships and Fellow-
ships, for more information on taxable and
nontaxable scholarships.
Child's earnings. Amounts a child earns
by performing services are his or her gross
income. This is true even if under local law
the child's parents have the right to the
earnings and may actually have received
them. If the child does not pay the tax due
on this income, the parent is liable for the tax.
Unearned income. This is income such as
interest, dividends, and capital gains. Trust
distributions of interest, dividends, capital
gains, and survivor annuities are considered
unearned income also.
Page 3

Election to report child's unearned income
on parent's return. You may be able to in-
clude your child's interest and dividend in-
come on your tax return. If you choose to do
this, your child will not have to file a return.
However, all of the following conditions must
be met.
1) Your child was under age 14 on January
1, 2001.
2) Your child is required to file a return for
2000 unless you make this election. 
3) Your child had gross income only from
interest and dividends (including Alaska
Permanent Fund Dividends). 
4) The interest and dividend income was
less than $7,000. 
5) No estimated tax payment was made for
2000 and no 1999 overpayment was
applied to 2000 under your child's name
and social security number. 
6) No federal income tax was withheld from
your child's income under the backup
withholding rules. 
7) You are the parent whose return must
be used when making the election to
report your child's unearned income.
For more information, see Parent's
Election To Report Child's Interest and Divi-
dends in Publication 929, and Form 8814.
Other Situations
You may have to file a tax return even if your
gross income is less than the amount shown
in Table 1 or Table 2 for your filing status. See
Table 3 for those other situations when you
must file.
Who Should File
Even if you do not have to file, you should
file a tax return to get money back if one of
the following applies.
1) You had income tax withheld from your
pay.
2) You qualify for the earned income credit.
See Publication 596, Earned Income
Credit (EIC), for more information.
3) You qualify for the additional child tax
credit. See the instructions in your tax
forms package for more information on
this credit.
Filing Status
You use your filing status in determining your
filing requirements, standard deduction (dis-
cussed later), and correct tax. You figure your
correct tax by using the Tax Rate Schedule
or the column in the Tax Table that applies
to your filing status.
You also use your filing status in deter-
mining whether you are eligible to claim cer-
tain other deductions and credits. 
There are five filing statuses:
 Single,
 Married Filing Jointly,
 Married Filing Separately,
Table 3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2000 Return
If any of the four conditions listed below applied to you for 2000, you must file a return.
1. You owe any special taxes, such as:
● Social security and Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer. (See
Publication 531, Reporting Tip Income.)
● Uncollected social security and Medicare or RRTA tax on tips you reported to your
employer. (See Publication 531.)
● Uncollected social security and Medicare or RRTA tax on group-term life insurance.
(See the Form 1040 instructions for line 57.)
● Alternative minimum tax. (See the Form 1040 instructions for line 41.)
● Tax on a qualified retirement plan, including an individual retirement arrangement
(IRA), or on a medical savings account (MSA). (See Publications 590, Individual
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) and 969, Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs). ) But if
you are filing a return only because you owe this tax, you can file Form 5329 by
itself.
● Recapture taxes. (See the Form 1040 instructions for lines 40 and 57.)
2. You received any advance earned income credit (AEIC) payments from your employer.
These payments should be shown in box 9 of your Form W-2. (See Publication 596,
Earned Income Credit.)
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Publication 533,
Self-Employment Tax.)
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled
organization that is exempt from employer social security and Medicare taxes. (See
Publication 533.)
 Head of Household, and
 Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent
Child.
If more than one filing status applies to you,
choose the one that will give you the lowest
tax.
Marital Status
In general, your filing status depends on
whether you are considered unmarried or
married. A marriage means only a legal union
between a man and a woman as husband
and wife.
Unmarried persons. You are considered
unmarried for the whole year if, on the last
day of your tax year, you are unmarried or
legally separated from your spouse under a
divorce or a separate maintenance decree.
State law governs whether you are mar-
ried or legally separated under a divorce or
separate maintenance decree.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced
under a final decree by the last day of the
year, you are considered unmarried for the
whole year. 
Divorce and remarriage.If you obtain a
divorce in one year for the sole purpose of
filing tax returns as unmarried individuals, and
at the time of divorce you intended to and did
remarry each other in the next tax year, you
and your spouse must file as married individ-
uals.
Annulled marriages. If you obtain a
court decree of annulment, which holds that
no valid marriage ever existed, you are con-
sidered unmarried even if you filed joint re-
turns for earlier years. You must file amended
returns (Form 1040X) claiming single or head
of household status for all tax years affected
by the annulment that are not closed by the
statute of limitations for filing a tax return. The
statute of limitations generally does not expire
until 3 years after your original return was
filed.
Head of household or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child. If you are
considered unmarried, you may be able to file
as a head of household or as a qualifying
widow(er) with a dependent child. See Head
of Household and Qualifying Widow(er) With
Dependent Child to see if you qualify.
Married persons. If you are considered
married for the whole year, you and your
spouse can file a joint return, or you can file
separate returns.
Considered married. You are consid-
ered married for the whole year if on the last
day of your tax year you and your spouse
meet any one of the following tests.
1) You are married and living together as
husband and wife.
2) You are living together in a common law
marriage  that is recognized in the state
where you now live or in the state where
the common law marriage began.
3) You are married and living apart, but not
legally separated under a decree of di-
vorce or separate maintenance.
4) You are separated under an interlocutory
(not final) decree of divorce. For pur-
poses of filing a joint return, you are not
considered divorced.
Spouse died during the year. If your
spouse died during the year, you are consid-
ered married for the whole year for filing sta-
tus purposes.
If you did not remarry before the end of the
tax year, you can file a joint return for yourself
and your deceased spouse. For the next 2
years, you may be entitled to the special
benefits described later under Qualifying
Widow(er) With Dependent Child.
If you remarried before the end of the tax
year, you can file a joint return with your new
spouse. Your deceased spouse's filing status
is married filing separately for that year.
Page 4

Married persons living apart.If you live
apart from your spouse and meet certain
tests, you may be considered unmarried. If
this applies to you, you can file as head of
household even though you are not divorced
or legally separated. If you qualify to file as
head of household instead of as married filing
separately, your standard deduction will be
higher. Also, your tax may be lower, and you
may be able to claim the earned income
credit. See Head of Household, later.
Single
Your filing status is single if, on the last day
of the year, you are unmarried or legally
separated from your spouse under a divorce
or separate maintenance decree, and you do
not qualify for another filing status. To deter-
mine your marital status on the last day of the
year, see Marital Status, earlier.
Your filing status may be single if you were
widowed before January 1, 2000, and did not
remarry in 2000. However, you might be able
to use another filing status that will give you
a lower tax. See Head of Household and
Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child,
later, to see if you qualify.
How to file. You can file Form 1040EZ (if you
have no dependents, are under 65 and not
blind, and meet other requirements), Form
1040A, or Form 1040. If you file Form 1040A
or Form 1040, show your filing status as sin-
gle by checking the box on line 1. Use the
Single column of the Tax Table, or Schedule
X of the Tax Rate Schedules, to figure your
tax.
Married Filing Jointly
You can choose married filing jointly as
your filing status if you are married and both
you and your spouse agree to file a joint re-
turn. On a joint return, you report your com-
bined income and deduct your combined al-
lowable expenses.
If you and your spouse decide to file a joint
return, your tax may be lower than your
combined tax for the other filing statuses.
Also, your standard deduction (if you do not
itemize deductions) may be higher, and you
may qualify for tax benefits that do not apply
to other filing statuses. You can file a joint
return even if one of you had no income or
deductions.
TIP
If you and your spouse each have in-
come, you may want to figure your tax
both on a joint return and on separate
returns (using the filing status of married filing
separately). Choose the method that gives
the two of you the lower combined tax.
How to file. If you file as married filing jointly,
you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you
have no dependents, are under 65 and not
blind, and meet other requirements, you can
file Form 1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or
Form 1040A, show this filing status by
checking the box on line 2. Use the Married
filing jointly column of the Tax Table, or
Schedule Y–1 of the Tax Rate Schedules, to
figure your tax.
Spouse died during the year. If your
spouse died during the year, you are consid-
ered married for the whole year and can
choose married filing jointly as your filing
status. See Spouse died during the year,
earlier.
Divorced persons.If you are divorced under
a final decree by the last day of the year, you
are considered unmarried for the whole year
and you cannot choose married filing jointly
as your filing status.
Filing a Joint Return
Both you and your spouse must include all
of your income, exemptions, and deductions
on your joint return.
Accounting period. Both of you must use
the same accounting period, but you can use
different accounting methods.
Joint responsibility.Both of you may be
held responsible, jointly and individually, for
the tax and any interest or penalty due on
your joint return. One spouse may be held
responsible for all the tax due even if all the
income was earned by the other spouse.
Divorced taxpayer. You may be held
jointly and individually responsible for any tax,
interest, and penalties due on a joint return
filed before your divorce. This responsibility
may apply even if your divorce decree states
that your former spouse will be responsible
for any amounts due on previously filed joint
returns.
Relief from joint responsibility.In some
cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint
liability for tax, interest, and penalties on a
joint return for items of the other spouse
which were incorrectly reported on the joint
return. You can ask for relief no matter how
small the liability.
There are three types of relief available.
1) Innocent spouse relief, which applies to
all joint filers.
2) Separation of liability, which applies to
joint filers who are divorced, widowed,
legally separated, or who have not lived
together for the past 12 months.
3) Equitable relief, which applies to all joint
filers who do not qualify for innocent
spouse relief or separation of liability and
to married couples filing separate returns
in community property states.
You must file Form 8857, Request for In-
nocent Spouse Relief (And Separation of Li-
ability and Equitable Relief), to request any
of these kinds of relief. Publication 971, In-
nocent Spouse Relief, explains these kinds
of relief and who may qualify for them.
Signing a joint return. For a return to be
considered a joint return, both husband and
wife must generally sign the return.
Spouse died before signing. If your
spouse died before signing the return, the
executor or administrator must sign the return
for your spouse. If neither you nor anyone
else has yet been appointed as executor or
administrator, you can sign the return for your
spouse and write “Filing as surviving
spouse” in the area where you sign the return.
Spouse away from home. If your spouse
is away from home, you should prepare the
return, sign it, and send it to your spouse to
sign so that it can be filed on time.
Injury or disease prevents signing.If
your spouse cannot sign because of injury or
disease and tells you to sign, you can sign
your spouse's name in the proper space on
the return followed by the words “By (your
name), Husband (or Wife).” Be sure to also
sign in the space provided for your signature.
Attach a dated statement, signed by you, to
the return. The statement should include the
form number of the return you are filing, the
tax year, the reason your spouse cannot sign,
and that your spouse has agreed to your
signing for him or her.
Signing as guardian of spouse.If you
are the guardian of your spouse who is men-
tally incompetent, you can sign the return for
your spouse as guardian.
Spouse in combat zone.If your spouse
is unable to sign the return because he or she
is serving in a combat zone, such as the
Persian Gulf Area or Yugoslavia, or a qual-
ified hazardous duty area (Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, and Macedonia), and
you do not have a power of attorney or other
statement, you can sign for your spouse. At-
tach a signed statement to your return that
explains that your spouse is serving in a
combat zone. For more information on spe-
cial tax rules for persons who are serving in
a combat zone, get Publication 3, Armed
Forces' Tax Guide.
Other reasons spouse cannot sign.If
your spouse cannot sign the joint return for
any other reason, you can sign for your
spouse only if you are given a valid power of
attorney (a legal document giving you per-
mission to act for your spouse). Attach the
power of attorney (or a copy of it) to your tax
return. You can use Form 2848.
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. A
joint return generally cannot be filed if either
spouse is a nonresident alien at any time
during the tax year. However, if one spouse
was a nonresident alien or dual-status alien
who was married to a U.S. citizen or resident
at the end of the year, the spouses can
choose to file a joint return. If you do file a
joint return, you and your spouse are both
treated as U.S. residents for the entire tax
year. See chapter 1 of Publication 519.
Married Filing Separately
You can choose married filing separately
as your filing status if you are married. This
method may benefit you if you want to be re-
sponsible only for your own tax or if this
method results in less tax than a joint return.
If you and your spouse do not agree to file a
joint return, you may have to use this filing
status.
If you live apart from your spouse and
meet certain tests, you may be considered
unmarried and may be able to file as head
of household. This can apply to you even if
you are not divorced or legally separated. If
you qualify to file as head of household, in-
stead of as married filing separately, your tax
may be lower, you may be able to claim the
earned income credit and certain other cred-
its, and your standard deduction will be
higher. The head of household filing status
allows you to choose the standard deduction
even if your spouse chooses to itemize de-
ductions. See Head of Household, later, for
more information.
TIP
Unless you are required to file sepa-
rately, you should figure your tax both
ways (on a joint return and on sepa-
rate returns). This way you can make sure
you are using the method that results in the
lowest combined tax. However, you will gen-
erally pay more combined tax on separate
returns than you would on a joint return be-
cause the tax rate is higher for married per-
sons filing separately.
Page 5

How to file. If you file a separate return, you
generally report only your own income, ex-
emptions, credits, and deductions on your in-
dividual return. You can claim an exemption
for your spouse if your spouse had no gross
income and was not the dependent of another
person. However, if your spouse had any
gross income or was the dependent of
someone else, you cannot claim an ex-
emption for him or her on your separate re-
turn.
If you file as married filing separately, you
can use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select
this filing status by checking the box on line
3 of either form. You must also write your
spouse's social security number and full
name in the spaces provided. Use the Mar-
ried filing separately column of the Tax Table
or Schedule Y–2 of the Tax Rate Schedules
to figure your tax.
Special Rules
Special rules apply if your filing status is
married filing separately.
Community property states. If you live in
Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,
New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or
Wisconsin and file separately, your income
may be considered separate income or com-
munity income for income tax purposes. See
Publication 555, Community Property.
Deductions, credits, and certain income.
If your filing status is married filing separately:
1) You should itemize deductions if your
spouse itemizes deductions, because
you cannot claim the standard de-
duction.
2) You cannot deduct interest paid on a
qualified student loan.
3) You cannot take the credit for child and
dependent care expenses in most in-
stances, and the amount that you can
exclude from income under an employ-
er's dependent care assistance program
is limited to $2,500 (instead of $5,000 if
you filed a joint return).
4) You cannot take the earned income
credit.
5) You cannot exclude any interest income
from qualified U.S. savings bonds that
you used for higher education expenses.
6) You cannot take the credit for the elderly
or the disabled unless you lived apart
from your spouse for the entire year.
7) You cannot take the education credits
(the Hope credit and the lifetime learning
credit).
8) You cannot take the exclusion or credit
for adoption expenses in most instances.
9) You will become subject to the limit on
the child tax credit, the limit on itemized
deductions, and the phaseout of the de-
duction for personal exemptions at in-
come levels that are half of those for a
joint return.
10) You may have to include in income more
of your social security benefits (or any
equivalent railroad retirement benefits)
than you would on a joint return. For in-
formation on social security and railroad
retirement benefits, see Publication 915,
Social Security and Equivalent Railroad
Retirement Benefits.
11) You cannot roll over amounts from a
traditional IRA into a Roth IRA during the
year, unless you did not live with your
spouse at any time during the year.
12) Your capital loss deduction limit is
$1,500 (instead of $3,000 if you filed a
joint return).
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
You may not be able to deduct all or part of
your contributions to a traditional IRA if you
or your spouse were covered by an employee
retirement plan at work during the year. Your
deduction is reduced or eliminated if your in-
come is more than a certain amount. This
amount is much lower for married individuals
who file separately and lived together at any
time during the year. For more information,
see How Much Can I Deduct? in Publication
590, Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) (Including Roth IRAs and Education
IRAs).
Rental activity losses.If you actively par-
ticipated in a passive rental real estate activity
that produces a loss, you generally can de-
duct the loss from your nonpassive income
up to $25,000. This is called a special allow-
ance. However, married persons filing sepa-
rate returns who lived together at any time
during the year cannot claim this special al-
lowance. Married persons filing separate re-
turns who lived apart at all times during the
year are each allowed a $12,500 maximum
special allowance for losses from passive real
estate activities. See Rental Activities in
Publication 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk
Rules.
Joint Return After
Separate Returns
You can change your filing status by filing an
amended return using Form 1040X.
If you or your spouse (or each of you) file
a separate return, you generally can change
to a joint return any time within 3 years from
the due date of the separate return or returns.
This does not include any extensions. A sep-
arate return includes a return filed by you or
your spouse claiming married filing sepa-
rately, single, or head of household filing sta-
tus.
Separate Returns
After Joint Return
Once you file a joint return, you cannot
choose to file separate returns for that year
after the due date of the return.
Exception. A personal representative for a
decedent can change from a joint return
elected by the surviving spouse to a separate
return for the decedent. The personal repre-
sentative has 1 year from the due date of the
return to make the change. See Publication
559 for more information on filing income tax
returns for a decedent.
Head of Household
You may be able to file as head of household
if you meet all of the following requirements.
1) You are unmarried or considered un-
married on the last day of the year.
2) You paid more than half the cost of
keeping up a home for the year.
3) A qualifying person must live with you in
the home for more than half the year
(except for temporary absences, such
as school). However, your dependent
parent does not have to live with you.
See Special rule for parent, later, under
Qualifying Person. A foster child must
live with you all year.
TIP
If you qualify to file as head of
household, your tax rate usually will
be lower than the rates for single or
married filing separately. You will also receive
a higher standard deduction than if you file
as single or married filing separately.
How to file.If you file as head of household,
you can use either Form 1040A or Form
1040. Indicate your choice of this filing status
by checking the box on line 4 of either form.
Use the Head of a household column of the
Tax Table or Schedule Z of the Tax Rate
Schedules, to figure your tax.
Considered Unmarried
You are considered unmarried on the last day
of the tax year if you meet all of the following
tests.
1) You file a separate return.
2) You paid more than half the cost of
keeping up your home for the tax year.
3) Your spouse did not live in your home
during the last 6 months of the tax year.
Your spouse is considered to live in your
home even if he or she is temporarily
absent due to special circumstances.
See Temporary absences, later.
4) Your home was the main home of your
child, stepchild or adopted child for more
than half the year or was the main home
of your foster child for the entire year.
(See Home of qualifying person, later, for
rules applying to a child's birth, death,
or temporary absence during the year.)
5) You must be able to claim an exemption
for the child. However, you can still meet
this test if you cannot claim the ex-
emption only because of one of the three
situations described under Exception on
page 14. The general rules to claim an
exemption for a dependent are explained
later under Exemptions for Dependents.
CAUTION
!
If you were considered married for
part of the year and lived in a com-
munity property state (listed earlier
under Married Filing Separately), special
rules may apply in determining your income
and expenses. See Publication 555 for more
information.
Nonresident alien spouse. You are consid-
ered unmarried for head of household pur-
poses if your spouse was a nonresident alien
at any time during the year and you do not
choose to treat your nonresident spouse as
a resident alien. However, your spouse is not
a qualifying person for head of household
purposes. You must have another qualifying
person and meet the other tests to be eligible
to file as a head of household.
Earned income credit. Even if you are
considered unmarried for head of household
purposes because you are married to a non-
resident alien, you are still considered married
for purposes of the earned income credit
(unless you meet the five tests listed earlier).
You are not entitled to the credit unless you
Page 6

file a joint return with your spouse and meet
other qualifications. See Publication 596 for
more information.
Choice to treat spouse as resident.
You are considered married if you choose to
treat your spouse as a resident alien. See
chapter 1 of Publication 519.
Keeping Up a Home
To qualify for head of household status, you
must pay more than half of the cost of keep-
ing up a home for the year. You can deter-
mine whether you paid more than half of the
cost of keeping up a home by using the Cost
of Keeping Up a Home worksheet, later.
Costs you include. Include in the cost of
upkeep expenses such as rent, mortgage in-
terest, real estate taxes, insurance on the
home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in the
home.
Costs you do not include.Do not include
in the cost of upkeep expenses such as
clothing, education, medical treatment, va-
cations, life insurance, or transportation. Also,
do not include the rental value of a home you
own or the value of your services or those of
a member of your household.
 
Qualifying Person
See Table 4 to see who is a qualifying person.
Any person not described in Table 4  is
not a qualifying person.
Home of qualifying person.Generally, the
qualifying person must live with you for more
than half of the year.
Special rule for parent.You may be el-
igible to file as head of household even if the
parent for whom you can claim an exemption
does not live with you. You must pay more
than half the cost of keeping up a home that
was the main home for the entire year for
your father or mother. You are keeping up a
main home for your father or mother if you
pay more than half the cost of keeping your
parent in a rest home or home for the elderly.
Death or birth. You may be eligible to file
as head of household if the individual who
qualifies you for this filing status is born or
dies during the year. You must have provided
more than half of the cost of keeping up a
home that was the individual's main home for
more than half of the year, or, if less, the pe-
riod during which the individual lived.
Example. You are unmarried. Your
mother, for whom you can claim an ex-
emption, lived in an apartment by herself. She
died on September 2. The cost of the upkeep
of her apartment for the year until her death
was $6,000. You paid $4,000 and your
brother paid $2,000. Your brother made no
other payments towards your mother's sup-
port. Your mother had no income. Because
you paid more than half of the cost of keeping
up your mother's apartment from January 1
until her death, and you can claim an ex-
emption for her, you can file as a head of
household.
Temporary absences.  You and your
qualifying person are considered to live to-
gether even if one or both of you are tempo-
rarily absent from your home due to special
circumstances such as illness, education,
business, vacation, and military service. It
must be reasonable to assume that the ab-
sent person will return to the home after the
temporary absence. You must continue to
keep up the home during the absence.
Qualifying Widow(er)
With Dependent Child
If your spouse died in 2000, you can use
married filing jointly as your filing status for
2000 if you would otherwise qualify to use that
status. The year of death is the last year for
which you can file jointly with your deceased
spouse. See Married Filing Jointly, earlier.
You may be eligible to use qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child as your fil-
ing status for 2 years following the year of
death of your spouse. For example, if your
spouse died in 1999 and you have not re-
married, you may be able to use this filing
status for 2000 and 2001. The rules for using
this filing status are explained in detail here.
This filing status entitles you to use joint
return tax rates and the highest standard de-
duction amount (if you do not itemize de-
ductions). This status does not entitle you to
file a joint return.
How to file. If you file as a qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child, you can use
either Form 1040A or Form 1040. Indicate
your filing status by checking the box on line
5 of either form. Write the year your spouse
died in the space provided on line 5. Use the
Married filing jointly column of the Tax Table
or Schedule Y–1 of the Tax Rate Schedules
to figure your tax.
Eligibility rules.You are eligible to file your
2000 return as a qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child if you meet all of the following
tests.
1) You were entitled to file a joint return with
your spouse for the year your spouse
died. It does not matter whether you ac-
tually filed a joint return. 
2) You did not remarry before the end of
2000. 
3) You have a child, stepchild, adopted
child, or foster child for whom you can
claim an exemption. 
4) You paid more than half of the cost of
keeping up a home that is the main
home for you and that child for the entire
year, except for temporary absences.
See Temporary absences and Keeping
Up a Home, discussed earlier, under
Head of Household.
CAUTION
!
As mentioned earlier, this filing status
is only available for 2 years following
the year of death of your spouse.
Example. John Reed's wife died in 1998.
John has not remarried. He has continued
during 1999 and 2000 to keep up a home for
himself and his child for whom he can claim
an exemption. For 1998 he was entitled to
file a joint return for himself and his deceased
wife. For 1999 and 2000 he can file as a
qualifying widower with a dependent child.
After 2000 he can file as head of household
if he qualifies.
Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as
a qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if
the child who qualifies you for this filing status
is born or dies during the year. You must have
provided more than half of the cost of keeping
up a home that was the child's main home
during the entire part of the year he or she
was alive.
Exemptions
Exemptions reduce your taxable income.
Generally, you can deduct $2,800 for each
exemption you claim in 2000. If you are enti-
tled to two exemptions for 2000, you would
deduct $5,600 ($2,800 × 2). But you may lose
the benefit of part or all of your exemptions if
your adjusted gross income is above a certain
amount. See Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
There are two types of exemptions: per-
sonal exemptions and exemptions for depen-
dents. While these are both worth the same
amount, different rules, discussed later, apply
to each type.
You usually can claim exemptions for
yourself, your spouse, and each person you
can claim as a dependent. If you are entitled
to claim an exemption for a dependent (such
as your child), that dependent cannot claim
a personal exemption on his or her own tax
return.
How to claim exemptions. How you claim
an exemption on your tax return depends on
which form you file.
Form 1040EZ filers. If you file Form
1040EZ, the exemption amount is combined
with the standard deduction and entered on
line 5.
Form 1040A filers. If you file Form
1040A, complete lines 6a through 6d. The
total number of exemptions you can claim is
the total in the box on line 6d. Also complete
line 24 by multiplying the number in the box
on line 6d by $2,800.
Form 1040 filers.If you file Form 1040,
complete lines 6a through 6d. On line 38,
multiply the total exemptions shown in the box
on line 6d by $2,800 and enter the result. If
your adjusted gross income is more than
$96,700, see Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
U.S. citizen or resident. If you are a U.S.
citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada
or Mexico, you may qualify for any of the ex-
emptions discussed here.
Cost of Keeping Up a Home 
Amount
You Total
Paid Cost
Property taxes $ $
Mortgage interest expense
Rent
Utility charges
Upkeep and repairs
Property insurance
Food consumed
on the premises
Other household expenses
Totals $ $
Minus total amount you paid ( )
Amount others paid $
If the total amount you paid is more than the amount
others paid, you meet the requirement of paying
more than half the cost of keeping up the home.
Page 7

Table 4. Who Is a Qualifying Person For Filing as Head of Household?
1
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
Parent, Grandparent, Brother, Sister,
Stepbrother, Stepsister, Stepmother,
Stepfather, Mother-in-law, Father-in-law,
Half brother, Half sister, Brother-in-law,
Sister-in-law, Son-in-law, or
Daughter-in-law
You can claim an exemption for him or her
2
A qualifying person
1
A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2
If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person cannot be a qualifying per son. See Multiple Support
Agreement.
You cannot claim an exemption for him or
her
NOT a qualifying person
Uncle, Aunt, Nephew, or Niece
Child, Grandchild, Stepchild, or Adopted
child
Foster child
5
He or she is related to you by blood and
you can claim an exemption for him or her
2,3
He or she is not related to you by blood
3
You cannot claim an exemption for him or
her
He or she is single
He or she is married, and
 you can claim an
exemption for him or her
2
He or she is married, and  you cannot claim
an exemption for him or her
The child lived with you all year, and you
can claim an exemption for him or her
2
The child did not live with you all year, or you
cannot claim an exemption for him or her
A qualifying person
NOT a qualifying person
A qualifying person
A qualifying person
NOT a qualifying person
4
A qualifying person
NOT a qualifying person
3
You are related by blood to an uncle or aunt if he or she is the brother or sister of your mother or father. You are related by  blood to a nephew or niece if
he or she is the child of your brother or sister.
4
This child is a qualifying person if you could claim an exemption for the child except that the child ’s other parent claims the exemption under the special
rules for a noncustodial parent discussed under Support Test for Divorced or Separated Parents.
5
The term “foster child” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents.
Nonresident aliens.Generally, if you are a
nonresident alien (other than a resident of
Canada or Mexico, or certain residents of
India, Japan, or Korea), you can qualify for
only one personal exemption for yourself. You
cannot claim exemptions for a spouse or de-
pendents.
These restrictions do not apply if you are
a nonresident alien married to a citizen or
resident of the United States and have cho-
sen to be treated as a resident of the United
States.
For information on exemptions if you are
a nonresident alien, see chapter 5 in Publi-
cation 519.
Dual-status taxpayers.If you have been
both a nonresident alien and a resident alien
in the same tax year, you should get Publi-
cation 519 for information on determining your
exemptions.
Personal Exemptions
You are generally allowed one exemption for
yourself and, if you are married, one ex-
emption for your spouse. These are called
personal exemptions.
Your Own Exemption
You can take one exemption for yourself un-
less you can be claimed as a dependent by
another taxpayer.
Single persons.If another taxpayer is enti-
tled to claim you as a dependent, you cannot
take an exemption for yourself. This is true
even if the other taxpayer does not actually
claim your exemption.
Married persons. If you file a joint return,
you can take your own exemption. If you file
a separate return, you can take your own
exemption only if another taxpayer is not en-
titled to claim you as a dependent.
Your Spouse's Exemption
Your spouse is never considered your de-
pendent. You may be able to take one ex-
emption for your spouse only because you
are married.
Joint return. On a joint return, you can claim
one exemption for yourself and one for your
spouse.
Separate return. If you file a separate return,
you can claim the exemption for your spouse
only if your spouse had no gross income
and was not the dependent of another tax-
payer. This is true even if the other taxpayer
does not actually claim your spouse's ex-
emption. This is also true if your spouse is a
nonresident alien.
Death of spouse. If your spouse died during
the year, you can generally claim your
spouse's exemption under the rules just ex-
plained in Joint return and Separate return.
If you remarried during the year, you can-
not take an exemption for your deceased
spouse.
If you are a surviving spouse without gross
income and you remarry in the year your
spouse died, you can be claimed as an ex-
emption on both the final separate return of
your deceased spouse and the separate re-
turn of your new spouse for that year. If you
file a joint return with your new spouse, you
can be claimed as an exemption only on that
return.
Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-
tained a final decree of divorce or separate
maintenance by the end of the year, you
cannot take your former spouse's exemption.
This rule applies even if you provided all of
your former spouse's support.
Exemptions
for Dependents
You are allowed one exemption for each
person you can claim as a dependent.
To claim the exemption for a dependent,
you must meet all five of the dependency
tests discussed later. You can take an ex-
emption for your dependent even if your de-
pendent files a return. But that dependent
cannot claim his or her personal exemption if
you are entitled to do so. However, see Joint
Return Test, later.
Child tax credit.You may be entitled to a
child tax credit for each of your qualifying
children for whom you can claim an ex-
emption. For more information, see the in-
structions in your tax forms package.
Page 8

Child born alive. If your child was born alive
during the year, and the dependency tests are
met, you can take the full exemption. This is
true even if the child lived only for a moment.
State or local law must treat the child as
having been born alive. There must be proof
of a live birth shown by an official document,
such as a birth certificate.
Stillborn child.You cannot claim an ex-
emption for a stillborn child.
Death of dependent. If your dependent died
during the year and otherwise met the de-
pendency tests, you can take an exemption
for your dependent.
Example. Your dependent mother died
on January 15. The five dependency tests are
met. You can take a full exemption for her on
your return.
Housekeepers, maids, or servants.If these
people work for you, you cannot claim ex-
emptions for them.
Dependency Tests
The following five tests must be met for you
to claim an exemption for a dependent.
1. Member of Household or Relationship Test.
2. Citizen or Resident Test.
3. Joint Return Test.
4. Gross Income Test.
5. Support Test.
1. Member of Household or
 Relationship Test
To meet this test, a person must either:
1) Live with you for the entire year as a
member of your household, or
2) Be related to you in one of the ways
listed later under Relatives who do not
have to live with you.
If at any time during the year the person was
your spouse, that person cannot be your de-
pendent. However, see Personal Exemptions,
earlier.
Temporary absences. A person lives with
you as a member of your household even if
either (or both) of you are temporarily absent
due to special circumstances. Temporary ab-
sences due to special circumstances include
absences because of illness, education,
business, vacation, and military service.
If the person is placed in a nursing home
for an indefinite period of time to receive
constant medical care, the absence is con-
sidered temporary.
Death or birth.A person who died during the
year, but was a member of your household
until death, will meet the member of house-
hold test. The same is true for a child who
was born during the year and was a member
of your household for the rest of the year. The
test is also met if a child would have been a
member except for any required hospital stay
following birth.
Local law violated.A person does not meet
the member of household test if at any time
during your tax year the relationship between
you and that person violates local law.
Relatives who do not have to live with you.
A person related to you in any of the following
ways does not have to live with you for the
entire year as a member of your household
to meet this test.
 Your child, grandchild, great grandchild,
etc. (a legally adopted child is considered
your child). 
 Your stepchild.
 Your brother, sister, half brother, half
sister, stepbrother, or stepsister. 
 Your parent, grandparent, or other direct
ancestor, but not foster parent.
 Your stepfather or stepmother. 
 A brother or sister of your father or
mother. 
 A son or daughter of your brother or sis-
ter. 
 Your father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-
law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, or
sister-in-law.
Any of these relationships that were estab-
lished by marriage are not ended by death
or divorce.
Adoption. Before legal adoption, a child is
considered to be your child if he or she was
placed with you for adoption by an authorized
agency. Also, the child must have been a
member of your household. If the child was
not placed with you by an authorized agency,
the child will meet this test only if he or she
was a member of your household for your
entire tax year.
Foster child. A foster child must live with you
as a member of your household for the entire
year to qualify as your dependent. For this
test, a foster child is one who is in your care
that you care for as your own child. It does
not matter how the child became a member
of the household.
Cousin. You can claim an exemption for your
cousin only if he or she lives with you as a
member of your household for the entire year.
A cousin is a descendant of a brother or sister
of your father or mother and does not qualify
under the relationship test.
Joint return.If you file a joint return, you do
not need to show that a person is related to
both you and your spouse. You also do not
need to show that a person is related to the
spouse who provides support.
For example, your spouse's uncle who
receives more than half of his support from
you may be your dependent, even though he
does not live with you. However, if you and
your spouse file separate returns, your
spouse's uncle can be your dependent only
if he is a member of your household and lives
with you for your entire tax year. 
2. Citizen or Resident Test
To meet the citizen or resident test, a person
must be a U.S. citizen or resident, or a resi-
dent of Canada or Mexico, for some part of
the calendar year in which your tax year be-
gins.
Children's place of residence.Children
usually are citizens or residents of the country
of their parents.
If you were a U.S. citizen when your child
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen al-
though the other parent was a nonresident
alien and the child was born in a foreign
country. If so, and the other dependency tests
are met, you can take the exemption. It does
not matter if the child lives abroad with the
nonresident alien parent.
If you are a U.S. citizen who has legally
adopted a child who is not a U.S. citizen or
resident, and the other dependency tests are
met, you can take the exemption if your home
is the child's main home and the child is a
member of your household for your entire tax
year.
Foreign students' place of residence. For-
eign students brought to this country under a
qualified international education exchange
program and placed in American homes for
a temporary period generally are not U.S.
residents and do not meet the citizen or resi-
dent test. You cannot claim an exemption for
them. However, if you provided a home for a
foreign student, you may be able to take a
charitable contribution deduction. See Ex-
penses Paid for Student Living With You in
Publication 526, Charitable Contributions. 
3. Joint Return Test
Even if the other dependency tests are met,
you are generally not allowed an exemption
for your dependent if he or she files a joint
return.
Example. You supported your daughter
for the entire year while her husband was in
the Armed Forces. The couple files a joint
return. Even though all the other tests are
met, you cannot take an exemption for your
daughter.
Exception. The joint return test does not
apply if a joint return is filed by the dependent
and his or her spouse merely as a claim for
refund and no tax liability would exist for ei-
ther spouse on separate returns.
Example. Your son and his wife each had
less than $2,000 of wages and no unearned
income. Neither is required to file a tax return.
Taxes were taken out of their pay, so they
filed a joint return to get a refund. You are
allowed to take exemptions for your son and
daughter-in-law if the other dependency tests
are met.
4. Gross Income Test
Generally, you cannot take an exemption for
a dependent if that person had gross income
of $2,800 or more for 2000. This test does
not apply if the person is your child and is
either:
1) Under age 19 at the end of the year, or
2) A student under age 24 at the end of the
year.
The exceptions for children under age 19 and
students under age 24 are discussed in detail
later.
If you file on a fiscal year basis, the gross
income test applies to the calendar year in
which your fiscal year begins.
Gross income defined. All income in the
form of money, property, and services that is
not exempt from tax is gross income.
In a manufacturing, merchandising, or
mining business, gross income is the total net
sales minus the cost of goods sold, plus any
miscellaneous income from the business.
Page 9

Figure A. Can You Claim an Exemption for a Dependent?
Was the person either a member of your household for the entire tax
year or related to you? (See Member of Household or Relationship Test. )
You cannot
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
You can
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
Start Here
No
Yes
No
Yes
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075 Was the person a U.S. citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada or
Mexico, for any part of the tax year?
1
Did the person file a joint return for the year?
2
Did you provide more than half the person ’s total support for the
year? (If you are a divorced or separated parent of the person, see
Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents. )
3
Did the person have gross income of $2,800 or more during the tax
year?
4
Was the person your child?
Was your child under 19 at the end of the year?
Was your child under 24 at the end of the year and a full-time
student for some part of each of five months during the year? (See
Student under age 24 .)
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
No
No
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
1
If the person was your legally adopted child and lived in your home as a member of your household for the entire tax year, answ er “yes” to this question.
2
If neither the person nor the person ’s spouse is required to file a return, but they file a joint return only to claim a refund of tax withheld, answer “no” to this
question.
3
Answer “yes” to this question if you meet the multiple support requirements under Multiple Support Agreement.
/H17075
4
Gross income for this purpose does not include income received by a permanently disabled individual at a sheltered workshop. (S ee Disabled dependents.)
Gross receipts from rental property are
gross income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs,
etc., to determine the gross income from
rental property.
Gross income includes a partner's share
of the gross (not a share of the net) partner-
ship income.
Gross income also includes all unemploy-
ment compensation and certain scholarship
and fellowship grants. Scholarships received
by degree candidates that are used for tuition,
fees, supplies, books, and equipment re-
quired for particular courses are not included
in gross income. For more information, see
Publication 520.
Tax-exempt income, such as certain so-
cial security payments, is not included in
gross income.
Disabled dependents.For this gross in-
come test, gross income does not include in-
come received by a permanently and totally
disabled individual for services performed at
a sheltered workshop. The availability of
medical care must be the main reason the
individual is at the workshop. Also, the in-
come must come solely from activities at the
workshop that are incident to this medical
care. A sheltered workshop is a school oper-
ated by certain tax-exempt organizations, or
by a state, a U.S. possession, a political
subdivision of a state or possession, the
United States, or the District of Columbia, that
provides special instruction or training de-
signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-
vidual.
Child defined. For purposes of the gross in-
come test, your child is your son, stepson,
daughter, stepdaughter, a legally adopted
child, or a child who was placed with you by
an authorized placement agency for your le-
gal adoption. A foster child who was a mem-
ber of your household for your entire tax year
is also considered your child.
Child under age 19.If your child is under
19 at the end of the year, the gross income
test does not apply. Your child can have any
amount of income and you can still claim an
exemption if the other dependency tests, in-
cluding the support test, are met.
Example. Marie, 18, earned $3,000. Her
father provided more than half her support.
Because Marie is under 19, the gross income
Page 10

test does not apply. If the other dependency
tests were met, Marie's father can claim an
exemption for her.
Student under age 24. The gross income
test does not apply if your child is a student
who is under age 24 at the end of the calen-
dar year. The other dependency tests must
still be met.
Student defined.To qualify as a student,
your child must be, during some part of each
of 5 calendar months during the calendar year
(not necessarily consecutive):
1) A full-time student at a school that has
a regular teaching staff, course of study,
and regularly enrolled body of students
in attendance, or 
2) A student taking a full-time, on-farm
training course given by a school de-
scribed in (1) above or a state, county,
or local government. 
Full-time student defined.A full-time
student is a person who is enrolled for the
number of hours or courses the school con-
siders to be full-time attendance.
School defined. The term “school” in-
cludes elementary schools, junior and senior
high schools, colleges, universities, and
technical, trade, and mechanical schools. It
does not include on-the-job training courses,
correspondence schools, and night schools.
Example. James, 22, attends college as
a full-time student. During the summer,
James earned $3,000. If the other depend-
ency tests are met, his parents can take the
exemption for James.
Vocational high school students.Peo-
ple who work on “co-op” jobs in private in-
dustry as a part of the school's prescribed
course of classroom and practical training are
considered full-time students.
Night school.Your child is not a full-time
student while attending school only at night.
However, full-time attendance at a school can
include some attendance at night as part of
a full-time course of study.
5. Support Test
You must provide more than half of a person's
total support during the calendar year to meet
the support test. You figure whether you have
provided more than half by comparing the
amount you contributed to the person's sup-
port with the entire amount of support the
person received from all sources. This in-
cludes support the person provided from his
or her own funds.
You may find Table 5  helpful in figuring
whether you provided more than half of a
person's support.
Person's own funds not used for support.
A person's own funds are not support unless
they are actually spent for support.
Example. Your mother received $2,400
in social security benefits and $300 in inter-
est. She paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for
recreation.
Even though your mother received a total
of $2,700, she spent only $2,400 for her own
support. If you spent more than $2,400 for her
support and no other support was received,
you have provided more than half of her
support.
Child's wages used for own support. You
cannot include in your contribution to your
child's support any support that is paid for by
the child with the child's own wages, even if
you paid the wages.
Year support is provided.The year you
provide the support is the year you pay for it,
even if you do so with borrowed money that
you repay in a later year.
If you use a fiscal year to report your in-
come, you must provide more than half of the
dependent's support for the calendar year in
which your fiscal year begins.
Armed Forces dependency allotments.
The part of the allotment contributed by the
government and the part taken out of your
military pay are both considered provided by
you in figuring whether you provide more than
half of the support. If your allotment is used
to support persons other than those you
name, you can take the exemptions for them
if they otherwise qualify.
Example. You are in the Armed Forces.
You authorize an allotment for your widowed
mother that she uses to support herself and
your sister. If the allotment provides more
than half of their support, you can take an
exemption for each of them, if they otherwise
qualify, even though you authorize the allot-
ment only for your mother.
Tax-exempt military quarters allow-
ances. These allowances are treated the
same way as dependency allotments in fig-
uring support. The allotment of pay and the
tax-exempt basic allowance for quarters are
both considered as provided by you for sup-
port.
Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's
total support, include tax-exempt income,
savings, and borrowed amounts used to
support that person. Tax-exempt income in-
cludes certain social security benefits, welfare
benefits, nontaxable life insurance proceeds,
Armed Forces family allotments, nontaxable
pensions, and tax-exempt interest.
Example 1. You provide $4,000 toward
your mother's support during the year. She
has earned income of $600, nontaxable social
security benefit payments of $4,800, and
tax-exempt interest of $200. She uses all
these for her support. You cannot claim an
exemption for your mother because the
$4,000 you provide is not more than half of
her total support of $9,600.
Example 2. Your daughter takes out a
student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay her
college tuition. She is personally responsible
for the loan. You provide $2,000 toward her
total support. You cannot claim an exemption
for your daughter because you provide less
than half of her support.
Social security benefit payments. If a
husband and wife each receive payments that
are paid by one check made out to both of
them, half of the total paid is considered to
be for the support of each spouse, unless
they can show otherwise.
If a child receives social security benefits
and uses them toward his or her own support,
the payments are considered as provided by
the child.
Support provided by the state (welfare,
food stamps, housing, etc.). Benefits pro-
vided by the state to a needy person generally
are considered to be used for support. How-
ever, payments based on the needs of the
recipient will not be considered as used en-
tirely for that person's support if it is shown
that part of the payments were not used for
that purpose.
Foster care payments and expenses. Pay-
ments you receive for the support of a foster
child from a child placement agency are con-
sidered support provided by the agency.
Similarly, payments you receive for the sup-
port of a foster child from a state or county
are considered support provided by the state
or county.
If you are not in the trade or business of
providing foster care and your unreimbursed
out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a foster
child were mainly to benefit an organization
qualified to receive deductible charitable
contributions, the expenses are deductible as
charitable contributions, but are not consid-
ered support you provided. For more infor-
mation about the deduction for charitable
contributions, see Publication 526. If your
unreimbursed expenses are not deductible
as charitable contributions, they are consid-
ered support you provided.
If you are in the trade or business of pro-
viding foster care, your unreimbursed ex-
penses are not considered support provided
by you.
Example. Lauren, a foster child, lived with
Mr. and Mrs. Verbenia. The Verbenias cared
for Lauren because they wanted to adopt her,
not as a trade or business or to benefit the
agency that placed her in their home. The
Verbenias' unreimbursed expenses are not
deductible as charitable contributions, but are
considered support they provided for Lauren.
Home for the aged.If you make a lump-sum
advance payment to a home for the aged to
take care of your relative for life and the
payment is based on that person's life ex-
pectancy, the amount of support you provide
each year is the lump-sum payment divided
by the relative's life expectancy. The amount
of support you provide also includes any other
amounts that you provided during the year.
Total Support
To figure if you provided more than half of the
support of a person, you must first determine
the total support provided for that person.
Total support includes amounts spent to pro-
vide food, lodging, clothing, education, med-
ical and dental care, recreation, transporta-
tion, and similar necessities.
Generally, the amount of an item of sup-
port is the amount of the expense incurred in
providing that item. For lodging, the amount
of support is the fair rental value of the lodg-
ing.
Expenses that are not directly related to
any one member of a household, such as the
cost of food for the household, must be di-
vided among the members of the household.
Example 1. Grace Brown, mother of Mary
Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and
their two children. Grace gets a fully taxable
pension of $1,500, which she spends for
clothing and recreation. Grace has no other
income. Frank and Mary's total food expense
for the household is $5,000. They pay Grace's
medical and drug expenses of $300. The fair
rental value of the lodging provided for Grace
is $960 a year, based on the cost of similar
Page 11

Table 5. Worksheet for Determining Support
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1) Total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable and nontaxable) and
amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other accounts at the beginning of the
year
2) Amount used for support
3) Amount used for other purposes
4) Amount in savings and other accounts at end of the year
(The total of lines 2, 3, and 4 should equal line 1)
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
5) Lodging (Complete item a or b)
a) Rent paid
b) If not rented, show fair rental value of home. If the person you supported owned the home, include this
amount in line 19.
6) Food
7) Utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 5a or 5b)
8) Repairs (not included in line 5a or 5b)
9) Other. Do not include expenses of maintaining home, such as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and
insurance.
10) Total household expenses (Add lines 5 through 9)
11) Total number of persons who lived in household
Expenses for the Person You Supported
12) Each person ’s part of household expenses (line 10 divided by line 11)
13) Clothing
14) Education
15) Medical, dental
16) Travel, recreation
17) Other (specify)
18) Total cost of support for the year (Add lines 12 through 17)
19) Amount the person provided for own support (line 2, plus line 5b if the person you supported
owned the home)
20) Amount others provided for the person ’s support. Include amounts provided by state, local, and other
welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1.
21) Amount you provided for the person ’s support (line 18 minus lines 19 and 20)
22) 50% of line 18
Is line 21 more than line 22?
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
Did You Provide More Than Half?
Yes. You meet the support test for the person. If the other exemption tests are met, you may claim an exemption for the person.
No. You do not meet the support test for the person. You cannot claim an exemption for the person unless you can do so under a mult iple
support agreement. See Multiple Support Agreement later in this publication.
Page 12

rooming facilities. Figure Grace's total support
as follows:
Because the support Frank and Mary
provide ($960 lodging + $300 medical ex-
penses + $1,000 food = $2,260) is more than
half of Grace's $3,760 total support, and
Grace meets the other dependency tests,
they can claim an exemption for her.
Example 2. Your parents live with you,
your spouse, and your two children in a house
you own. The fair rental value of your parents'
share of the lodging is $2,000 a year, which
includes furnishings and utilities. Your father
receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200,
which he spends equally between your
mother and himself for items of support such
as clothing, transportation, and recreation.
Your total food expense for the household is
$6,000. Your heat and utility bills amount to
$1,200. Your mother has hospital and med-
ical expenses of $600, which you pay during
the year. Figure your parents' total support
as follows:
You must apply the support test sepa-
rately to each parent. You provide $2,000
($1,000 lodging, $1,000 food) of your father's
total support of $4,100 — less than half. You
provide $2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodg-
ing, $1,000 food, $600 medical) — more than
half of her total support of $4,700. You meet
the support test for your mother, but not your
father. Heat and utility costs are included in
the fair rental value of the lodging, so these
are not considered separately.
Lodging defined. Lodging is the fair rental
value of the room, apartment, or house in
which the person lives. It includes a reason-
able allowance for the use of furniture and
appliances, and for heat and other utilities.
Fair rental value defined. This is the
amount you could reasonably expect to re-
ceive from a stranger for the same kind of
lodging. It is used in place of rent or taxes,
interest, depreciation, paint, insurance, utili-
ties, cost of furniture and appliances, etc. In
some cases, fair rental value may be equal
to the rent paid.
If you provide the total lodging, the amount
of support you provide is the fair rental value
of the room the person uses, or a share of the
fair rental value of the entire dwelling if the
person has use of your entire home. If you
do not provide the total lodging, the total fair
rental value must be divided depending on
how much of the total lodging you provide. If
you provide only a part and the person sup-
plies the rest, the fair rental value must be
divided between both of you according to the
amount each provides.
Example. Your parents live rent free in
a house you own. It has a fair rental value of
$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair
rental value of $3,600 for the house and
$1,800 for the furniture. This does not include
heat and utilities. The house is completely
furnished with furniture belonging to your
parents. You pay $600 for their utility bills.
Utilities are not usually included in rent for
houses in the area where your parents live.
Therefore, you consider the total fair rental
value of the lodging to be $6,000 ($3,600 fair
rental value of the unfurnished house, $1,800
allowance for the furnishings provided by your
parents, and $600 cost of utilities) of which
you are considered to provide $4,200 ($3,600
+ $600).
Person living in his or her own home.
The total fair rental value of a person's home
that he or she owns is considered support
contributed by that person.
Living with someone rent free.If you
live with a person rent free in his or her home,
you must reduce the amount you provide for
support by the fair rental value of lodging he
or she provides you.
Property. Property provided as support is
measured by its fair market value. Fair market
value is the price that property would sell for
on the open market. It is the price that would
be agreed upon between a willing buyer and
a willing seller, with neither being required to
act, and both having reasonable knowledge
of the relevant facts.
Capital expenses. Capital items, such as
furniture, appliances, and cars, that are
bought for a person during the year can be
included in total support under certain cir-
cumstances.
The following examples show when a
capital item is or is not support.
Example 1. You buy a $200 power lawn
mower for your 13-year-old child. The child
is given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed.
Because a lawn mower is ordinarily an item
you buy for personal and family reasons that
benefits all members of the household, you
cannot include the cost of the lawn mower in
the support of your child.
Example 2. You buy a $150 television
set as a birthday present for your 12-year-old
child. The television set is placed in your
child's bedroom. You can include the cost of
the television set in the support of your child.
Example 3. You pay $5,000 for a car and
register it in your name. You and your
17-year-old daughter use the car equally.
Because you own the car and do not give it
to your daughter but merely let her use it, you
cannot include the cost of the car in your
daughter's total support. However, you can
include in your daughter's support your out-
of-pocket expenses of operating the car for
her benefit.
Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, using
personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You
provide all the rest of your son's support —
$4,000. Since the car is bought and owned
by your son, the car's fair market value
($4,500) must be included in his support. The
$4,000 support you provide is less than half
of his total support of $8,500. You cannot
claim an exemption for your son.
Medical insurance premiums. Medical in-
surance premiums you pay, including premi-
ums for supplementary Medicare coverage,
are included in the support you provide.
Medical insurance benefits. Medical in-
surance benefits, including basic and supple-
mentary Medicare benefits, are not part of
support.
Tuition payments and allowances under
the GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under
the GI Bill for tuition payments and allow-
ances while they attend school are included
in total support.
Example. During the year, your son re-
ceives $2,200 from the government under the
GI Bill. He uses this amount for his education.
You provide the rest of his support — $2,000.
Because GI benefits are included in total
support, your son is not your dependent.
Other support items.Other items may be
considered as support depending on the facts
in each case. For example, if you pay some-
one to provide child care or disabled de-
pendent care, you can include these pay-
ments as support, even if you claim a credit
for them. For information on the credit, see
Publication 503, Child and Dependent Care
Expenses.
Do Not Include
in Total Support
The following items are not included in total
support.
1) Federal, state, and local income taxes
paid by persons from their own income.
2) Social security and Medicare taxes paid
by persons from their own income.
3) Life insurance premiums.
 4) Funeral expenses.
5) Scholarships received by your child if
your child is a full-time student.
6) Survivors' and Dependents' Educational
Assistance payments used for the sup-
port of the child who receives them.
Multiple Support Agreement
Sometimes no one provides more than half
of the support of a person. Instead, two or
more persons, each of whom would be able
to take the exemption but for the support test,
together provide more than half of the per-
son's support.
When this happens, you can agree that
any one of you who individually provides
more than 10% of the person's support, but
only one, can claim an exemption for that
person. Each of the others must sign a written
statement agreeing not to claim the ex-
emption for that year. The statements must
be filed with the income tax return of the
person who claims the exemption. Form
2120, Multiple Support Declaration, can be
used for this purpose.
Example 1. You, your sister, and your
two brothers provide the entire support of
your mother for the year. You provide 45%,
your sister 35%, and your two brothers each
provide 10%. Either you or your sister can
claim an exemption for your mother. The
other must sign a Form 2120 or a similar
statement agreeing not to take an exemption
for her. Because neither brother provides
more than 10% of the support, neither can
take the exemption. Your brothers do not
have to sign a Form 2120 or the written
statement.
Fair rental value of lodging .......................... $ 960
Clothing and recreation ............................... 1,500
Medical expenses ........................................ 300
Share of food (1/5 of $5,000) ...................... 1,000
Total support .............................................. $3,760
Support provided FatherMother
Fair rental value of lodging ............. $1,000 $1,000
Pension spent for their support ....... 2,100 2,100
Share of food (1/6 of $6,000) ......... 1,000 1,000
Medical expenses for mother ..........
600
Parents' total support ................... $4,100$4,700
Page 13

Example 2. You and your brother each
provide 20% of your mother's support for the
year. The remaining 60% of her support is
provided equally by two persons who are not
related to her. She does not live with them.
Because more than half of her support is
provided by persons who cannot claim an
exemption for her, no one can take the ex-
emption.
Example 3. Your father lives with you and
receives 25% of his support from social se-
curity, 40% from you, 24% from his brother,
and 11% from a friend. Either you or your
uncle can take the exemption for your father.
A Form 2120 or a similar statement from the
one not taking the exemption must be at-
tached to the return of the one who takes the
exemption.
Support Test for Child of
Divorced or Separated Parents
The support test for a child of divorced or
separated parents is based on the special
rules explained here and shown in Figure B.
However, these special rules apply only if all
of the following are true.
1) The parents are divorced or legally sep-
arated under a decree of divorce or
separate maintenance, or separated un-
der a written separation agreement, or
lived apart at all times during the last 6
months of the calendar year.
2) One or both parents provide more than
half of the child's total support for the
calendar year.
3) One or both parents have custody of the
child for more than half of the calendar
year. 
“Child” is defined earlier under Gross In-
come Test.
This discussion does not apply if the sup-
port of the child is determined under a multi-
ple support agreement, discussed earlier.
CAUTION
!
Parents who never married. These
special rules do not apply to parents
who never married each other.
General rule. The parent who has custody
of the child for the greater part of the year (the
custodial parent) is generally treated as the
parent who provides more than half of the
child's support. It does not matter whether
the custodial parent actually provided more
than half of the support.
Custody. Custody is usually determined
by the terms of the most recent decree of di-
vorce or separate maintenance, or a later
custody decree. If there is no decree, use the
written separation agreement. If neither a
decree nor agreement establishes custody,
then the parent who has the physical custody
of the child for the greater part of the year is
considered to have custody of the child. This
also applies if the validity of a decree or
agreement awarding custody is uncertain be-
cause of legal proceedings pending on the
last day of the calendar year.
If the parents are divorced or separated
during the year and had joint custody of the
child before the separation, the parent who
has custody for the greater part of the rest of
the year is considered to have custody of the
child for the tax year.
Example 1. Under the terms of your di-
vorce, you have custody of your child for 10
months of the year. Your former spouse has
custody for the other 2 months. You and your
former spouse provide the child's total sup-
port. You are considered to have provided
more than half of the support of the child.
However, see Exception, later.
Example 2. You and your former spouse
provided your child's total support for 2000.
You had custody of your child under your
1994 divorce decree, but on August 31, 2000,
a new custody decree granted custody to
your former spouse. Because you had cus-
tody for the greater part of the year, you are
considered to have provided more than half
of your child's support, unless the exception
described next applies.
Exception. The noncustodial parent will
be treated as providing more than half of the
child's support if:
1) The custodial parent signs a written
declaration, discussed later, that he or
she will not claim the exemption for the
child, and the noncustodial parent at-
taches this written declaration to his or
her return,
2) A decree or agreement went into effect
after 1984 and states the noncustodial
parent can claim the child as a depend-
ent without regard to any condition, such
as payment of support, or
3) A decree or agreement executed before
1985 provides that the noncustodial
parent is entitled to the exemption, and
he or she provides at least $600 for the
child's support during the year, unless
the pre-1985 decree or agreement is
modified after 1984 to specify that this
provision will not apply.
Noncustodial parent. The noncustodial
parent is the parent who has custody of the
child for the shorter part of the year or who
does not have custody at all. 
Example. Under the terms of your 1984
divorce decree, your former spouse has cus-
tody of your child. The decree specifically
states that you are entitled to the exemption.
You provide at least $600 in child support
during the calendar year. You are considered
to have provided more than half of the child's
support.
Written declaration. The custodial parent
may use either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment to make the written declaration to re-
lease the exemption to the noncustodial par-
ent. The noncustodial parent must attach the
form or statement to his or her tax return.
The exemption can be released for a sin-
gle year, for a number of specified years (for
example, alternate years), or for all future
years, as specified in the declaration. If the
exemption is released for more than one year,
the original release must be attached to the
return of the noncustodial parent for the first
year, and a copy must be attached for each
later year.
Divorce decree or separation agree-
ment. If your divorce decree or separation
agreement went into effect after 1984 and it
states you can claim the child as your de-
pendent without regard to any condition, such
as payment of support, you can attach a copy
of the following pages from the decree or
agreement instead of Form 8332.
1) Cover page (write the other parent's so-
cial security number on this page). 
2) The page that states you can claim the
child as your dependent.
3) Signature page with the other parent's
signature and the date of the agreement.
CAUTION
!
If your divorce decree or separation
agreement went into effect after 1984
and it states that you can claim the
child as your dependent if you meet certain
conditions, you must attach to your return
Form 8332 or a similar statement from the
custodial parent releasing the exemption.
Child support. All child support payments
actually received from the noncustodial par-
ent are considered used for the support of the
child.
Example. The noncustodial parent pro-
vides $1,200 for the child's support. This
amount is considered support provided by the
noncustodial parent even if the $1,200 was
actually spent on things other than support.
Paid in a later year.If you fail to pay child
support in the year it is due, but pay it in a
later year, your payment of the overdue
amount is not considered paid for the support
of your child either for the year the payment
was due or for the year it is paid. It is payment
of an amount you owed to the custodial par-
ent, but it is not considered paid by you for the
support of your child.
Example. You owed but failed to pay
child support last year. This year, you pay all
of the amount owed from last year and the full
amount due for this year. Your payment of
this year's child support counts as your sup-
port for this year, but payment of the amount
owed from last year does not count as sup-
port either for this year or for last year.
Third-party support.Support provided by a
third party for a divorced or separated parent
is not included as support provided by that
parent. However, see Remarried parent, be-
low.
Example. You are divorced. During the
entire year you and your child live with your
mother in a house she owns. The fair rental
value of the lodging provided by your mother
for your child is $3,000. The home provided
by your mother is not included in the amount
of support you provide.
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the
support provided by your new spouse is
treated as provided by you.
Example. You have two children from a
former marriage who live with you. You have
remarried and are living in a home owned by
your new spouse. The fair rental value of the
home provided to the children by your new
spouse is treated as provided by you.
Home jointly owned.If you and your former
spouse have the right to use and live in the
home, each of you is considered to provide
half of your child's lodging. However, if the
divorce decree gives only you the right to use
and live in the home, you are considered to
provide your child's entire lodging. It does not
matter if the legal title to the home remains in
the names of both parents.
Page 14

Figure B. Support Test for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents
Are the parents divorced or
legally separated, separated
under a written agreement, or
did they live apart the last 6
months of the year?
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
after 1984 that
unconditionally entitles
the noncustodial parent
to the exemption?
Start Here
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
/H17075
Did one or both parents
furnish over half of the child ’s
total support?
Is the child in the custody of
one or both parents for more
than half of the year?
Did the custodial parent sign
a Form 8332 or similar
statement releasing the
exemption?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
YesDid any one person
provide over half of the
child’s total support?
The person who provided
over half of the child ’s
support meets the support
test.
See Multiple Support
Agreement.
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
before 1985 (and not
modified after 1984)
that entitles the
noncustodial parent to
the exemption?
Did the noncustodial
parent provide at least
$600 of the child ’s
support during the
year?
The noncustodial parent
meets the support test.
The custodial parent meets
the support test.
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Page 15

Table 6. Deduction for Exemptions Worksheet
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 33, more than the amount shown on
line 4 below for your filing status?
● Married filing separately, enter $96,700
No. Stop. Multiply $2,800 by the total number of exemptions
claimed on Form 1040, line 6d, and enter the result on line 38.
Yes. Complete the worksheet below to figure your deduction for
exemptions.
2. Multiply $2,800 by the total number of exemptions claimed on Form
1040, line 6d
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 33
4. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status:
● Single, enter $128,950
● Head of household, enter $161,150
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er),
enter $193,400
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, stop here;
enter the amount from line 2 above on Form 1040,
line 38
Note: If line 5 is more than $122,500 (more than $61,250 if married filing
separately), stop here; you cannot take a deduction for exemptions. Enter
-0- on Form 1040, line 38.
6. Divide line 5 by $2,500 ($1,250 if married filing
separately). If the result is not a whole number, round
it UP to the next higher whole number
7. Multiply line 6 by 2% (.02), and enter the result as a
decimal amount
8. Multiply line 2 by line 7
9. Deduction for exemptions. Subtract line 8 from line 2. Enter the result
here and on Form 1040, line 38
2.
3.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
4.
/H20854
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. To apply for an
ITIN, use Form W–7,  Application for IRS In-
dividual Taxpayer Identification Number.
It usually takes about 30 days to get an
ITIN.
Taxpayer identification number for
adoptees. If you have a child who was
placed with you by an authorized placement
agency, you may be able to claim an ex-
emption for the child. However, if you cannot
get an SSN or an ITIN for the child, you must
get an adoption taxpayer identification num-
ber (ATIN) for the child from the IRS. See
Form W–7A,  Application for Taxpayer Iden-
tification Number for Pending U.S. Adoptions,
for details.
Standard Deduction
Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking
a standard deduction or itemizing their de-
ductions. The standard deduction is a dollar
amount that reduces the amount of income
on which you are taxed. It is a benefit that
eliminates the need for many taxpayers to
itemize actual deductions, such as medical
expenses, charitable contributions, and taxes,
on Schedule A of Form 1040. The standard
deduction is higher for taxpayers who are 65
or older or blind. If you have a choice, you
should use the method that gives you the
lower tax.
TIP
You benefit from the standard de-
duction if your standard deduction is
more than the total of your allowable
itemized deductions.
Persons not eligible for the standard de-
duction. Your standard deduction is zero
and you should itemize any deductions you
have if:
1) You are married and filing a separate
return, and your spouse itemizes de-
ductions, 
2) You are filing a tax return for a short tax
year because of a change in your annual
accounting period, or 
3) You are a nonresident or dual-status al-
ien during the year. You are considered
a dual-status alien if you were both a
nonresident and resident alien during the
year. 
If you are a nonresident alien who is
married to a U.S. citizen or resident at
the end of the year, you can choose to
be treated as a U.S. resident. (See
Publication 519.) If you make this choice,
you can take the standard deduction.
CAUTION
!
If an exemption for you can be
claimed on another person's return
(such as your parents' return), your
standard deduction may be limited. See
Standard Deduction for Dependents, later.
Standard Deduction Amount
The standard deduction amount depends on
your filing status, whether you are 65 or older
or blind, and whether an exemption can be
claimed for you by another taxpayer. The
standard deduction amounts for most tax-
payers are shown in Table 7.
The amount of the standard deduction for
a decedent's final tax return is the same as
it would have been had the decedent contin-
ued to live. However, if the decedent was not
Phaseout of Exemptions
The amount you can claim as a deduction for
exemptions is phased out once your adjusted
gross income (AGI) goes above a certain
level for your filing status. These levels are
as follows:
You must reduce the dollar amount of your
exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part
of $2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing
separately), that your AGI exceeds the
amount shown above for your filing status. If
your AGI exceeds the amount shown above
by more than $122,500 ($61,250 if married
filing separately), the amount of your de-
duction for exemptions is reduced to zero.
If your AGI exceeds the level for your filing
status, use Table 6 to figure the amount of
your deduction for exemptions.
Social Security
Numbers for Dependents
You must list the social security number
(SSN) of any person for whom you claim an
exemption in column (2) of line 6c of your
Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
CAUTION
!
If you do not list the dependent's SSN
when required or if you list an incor-
rect SSN, the exemption may be dis-
allowed.
Note. If your dependent does not have
and cannot get an SSN, you must list the in-
dividual taxpayer identification number (ITIN)
or adoption taxpayer identification number
(ATIN) instead of an SSN. See Taxpayer
identification numbers for aliens, or Taxpayer
identification number for adoptees, later.
No social security number.If a person for
whom you expect to claim an exemption on
your return does not have an SSN, either you
or that person should apply for an SSN as
soon as possible by filing  Form SS–5, Ap-
plication for a Social Security Card, with the
Social Security Administration (SSA). Infor-
mation about applying for an SSN and Form
SS–5 is available at your local SSA office.
It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an
SSN. If you do not have a required SSN by
the filing due date, you can file Form 4868 for
an extension of time to file.
Born and died in 2000.If your child was
born and died in 2000, and you do not have
an SSN for the child, you may attach a copy
of the child's birth certificate instead. If you
do, enter “DIED” in column 2 of line 6c of your
Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Taxpayer identification numbers for al-
iens. If your dependent is a resident or non-
resident alien who does not have and is not
eligible to get an SSN, the IRS will issue your
dependent an individual taxpayer identifica-
tion number (ITIN) instead of an SSN. Write
the number in column (2) of line 6c of your
AGI Level
Which Reduces
Filing Status Exemption Amount
Married filing separately .......... $ 96,700
Single ....................................... 128,950
Head of household .................. 161,150
Married filing jointly .................. 193,400
Qualifying widow(er) ................ 193,400
Page 16

Table 7. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
IF Your Filing Status is . . .
Your Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,400
7,350
3,675
6,450
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table 8 or 9 instead.Table 8. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
IF Your
Filing Status
is . . .
THEN your
Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,500
6,600
8,200
9,050
9,900
10,750
4,525
5,375
6,225
7,075
7,550
8,650
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table 9, instead.
AND the Number
in the Box Above
is . . .
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table 9. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,400
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,675
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,350
● Head of household, enter $6,450
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,100 ($850 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2000.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$700
2000 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 3.
$250
65 or older at the time of death, the higher
standard deduction for age cannot be
claimed.
Higher Standard Deduction for
Age (65 or Older)
If you do not itemize deductions, you are en-
titled to a higher standard deduction if you are
age 65 or older at the end of the year. You
are considered 65 on the day before your
65th birthday. Therefore, you can take a
higher standard deduction for 2000 if your
65th birthday was on or before January 1,
2001.
Use Table 8 to figure the standard de-
duction amount.
Higher Standard Deduction for
Blindness
If you are blind on the last day of the year and
you do not itemize deductions, you are enti-
tled to a higher standard deduction. Use Ta-
ble 8. You qualify for this benefit if you are
totally or partly blind.
Partly blind.If you are partly blind, you must
get a certified statement from an eye doctor
or registered optometrist that:
1) You cannot see better than 20/200 in the
better eye with glasses or contact
lenses, or 
2) Your field of vision is not more than 20
degrees.
If your eye condition will never improve
beyond these limits, the statement should in-
clude this fact. You must keep the statement
in your records.
If your vision can be corrected beyond
these limits only by contact lenses that you
can wear only briefly because of pain, in-
fection, or ulcers, you can take the higher
standard deduction for blindness if you oth-
erwise qualify.
Spouse 65 or Older or Blind
You can take the higher standard deduction
if your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:
1) You file a joint return, or 
2) You file a separate return and can claim
an exemption for your spouse because
your spouse had no gross income and
an exemption for your spouse could not
be claimed by another taxpayer. 
CAUTION
!
You cannot claim the higher standard
deduction for an individual other than
yourself and your spouse.
Examples
The following examples illustrate how to de-
termine your standard deduction using Tables
7 and 8.
Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are
filing a joint return for 2000. Neither is blind.
They decide not to itemize their deductions.
Page 17

They use Table 7. Their standard deduction
is $7,350.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as
in Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the
end of 2000. Larry and Donna use Table 8.
Their standard deduction is $8,200.
Example 3. Bill and Terry are filing a joint
return for 2000. Both are over age 65. Neither
is blind. If they do not itemize deductions, they
use Table 8. Their standard deduction is
$9,050.
Standard Deduction
for Dependents
The standard deduction for an individual for
whom an exemption can be claimed on an-
other person's tax return is generally limited
to the greater of (a) $700, or (b) the individ-
ual's earned income for the year plus $250
(but not more than the regular standard de-
duction amount, generally $4,400).
However, if the individual is 65 or older
or blind, the standard deduction may be
higher.
If an exemption for you can be claimed
on someone else's return, use Table 9 to
determine your standard deduction.
Earned income defined. Earned income
is salaries, wages, tips, professional fees and
other amounts received as pay for work you
actually perform.
For purposes of the standard deduction,
earned income also includes any part of a
scholarship or fellowship grant that you must
include in your gross income. See Publication
520 for more information on what qualifies as
a scholarship or fellowship grant.
Example 1. Michael is single. His parents
claim an exemption for him on their 2000 tax
return. He has interest income of $780 and
wages of $150. He has no itemized de-
ductions. Michael uses Table 9 to find his
standard deduction. He enters $150 (his
earned income) on line 1, $400 ($150 plus
$250) on line 3, $700 (the larger of $400 and
$700) on line 5, and $4,400 on line 6. The
amount of his standard deduction, on line 7a,
is $700 (the smaller of $700 and $4,400).
Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time
college student, is claimed on his parents'
2000 tax return. Joe is married and files a
separate return. His wife does not itemize
deductions on her separate return.
Joe has $1,500 in interest income and
wages of $3,600. He has no itemized de-
ductions. Joe finds his standard deduction by
using Table 9.  He enters his earned income,
$3,600, on line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 and
enters $3,850 on line 3. On line 5 he enters
$3,850, the larger of lines 3 and 4. Since Joe
is married filing a separate return, he enters
$3,675 on line 6. On line 7a he enters $3,675
as his standard deduction because it is
smaller than $3,850, the amount on line 5.
Example 3. Amy, who is single, is
claimed on her parents' 2000 tax return. She
is 18 years old and blind. She has interest
income of $1,300 and wages of $2,900. She
has no itemized deductions. Amy uses Table
9 to find her standard deduction. She enters
her wages of $2,900 on line 1. She adds lines
1 and 2 and enters $3,150 on line 3. On line
5 she enters $3,150, the larger of lines 3 and
4. Since she is single, Amy enters $4,400 on
line 6. She enters $3,150 on line 7a. This is
the smaller of the amounts on lines 5 and 6.
Because she checked one box in the top part
of the worksheet, she enters $1,100 on line
7b. She then adds the amounts on lines 7a
and 7b and enters her standard deduction of
$4,250 on line 7c.
Who Should Itemize
You should itemize deductions if your total
deductions are more than the standard de-
duction amount. Also, you should itemize if
you do not qualify for the standard deduction,
as discussed earlier under Persons not eligi-
ble for the standard deduction. 
You should first figure your itemized de-
ductions and compare that amount to your
standard deduction to make sure you are us-
ing the method that gives you the greater
benefit.
CAUTION
!
You may be subject to a limit on some
of your itemized deductions if your
adjusted gross income (AGI) is more
than $128,950 ($64,475 if you are married
filing separately). See the instructions for
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28, for more
information on figuring the correct amount of
your itemized deductions.
When to itemize.You may benefit from
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A
(Form 1040) if you:
1) Do not qualify for the standard de-
duction, or the amount you can claim is
limited, 
2) Had large uninsured medical and dental
expenses during the year, 
3) Paid interest and taxes on your home, 
4) Had large unreimbursed employee busi-
ness expenses or other miscellaneous
deductions, 
5) Had large uninsured casualty or theft
losses, 
6) Made large contributions to qualified
charities, or 
7) Have total itemized deductions that are
more than the standard deduction to
which you otherwise are entitled. 
If you decide to itemize your deductions,
complete Schedule A and attach it to your
Form 1040. Enter the amount from Schedule
A, line 28, on Form 1040, line 36.
Itemizing for state tax or other purposes.
If you choose to itemize even though your
itemized deductions are less than the amount
of your standard deduction, write “IE” (item-
ized elected) next to line 36 (Form 1040).
Changing your mind. If you do not itemize
your deductions and later find that you should
have itemized — or if you itemize your de-
ductions and later find you should not have
— you can change your return by filing Form
1040X.
Married persons who filed separate re-
turns. You can change methods of taking
deductions only if you and your spouse both
make the same changes. Both of you must
file a consent to assessment for any addi-
tional tax either one may owe as a result of
the change.
You and your spouse can use the method
that gives you the lower total tax, even though
one of you may pay more tax than you would
have paid by using the other method. You
both must use the same method of claiming
deductions. If one itemizes deductions, the
other should itemize because he or she will
not qualify for the standard deduction (see
Persons not eligible for the standard de-
duction, earlier).
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved tax issues,
order free publications and forms, ask tax
questions, and get more information from the
IRS in several ways. By selecting the method
that is best for you, you will have quick and
easy access to tax help.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem
unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-
payer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your
interests and concerns within the IRS by
protecting your rights and resolving problems
that have not been fixed through normal
channels. While Taxpayer Advocates cannot
change the tax law or make a technical tax
decision, they can clear up problems that re-
sulted from previous contacts and ensure that
your case is given a complete and impartial
review.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
 Call the Taxpayer Advocate at
1–877–777–4778.
 Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.
 Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate
office in your area.
 Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a
TTY/TDD user.
For more information, see Publication
1546, The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS.
Free tax services.To find out what services
are available, get Publication 910, Guide to
Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax
publications and an index of tax topics. It also
describes other free tax information services,
including tax education and assistance pro-
grams and a list of TeleTax topics.
Personal computer. With your per-
sonal computer and modem, you can
access the IRS on the Internet at
www.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, you
can select:
 Frequently Asked Tax Questions (located
under Taxpayer Help & Ed) to find an-
swers to questions you may have.
 Forms & Pubs to download forms and
publications or search for forms and
publications by topic or keyword.
 Fill-in Forms (located under Forms &
Pubs) to enter information while the form
is displayed and then print the completed
form.
 Tax Info For You to view Internal Reve-
nue Bulletins published in the last few
years.
 Tax Regs in English to search regulations
and the Internal Revenue Code (under
United States Code (USC)).
 Digital Dispatch and IRS Local News Net
(both located under Tax Info For Busi-
Page 18

ness) to receive our electronic newslet-
ters on hot tax issues and news.
 Small Business Corner (located under
Tax Info For Business) to get information
on starting and operating a small busi-
ness.
You can also reach us with your computer
using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone
attached to your fax machine, you can
receive forms and instructions by
calling 703–368–9694. Follow the directions
from the prompts. When you order forms,
enter the catalog number for the form you
need. The items you request will be faxed to
you.
Phone. Many services are available
by phone.
 Ordering forms, instructions, and publi-
cations. Call  1–800–829–3676 to order
current and prior year forms, instructions,
and publications.
 Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.
 TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–
4059 to ask tax questions or to order
forms and publications.
 TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to
listen to pre-recorded messages covering
various tax topics.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone
services. To ensure that IRS representatives
give accurate, courteous, and professional
answers, we evaluate the quality of our tele-
phone services in several ways.
 A second IRS representative sometimes
monitors live telephone calls. That person
only evaluates the IRS assistor and does
not keep a record of any taxpayer's name
or tax identification number.
 We sometimes record telephone calls to
evaluate IRS assistors objectively. We
hold these recordings no longer than one
week and use them only to measure the
quality of assistance.
 We value our customers' opinions.
Throughout this year, we will be survey-
ing our customers for their opinions on
our service.
Walk-in. You can walk in to many
post offices, libraries, and IRS offices
to pick up certain forms, instructions,
and publications. Also, some libraries and IRS
offices have:
 An extensive collection of products avail-
able to print from a CD-ROM or photo-
copy from reproducible proofs.
 The Internal Revenue Code, regulations,
Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-
tive Bulletins available for research pur-
poses.
Mail. You can send your order for
forms, instructions, and publications
to the Distribution Center nearest to
you and receive a response within 10 work-
days after your request is received. Find the
address that applies to your part of the
country.
 Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
 Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
 Eastern part of U.S. and foreign ad-
dresses:
Eastern Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 85074
Richmond, VA 23261–5074
CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publi-
cation 1796, Federal Tax Products on
CD-ROM, and obtain:
 Current tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications.
 Prior-year tax forms, instructions, and
publications.
 Popular tax forms which may be filled in
electronically, printed out for submission,
and saved for recordkeeping.
 Internal Revenue Bulletins.
The CD-ROM can be purchased from
National Technical Information Service (NTIS)
by calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet
at www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first release
is available in mid-December and the final
release is available in late January.
IRS Publication 3207, The Business Re-
source Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM that
contains information important to small busi-
nesses. It is available in mid-February. You
can get one free copy by calling
1–800–829–3676.
Page 19

Index
A
 Absences, temporary .............. 7, 9
Adopted child (Relationship test) 9
 Adoption ...................................... 9
Adoption Taxpayer Identification
Number (ATIN) ..................... 16
Age 65 or older ..................... 3, 17
Armed Forces dependency allot-
ments .................................... 11
Assistance (See Tax help)               
B
 Blindness ................................... 17
C
Canada, resident of ................. 7, 9
 Capital expenses ....................... 13
Child's income, parent's return .... 4
 Child:
 Born alive ............................... 9
For head of household filing
status ................................. 4
 Stillborn .................................. 9
 Support ................................. 14
Under age 19 (Gross income
test) ................................... 9
Citizen or resident test ................ 9
 Comments ................................... 2
Common law marriage ................ 4
Community property states ......... 6
 Custodial parent ........................ 14
 Custody ..................................... 14
D
Death of dependent ..................... 9
Death of spouse .............. 4, 5, 7, 8
Death or birth of dependent ........ 7
 Deceased persons ...................... 3
 Dependency tests ........................ 9
 Dependents ............................. 3, 8
Divorce decree, exemption for
child ...................................... 14
Divorced taxpayers ........ 4, 5, 8, 14
 Exemptions ....................... 8, 14
 Filing status ............................ 4
E
 Earned income ...................... 3, 18
Earned income credit .................. 6
 Exemptions:
 For dependents ...................... 8
 For spouse ............................. 8
 In general ............................... 7
 Personal ................................. 8
 Phaseout of .......................... 16
F
Fair rental value ........................ 13
 Filing requirements .................. 2, 3
 Filing status ................................. 4
 Foreign students .......................... 9
 Form:
1040X ........................... 4, 6, 18
 2120 ..................................... 13
 2848 ....................................... 5
 8332 ..................................... 14
 8814 ....................................... 2
 SS–5 ..................................... 16
 W–7 ...................................... 16
 W–7A .................................... 16
Foster care expenses ................ 11
Foster care payments ............... 11
Foster child, dependency ex-
emption for:
Member of household test ..... 9
 Support test .......................... 11
Free tax services ....................... 18
G
 GI Bill ......................................... 13
 Gross income .......................... 2, 9
Gross income test ................. 9, 10
H
Head of household ...................... 6
Help (See Tax help)                         
Home, keeping up ....................... 7
Household, member of, test ........ 9
I
Individual retirement arrangements
(IRAs) ..................................... 6
Individual Taxpayer Identification
Number (ITIN) ...................... 16
Innocent spouse relief ................. 5
J
Joint return .......................... 5, 6, 8
 Joint liability ............................ 5
 Signing ................................... 5
Joint return test ........................... 9
K
Keeping up a home ..................... 7
L
 Lodging ...................................... 13
M
 Marital status ........................... 3, 4
 Marriage annulled ........................ 4
 Married persons ...................... 4, 8
Medical insurance premiums .... 13
 Medicare benefits ...................... 13
Member of household or relation-
ship test .................................. 9
Mexico, resident of .................. 7, 9
More information (See Tax help)     
Multiple support agreement ....... 13
N
 Noncustodial parent .................. 14
Nonresident alien spouse ........ 5, 6
Nonresident aliens ............... 2, 6, 8
O
 Overseas taxpayers .................... 3
P
 Personal exemption ..................... 8
Phaseout of exemptions ............ 16
Publications (See Tax help)             
Puerto Rico, residents of ............. 3
Q
Qualifying widow(er) with depend-
ent child .................................. 7
R
 Relationship test .......................... 9
Relief from joint responsibility ..... 5
 Rental losses ............................... 6
Rental value, fair ....................... 13
S
Scholarships .................... 3, 10, 13
 Self-employed persons ................ 2
Separate returns ................ 6, 8, 18
 Separated parents ..................... 14
 Single taxpayers ...................... 5, 8
Social security benefits ............. 11
Social security numbers for de-
pendents ............................... 16
 Spouse:
Died ............................ 4, 5, 7, 8
 Exemption for ......................... 8
Filing a joint return ................. 5
 Nonresident ........................ 5, 6
 Standard deduction ............. 16, 18
State benefit payments ............. 11
 Stepchild .................................. 7, 9
 Student ...................................... 11
 Suggestions ................................. 2
Support test ................... 11, 13, 14
Divorced or separated
parents ............................ 14
Multiple support agreement . 13
 Total support ........................ 11
T
 Tax help ..................................... 18
 Tax-exempt income ................... 11
 Taxpayer Advocate ................... 18
 Temporary absences ............... 7, 9
Tests for exemption ............... 9, 11
Citizen or resident test ........... 9
Gross income test .................. 9
Joint return test ...................... 9
Member of household or re-
lationship test .................... 9
 Support test .......................... 11
 Total support ............................. 11
 TTY/TDD information ................ 18
U
U.S. citizens abroad .................... 3
 Unearned income ........................ 3
 Unmarried persons ...................... 4
W
Who must file .............................. 2
Who should file ............................ 4
Who should itemize ................... 18
/H18549
Page 20