Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P550.SGM ( 8-Feb-2007) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 ContentsCat. No. 15093R
What’s New for 2006............... 2
Department
What’s New for 2007............... 2of the
InvestmentTreasury Reminders ...................... 2
Internal Introduction ..................... 2Revenue Income and
Service Chapter 1. Investment Income ........ 3
General Information ............. 3
Interest Income ................ 5Expenses
Discount on Debt Instruments ...... 13
When To Report Interest Income .... 16
How To Report Interest Income ..... 16(Including Capital Dividends and Other Corporate
Distributions ............... 19Gains and Losses) How To Report Dividend
Income ................... 23
Stripped Preferred Stock .......... 25For use in preparing REMICs, FASITs, and Other
CDOs .................... 25
S Corporations ................ 262006 Returns
Investment Clubs ............... 26
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters and Other
Reportable Transactions ......... 28
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses ...... 32
Limits on Deductions ............ 32
Interest Expenses .............. 32
Bond Premium Amortization ........ 34
Expenses of Producing Income ..... 36
Nondeductible Expenses .......... 37
How To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 38
When To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 38
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property ............ 39
What Is a Sale or Trade? .......... 39
Basis of Investment Property ....... 42
How To Figure Gain or Loss ....... 45
Nontaxable Trades .............. 46
Transfers Between Spouses ....... 47
Related Party Transactions ........ 48
Capital Gains and Losses ......... 49
Capital or Ordinary Gain or
Loss ..................... 49
Holding Period ............... 53
Nonbusiness Bad Debts ......... 54
Short Sales ................. 55
Wash Sales ................. 56
Options .................... 57
Straddles ................... 58
Sales of Stock to ESOPs or
Certain Cooperatives ......... 61
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded Securities ...... 62
Gains on Qualified Small
Business Stock ............. 62
Rollover of Gain From Sale of 
Empowerment Zone Assets ..... 64
Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses ................... 64
Special Rules for Traders in
Get forms and other information Securities ................. 72
faster and easier by: Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help ...... 73
Glossary ....................... 75Internet • www.irs.gov
Index .......................... 77

Page 2 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to withhold income tax on the amount you pay
for the property (including cash, the fair marketWhat’s New for 2006 Introductionvalue of other property, and any assumed liabil-
ity). Domestic or foreign corporations, partner- This publication provides information on the taxGulf Opportunity Zone bonds. The Gulf Op- ships, trusts, and estates may also have to treatment of investment income and expenses.portunity Zone Act of 2005 authorized the states withhold on certain distributions and other trans- It explains what investment income is taxableof Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi, and actions involving U.S. real property interests. If and what investment expenses are deductible. Ittheir local governments to issue Gulf Opportu- you fail to withhold, you may be held liable for explains when and how to show these items onnity Zone bonds. These bonds are treated as the tax, penalties that apply, and interest. Forqualified private activity bonds and the interest your tax return. It also explains how to determinemore information, see Publication 515, With-on them is tax exempt. For more information, and report gains and losses on the disposition ofholding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and For-see Private activity bonds underTaxable Interest investment property and provides informationeign Entities.in chapter 1. on property trades and tax shelters.
Foreign source income. If you are a U.S.Tax-exempt interest and exempt-interest div- The glossary at the end of this publica-citizen with investment income from sourcesidends. For 2006 and later years, tax-exempt tion defines many of the terms used.outside the United States (foreign income), youinterest and exempt-interest dividends should
TIP
must report that income on your tax return un-be shown in box 8 of Form 1099-INT, Interest less it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whetherIncome. Any tax-exempt interest and exempt you reside inside or outside the United Statesinterest dividends subject to the alternative mini- and whether or not you receive a Form 1099mum tax should be shown in box 9 of Form Investment income. This generally includesfrom the foreign payer.1099-INT. However, for 2006, these amounts interest, dividends, capital gains, and other
may be shown on a substitute statement instead Alien’s individual taxpayer identification types of distributions.
of a Form 1099-INT. number (ITIN). If you are a nonresident or
resident alien and do not have and are not eligi-Loans to continuing care facilities. The re- Investment expenses. These include interestble to get a social security number (SSN), youporting of interest income from loans to continu- paid or incurred to acquire investment propertymust apply for an ITIN. For details on how to doing care facilities is subject to the rules for and expenses to manage or collect income fromso, see Form W-7, Application for IRS Individualbelow-market loans unless certain requirements investment property.Taxpayer Identification Number, and its instruc-are met. However, these requirements have tions. If you already have an ITIN, enter it wher-changed for calendar years 2006 through 2010. ever an SSN is requested on your tax return. Comments and suggestions. We welcomeThere is no longer a dollar limit on the total An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitleoutstanding loan balance and the definitions of your comments about this publication and youryou to social security benefits or change yourqualified continuing care facility and continuing suggestions for future editions.employment or immigration status under U.S.care contract have changed. For more informa- You can write to us at the following address:law.tion, see Exception for loans to continuing care
Internal Revenue Servicefacilities under Below-Market Loans in chapter Sale of DC Zone assets. Investments in Dis-
1. Individual Forms and Publications Branchtrict of Columbia Enterprise Zone (DC Zone)
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Iassets held more than 5 years will qualify for a
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406special tax benefit. If you sell or trade a DC Zone
asset at a gain, you may be able to exclude the Washington, DC 20224
What’s New for 2007 qualified capital gain from your gross income.
This exclusion applies to an interest in, or prop-
erty of, certain businesses operating in the Dis- We respond to many letters by telephone.Capital asset treatment for self-created mu-
trict of Columbia. For more information about thesical works. Musical compositions and copy- Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
exclusion, see the Schedule D instructions. Forrights in musical works are generally not capital clude your daytime phone number, including the
more information about DC Zone assets, seeassets. However, you can elect to treat these area code, in your correspondence.Publication 954, Tax Incentives for Distressedtypes of property as capital assets if you sell or You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (TheCommunities.exchange them in tax years beginning after May
asterisk must be included in the address.)17, 2006, and: Photographs of missing children. The Inter- Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
• Your personal efforts created the property, nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-or National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- ally to each email, we do appreciate your
dren. Photographs of missing children selected• You acquired the property under circum- feedback and will consider your comments asby the Center may appear in this publication onstances (for example, by gift) entitling you we revise our tax products.pages that would otherwise be blank. You canto the basis of the person who created the Tax questions. If you have a tax question,help bring these children home by looking at theproperty or for whom it was prepared or photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST visit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. Weproduced. (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. cannot answer tax questions at either of the
addresses listed above.
Ordering forms and publications. Visit
www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andReminders
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the
National Distribution Center at the addressU.S. property acquired from a foreign per-
shown under How To Get Tax Help in the backson. If you acquire a U.S. real property inter-
of this publication.est from a foreign person or firm, you may have
Page 2 Publication 550 (2006)

Page 3 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 5 for information about getting savings account with your child using funds be-
these publications and forms. longing to the child, list the child’s name first on
the account and give the child’s SSN.
1.
Custodian account for your child. If your
child is the actual owner of an account that is
General Information recorded in your name as custodian for the child,
give the child’s SSN to the payer. For example,Investment A few items of general interest are covered here. you must give your child’s SSN to the payer of
dividends on stock owned by your child, evenRecordkeeping.You should keep a listIncome though the dividends are paid to you as custo-showing sources and amounts of in-
dian.vestment income that you receive dur-RECORDS
ing the year. Also, keep the forms you receive Penalty for failure to supply SSN. You will
that show your investment income (FormsTopics be subject to a penalty if, when required, you fail
1099-INT, Interest Income, and 1099-DIV, Divi-This chapter discusses: to:
dends and Distributions, for example) as an im-
• Include your SSN on any return, state-portant part of your records.• Interest income, ment, or other document,
• Dividends and other corporate distribu- • Give your SSN to another person who hasTax on investment income of a child undertions,
to include it on any return, statement, orage 18. Part of a child’s 2006 investment in-
• Real estate mortgage investment conduits other document, orcome may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. This
(REMICs), financial asset securitization in- may happen if all of the following are true. • Include the SSN of another person on anyvestment trusts (FASITs), and other collat-
return, statement, or other document.• The child was under age 18 at the end oferalized debt obligations (CDOs),
2006. A child born on January 1, 1989, is The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-• S corporations, and considered to be age 18 at the end of mum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.2006.• Investment clubs.
You will not be subject to this penalty if you• The child had more than $1,700 of invest- can show that your failure to provide the SSNment income (such as taxable interest andUseful Items was due to a reasonable cause and not to willfuldividends) and has to file a tax return.You may want to see: neglect.
• Either parent was alive at the end of 2006. If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also be
Publication subject to backup withholding.
If all of these statements are true, Form 8615❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income Backup withholding. Your investment in-must be completed and attached to the child’s❏ 537 Installment Sales come is generally not subject to regular with-tax return. If any of these statements is not true,
holding. However, it may be subject to backupForm 8615 is not required and the child’s income❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions withholding to ensure that income tax is col-is taxed at his or her own tax rate.❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements lected on the income. Under backup withhold-
However, the parent can choose to include(IRAs) ing, the bank, broker, or other payer of interest,
the child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s original issue discount (OID), dividends, cash❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules return if certain requirements are met. Use Form patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold,
8814 for this purpose.❏ 1212 Guide to Original Issue Discount as income tax, 28% of the amount you are paid.
(OID) Instruments For more information about the tax on invest- Backup withholding applies if:
ment income of children and the parents’ elec-
Form (and Instructions) 1. You do not give the payer your identifica-tion, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for Children
tion number (either a social security num-and Dependents.❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and ber or an employer identification number)Ordinary Dividends in the required manner,Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest,
dividends, and other investment income you re-❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and 2. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) noti-Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040A ceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust is fies the payer that you gave an incorrectFilers generally taxable income. You should receive a identification number,Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary’s Share❏ 1099 General Instructions for Forms 3. The IRS notifies the payer that you areof Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G subject to backup withholding on interestfiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and its
or dividends because you have underre-❏ 3115 Application for Change in instructions will tell you where to report the in-
ported interest or dividends on your in-Accounting Method come on your Form 1040.
come tax return, or❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax —
Social security number (SSN). You must 4. You are required, but fail, to certify thatIndividuals
give your name and SSN to any person required you are not subject to backup withholding❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations by federal tax law to make a return, statement, for the reason described in (3).
or other document that relates to you. This in-❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 18 Who
cludes payers of interest and dividends. Certification. For new accounts paying in-Have Investment Income of More
terest or dividends, you must certify under pen-Than $1,700 SSN for joint account. If the funds in a joint
alties of perjury that your social security numberaccount belong to one person, list that person’s❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’s is correct and that you are not subject to backupname first on the account and give that person’sInterest and Dividends withholding. Your payer will give you a FormSSN to the payer. (For information on who owns
❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series W-9, Request for Taxpayer Identification Num-the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,
EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds ber and Certification, or similar form, to makelater.) If the joint account contains combined
Issued After 1989 this certification. If you fail to make this certifica-funds, give the SSN of the person whose name
tion, backup withholding may begin immediatelyis listed first on the account.❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record on your new account or investment.These rules apply both to joint ownership byRedemption of Series EE and I
a married couple and to joint ownership by other Underreported interest and dividends.U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After
1989 individuals. For example, if you open a joint You will be considered to have underreported
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

Page 4 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your interest and dividends if the IRS has deter- payment on that return, but you failed to show that at least one of the followi ng situations
mined for a tax year that: file the return. applies.
• You failed to include any part of a reporta- • No underreporting occurred.How to stop backup withholding due toble interest or dividend payment required underreporting. If you have been notified that • You have a bona fide dispute with the IRSto be shown on your return, or you underreported interest or dividends, you can about whether underreporting occurred.
request a determination from the IRS to prevent• You were required to file a return and to • Backup withholding will cause or is caus-backup withholding from starting or to stopinclude a reportable interest or dividend ing an undue hardship, and it is unlikelybackup withholding once it has begun. You must that you will underreport interest and divi-
dends in the future.Table 1-1. Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income
• You have corrected the underreporting by(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this
filing a return if you did not previously filepublication, especially How To Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend
one and by paying all taxes, penalties, andIncome in chapter 1.)
interest due for any underreported interest
or dividend payments.Type of Income If you file Form 1040, If you can file Form If you can file Form
report on ... 1040A, report on ... 1040EZ, report on ...
If the IRS determines that backup withholding
should stop, it will provide you with a certificationTaxable interest that Line 8a (You may need Line 8a (You may need Line 2
and will notify the payers who were sent noticestotals $1,500 or less to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as
earlier.well.) well.)
How to stop backup withholding due to anTaxable interest that Line 8a; also use Line 8a; also use incorrect identification number. If you havetotals more than Schedule B Schedule 1 been notified by a payer that you are subject to$1,500 backup withholding because you have provided
an incorrect SSN or employer identificationSavings bond interest Schedule B; also use Schedule 1; also use
number, you can stop it by following the instruc-you will exclude Form 8815 Form 8815
tions the payer gives you.because of higher
education expenses Reporting backup withholding. If backup
withholding is deducted from your interest orOrdinary dividends Line 9a (You may need Line 9a (You may need dividend income or other reportable payment,that total $1,500 or to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as the bank or other business must give you anless well.) well.)
information return for the year (for example, a
Form 1099-INT) that indicates the amount with-
Ordinary dividends Line 9a; also use Line 9a; also use
held. The information return will show anythat total more than Schedule B Schedule 1
backup withholding as “Federal income tax with-$1,500
held.”
Qualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the Line 9b; also use the Nonresident aliens. Generally, paymentsyou do not have to file Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and made to nonresident aliens are not subject toSchedule D) Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax
backup withholding. You can use FormWorksheet Worksheet
W-8BEN, Certificate of Foreign Status of Benefi-
cial Owner for United States Tax Withholding, toQualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the You cannot use Form
certify exempt status. However, this does notyou have to file Qualified Dividends and 1040A.
Schedule D) Capital Gain Tax exempt you from the 30% (or lower treaty) with-
Worksheet or the You cannot use Form holding rate that may apply to your investment
Schedule D Tax 1040EZ income. For information on the 30% rate, see
Worksheet Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Penalties. There are civil and criminal pen-Capital gain Line 13; also use the Line 10; also use the
alties for giving false information to avoiddistributions (if you do Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and
not have to file Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500.
Schedule D) Worksheet Worksheet The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of
up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or
Capital gain Schedule D, line 13; also both.
distributions (if you use the Qualified
Where to report investment income. Tablehave to file Schedule Dividends and Capital
D) Gain Tax Worksheet or 1-1 gives an overview of the forms and sched-
the Schedule D Tax ules to use to report some common types of
Worksheet investment income. But, see the rest of this
publication for detailed information about report-
Gain or loss from sales Line 13; also use ing investment income.of stocks or bonds Schedule D and the
Qualified Dividends and Joint accounts. If two or more persons holdYou cannot use FormCapital Gain Tax property (such as a savings account, bond, or1040AWorksheet or the stock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or
Schedule D Tax tenants in common, each person’s share of anyWorksheet interest or dividends from the property is deter-
mined by local law.Gain or loss from Line 13; also use
exchanges of like-kind Schedule D, Form 8824, Example. You and your husband have ainvestment property and the Qualified
joint money market account. Under state law,Dividends and Capital
half the income from the account belongs to you,Gain Tax Worksheet or
and half belongs to your husband. If you filethe Schedule D Tax
Worksheet separate returns, you each report half of the
income.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 5 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Income from property given to a child. to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Sched- • Cooperative banks,
Property you give as a parent to your child under ule K-1 (Form 1120S). • Credit unions,
the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the • Domestic building and loan associations,Nominees. Generally, if someone receivesUniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law, • Domestic savings and loan associations,interest as a nominee for you, that person willbecomes the child’s property. • Federal savings and loan associations,give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interestIncome from the property is taxable to the andreceived on your behalf.child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includes • Mutual savings banks.obligation to support the child is taxable to the amounts belonging to another person, see theparent or guardian having that legal obligation. discussion on nominee distributions, later, Money market funds. Generally, amountsSavings account with parent as trustee. under How To Report Interest Income. you receive from money market funds should beInterest income from a savings account opened Incorrect amount. If you receive a Form reported as dividends, not as interest.for a child who is a minor, but placed in the name 1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (orand subject to the order of the parents as trust- Certificates of deposit and other deferredother incorrect information), you should ask theees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of the interest accounts. If you open any of theseissuer for a corrected form. The new Formstate in which the child resides, both of the accounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervals1099-INT you receive will be marked “Cor-following are true. of 1 year or less during the term of the account.rected.”
• The savings account legally belongs to the You generally must include this interest in your
Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest incomechild. income when you actually receive it or are enti-
may also be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original tled to receive it without paying a substantial• The parents are not legally permitted to Issue Discount. For more information about penalty. The same is true for accounts that ma-use any of the funds to support the child. amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single
Discount (OID), later in this chapter. payment at maturity. If interest is deferred for
Accuracy-related penalty. An accu- more than 1 year, see Original Issue DiscountExempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interestracy-related penalty of 20% can be charged for (OID), later.dividends you receive from a regulated invest-underpayments of tax due to negligence or dis- ment company (mutual fund) are not included in Interest subject to penalty for early with-regard of rules or regulations or substantial un- your taxable income. (However, see Informa- drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferredderstatement of tax. For information on the tion-reporting requirement , next.) Ex- interest account before maturity, you may havepenalty and any interest that applies, see Penal- empt-interest dividends should be shown in box to pay a penalty. You must report the totalties in chapter 2. 8 of Form 1099-INT. amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-
count during the year, without subtracting theInformation-reporting requirement. Al- penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-though exempt-interest dividends are not tax- ings under How To Report Interest Income ,able, you must show them on your tax return ifInterest Income later, for more information on how to report theyou have to file. This is an information-reporting interest and deduct the penalty.Terms you may need to know requirement and does not change the ex-
(see Glossary): empt-interest dividends into taxable income. Money borrowed to invest in certificate of
See How To Report Interest Income, later. deposit. The interest you pay on money bor-
Accrual method rowed from a bank or savings institution to meet
Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid from the minimum deposit required for a certificate ofBelow-market loan
specified private activity bonds may be subject deposit from the institution and the interest youCash method to the alternative minimum tax. The ex- earn on the certificate are two separate items.Demand loan empt-interest dividends subject to the alterna- You must report the total interest you earn onForgone interest tive minimum tax are shown in box 9 of Form the certificate in your income. If you itemizeGift loan 1099-INT. See Form 6251 and its instructions deductions, you can deduct the interest you payInterest for more information about this tax. (Private ac- as investment interest, up to the amount of your
Nominee tivity bonds are discussed later under State or net investment income. See Interest Expenses
Local Government Obligations.)Original issue discount in chapter 3.
Private activity bond Interest on VA dividends. Interest on insur- Example. You deposited $5,000 with aTerm loan ance dividends that you leave on deposit with bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank tothe Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not make up the $10,000 minimum deposit requiredtaxable. This includes interest paid on dividendsThis section discusses the tax treatment of dif- to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer-on converted United States Government Lifeferent types of interest income. tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2006, but youInsurance policies and on National Service LifeIn general, any interest that you receive or received only $265, which represented the $575Insurance policies.that is credited to your account and can be you earned minus $310 interest charged on your
withdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have to $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a FormIndividual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
be entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to this 1099-INT for 2006 showing the $575 interestInterest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.
rule are discussed later. you earned. The bank also gives you a state-Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You
ment showing that you paid $310 interest forgenerally do not include it in your income untilForm 1099-INT. Interest income is generally 2006. You must include the $575 in your in-you make withdrawals from the IRA. See Publi-reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-cation 590 for more information.statement, by banks, savings and loans, and ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subjectother payers of interest. This form shows you the to the net investment income limit.Taxable Interest — Generalinterest you received during the year. Keep this
form for your records. You do not have to attach Gift for opening account. If you receive non-Taxable interest includes interest you receiveit to your tax return. cash gifts or services for making deposits or forfrom bank accounts, loans you make to others,Report on your tax return the total amount of opening an account in a savings institution, youand other sources. The following are someinterest income that you receive for the tax year. may have to report the value as interest.sources of taxable interest.
For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts orInterest not reported on Form 1099-INT.
services valued at more than $10 must be re-Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, you Dividends that are actually interest. Cer-
ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 ormust still report all of your taxable interest in- tain distributions commonly called dividends
more, gifts or services valued at more than $20come. For example, you may receive distributive are actually interest. You must report as inter-
must be reported as interest. The value is deter-shares of interest from partnerships or sub- est so-called “dividends” on deposits or on
mined by the cost to the financial institution.chapter S corporations. This interest is reported share accounts in:
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

Page 6 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You open a savings account at If you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in- Applicable federal rate. Applicable federal
your local bank and deposit $800. The account come on deposits that were frozen at the end of rates are published by the IRS each  month in the
earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal- 2006, see Frozen deposits under How To Re- Internal Revenue Bulletin. Some IRS offices
culator. If no other interest is credited to your port Interest Income  for information about re- have these bulletins available for research. See
account during the year, the Form 1099-INT you porting this interest income exclusion on your chapter 5 for other ways to get thi s information.
receive will show $35 interest for the year. You tax return. Rules for below-market loans. The rules thatmust report $35 interest income on your tax The interest you exclude is treated as credited apply to a below-market loan depend onreturn. to your account in the following year. You must whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, or
include it in income in the year you can withdraw term loan.Interest on insurance dividends. Interest on
it.insurance dividends left on deposit with an in- Gift and demand loans. A gift loan is anysurance company that can be withdrawn annu- below-market loan where the forgone interest isExample. $100 of interest was credited onally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to in the nature of a gift.your frozen deposit during the year. You with-your account. However, if you can withdraw it A demand loan is a loan payable in full at anydrew $80 but could not withdraw any more as ofonly on the anniversary date of the policy (or time upon demand by the lender. A demand loanthe end of the year. You must include $80 inother specified date), the interest is taxable in is a below-market loan if no interest is chargedyour income and exclude $20 from your incomethe year that date occurs. or if interest is charged at a rate below thefor the year. You must include the $20 in your applicable federal rate.Prepaid insurance premiums. Any increase income for the year you can withdraw it. A demand loan or gift loan that is a be-in the value of prepaid insurance premiums,
low-market loan is generally treated as anadvance premiums, or premium deposit funds is Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at a arm’s-length transaction in which the lender isinterest if it is applied to the payment of premi- discount when interest has been defaulted or treated as having made:ums due on insurance policies or made avail- when the interest has accrued but has not been
able for you to withdraw. • A loan to the borrower in exchange for apaid, the transaction is described as trading a
note that requires the payment of interestbond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is notU.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations, at the applicable federal rate, andincome and is not taxable as interest if paid later.such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds,
• An additional payment to the borrower inWhen you receive a payment of that interest, it isissued by any agency or instrumentality of the an amount equal to the forgone interest.a return of capital that reduces the remainingUnited States is taxable for federal income tax
cost basis of your bond. Interest that accruespurposes. The borrower is generally treated as transferringafter the date of purchase, however, is taxable the additional payment back to the lender asInterest on tax refunds. Interest you receive interest income for the year received or accrued. interest. The lender must report that amount ason tax refunds is taxable income. See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later in interest income.this chapter.Interest on condemnation award. If the con- The lender’s additional payment to the bor-demning authority pays you interest to compen- rower is treated as a gift, dividend, contributionsate you for a delay in payment of an award, the Below-Market Loans to capital, pay for services, or other payment,interest is taxable. depending on the substance of the transaction.If you make a below-market gift or demand loan,Installment sale payments. If a contract for The borrower may have to report this paymentyou must report as interest income any forgonethe sale or exchange of property provides for as taxable income, depending on its classifica-interest (defined later) from that loan. The be-deferred payments, it also usually provides for tion.low-market loan rules and exceptions are de-interest payable with the deferred payments. These transfers are considered to occur an-scribed in this section. For more information,That interest is taxable when you receive it. If nually, generally on December 31.see section 7872 of the Internal Revenue Codelittle or no interest is provided for in a deferred and its regulations. Term loans. A term loan is any loan that ispayment contract, part of each payment may be If you receive a below-market loan, you may not a demand loan. A term loan is a be-treated as interest. See Unstated Interest and be able to deduct the forgone interest as well as low-market loan if the amount of the loan is moreOriginal Issue Discount in Publication 537. any interest that you actually paid, but not if it is than the present value of all payments due
personal interest.Interest on annuity contract. Accumulated under the loan.
interest on an annuity contract you sell before its A lender who makes a below-market termLoans subject to the rules. The rules formaturity date is taxable. loan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer-below-market loans apply to: ring an additional lump-sum cash payment toUsurious interest. Usurious interest is inter- • Gift loans, the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to capi-est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as • Pay-related loans, tal, etc.) on the date the loan is made. Theinterest unless state law automatically changes • Corporation-shareholder loans, amount of this payment is the amount of the loanit to a payment on the principal. minus the present value, at the applicable fed-• Tax avoidance loans, and
Interest income on frozen deposits. Ex- eral rate, of all payments due under the loan. An• Certain loans made to qualified continuing
clude from your gross income interest on fro- equal amount is treated as original issue dis-care facilities under a continuing care con-
zen deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end count (OID). The lender must report the annualtract.
of the year, you cannot withdraw any part of part of the OID as interest income. The borrower
the deposit because: may be able to deduct the OID as interest ex-A pay-related loan is any below-market loan
pense. See Original Issue Discount (OID), later.• The financial institution is bankrupt or in- between an employer and an employee or be-
solvent, or tween an independent contractor and a person Exceptions to the below-market loan rules.
• The state in which the institution is located for whom the contractor provides services. Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are
has placed limits on withdrawals because A tax avoidance loan is any below-market discussed here.
other financial institutions in the state are loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one of Exception for loans of $10,000 or less.bankrupt or insolvent. the main purposes of the interest arrangement. The rules for below-market loans do not apply
to any day on which the total outstandingThe amount of interest you must exclude is Forgone interest. For any period, forgone in-
amount of loans between the borrower andthe interest that was credited on the frozen terest is:
lender is $10,000 or less. This exception ap-deposits minus the sum of: • The amount of interest that would be pay- plies only to:• The net amount you withdrew from these able for that period if interest accrued on
deposits during the year, and the loan at the applicable federal rate and 1. Gift loans between individuals if the gift
was payable annually on December 31, loan is not directly used to buy or carry• The amount you could have withdrawn as
minus income-producing assets, andof the end of the year (not reduced by any
penalty for premature withdrawals of a • Any interest actually payable on the loan 2. Pay-related loans or corpora-
time deposit). for the period. tion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of
Page 6 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 7 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
federal tax is not a principal purpose of the forgone interest to be included in income by the price and the redemption value is taxable inter-
interest arrangement. lender and deducted by the borrower is limited to est.
the amount of the borrower’s net investmentThis exception does not apply to a term loan Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds were firstincome for the year. If the borrower’s net invest-described in (2) above that previously has been offered in July 1980. They have a maturity pe-ment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated assubject to the below-market loan rules. Those riod of 30 years. Before July 1980, series Ezero. This limit does not apply to a loan if therules will continue to apply even if the outstand- bonds were issued. The original 10-year matur-avoidance of federal tax is one of the maining balance is reduced to $10,000 or less. ity period of series E bonds has been extendedpurposes of the interest arrangement.
to 40 years for bonds issued before DecemberException for loans to continuing care fa- Effective dates.  These rules apply to term 1965 and 30 years for bonds issued after No-cilities. Loans to qualified continuing care fa- loans made after June 6, 1984, and to demand vember 1965. Paper series EE and series Ecilities under continuing care contracts are not loans outstanding after that date. bonds are issued at a discount. The face value issubject to the rules for below-market loans for
payable to you at maturity. Electronic series EEthe calendar year if the lender or the lender’s
bonds are issued at their face value. The faceU.S. Savings Bondsspouse is age 62 or older at the end of the year.
value plus accrued interest is payable to you atFor the definitions of qualified continuing care
This section provides tax information on U.S. maturity.facility and continuing care contract, see Internal
savings bonds. It explains how to report the  Owners of paper series E and EE bonds canRevenue Code section 7872(h).
interest income on these bonds and how to treat convert them to electronic bonds. These con-Exception for loans without significant transfers of these bonds. verted bonds do not retain the denominationtax effect. Loans are excluded from the be- U.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi- listed on the paper certificate but are posted atlow-market loan rules if their interest arrange- viduals are the following. their purchase price (with accrued interest).ments do not have a significant effect on the • Series EE bondsfederal tax liability of the borrower or the Series I bonds. Series I bonds were first of-• Series I bondslender. These loans include: fered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed bonds
issued at their face amount with a maturity pe-1. Loans made available by the lender to the For other information on U.S. savings riod of 30 years. The face value plus all accruedgeneral public on the same terms and con- bonds, write to: interest is payable to you at maturity.ditions that are consistent with the lender’s
customary business practice, Reporting options for cash method tax-For Series HH/H:2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or payers. If you use the cash method of report-Bureau of the Public Debtmunicipal government that are made avail- ing income, you can report the interest onDivision of Customer Assistanceable under a program of general applica- series EE, series E, and series I bonds in ei-P.O. Box 2186tion to the public, ther of the following ways.Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186.3. Certain employee-relocation loans, 1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest
4. Certain loans from a foreign person, un- until the earlier of the year you cash or
less the interest income would be effec- dispose of the bonds or the year in which
tively connected with the conduct of a U.S. they mature. (However, see SavingsFor Series EE and Itrade or business and would not be ex- bonds traded, later.)Bureau of the Public Debtempt from U.S. tax under an income tax Note. Series E bonds issued in 1976 ma-Division of Customer Assistancetreaty, tured in 2006. If you have used method 1,P.O. Box 70125. Gift loans to a charitable organization, con- you generally must report the interest onParkersburg, WV 26106-7012.tributions to which are deductible, if the these bonds on your 2006 return.
total outstanding amount of loans between 2. Method 2. Choose to report the increaseOr, on the Internet, visit:the organization and lender is $250,000 or in redemption value as interest each year.www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/prod-less at all times during the tax year, and ucts/products.htm/.6. Other loans on which the interest arrange- You must use the same method for all series EE,ment can be shown to have no significant Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac- series E, and series I bonds you own. If you doeffect on the federal tax liability of the crual method of accounting, you must report not choose method 2 by reporting the increaselender or the borrower. interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it in redemption value as interest each year, you
For a loan described in (6) above, all the accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interest must use method 1.
facts and circumstances are used to determine until you receive it or until the bonds mature. If you plan to cash your bonds in theif the interest arrangement has a significant same year that you will pay for higherCash method taxpayers. If you use the casheffect on the federal tax liability of the lender or educational expenses, you may wantmethod of accounting, as most individual tax-
TIP
borrower. Some factors to be considered are: to use method 1 because you may be able topayers do, you generally report the interest on• Whether items of income and deduction exclude the interest from your income. To learnU.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But seegenerated by the loan offset each other, how, see Education Savings Bond Program,Series EE and series I bonds, below.• The amount of these items, later.Series HH bonds. These bonds were issued• The cost to you of complying with the be-
at face value. Interest is paid twice a year bylow-market loan rules, if they were to ap- Change from method 1. If you want to
direct deposit to your bank account. If you are aply, and change your method of reporting the interest
cash method taxpayer, you must report interest from method 1 to method 2, you can do so• Any reasons other than taxes for structur-
on these bonds as income in the year you re- without permission from the IRS. In the year ofing the transaction as a below-market
ceive it. change, you must report all interest accrued toloan.
Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980; date and not previously reported for all your
they were last offered in August 2004. Before bonds.If you structure a transaction to meet this
1980, series H bonds were issued. Series H Once you choose to report the interest eachexception, and one of the principal purposes of
bonds are treated the same as series HH bonds. year, you must continue to do so for all seriesstructuring the transaction in that way is the
If you are a cash method taxpayer, you must EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and foravoidance of federal tax, the loan will be consid-
report the interest when you receive it. any you get later, unless you request permissionered a tax-avoidance loan and this exception will
Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30 to change, as explained next.not apply.
years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of Change from method 2. To change from
$100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi- Series EE and series I bonds. Interest on method 2 to method 1, you must request per-
viduals, if the outstanding loans between the these bonds is payable when you redeem the mission from the IRS. Permission for the
lender and borrower total $100,000 or less, the bonds. The difference between the purchase change is automatically granted if you  send the
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Page 8 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or series I bonds, the interest on the bonds isTable 1-2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
income to your child in the earlier of the year the
bonds are cashed or disposed of or the year the
bonds mature, unless your child chooses to re-IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ...
port the interest income each year.
you buy a bond in your name and the name of you.
Choice to report interest each year. Theanother person as co-owners, using only your
choice to report the accrued interest each yearown funds
can be made either by your child or by you foryou buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond. your child. This choice is made by filing an in-who is the sole owner of the bond come tax return that shows all the interest
earned to date, and by stating on the return thatyou and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion
your child chooses to report the interest eachco-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond.
year. Either you or your child should keep a copypurchase price
of this return.you and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate Unless your child is otherwise required to fileproperty state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally a tax return for any year after making this choice,property report one-half of the interest. your child does not have to file a return only to
report the annual accrual of U.S. savings bond
interest under this choice. However, see Tax onIRS a statement that meets all the following Internal Revenue Service investment income of a child under age 18 ,Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulingsrequirements. earlier, under General Information. Neither youBranch) nor your child can change the way you report the1. You have typed or printed at the top, 1111 Constitution Avenue, NW interest unless you request permission from the“Change in Method of Accounting Under Washington, DC 20224. IRS, as discussed earlier under Change fromSection 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc.
method 2.2002-9” (or later update). Instead of filing this statement, you can re-2. It includes your name and social security Ownership transferred. If you bought seriesquest permission to change from method 2 tonumber under the label in (1). E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with yourmethod 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,
3. It identifies the savings bonds for which own funds and had them reissued in yourfollow the form instructions for an automatic
you are requesting this change. co-owner’s name or beneficiary’s name alone,change. No user fee is required. 
4. It includes your agreement to: you must include in your gross income for the
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in year of reissue all interest that you earned ona. Report all interest on any bonds ac- the names of co-owners, such as you and your these bonds and have not previously reported.quired during or after the year of child or you and your spouse, interest on the But, if the bonds were reissued in your namechange when the interest is realized bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who alone, you do not have to report the interestupon disposition, redemption, or final bought the bond. accrued at that time.maturity, whichever is earliest, and This same rule applies when bonds (otherOne co-owner’s funds used. If you usedb. Report all interest on the bonds ac- than bonds held as community property) areyour funds to buy the bond, you must pay the taxquired before the year of change when transferred between spouses or incident to di-on the interest. This is true even if you let thethe interest is realized upon disposition, vorce.other co-owner redeem the bond and keep allredemption, or final maturity, whichever the proceeds. Under these circumstances, since
Example. You bought series EE bonds en-is earliest, with the exception of the in- the other co-owner will receive a Form 1099-INT
tirely with your own funds. You did not choose toterest reported in prior tax years. at the time of redemption, the other co-owner report the accrued interest each year. Later, youmust provide you with another Form 1099-INT5. It includes your signature. transfer the bonds to your former spouse undershowing the amount of interest from the bond a divorce agreement. You must include the de-You must attach this statement to your tax re- that is taxable to you. The co-owner who re- ferred accrued interest, from the date of thedeemed the bond is a “nominee.” See Nomineeturn for the year of change, which you must file original issue of the bonds to the date of transfer,distributions under How To Report Interest In-by the due date (including extensions). in your income in the year of transfer. Yourcome, later, for more information about how aYou can have an automatic extension of 6 former spouse includes in income the interest onperson who is a nominee reports interest in-months from the due date of your return for the the bonds from the date of transfer to the date ofcome belonging to another person.year of change (excluding extensions) to file the redemption.
Both co-owners’ funds used. If you andstatement with an amended return. At the top of Purchased jointly. If you and athe other co-owner each contribute part of thethe statement, enter “Filed pursuant to section co-owner each contributed funds to buy seriesbond’s purchase price, the interest is generally301.9100-2.” To get this extension, you must E, series EE, or series I bonds jointly and latertaxable to each of you, in proportion to thehave filed your original return for the year of the have the bonds reissued in the co-owner’s nameamount each of you paid.change by the due date (including extensions). alone, you must include in your gross income for
Community property. If you and your the year of reissue your share of all the interestBy the date you file the original state- spouse live in a community property state and earned on the bonds that you have not previ-ment with your return, you must also hold bonds as community property, one-half of ously reported. The former co-owner does notsend a copy to the address below. the interest is considered received by each of have to include in gross income at the time of
you. If you file separate returns, each of you reissue his or her share of the interest earned
generally must report one-half of the bond inter- that was not reported before the transfer. This
est. For more information about community interest, however, as well as all interest earned
property, see Publication 555, Community Prop- after the reissue, is income to the formerInternal Revenue Service erty. co-owner.Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulings
This income-reporting rule also applies whenTable 1-2. These rules are also shown inBranch) the bonds are reissued in the name of yourTable 1-2.P.O. Box 7604 former co-owner and a new co-owner. But theBenjamin Franklin Station new co-owner will report only his or her share ofChild as only owner. Interest on U.S. savingsWashington, DC 20044. the interest earned after the transfer.bonds bought for and registered only in the
If you use a private delivery service, send the name of your child is income to your child, even If bonds that you and a co-owner bought
copy to the address below. if you paid for the bonds and are named as jointly are reissued to each of you separately in
beneficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E, the same proportion as your contribution to the
Page 8 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 9 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
purchase price, neither you nor your co-owner person who acquires the bonds then in- bonds and the interest, if any, payable on t he
cludes in income only interest earned after series H bonds but not received as of the date ofhas to report at that time the interest earned
the date of death. your aunt’s death. You must report any interestbefore the bonds were reissued.
received during the year as income on your2. If the choice in (1) is not made, the interest
Example 1. You and your spouse each return. The part of the interest that was payableearned up to the date of death is income in
spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series but not received before your aunt’s death isrespect of the decedent. It should not be
EE savings bond. The bond was issued to you income in respect of the decedent and mayincluded in the decedent’s final return. All
and your spouse as co-owners. You both post- qualify for the estate tax deduction. For informa-of the interest earned both before and after
tion on when to report the interest on the seriespone reporting interest on the bond. You later the decedent’s death (except any part re-
E bonds traded, see Savings bonds traded ,have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one ported by the estate on its income tax re-
later.in your name and one in your spouse’s name. At turn) is income to the person who acquires
that time neither you nor your spouse has to the bonds. If that person uses the cash
Savings bonds distributed from a retirementreport the interest earned to the date of reissue. method and does not choose to report the
or profit-sharing plan. If you acquire a U.S.interest each year, he or she can postpone
savings bond in a taxable distribution from aExample 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE reporting it until the year the bonds are
retirement or profit-sharing plan, your income forsavings bond entirely with your own funds. The cashed or disposed of or the year they
the year of distribution includes the bond’s re-bond was issued to you and your spouse as mature, whichever is earlier. In the year
demption value (its cost plus the interest ac-co-owners. You both postponed reporting inter- that person reports the interest, he or she
crued before the distribution). When you redeemest on the bond. You later have the bond reis- can claim a deduction for any federal es-
the bond (whether in the year of distribution orsued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and tate tax that was paid on the part of the
later), your interest income includes only theone in your spouse’s name. You must report half interest included in the decedent’s estate.
interest accrued after the bond was distributed.the interest earned to the date of reissue. For more information on income in respect of a To figure the interest reported as a taxable distri-
decedent, see Publication 559, Survivors, Exec- bution and your interest income when you re-Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, series utors, and Administrators. deem the bond, see Worksheet for savingsEE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a
bonds distributed from a retirement ortrust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must Example 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax- profit-sharing plan under How To Report Interestinclude in your income for that year the interest payer, died and left you a $1,000 series EE Income, later.earned to the date of transfer if you have not bond. He had bought the bond for $500 and hadalready reported it. However, if you are consid- not chosen to report the interest each year. At Savings bonds traded. If you postponed re-ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in the date of death, interest of $200 had accrued porting the interest on your series EE or series Evalue both before and after the transfer contin- on the bond and its value of $700 was included bonds, you did not recognize taxable incomeues to be taxable to you, you can continue to in your uncle’s estate. Your uncle’s executor when you traded the bonds for series HH ordefer reporting the interest earned each year. chose not to include the $200 accrued interest in series H bonds, unless you received cash in theYou must include the total interest in your in- your uncle’s final income tax return. The $200 is trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-come in the year you cash or dispose of the income in respect of the decedent. ries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can-bonds or the year the bonds finally mature, not trade any other series of bonds for series HHYou are a cash method taxpayer and do notwhichever is earlier. bonds.) Any cash you received is income up tochoose to report the interest each year as it isThe same rules apply to previously unre- the amount of the interest earned on the bondsearned. If you cash the bond when it reachesported interest on series EE or series E bonds if traded. When your series HH or series H bondsmaturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter-the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or mature, or if you dispose of them before matur-est income—the difference between maturityseries H bonds you acquired in a trade for the ity, you report as interest the difference betweenvalue of $1,000 and the original cost of $500.series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds their redemption value and your cost. Your costFor that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane-traded, later. is the sum of the amount you paid for the tradedous itemized deduction not subject to the
series EE or series E bonds plus any amount2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) any federal
Decedents. The manner of reporting interest you had to pay at the time of the trade.estate tax paid because the $200 interest was
income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds, included in your uncle’s estate.
after the death of the owner, depends on the Example.  In 2004, you traded series EE
accounting and income-reporting method previ- bonds (on which you postponed reporting theExample 2. If, in Example 1, the executor
ously used by the decedent. interest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223had chosen to include the $200 accrued interest
in cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in-in your uncle’s final return, you would report onlyDecedent who reported interest each year. come in 2004, the year of the trade. At the time$300 as interest when you cashed the bond atIf the bonds transferred because of death were of the trade, the series EE bonds had accruedmaturity. $300 is the interest earned after yourowned by a person who used an accrual interest of $523 and a redemption value ofuncle’s death.method, or who used the cash method and had $2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma-chosen to report the interest each year, the turity, when you receive $2,500. You must reportExample 3. If, in Example 1, you make orinterest earned in the year of death up to the $300 as interest income in the year of maturity.have made the choice to report the increase indate of death must be reported on that person’s This is the difference between their redemptionredemption value as interest each year, youfinal return. The person who acquires the bonds value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (theinclude in gross income for the year you acquireincludes in income only interest earned after the amount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It isthe bond all of the unreported increase in valuedate of death. also the difference between the accrued interestof all series E, series EE, and series I bonds you
Decedent who postponed reporting inter- of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223hold, including the $200 on the bond you inher-
est. If the transferred bonds were owned by a cash received on the trade.)ited from your uncle.
decedent who had used the cash method and Choice to report interest in year of trade.had not chosen to report the interest each Example 4. When your aunt died, she You could have chosen to treat all of the previ-year, and who had bought the bonds entirely owned series H bonds that she had acquired in a ously unreported accrued interest on series EEwith his or her own funds, all interest earned trade for series E bonds. You were the benefi- or series E bonds traded for series HH bonds asbefore death must be reported in one of the ciary of these bonds. Your aunt used the cash income in the year of the trade. If you made thisfollowing ways. method and did not choose to report the interest choice, it is treated as a change from method 1.on the series E bonds each year as it accrued.1. The surviving spouse or personal repre- See Change from method 1  under Series EEYour aunt’s executor chose not to include anysentative (executor, administrator, etc.) and series I bonds, earlier.interest earned before your aunt’s death on herwho files the final income tax return of the
final return.decedent can choose to include on that Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond inter-
return all of the interest earned on the The income in respect of the decedent is the est. When you cash a bond, the bank or
bonds before the decedent’s death. The sum of the unreported interest on the series E other payer that redeems it must give you a
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Page 10 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1099-INT if the interest part of the pay- year if you pay qualified higher educational ex- 1. Tax-free part of scholarships a nd fellow-
ment you receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your ships.penses during the same year. This exclusion is
Form 1099-INT should show the interest as the known as the Education Savings Bond Program. 2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
difference between the amount you received tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.You do not qualify for this exclusion if your
and the amount paid for the bond. However, filing status is married filing separately. 3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
your Form 1099-INT may show more interest tion of distributions from a qualified tuition
than you have to include on your income tax program.Form 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of In-
return. For example, this may happen if any of terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds 4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts orthe following are true. Issued After 1989, to figure your exclusion. At- inheritances) received as educational as-
• You chose to report the increase in the tach the form to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. sistance, such as:
redemption value of the bond each year. a. Veterans’ educational assistance bene-The interest shown on your Form Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualified fits,1099-INT will not be reduced by amounts U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued b. Qualified tuition reductions, orpreviously included in income. after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be c. Employer-provided educational assis-• You received the bond from a decedent. issued either in your name (sole owner) or in tance.The interest shown on your Form your and your spouse’s names (co-owners).
1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter- You must be at least 24 years old before the 5. Any expense used in figuring the Hope
est reported by the decedent before death, bond’s issue date. For example, a bond bought and lifetime learning credits.
or on the decedent’s final return, or by the by a parent and issued in the name of his or her For information about these benefits, see Pub-estate on the estate’s income tax return. child under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu- lication 970.• Ownership of the bond was transferred. sion by the parent or child.
The interest shown on your Form Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in-The issue date of a bond may be earlier1099-INT will not be reduced by interest terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav-than the date the bond is purchasedthat accrued before the transfer. ings bonds you redeem during the year are notbecause the issue date assigned to aCAUTION
!
• You were named as a co-owner and the more than your adjusted qualified higher educa-bond is the first day of the month in which it isother co-owner contributed funds to buy tional expenses for the year, you may be able topurchased.the bond. The interest shown on your exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds are
Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by the more than the expenses, you may be able toBeneficiary. You can designate any individ-amount you received as nominee for the exclude only part of the interest.ual (including a child) as a beneficiary of theother co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in To determine the excludable amount, multi-bond.this section, for more information about ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.
Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclu-the reporting requirements.) The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the
sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp- qualified higher educational expenses you paid• You received the bond in a taxable distri-
tion information from the Department of during the year. The denominator (bottom part)bution from a retirement or profit-sharing
Treasury. of the fraction is the total proceeds you receivedplan. The interest shown on your Form
during the year.1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter-
Qualified expenses. Qualified higher educa-est portion of the amount taxable as a
tional expenses are tuition and fees required for Example. In February 2006, Mark anddistribution from the plan and not taxable
you, your spouse, or your dependent (for whom Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-as interest. (This amount is generally
ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in Aprilyou claim an exemption) to attend an eligibleshown on Form 1099-R, Distributions
1996. They received proceeds of $7,272, repre-educational institution.From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or
senting principal of $5,000 and interest ofProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Qualified expenses include any contribution
$2,272. In 2006, they paid $4,000 of their daugh-Contracts, etc., for the year of distribution.) you make to a qualified tuition program or to a
ter’s college tuition. They are not claiming anCoverdell education savings account. For infor-
education credit for that amount, and theirFor more information on including the correct mation about these programs, see Publication
daughter does not have any tax-free educationalamount of interest on your return, see U.S. sav- 970, Tax Benefits for Education.
assistance. They can exclude $1,250 ($2,272 ×ings bond interest previously reported  or Nomi- Qualified expenses do not include expenses ($4,000 ÷ $7,272)) of interest in 2006. Theynee distributions under How To Report Interest for room and board or for courses involving must pay tax on the remaining $1,022 ($2,272 −Income, later. sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of a $1,250) interest.degree or certificate granting program.Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-
Figuring the interest part of the proceedsempt from state and local taxes. The Eligible educational institutions. These (Form 8815, line 6). To figure the amount ofForm 1099-INT you receive will indi-
TIP
institutions include most public, private, and interest to report on Form 8815, line 6, use thecate the amount that is for U.S. savings bonds nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational Line 6 Worksheet in the Form 8815 instructions.interest in box 3. Do not include this income on schools that are accredited and are eligible toyour state or local income tax return. participate in student aid programs run by the
Department of Education. See chapter 10 of
Publication 970 for information on foreign
Education Savings Bond Program schools that are eligible.
Reduction for certain benefits. You mustYou may be able to exclude from income all or
reduce your qualified higher educational ex-part of the interest you receive on the redemp-
penses by all of the following tax-free benefits.tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the
Page 10 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 11 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you previously reported any interest (Form 1040), you must make a special computa- bonds generally pay interest every 6 months .
from savings bonds cashed during tion of your deductible interest to figure the net Generally, you report this interest for the year
2006, use the Alternate Line 6 Work- royalty income included in your modified AGI. paid. When the notes or bonds mature, you can
sheet below instead. You must figure deductible interest without re- redeem these securities for face value.
gard to this exclusion of bond interest. Treasury notes and bonds are sold by auc-
You can use a “dummy” Form 4952, Invest- tion. Two types of bids are accepted: competi-Alternate Line 6 Worksheet
ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make the tive bids and noncompetitive bids. If you make a1. Enter the amount from Form 8815, special computation. On this form, include in competitive bid and a determination is made thatline 5 .................... your net investment income your total interest the purchase price is less than the face value,2. Enter the face value of all post-1989 income for the year from series EE and I U.S. you will receive a refund for the difference be-paper series EE bonds cashed in savings bonds. Use the deductible interest tween the purchase price and the face value.2006 ..................... amount from this form only to figure the net This amount is considered original issue dis-3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50) royalty income included in your modified AGI. count. However, the original issue discount rules4. Enter the face value of all electronic
Do not attach this form to your tax return. (discussed later) do not apply if the discount isseries EE bonds (including
After you figure this interest exclusion, use a less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the facepost-1989 series EE bonds
separate Form 4952 to figure your actual deduc- amount, multiplied by the number of full yearsconverted from paper to electronic
tion for investment interest expenses, and at- from the date of original issue to maturity. Seeformat) and all series I bonds
tach that form to your return. De minimis OID  under Original Issue Discountcashed in 2006 ..............
5. Add lines 3 and 4 ............ (OID), later. If the purchase price is determinedRecordkeeping. If you claim the inter-6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ....... to be more than the face amount, the differenceest exclusion, you must keep a written7. Enter the amount of interest is a premium. (See Bond Premium Amortizationrecord of the qualified U.S. savingsRECORDS
reported as income in previous in chapter 3.)bonds you redeem. Your record must includeyears ....................
the serial number, issue date, face value, and For other information on these notes or8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter the
total redemption proceeds (principal and inter- bonds, write to:result here and on Form 8815, line 6
est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818,
Optional Form To Record Redemption of Series Bureau of The Public DebtModified adjusted gross income limit.
EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989, P.O. Box 7015The interest exclusion is limited if your modified
to record this information. You should also keep Parkersburg, WV 26106-7015adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-• $63,100 to $78,100 for taxpayers filing sin- Or, on the Internet, visit:mentation that shows you paid qualified highergle or head of household, and www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/prod-educational expenses during the year.• $94,700 to $124,700 for married taxpayers ucts/products.htm/.filing jointly, or for a qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child. U.S. Treasury Bills, Treasury inflation-protected securities
(TIPS). These securities pay interest twice a
Notes, and BondsYou do not qualify for the interest exclusion if
year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amountyour modified AGI is equal to or more than the Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts that is adjusted to take into account inflation andupper limit for your filing status. (obligations) of the U.S. Government. deflation. For the tax treatment of these securi-
Modified AGI. Modified AGI, for purposes ties, see Inflation-Indexed Debt InstrumentsTaxation of interest. Interest income fromof this exclusion, is adjusted gross income under Original Issue Discount (OID), later.Treasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to(Form 1040A, line 21, or Form 1040, line 37)
Retirement, sale, or redemption. For infor-federal income tax, but is exempt from all statefigured before the interest exclusion, and modi-
mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption ofand local income taxes. You should receivefied by adding back any:
U.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or-Form 1099-INT showing the amount of interest1. Foreign earned income exclusion, dinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non-(in box 3) that was paid to you for the year.2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction, taxable Trades  in chapter 4 for informationPayments of principal and interest generally
3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents about trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer-will be credited to your designated checking or
of American Samoa, tain other designated issues.savings account by direct deposit through the
4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico, TREASURY DIRECT system.
5. Exclusion for adoption benefits received Bonds Sold Between InterestTreasury bills. These bills generally have aunder an employer’s adoption assistance Dates4-week, 13-week, or 26-week maturity period.program,
They are issued at a discount in the amount of6. Deduction for tuition and fees, If you sell a bond between interest payment$1,000 and multiples of $1,000. The difference7. Deduction for student loan interest, and dates, part of the sales price represents interestbetween the discounted price you pay for the accrued to the date of sale. You must report that8. Deduction for domestic production activi- bills and the face value you receive at maturity is part of the sales price as interest income for theties. interest income. Generally, you report this inter- year of sale.est income when the bill is paid at maturity. SeeUse the worksheet in the instructions for line If you buy a bond between interest paymentDiscount on Short-Term Obligations under Dis-9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If you dates, part of the purchase price representscount on Debt Instruments, later.claim any of the exclusion or deduction items interest accrued before the date of purchase.If you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur-listed above (except items 6, 7, and 8), add the When that interest is paid to you, treat it as aity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you willamount of the exclusion or deduction (except return of your capital investment, rather thanreceive payment for the difference between theany deduction for tuition and fees, student loan interest income, by reducing your basis in theproceeds of the maturing bill (par amount lessinterest, or domestic production activities) to the bond. See Accrued interest on bonds  underany tax withheld) and the purchase price of theamount on line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the How To Report Interest Income , later in thisnew Treasury security. However, you must re-total on Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI. chapter, for information on reporting the pay-port the full amount of the interest income on ment.Royalties included in modified AGI. Be- each of your Treasury bills at the time it reachescause the deduction for interest expenses due maturity.to royalties and other investments is limited to Insurance
your net investment income (see Investment Treasury notes and bonds. Treasury notes
Interest in chapter 3), you cannot figure the have maturity periods of more than 1 year, rang- Life insurance proceeds paid to you as ben efi-
deduction for interest expenses until you have ing up to 10 years. Maturity periods for Treasury ciary of the insured person are usually not tax-
figured this exclusion of savings bond interest. bonds are longer than 10 years. Both of these able. But if you receive the proceeds in
Therefore, if you had interest expenses that are Treasury issues generally are issued in denomi- installments, you must usually r eport part of
due to royalties and deductible on Schedule E nations of $1,000 to $1 million. Both notes and each installment payment as interes t income.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

Page 12 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information about insurance pro- are to be used in the exercise of any essential 1. More than 10% of the proceeds of the is-
ceeds received in installments, see Publication government function. However, interest on pri- sue is to be used for a private business
525. vate activity bonds (other than certain bonds for use.
tribal manufacturing facilities) is taxable. 2. More than 10% of the payment of the prin-Interest option on insurance. If you leave life
cipal or interest is:insurance proceeds on deposit with an insur- Original issue discount. Original issue dis-
ance company under an agreement to pay inter- count (OID) on tax-exempt state or local govern- a. Secured by an interest in property to be
est only, the interest paid to you is taxable. ment bonds is treated as tax-exempt interest. used for a private business use (or pay-
For information on the treatment of OID ments for this property), orAnnuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur- when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, see b. Derived from payments for property (orance proceeds, the annuity payments you re- Tax-exempt state and local government bonds borrowed money) used for a privateceive are taxed as pension and annuity income under Discounted Debt Instruments  in chapter business use.from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income. 4.See Publication 939, General Rule for Pensions
Also, a bond is generally considered a privateand Annuities, for information on taxation of Stripped bonds or coupons. For special
pension and annuity income from nonqualified rules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga- activity bond if the amount of the proceeds to
plans. tions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons  under be used to make or finance loans to persons
Original Issue Discount (OID), later. other than government units is more than 5%
of the proceeds or $5 million (whichever isState or Local Information reporting requirement. If you
less).must file a tax return, you are required to showGovernment Obligations
any tax-exempt interest you received on your Qualified bond. Interest on a private activ-Interest you receive on an obligation issued by a return. This is an information-reporting require- ity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. Astate or local government is generally not tax- ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter- qualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (includ-able. The issuer should be able to tell you est to taxable interest. See Reporting ing an enterprise zone facility bond, a New Yorkwhether the interest is taxable. The issuer tax-exempt interest under How To Report Inter- Liberty bond, or a Gulf Opportunity Zone Bondshould also give you a periodic (or year-end) est Income, later in this chapter. treated as an exempt facility bond), qualifiedstatement showing the tax treatment of the obli-
student loan bond, qualified small issue bondgation. If you invested in the obligation through a
(including a tribal manufacturing facility bond),trust, a fund, or other organization, that organi- Taxable Interest
qualified redevelopment bond, qualified mort-zation should give you this information.
gage bond (including a Gulf Opportunity ZoneInterest on some state or local obligations isEven if interest on the obligation is not taxable. Bond) treated as a qualified mortgage bond,subject to income tax, you may have to qualified veterans’ mortgage bond, or qualifiedFederally guaranteed bonds. Interest onreport capital gain or loss when you sellCAUTION
!
501(c)(3) bond (a bond issued for the benefit offederally guaranteed state or local obligationsit. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax may certain tax-exempt organizations).issued after 1983 is generally taxable. This ruleapply to other dispositions of the obligation.
does not apply to interest on obligations guar- Interest that you receive on these
anteed by the following U.S. Government tax-exempt bonds (except qualified 501(c)(3)
agencies. bonds, New York Liberty bonds, and Gulf Op-Tax-Exempt Interest • Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran- portunity Zone Bonds), if issued after August 7,
Interest on a bond used to finance government tee was under the Northwest Power Act as 1986, generally is a “tax preference item” and
operations generally is not taxable if the bond in effect on July 18, 1984). may be subject to the alternative minimum tax.
is issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a • Department of Veterans Affairs. See Form 6251 and its instructions for more
U.S. possession, or any of their political subdi- • Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora- information.
visions. Political subdivisions include: tion. Enterprise zone facility bonds. Interest on• Port authorities, • Federal Housing Administration. certain private activity bonds issued by a state or• Toll road commissions, • Federal National Mortgage Association. local government to finance a facility used in an• Utility services authorities, • Government National Mortgage Corpora- empowerment zone or enterprise community is• Community redevelopment agencies, and tion. tax exempt. For information on these bonds, see• Qualified volunteer fire departments (for • Resolution Funding Corporation. Publication 954.certain obligations issued after 1980). • Student Loan Marketing Association.
New York Liberty bonds. New York LibertyThere are other requirements for tax-exempt bonds are bonds issued after March 9, 2002, tobonds. Contact the issuing state or local govern- Mortgage revenue bonds. The proceeds of finance the construction and rehabilitation ofment agency or see sections 103 and 141 these bonds are used to finance mortgage loans real property in the designated “Liberty Zone” ofthrough 150 of the Internal Revenue Code and for homebuyers. Generally, interest on state or New York City. Interest on these bonds is taxthe related regulations. local government home mortgage bonds issued exempt.after April 24, 1979, is taxable unless the bonds
Obligations that are not bonds. Inter- are qualified mortgage bonds or qualified veter-
est on a state or local government obli- ans’ mortgage bonds. Market discount. Market discount on a
gation may be tax exempt even if the
TIP
tax-exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If youArbitrage bonds. Interest on arbitrage bondsobligation is not a bond. For example, interest on bought the bond after April 30, 1993, you canissued by state or local governments after Octo-a debt evidenced only by an ordinary written choose to accrue the market discount over theber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is aagreement of purchase and sale may be tax period you own the bond and include it in yourbond any portion of the proceeds of which isexempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer on income currently, as taxable interest. See Mar-expected to be used to buy (or to replace fundsdefault by the state or political subdivision may ket Discount Bonds  under Discount on Debtused to buy) higher yielding investments. Abe tax exempt. Instruments, later. If you do not make thatbond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuer
choice, or if you bought the bond before May 1,intentionally uses any part of the proceeds of theRegistration requirement. A bond issued af-
1993, any gain from market discount is taxableissue in this manner.ter June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis-
when you dispose of the bond.tered form for the interest to be tax exempt. Private activity bonds. Interest on a private
For more information on the treatment ofIndian tribal government. Bonds issued after activity bond that is not a qualified bond (de-
market discount when you dispose of a1982 by an Indian tribal government are treated fined below) is taxable. Generally, a private
tax-exempt bond, see Discounted Debt Instru-as issued by a state. Interest on these bonds is activity bond is part of a state or local govern-
ments under Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss ingenerally tax exempt if the bonds are part of an ment bond issue that meets both of the follow-
chapter 4.issue of which substantially all of the proceeds ing requirements.
Page 12 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 13 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
issued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth of and has information that will help you figure OID.
1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10 If your debt instrument is not listed, consult theDiscount on
(the number of full years from the date of original issuer for further information about the accrued
issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20 OID for the year.Debt Instruments
discount is less than $25, the OID is treated as
zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you willTerms you may need to know Nominee. If someone else is the holder of
recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)(see Glossary): record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-
ment that belongs to you and receives a Form
Example 2. The facts are the same as in 1099-OID on your behalf, that person must giveMarket discount
Example 1, except that the bond was issued at you a Form 1099-OID.Market discount bond $950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount If you receive a Form 1099-OID that includesOriginal issue discount (OID) is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-Premium must include the OID in income as it accrues inee distributions under How To Report Interestover the term of the bond. Income, later.
In general, a debt instrument, such as a bond, Debt instrument bought after original is-
note, debenture, or other evidence of indebted- sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID.
ness, that bears no interest or bears interest at minimis OID at a premium, the discount is not You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or
a lower than current market rate will usually be includible in income. If you buy a debt instrument box 6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the follow-
issued at less than its face amount. This dis- with de minimis OID at a discount, the discount ing apply.
count is, in effect, additional interest income. is reported under the market discount rules. See • You bought the debt instrument after its
The following are some of the types of dis- Market Discount Bonds, later in this chapter. original issue and paid a premium or an
counted debt instruments. acquisition premium.
• U.S. Treasury bonds. Exceptions to reporting OID. The OID rules • The debt instrument is a stripped bond or
• Corporate bonds. discussed here do not apply to the following a stripped coupon (including certain zero
debt instruments. • Municipal bonds. coupon instruments). See Figuring OID
• Certificates of deposit. under Stripped Bonds and Coupons, later1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see
in this chapter.• Notes between individuals. Stripped tax-exempt obligations, later.)
• Stripped bonds and coupons. 2. U.S. savings bonds.
• Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). 3. Short-term debt instruments (those with a See Original issue discount (OID) adjustment
fixed maturity date of not more than 1 year under How To Report Interest Income , later inThe discount on these instruments (except mu- from the date of issue). this chapter, for information about reporting thenicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. The 4. Obligations issued by an individual before correct amount of OID.discount on municipal bonds generally is not March 2, 1984.taxable (but see State or Local Government Premium. You bought a debt instrument at5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow-Obligations, earlier, for exceptions). See also a premium if its adjusted basis immediately aftering are true.REMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs , later, for purchase was greater than the total of all
information about applying the rules discussed a. The lender is not in the business of amounts payable on the instrument after the
in this section to the regular interest holder of a lending money. purchase date, other than qualified stated inter-
real estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi- b. The amount of the loan, plus the est.
nancial asset securitization investment trust, or amount of any outstanding prior loans If you bought an OID debt instrument at aother CDO. between the same individuals, is premium, you generally do not have to report
$10,000 or less. any OID as ordinary income.
Original Issue c. Avoiding any federal tax is not one of Qualified stated interest. In general, this isthe principal purposes of the loan.Discount (OID) stated interest that is unconditionally payable in
cash or property (other than debt instruments ofOID is a form of interest. You generally include the issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate.OID in your income as it accrues over the term of
Form 1099-OIDthe debt instrument, whether or not you receive Acquisition premium. You bought a debt
any payments from the issuer. instrument at an acquisition premium if both ofThe issuer of the debt instrument (or your bro-A debt instrument generally has OID when the following are true.ker, if you held the instrument through a broker)the instrument is issued for a price that is less • You did not pay a premium.should give you Form 1099-OID, Original Issuethan its stated redemption price at maturity. OID • The instrument’s adjusted basis immedi-Discount, or a similar statement, if the total OIDis the difference between the stated redemption ately after purchase (including purchase atfor the calendar year is $10 or more. Formprice at maturity and the issue price. original issue) was greater than its ad-1099-OID will show, in box 1, the amount of OIDAll debt instruments that pay no interest justed issue price. This is the issue pricefor the part of the year that you held the bond. Itbefore maturity are presumed to be issued at a plus the OID previously accrued, minusalso will show, in box 2, the stated interest thatdiscount. Zero coupon bonds are one example any payment previously made on the in-you must include in your income. A copy of Formof these instruments. strument other than qualified stated inter-1099-OID will be sent to the IRS. Do not file yourThe OID accrual rules generally do not apply est.copy with your return. Keep it for your records.to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-
In most cases, you must report the entireturity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).
amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID as Acquisition premium reduces the amount of OIDSee Discount on Short-Term Obligations, later.
interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown includible in your income. For information aboutFor information about the sale of a debt in-
on Form 1099-OID, later in this discussion, and figuring the correct amount of OID to include instrument with OID, see chapter 4.
also Original issue discount (OID) adjustment your income, see Figuring OID on Long-Term
under How To Report Interest Income , later in Debt Instruments in Publication 1212.De minimis OID. You can treat the discount
this chapter, for more information.as zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025)
Refiguring periodic interest shown on Formof the stated redemption price at maturity multi-
1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrumentForm 1099-OID not received. If you had OIDplied by the number of full years from the date of
or acquired it from another holder during thefor the year but did not receive a Formoriginal issue to maturity. This small discount is
year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates ,1099-OID, see the OID tables found atknown as “de minimis” OID.
earlier, for information about the treatment ofhttp://www.irs.gov/formspubs/article/
periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of0,,id=109875,00.html,Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond with
Form 1099-OID for that instrument.which list total OID on certain debt instrumentsa stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

Page 14 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
no actual or constructive receipt of interest until and Principal of Securities (STRIPS) pro-Applying the OID Rules
the fixed maturity date is reached. For instance, gram and government-sponsored enter-
The rules for reporting OID depend on the date you and your bank enter into an arrangement prises such as the Resolution Funding
the long-term debt instrument was issued. under which you agree to deposit $100 each Corporation and the Financing Corpora-
month for a period of 5 years. Interest will be tion, andDebt instruments issued after 1954 and compounded twice a year at 71/2%, but payable • Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se-before May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if a only at the end of the 5-year period. You must curities that represent ownership interestsgovernment instrument). For these instru- include a part of the interest in your income as in those securities, such as obligationsments, you do not report the OID until the year OID each year. Each year the bank must give backed by U.S. Treasury bonds that areyou sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. If you a Form 1099-OID to show you the amount offered primarily by brokerage firms.a gain results and the instrument is a capital you must include in your income for the year.asset, the amount of the gain equal to the OID is
ordinary interest income. The rest of the gain is Seller. If you strip coupons from a bond andRedemption before maturity. If, before thecapital gain. If there is a loss on the sale of the sell the bond or coupons, include in income thematurity date, you redeem a deferred interestinstrument, the entire loss is a capital loss and interest that accrued while you held the bondaccount for less than its stated redemption priceno reporting of OID is required. before the date of sale to the extent you did notat maturity, you can deduct the amount of OIDIn general, the amount of gain that is ordinary previously include this interest in your income.that you previously included in income but didinterest income equals the following amount: For an obligation acquired after October 22,not receive. 1986, you must also include the market discount
that accrued before the date of sale of theRenewable certificates. If you renew a CD atNumber of full stripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you didmaturity, it is treated as a redemption and amonths you held Original not previously include this discount in your in-purchase of a new certificate. This is true re-the instrument × Issue come.gardless of the terms of renewal.Number of full Discount Add the interest and market discount thatmonths from date you include in income to the basis of the bondof original issue and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be-Face-Amount Certificatesto date of maturity tween the items you keep and the items you sell,
These certificates are subject to the OID rules. based on the fair market value of the items. TheDebt instruments issued after May 27, 1969 They are a form of endowment contracts issued difference between the sale price of the bond (or(after July 1, 1982, if a government instru- by insurance or investment companies for either coupon) and the allocated basis of the bond (orment), and before 1985. If you hold these a lump-sum payment or periodic payments, with coupon) is your gain or loss from the sale.debt instruments as capital assets, you must the face amount becoming payable on the ma- Treat any item you keep as an OID bondinclude a part of the discount in your gross turity date of the certificate. originally issued and bought by you on the saleincome each year that you own the instruments. In general, the difference between the face date of the other items. If you keep the bond,
amount and the amount you paid for the contractEffect on basis.  Your basis in the instru- treat the amount of the redemption price of the
is OID. You must include a part of the OID inment is increased by the amount of OID that you bond that is more than the basis of the bond as
your income over the term of the certificate.include in your gross income. the OID. If you keep the coupons, treat the
The issuer must give you a statement on amount payable on the coupons that is moreDebt instruments issued after 1984. For Form 1099-OID indicating the amount you must than the basis of the coupons as the OID.these debt instruments, you report the total OID include in your income each year.that applies each year regardless of whether Buyer. If you buy a stripped bond or stripped
you hold that debt instrument as a capital asset. coupon, treat it as if it were originally issued on
the date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond,Inflation-IndexedEffect on basis.  Your basis in the instru- treat as OID any excess of the stated redemp-Debt Instrumentsment is increased by the amount of OID that you tion price at maturity over your purchase price. Ifinclude in your gross income. If you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID any
(other than a series I U.S. savings bond), you excess of the amount payable on the due date of
must report as OID any increase in the infla- the coupon over your purchase price.Certificates of Deposit (CDs) tion-adjusted principal amount of the instrument
Figuring OID. The rules for figuring OID onthat occurs while you held the instrument duringIf you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1 stripped bonds and stripped coupons depend onthe year. In general, an inflation-indexed debtyear, you must include in income each year a the date the debt instruments were purchased,instrument is a debt instrument on which thepart of the total interest due and report it in the not the date issued.payments are adjusted for inflation and deflationsame manner as other OID. You must refigure the OID shown on the(such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securi-This also applies to similar deposit arrange- Form 1099-OID you receive for a stripped bondties). You should receive Form 1099-OID fromments with banks, building and loan associa- or coupon. For information about figuring thethe payer showing the amount you must reporttions, etc., including: correct amount of OID on these instruments toas OID and any qualified stated interest paid to• Time deposits, include in your income, see Figuring OID onyou during the year. For more information, see• Bonus plans, Stripped Bonds and Coupons  in PublicationPublication 1212.• Savings certificates, 1212. However, owners of stripped bonds and
• Deferred income certificates, coupons should not rely on the OID shown in
• Bonus savings certificates, and Section II of The OID tables (available atStripped Bonds and Coupons
http://www.irs.gov/formspubs/article/• Growth savings certificates.
0,,id=109875,00.html)If you strip one or more coupons from a bond
because the amounts listed in Section II forand sell the bond or the coupons, the bond andBearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generally stripped bonds or coupons are figured withoutcoupons are treated as separate debt instru-must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are CDs reference to the date or price at which you ac-ments issued with OID.that are not in registered form. They are not quired them.The holder of a stripped bond has the right toissued in the depositor’s name and are transfer- receive the principal (redemption price) pay- Stripped inflation-indexed debt instru-able from one individual to another. ment. The holder of a stripped coupon has the ments. OID on stripped inflation-indexed debtBanks must provide the IRS and the person right to receive interest on the bond. instruments is figured under the discount bondredeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT. Stripped bonds and stripped coupons in- method. This method is described in Regula-clude:Time deposit open account arrangement. tions section 1.1275-7(e).
This is an arrangement with a fixed maturity date • Zero coupon instruments available
in which you make deposits on a schedule ar- through the Department of the Treasury’s Stripped tax-exempt obligations. You do
ranged between you and your bank. But there is Separate Trading of Registered Interest not have to pay tax on OID on any stripped
Page 14 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 15 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax-exempt bond or coupon that you bought Bonds acquired at original issue. Generally, choice, see section 12A of the Appendix to Rev-
enue Procedure 2002-9 in Internal Revenuea bond that you acquired at original issue is not abefore June 11, 1987. However, if you acquired
Bulletin 2002-3. You can find this Internal Reve-market discount bond. If your adjusted basis in ait after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID
nue Bulletin atbond is determined by reference to the adjustedon it to determine its basis when you dispose of
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-03.pdf.basis of another person who acquired the bondit. See Original issue discount (OID) on debt
Also see Election To Report All Interest asat original issue, you are also considered toinstruments under Stocks and Bonds in chapter
OID, later. If you make that election, you musthave acquired it at original issue.4.
use the constant yield method.You may have to pay tax on part of the OID Exceptions. A bond you acquired at origi-
on stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons that Effect on basis. You increase the basis ofnal issue can be a market discount bond if
you bought after June 10, 1987. For information your bonds by the amount of market discounteither of the following is true.
on figuring the taxable part, see Tax-Exempt you include in your income.• Your cost basis in the bond is less than
Bonds and Coupons  under Figuring OID on the bond’s issue price. Partial principal payments. If you receive aStripped Bonds and Coupons  in Publication • The bond is issued in exchange for a mar- partial payment of principal on a market discount1212. ket discount bond under a plan of reorgan- bond that you acquired after October 22, 1986,
ization. (This does not apply if the bond is and you did not choose to include the discount in
Market Discount Bonds issued in exchange for a market discount income currently, you must treat the payment as
bond issued before July 19, 1984, and the ordinary interest income up to the amount of theA market discount bond is any bond having terms and interest rates of both bonds are bond’s accrued market discount. Reduce themarket discount except: the same.) amount of accrued market discount reportable
• Short-term obligations (those with fixed as interest at disposition by that amount.
maturity dates of up to 1 year from the There are 3 methods you can use to figureAccrued market discount. The accrued mar-date of issue), accrued market discount for this purpose. Youket discount is figured in one of two ways.• Tax-exempt obligations that you bought can choose to figure accrued market discount:
Ratable accrual method. Treat the marketbefore May 1, 1993, 1. On the basis of the constant yield method,discount as accruing in equal daily installments• U.S. savings bonds, and described earlier,during the period you hold the bond. Figure the• Certain installment obligations. 2. In proportion to the accrual of OID for anydaily installments by dividing the market dis- accrual period, if the debt instrument hascount by the number of days after the date youMarket discount arises when the value of a OID, oracquired the bond, up to and including its matur-debt obligation decreases after its issue date, 3. In proportion to the amount of stated inter-ity date. Multiply the daily installments by thegenerally because of an increase in interest est paid in the accrual period, if the debtnumber of days you held the bond to figure yourrates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar- instrument has no OID.accrued market discount.ket, it may have market discount.
Under method (2) above, figure accruedWhen you buy a market discount bond, you Constant yield method. Instead of using
market discount for a period by multiplying thecan choose to accrue the market discount over the ratable accrual method, you can choose to total remaining market discount by a fraction.the period you own the bond and include it in figure the accrued discount using a constant The numerator (top part) of the fraction is theinterest rate (the constant yield method). Makeyour income currently as interest income. If you OID for the period, and the denominator (bottomthis choice by attaching to your timely filed returndo not make this choice, the following rules part) is the total remaining OID at the beginninga statement identifying the bond and stating thatgenerally apply. of the period.you are making a constant interest rate election.• You must treat any gain when you dispose Under method (3) above, figure accruedThe choice takes effect on the date you acquiredof the bond as ordinary interest income, market discount for a period by multiplying thethe bond. If you choose to use this method forup to the amount of the accrued market total remaining market discount by a fraction.any bond, you cannot change your choice fordiscount. See Discounted Debt Instru- The numerator is the stated interest paid in thethat bond.ments under Capital Gains and Losses in accrual period, and the denominator is the totalFor information about using the constantchapter 4. stated interest remaining to be paid at the begin-yield method, see Figuring OID using the con-• You must treat any partial payment of prin- ning of the accrual period.stant yield method  under Debt Instruments Is-cipal on the bond as ordinary interest in-
sued After 1984 in Publication 1212. To use thiscome, up to the amount of the accrued Discount onmethod to figure market discount (instead ofmarket discount. See Partial principal pay-
Short-Term ObligationsOID), treat the bond as having been issued onments, later in this discussion.
the date you acquired it. Treat the amount of• If you borrow money to buy or carry the When you buy a short-term obligation (one withyour basis (immediately after you acquired thebond, your deduction for interest paid on a fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from thebond) as the issue price. Then apply the formulathe debt is limited. See Limit on interest date of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga-shown in Publication 1212.deduction for market discount bonds tion, you can generally choose to include any
under When To Deduct Investment Inter- discount and interest payable on the obligationChoosing to include market discount in in-est in chapter 3. in income currently. If you do not make thiscome currently. You can make this choice if choice, the following rules generally apply.you have not revoked a prior choice to include
• You must treat any gain when you sell,Market discount. Market discount is the market discount in income currently within the
exchange, or redeem the obligation as or-amount of the stated redemption price of a bond last 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at-
dinary income, up to the amount of theat maturity that is more than your basis in the taching to your timely filed return a statement
ratable share of the discount. See Dis-bond immediately after you acquire it. You treat in which you:
counted Debt Instruments under Capitalmarket discount as zero if it is less than • State that you have included market dis- Gains and Losses in chapter 4.one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated redemp- count in your gross income for the year
• If you borrow money to buy or carry thetion price of the bond multiplied by the number of under section 1278(b) of the Internal Rev-
obligation, your deduction for interest paidfull years to maturity (after you acquire the enue Code, and
on the debt is limited. See Limit on interestbond). • Describe the method you used to figure deduction for short-term obligations underIf a market discount bond also has OID, the the accrued market discount for the year. When To Deduct Investment Interest inmarket discount is the sum of the bond’s issue
chapter 3.price and the total OID includible in the gross Once you make this choice, it will apply to all
income of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, the market discount bonds that you acquire during
total OID that accrued) before you acquired the the tax year and in later tax years. You cannot Short-term obligations for which no choice
bond, reduced by your basis in the bond immedi- revoke your choice without the consent of the is available. You must include any discount
IRS. For information on how to revoke yourately after you acquired it. or interest in current income as it accrues for
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

Page 16 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Choosing to include accrued discount andany short-term obligation (other than a you are considered to receive interest, divi-
other interest in current income. If you ac- dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-tax-exempt obligation) that is:
quire short-term discount obligations that are not count in a bank, savings and loan, or similar• Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer,
subject to the rules for current inclusion in in- financial institution, or interest on life insurance• Held primarily for sale to customers in the
come of the accrued discount or other interest, policy dividends left to accumulate, when theyordinary course of your trade or business,
you can choose to have those rules apply. This are credited to your account and subject to your• Held by a bank, regulated investment choice applies to all short-term obligations you withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yetcompany, or common trust fund, acquire during the year and in all later years. entered in your passbook.• Held by certain pass-through entities, You cannot change this choice without the con- You constructively receive income on the• Identified as part of a hedging transaction, sent of the IRS. deposit or account even if you must:or The procedures to use in making this choice • Make withdrawals in multiples of even• A stripped bond or stripped coupon held are the same as those described for choosing to amounts,by the person who stripped the bond or include acquisition discount instead of OID on • Give a notice to withdraw before makingcoupon (or by any other person whose nongovernment obligations in current income. the withdrawal,basis in the obligation is determined by However, you should indicate that you are mak- • Withdraw all or part of the account to with-reference to the basis in the hands of that ing the choice under section 1282(b)(2) of the draw the earnings, orperson). Internal Revenue Code. • Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unlessAlso see the following discussion. If you the interest you are to receive on an earlymake the election to report all interest currentlyEffect on basis. Increase the basis of your withdrawal or redemption is substantiallyas OID, you must use the constant yield method.obligation by the amount of discount you include less than the interest payable at maturity.in income currently.
Election To Report Accrual method. If you use an accrualFiguring the accrued discount. Figure the All Interest as OID method, you report your interest income whenaccrued discount by using either the ratable you earn it, whether or not you have received it.accrual method or the constant yield method Generally, you can elect to treat all interest on a Interest is earned over the term of the debtdiscussed previously in Accrued market dis- debt instrument acquired during the tax year as instrument.count under Market Discount Bonds, earlier. OID and include it in income currently. For pur-
poses of this election, interest includes stated Example. If, in the previous example, youGovernment obligations. For an obligation interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimis use an accrual method, you must include theOID, market discount, de minimis  market dis-described above that is a short-term govern- interest in your income as you earn it. You wouldcount, and unstated interest as adjusted by anyment obligation, the amount you include in your report the interest as follows: 2004, $80; 2005,amortizable bond premium or acquisition pre-income for the current year is the accrued acqui- $249.60; and 2006, $179.20.mium. See Regulations section 1.1272-3.sition discount, if any, plus any other accrued
interest payable on the obligation. The acquisi- Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds istion discount is the stated redemption price at taxable in the year the coupon becomes due and
maturity minus your basis. payable. It does not matter when you mail the
If you choose to use the constant yield When To Report coupon for payment.
method to figure accrued acquisition discount,
Interest Incometreat the cost of acquiring the obligation as the
issue price. If you choose to use this method,
Terms you may need to knowyou cannot change your choice. How To Report(see Glossary):
Nongovernment obligations. For an obliga- Interest Income
Accrual methodtion listed above that is not a government obliga-
Cash methodtion, the amount you include in your income for Terms you may need to know
the current year is the accrued OID, if any, plus (see Glossary):
any other accrued interest payable. If you
When to report your interest income depends onchoose the constant yield method to figure ac- Nomineewhether you use the cash method or an accrualcrued OID, apply it by using the obligation’s Original issue discount (OID)method to report income.issue price.
Choosing to include accrued acquisition Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use Generally, you report all of your taxable interestdiscount instead of OID. You can choose to the cash method. If you use this method, you income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, linereport accrued acquisition discount (defined generally report your interest income in the year 8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2.earlier under Government obligations ) rather in which you actually or constructively receive it.
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interestthan accrued OID on these short-term obliga- However, there are special rules for reporting
income is more than $1,500. Instead, you musttions. Your choice will apply to the year for which the discount on certain debt instruments. See
use Form 1040A or Form 1040.it is made and to all later years and cannot be U.S. Savings Bonds and Discount on Debt In-
changed without the consent of the IRS. In addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ ifstruments, earlier.
you must use Form 1040, as described later, orYou must make your choice by the due
if any of the statements listed under Schedule B,date of your return, including extensions, for Example. On September 1, 2004, you
later, are true.the first year for which you are making the loaned another individual $2,000 at 12% com-
choice. Attach a statement to your return or pounded annually. You are not in the business
Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1amended return indicating: of lending money. The note stated that principal
(Form 1040A), Part I, if you file Form 1040Aand interest would be due on August 31, 2006.• Your name, address, and social security and any of the following are true. In 2006, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-number,
pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash 1. Your taxable interest income is more than• The choice you are making and that it is
method, you must include in income on your $1,500.being made under section 1283(c)(2) of
2006 return the $508.80 interest you received inthe Internal Revenue Code, 2. You are claiming the interest exclusion
that year. under the Education Savings Bond Pro-• The period for which the choice is being
gram (discussed earlier).made and the obligation to which it ap- Constructive receipt. You constructively
plies, and 3. You received interest from areceive income when it is credited to your ac-
seller-financed mortgage, and the buyer• Any other information necessary to show count or made available to you. You do not need
used the property as a home.you are entitled to make this choice. to have physical possession of it. For example,
Page 16 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 17 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional)PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0112
Interest Income
Interest income not included in box 31PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
$
Early withdrawal penalty Interest on U.S. Savings
Bonds and Treas. obligations
32RECIPIENT’S name
$$
Federal income tax withheld4Street address (including apt. no.)
$
Foreign country or U.S.
possession
7City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-INT
Investment expenses5
$
2006
Foreign tax paid6
$
$
Tax-exempt interest8 Specified private activity
bond interest
9
4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. 2. You are claiming the interest exclusion Do not report interest from an individ-
savings bond interest that includes ual retirement arrangement (IRA) asunder the Education Savings Bond Pro-
amounts you reported before 2006. tax-exempt interest.gram (discussed earlier). CAUTION
!
5. You received, as a nominee, interest that 3. You had a foreign account or you received
actually belongs to someone else. a distribution from, or were a granter of, or Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income,
transferor to, a foreign trust.6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest except for interest from U.S. savings bonds and
on frozen deposits. 4. You received interest from a Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Form
seller-financed mortgage, and the buyer 1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxableList each payer’s name and the amount of inter- used the property as a home. interest income you received. You must reportest income received from each payer on line 1. If all of your taxable interest income even if you do5. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.you received a Form 1099-INT or Form not receive a Form 1099-INT.savings bond interest that includes1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker- If you forfeited interest income because ofamounts you reported before 2006.age firm as the payer. the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-6. You received, as a nominee, interest thatYou cannot use Form 1040A if you must use ductible amount will be shown on Formactually belongs to someone else.Form 1040, as described next. 1099-INT, in box 2. See Penalty on early with-7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interestForm 1040. You must use Form 1040 in- drawal of savings, later.on frozen deposits.stead of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if: Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the amount8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest of interest income you received from U.S. sav-1. You forfeited interest income because of on a bond that you bought between inter- ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, andthe early withdrawal of a time deposit, est payment dates. Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 32. You received or paid accrued interest on 9. Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list is to any other taxable interest income you re-securities transferred between interest true. ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 waspayment dates,
previously included in your interest income. IfOn Part I, line 1, list each payer’s name and the3. You had a financial account in a foreign part of the amount shown in box 3 was previ-amount received from each. If you received acountry, unless the combined value of all ously included in your interest income, see U.S.Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-foreign accounts was $10,000 or less dur- savings bond interest previously reported, later.kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.ing all of 2006 or the accounts were with If you redeemed U.S. savings bonds you boughtcertain U.S. military banking facilities, Reporting tax-exempt interest. The total of after 1989 and you paid qualified educational4. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 your tax-exempt interest (such as interest or expenses, see Interest excluded under the Edu-and choose to reduce interest income from accrued OID on certain state and municipal cation Savings Bond Program, later.the bonds by any amortizable bond pre- bonds) and exempt-interest dividends from a Box 4 (federal income tax withheld) of Formmium (discussed in chapter 3 under Bond mutual fund as shown in box 8 of Form 1099-INT will contain an amount if you werePremium Amortization), 1099-INT. Add this amount to any other subject to backup withholding. Report the5. You are reporting OID in an amount more tax-exempt interest you received. Report the amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7, onor less than the amount shown on Form total on line 8b of Form 1040A or Form 1040. If Form 1040A, line 39, or on Form 1040, line 64.1099-OID, or you file Form 1040EZ, enter “TEI” and the Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment
6. You received tax-exempt interest from pri- amount in the space to the left of line 2. Do not expenses you may be able to deduct as an
vate activity bonds issued after August 7, add tax-exempt interest in the total on Form itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-
1986. 1040EZ, line 2. ment expenses.
Box 9 shows the tax-exempt interest subject If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of FormSchedule B. You must complete Schedule to the alternative minimum tax on Form 6251, 1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may beB (Form 1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 and Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals. It is al- able to take a credit for the amount shown in boxany of the following apply. ready included in the amount in box 8. Do not 6 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct this
add the amount in box 9 to, or subtract it from,1. Your taxable interest income is more than amount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as “Other
the amount in box 8.$1,500. taxes.” To take the credit, you may have to file
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Page 18 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor- Reported” and enter $815.20 ($841.20 − Use the worksheet below to figure the
mation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit $26.00). Subtract $815.20 from $841.20 and amount you subtract from the interest
for Individuals. enter $26.00 on line 2. Enter $26.00 on Sched- shown on Form 1099-INT.
ule 1, line 4, and on Form 1040A, line 8a.Form 1099-OID. The taxable OID on a dis-
counted obligation for the part of the year you A. Enter the amount of cash receivedExample 2. Your uncle died and left you aowned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099-OID. upon redemption of the bond ....$1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bondInclude this amount in your total taxable interest when it reaches maturity.income. But see Refiguring OID shown on Form B. Enter the value of the bond at theYour uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $5001099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID) , time of distribution by the plan ....of the amount you receive upon redemption isearlier. interest income. Your uncle’s executor includedYou must report all taxable OID even if you C. Subtract the amount on line B fromin your uncle’s final return $200 of the interestdo not receive a Form 1099-OID. the amount on line A. This is thethat had accrued at the time of your uncle’s amount of interest accrued on theBox 2 of Form 1099-OID shows any taxable death. You have to include only $300 in your bond since it was distributed by theinterest on the obligation other than OID. Add income. plan .....................this amount to the OID shown in box 1 and The bank where you redeem the bond givesinclude the result in your total taxable income. you a Form 1099-INT showing interest income D. Enter the amount of interest shownIf you forfeited interest or principal on the of $500. You also receive a Form 1099-INT on your Form 1099-INT ........obligation because of an early withdrawal, the showing taxable interest income of $300 fromdeductible amount will be shown in box 3. See your savings account. E. Subtract the amount on line C fromPenalty on early withdrawal of savings, later. You file Form 1040 and you complete the amount on line D. This is theBox 4 of Form 1099-OID will contain an Schedule B. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list the amount you include in “U.S. Savingsamount if you were subject to backup withhold- $500 and $300 interest amounts shown on your Bond Interest Previously Reported”ing. Report the amount from box 4 on Form Forms 1099. Several lines above line 2, you put1040EZ, line 7, on Form 1040A, line 39, or on Your employer should tell you the value ofa subtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, enterForm 1040, line 64. each bond on the date it was distributed.“U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Re-Box 7 of Form 1099-OID shows investment ported” and enter the $200 interest included inexpenses you may be able to deduct as an Example. You received a distribution of se-your uncle’s final return. Subtract the $200 fromitemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest- ries EE U.S. savings bonds in December 2003the subtotal and enter $600 on line 2. You thenment expenses. from your company’s profit-sharing plan.complete the rest of the form.
In March 2006, you redeemed a $100 seriesU.S. savings bond interest previously re- Worksheet for savings bonds distributed EE bond that was part of the distribution youported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for from a retirement or profit-sharing plan. If received in 2003. You received $107.88 for theU.S. savings bond interest, the form may show you cashed a savings bond acquired in a taxable bond the company bought in May 1992. Theinterest you do not have to report. See Form distribution from a retirement or profit-sharing value of the bond at the time of distribution in1099-INT for U.S. savings bond interest  under plan (as discussed under U.S. Savings Bonds , 2003 was $98.68. (This is the amount you in-U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier. earlier), your interest income does not include cluded on your 2003 return.) The bank gave youOn Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, the interest accrued before the distribution and a Form 1099-INT that shows $57.88 interestor on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1, taxed as a distribution from the plan. (the total interest from the date the bond wasreport all the interest shown on your Form
purchased to the date of redemption). Since a1099-INT. Then follow these steps.
part of the interest was included in your income1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal in 2003, you need to include in your 2006 in-of all interest listed on line 1. come only the interest that accrued after the
2. Below the subtotal enter “U.S. Savings bond was distributed to you.
Bond Interest Previously Reported” and On Schedule B (Form 1040), line 1, includeenter amounts previously reported or inter- all the interest shown on your Form 1099-INT asest accrued before you received the bond. well as any other taxable interest income you
3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal received. Several lines above line 2, put a sub-
and enter the result on line 2. total of all interest listed on line 1. Below this
subtotal enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Pre-
viously Reported” and enter the amount figuredExample 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav-
on the worksheet below.ings bonds for you when you were a child. The
bonds were issued in your name, and the inter-
est on the bonds was reported each year as it A. Enter the amount of cash received
accrued. (See Choice to report interest each upon redemption of the bond . . . $107.88
year under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.) B. Enter the value of the bond at the
In March 2006, you redeemed one of the time of distribution by the plan . . . 98.68
bonds — a $1,000 series EE bond. The bond C. Subtract the amount on line B from
was originally issued in March 1987. When you the amount on line A. This is the
amount of interest accrued on theredeemed the bond, you received $1,341.20 for
bond since it was distributed byit.
the plan .................. $9.20The Form 1099-INT you received shows in-
D. Enter the amount of interest shownterest income of $841.20. However, since the
on your Form 1099-INT ....... $57.88interest on your savings bonds was reported
E. Subtract the amount on line C fromyearly, you need only include the $26.00 interest the amount on line D. This is thethat accrued from January 2006 to March 2006. amount you include in “U.S.You received no other taxable interest for Savings Bond Interest Previously2006. You file Form 1040A. Reported” ................ $48.68On Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1,
enter your interest income as shown on Form Subtract $48.68 from the subtotal and enter the
1099-INT — $841.20. (If you had other taxable result on Schedule B, line 2. You then complete
interest income, you would enter it next and then the rest of the form.
enter a subtotal, as described earlier, before
going to the next step.) Several lines above line Interest excluded under the Education Sav-
2, enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously ings Bond Program. Use Form 8815 to figure
Page 18 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 19 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your interest exclusion when you redeem quali- the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099-INT with a amount as “OID Adjustment” and add it  to the
fied savings bonds and pay qualified higher edu- Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of subtotal.
cational expenses during the same year. U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-
For more information on the exclusion and nue Service Center by February 28, 2007 (April Penalty on early withdrawal of savings. If
qualified higher educational expenses, see the 2, 2007 if you file Form 1099-INT electronically). you withdraw funds from a certificate of deposit
earlier discussion under Education Savings Give the actual owner of the interest Copy B of or other deferred interest account before matur-
Bond Program. the Form 1099-INT by January 31, 2007. On ity, you may be charged a penalty. The Form
You must show your total interest from quali- Form 1099-INT, you should be listed as the 1099-INT or similar statement given to you by
fied savings bonds that you cashed during 2006 “Payer.” Prepare one Form 1099-INT for each the financial institution will show the total
on Form 8815, line 6, and on line 1 of either other owner and show that person as the “Recip- amount of interest in box 1 and will show the
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Schedule B (Form ient.” However, you do not have to file Form penalty separately in box 2. You must include in
1040). After completing Form 8815, enter the 1099-INT to show payments for your spouse. income all the interest shown in box 1. You can
result from line 14 (Form 8815) on Schedule 1 For more information about the reporting re- deduct the penalty on Form 1040, line 30, or
(Form 1040A), line 3, or Schedule B (Form quirements and the penalties for failure to file (or Form 1040A, line 16. Deduct the entire penalty1040), line 3. furnish) certain information returns, see the even if it is more than your interest income.
General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,Interest on seller-financed mortgage. If an 5498, and W2-G.individual buys his or her home from you in a
Similar rules apply to OID reported to you assale that you finance, you must report the
a nominee on Form 1099-OID. You must file abuyer’s name, address, and social security num- Dividends and
Form 1099-OID with Form 1096 to show theber on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), line 1, or
proper distributions of the OID. Other CorporateSchedule B (Form 1040), line 1. If you do not,
you may have to pay a $50 penalty. The buyer Example. You and your sister have a joint Distributionsmay have to pay a $50 penalty if he or she does savings account that paid $1,500 interest fornot give you this information.
2006. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds in Dividends are distributions of money, stock, orYou must also give your name, address, and
this account, and you and she have agreed to other property paid to you by a corporation. Yousocial security number (or employer identifica-
share the yearly interest income in proportion to also may receive dividends through a partner-tion number) to the buyer. If you do not, you may
the amount that each of you has invested. Be- ship, an estate, a trust, or an association that ishave to pay a $50 penalty.
cause your social security number was given to taxed as a corporation. However, some
Frozen deposits. Even if you receive a Form the bank, you received a Form 1099-INT for amounts you receive that are called dividends
1099-INT for interest on deposits that you could 2006 that includes the interest income earned are actually interest income. (See Dividends that
not withdraw at the end of 2006, you must ex- belonging to your sister. This amount is $450, or are actually interest  under Taxable Interest —
clude these amounts from your gross income. 30% of the total interest of $1,500. General, earlier.)
(See Interest income on frozen deposits  under You must give your sister a Form 1099-INT The most common kinds of distributionsInterest Income , earlier.) Do not include this by January 31, 2007, showing $450 of interest are:income on line 8a of Form 1040A or Form 1040. income that she earned for 2006. You must also • Ordinary dividends,In Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, or Schedule send a copy of the nominee Form 1099-INT, • Capital gain distributions, andB (Form 1040), Part I, include the full amount of along with Form 1096, to the Internal Revenue • Nondividend distributions.interest shown on your Form 1099-INT on line 1. Service Center by February 28, 2007 (April 2,Several lines above line 2, put a subtotal of all Most distributions are paid in cash (check).2007, if you file Form 1099-INT electronically).interest income. Below this subtotal, enter “Fro- However, distributions can consist of moreShow your own name, address, and social se-zen Deposits” and show the amount of interest stock, stock rights, other property, or services.curity number as that of the “Payer” on the Formthat you are excluding. Subtract this amount 1099-INT. Show your sister’s name, address,from the subtotal and enter the result on line 2. Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use Formand social security number in the blocks pro-
1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to showvided for identification of the “Recipient.”Accrued interest on bonds. If you received a you the distributions you received from themWhen you prepare your own federal incomeForm 1099-INT that reflects accrued interest during the year. Keep this form with your rec-tax return, report the total amount of interestpaid on a bond you bought between interest ords. You do not have to attach it to your taxincome, $1,500, on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),payment dates, include the full amount shown
return.Part I, line 1, or Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I,as interest on the Form 1099-INT on Schedule B
line 1, and identify the name of the bank that(Form 1040), Part I, line 1. Then, below a sub- Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.
paid this interest. Show the amount belonging tototal of all interest income listed, enter “Accrued Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, you
your sister, $450, as a subtraction from a sub-Interest” and the amount of accrued interest that must still report all of your taxable dividend in-
total of all interest on Schedule 1 (or Scheduleyou paid to the seller. That amount is taxable to come. For example, you may receive distributive
B) and identify this subtraction as a “Nomineethe seller, not you. Subtract that amount from shares of dividends from partnerships or sub-
Distribution.” (Your sister will report the $450 ofthe interest income subtotal. Enter the result on chapter S corporations. These dividends are
interest income on her own tax return, if she hasline 2 and also on Form 1040, line 8a. reported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)
to file a return, and identify you as the payer ofFor more information, see Bonds Sold Be- and Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).
that amount.)tween Interest Dates, earlier.
Nominees. If someone receives distribu-
Nominee distributions. If you received a tions as a nominee for you, that person will giveOriginal issue discount (OID) adjustment. IfForm 1099-INT that includes an amount you you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu-you are reporting OID in an amount greater orreceived as a nominee for the real owner, report tions received on your behalf.less than the amount shown on Form 1099-OIDthe full amount shown as interest on the Form If you receive a Form 1099-DIV that includesor other written statement (such as for a REMIC1099-INT on Part I, line 1 of Schedule 1 (Form amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-regular interest), include the full amount of OID1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Then, be- inees under How To Report Dividend Income ,shown on your Form 1099-OID or other state-low a subtotal of all interest income listed, enter later, for more information.ment on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1.“Nominee Distribution” and the amount that ac- If the OID to be reported is less than the amounttually belongs to someone else. Subtract that Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay-shown on Form 1099-OID, show the OID you doamount from the interest income subtotal. Enter ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interestnot have to report below a subtotal of the interestthe result on line 2 and also on line 8a of Form that are received by a broker on your behalfand OID listed. Identify the amount as “OID1040A or 1040. must be reported to you on Form 1099-MISC,Adjustment” and subtract it from the subtotal. If
Miscellaneous Income, or a similar statement.the OID to be reported is greater than theFile Form 1099-INT with the IRS. If you
amount shown on Form 1099-OID, show the See also Reporting Substitute Payments underreceived interest as a nominee in 2006, you
additional OID below the subtotal. Identify the Short Sales in chapter 4.must file a Form 1099-INT for that interest with
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

Page 20 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. If that begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date. 1. You had an option to sell, were under a
you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect The ex-dividend date is the first date following contractual obligation to sell, or had made
amount (or other incorrect information), you the declaration of a dividend on which the buyer (and not closed) a short sale of substan-
should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The of a stock will not receive the next dividend tially identical stock or securities.
new Form 1099 you receive will be marked “Cor- payment. When counting the number of days 2. You were grantor (writer) of an option torected.” you held the stock, include the day you disposed buy substantially identical stock or securi-of the stock, but not the day you acquired it. SeeDividends on stock sold. If stock is sold, ties.the examples, later.exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a 3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holding
dividend is declared, but before it is paid, the Exception for preferred stock. In the case one or more other positions in substantially
owner of record (usually the payee shown on the of preferred stock, you must have held the stock similar or related property.dividend check) must include the dividend in more than 90 days during the 181-day period For information about how to apply conditionincome. that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend date
(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.if the dividends are due to periods totaling moreDividends received in January. If a regu-
than 366 days. If the preferred dividends are duelated investment company (mutual fund) or real
to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold- Qualified foreign corporation. A foreignestate investment trust (REIT) declares a divi-
ing period in the preceding paragraph applies.dend (including any exempt-interest dividend or corporation is a qualified foreign corporation if
capital gain distribution) in October, November, it meets any of the following conditions. Example 1. You bought 5,000 shares ofor December payable to shareholders of record 1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.XYZ Corp. common stock on June 29, 2006.on a date in one of those months but actually possession.XYZ Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents perpays the dividend during January of the next
2. The corporation is eligible for the benefitsshare. The ex-dividend date was July 7, 2006.calendar year, you are considered to have re-
of a comprehensive income tax treaty withYour Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. showsceived the dividend on December 31. You report
$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in box the United States that the Treasury De-the dividend in the year it was declared.
1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold the partment determines is satisfactory for this
5,000 shares on August 2, 2006. You held your purpose and that includes an exchange ofOrdinary Dividends shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of the information program. For a list of those
121-day period (from June 30, 2006, throughOrdinary (taxable) dividends are the most com- treaties, see Table 1-3.
August 2, 2006). The 121-day period began onmon type of distribution from a corporation. They 3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)May 8, 2006 (60 days before the ex-dividendare paid out of the earnings and profits of a above, but the stock for which the dividenddate), and ended on September 5, 2006. Youcorporation and are ordinary income to you. This is paid is readily tradable on an estab-have no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be-means they are not capital gains. You can as- lished securities market in the Unitedcause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61sume that any dividend you receive on common States. See Readily tradable stock, later.days.or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unless
the paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi- Exception. A corporation is not a qualifiedExample 2. Assume the same facts as innary dividends will be shown in box 1a of the foreign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-Example 1 except that you bought the stock onForm 1099-DIV you receive.
vestment company during its tax year in whichJuly 6, 2006 (the day before the ex-dividend
the dividends are paid or during its previous taxdate), and you sold the stock on September 7,
2006. You held the stock for 63 days (from July year.Qualified Dividends
7, 2006, through September 7, 2006). The $500 Controlled foreign corporation (CFC).Qualified dividends are the ordinary dividends of qualified dividends shown in box 1b of your Dividends paid out of a CFC’s earnings andthat are subject to the same 5% or 15% maxi- Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends be- profits that were not previously taxed are quali-mum tax rate that applies to net capital gain. cause you held the stock for 61 days of the
fied dividends if the CFC is otherwise a qualifiedThey should be shown in box 1b of the Form 121-day period (from July 7, 2006, through Sep-
foreign corporation and the other requirements1099-DIV you receive. tember 5, 2006).
Qualified dividends are subject to the 15% in this discussion are met. Certain dividends
rate if the regular tax rate that would apply is paid by a CFC that would be treated as a pas-Example 3. You bought 10,000 shares of
25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that would ABC Mutual Fund common stock on June 29, sive foreign investment company but for section
apply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends are 2006. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend of 1297(e) of the Internal Revenue Code may be
subject to the 5% rate. 10 cents per share. The ex-dividend date was treated as qualified dividends. For more infor-To qualify for the 5% or 15% maximum July 7, 2006. The ABC Mutual Fund advises you mation, see Notice 2004-70, which is on pagerate, all of the following requirements must be that the portion of the dividend eligible to be 724 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-44 atmet. treated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-44.pdf.• The dividends must have been paid by a share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual
Readily tradable stock. Any stock (such asU.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor- Fund shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000
poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora- common, ordinary, or preferred stock), or anand qualified dividends of $200. However, you
tion later.) American depositary receipt in respect of thatsold the 10,000 shares on August 2, 2006. You
• The dividends are not of the type listed stock, is considered to satisfy requirement (3) ifhave no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual
later under Dividends that are not qualified Fund because you held the ABC Mutual Fund it is listed on one of the following securities
dividends. stock for less than 61 days. markets: the New York Stock Exchange, the
• You meet the holding period (discussed NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Ex-Holding period reduced where risk of lossnext). change, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cincin-is diminished. When determining whether
nati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stockyou met the minimum holding period discussed
Exchange, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, orearlier, you cannot count any day during whichHolding period. You must have held the stock
the Pacific Exchange, Inc.for more than 60 days during the 121-day period you meet any of the following conditions.
Page 20 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 21 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
lets you choose to use your dividends to buy 1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-Table 1-3. Income Tax Treaties
(through an agent) more shares of stock in the tions the part reported to you as unrecaptured
Income tax treaties that the United States corporation instead of receiving the dividends in section 1250 gain. For any gain on qualified
has with the following countries satisfy cash. If you are a member of this type of plan small business stock, follow the reporting in-
requirement (2) under Qualified foreign and you use your dividends to buy more stock at structions under Section 1202 Exclusion  in
corporation. a price equal to its fair market value, you still chapter 4. Enter the collectibles gain on line 4 of
must report the dividends as income. the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the ScheduleAustralia Indonesia Romania D instructions.If you are a member of a dividend reinvest-Austria Ireland Russian The tax paid on these gains by the mutualment plan that lets you buy more stock at a priceBangladesh1 Israel Federation fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.less than its fair market value, you must reportBarbados2 Italy Slovak You take credit for this tax by including it onas dividend income the fair market value of theBelgium Jamaica Republic Form 1040, line 70, and checking box a on thatadditional stock on the dividend payment date.Canada Japan Slovenia line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return,You also must report as dividend income anyChina Kazakhstan Sri Lanka 3
and keep Copy C for your records.service charge subtracted from your cash divi-Cyprus Korea South Africa
dends before the dividends are used to buy the Basis adjustment. Increase your basis inCzech Latvia Spain
additional stock. But you may be able to deduct your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, byRepublic Lithuania Sweden the service charge. See Expenses of Producing the difference between the gain you report andDenmark Luxembourg Switzerland Income in chapter 3. the credit you claim for the tax paid.Egypt Mexico Thailand
In some dividend reinvestment plans, youEstonia Morocco Trinidad and
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at aFinland Netherlands Tobago Nondividend Distributionsprice less than fair market value. If you chooseFrance New Zealand Tunisia to do this, you must report as dividend income A nondividend distribution is a distribution that isGermany Norway Turkey the difference between the cash you invest and not paid out of the earnings and profits of aGreece Pakistan Ukraine the fair market value of the stock you buy. When corporation. You should receive a FormHungary Philippines United figuring this amount, use the fair market value of 1099-DIV or other statement from the corpora-Iceland Poland Kingdom the stock on the dividend payment date. tion showing you the nondividend distribution.India Portugal Venezuela On Form 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution1Effective for dividends paid after August 6, 2006.
will be shown in box 3. If you do not receive such2Effective for dividends paid after December 19,
Money Market Funds2004. a statement, you report the distribution as an
3Effective for dividends paid after July 11, 2004. ordinary dividend.Report amounts you receive from money market
funds as dividend income. Money market funds
Basis adjustment. A nondividend distributionare a type of mutual fund and should not be
reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxedconfused with bank money market accounts that
until your basis in the stock is fully recovered.Dividends that are not qualified dividends. pay interest.
This nontaxable portion is also called a return ofThe following dividends are not qualified divi-
capital; it is a return of your investment in thedends. They are not qualified dividends even if Capital Gain Distributions stock of the company. If you buy stock in athey are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV.
corporation in different lots at different times,• Capital gain distributions. Capital gain distributions (also called capital and you cannot definitely identify the shares• Dividends paid on deposits with mutual gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to subject to the nondividend distribution, reducesavings banks, cooperative banks, credit your account by regulated investment compa- the basis of your earliest purchases first.unions, U.S. building and loan associa- nies (commonly called mutual funds) and real
When the basis of your stock has been re-tions, U.S. savings and loan associations, estate investment trusts (REITs). They will be
duced to zero, report any additional nondividendfederal savings and loan associations, and shown in box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you
distribution that you receive as a capital gain.similar financial institutions. (Report these receive from the mutual fund or REIT.
Whether you report it as a long-term oramounts as interest income.) Report capital gain distributions as long-term short-term capital gain depends on how long• Dividends from a corporation that is a capital gains, regardless of how long you owned you have held the stock. See Holding Period intax-exempt organization or farmer’s coop- your shares in the mutual fund or REIT. See chapter 4.erative during the corporation’s tax year in Capital gain distributions under How To Report
which the dividends were paid or during Dividend Income, later in this chapter. Example. You bought stock in 1994 forthe corporation’s previous tax year. $100. In 1997, you received a nondividend dis-• Dividends paid by a corporation on em- Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds tribution of $80. You did not include this amountployer securities which are held on the and REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs in your income, but you reduced the basis ofdate of record by an employee stock own- keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on your stock to $20. You received a nondividendership plan (ESOP) maintained by that them. You must treat your share of these gains distribution of $30 in 2006. The first $20 of thiscorporation. as distributions, even though you did not actu- amount reduced your basis to zero. You report• Dividends on any share of stock to the ally receive them. However, they are not in- the other $10 as a long-term capital gain forextent that you are obligated (whether cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are 2006. You must report as a long-term capitalunder a short sale or otherwise) to make reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share- gain any nondividend distribution you receive onrelated payments for positions in substan- holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capital this stock in later years.tially similar or related property. Gains.
• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if Form 2439 will also show how much, if any, Liquidating Distributionsyou know or have reason to know that the of the undistributed capital gains is:
payments are not qualified dividends. • Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1b), Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liqui-
• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box • Gain from qualified small business stock dating dividends, are distributions you receive
1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent (section 1202 gain, box 1c), or during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-
you know or have reason to know the pay- poration. These distributions are, at least in part,• Collectibles (28%) gain (box 1d).ments are not qualified dividends. one form of a return of capital. They may be paidFor information about these terms, see Capital in one or more installments. You will receiveGain Tax Rates in chapter 4. Form 1099-DIV from the corporation showingDividends Used To
you the amount of the liquidating distribution inReport undistributed capital gains (box 1a ofBuy More Stock
box 8 or 9.Form 2439) as long-term capital gains on
The corporation in which you own stock may Schedule D (Form 1040), line 11, column (f). Any liquidating distribution you receive is not
have a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section taxable to you until you have recovered  the
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

Page 22 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
basis of your stock. After the basis of your stock If you receive taxable stock dividends or not more likely than not to occur if  all of the
stock rights, include their fair market value at thehas been reduced to zero, you must report the following are true.
time of the distribution in your income.liquidating distribution as a capital gain. Whether a. You and the issuer are not relatedyou report the gain as a long-term or short-term under the rules discussed in chapter 4Constructive distributions. You must treatcapital gain depends on how long you have held under Losses on Sales or Trades ofcertain transactions that increase your propor-the stock. See Holding Period in chapter 4. Property, substituting “20%” for “50%.”tionate interest in the earnings and profits orStock acquired at different times. If you b. There are no plans, arrangements, orassets of a corporation as if they were distribu-acquired stock in the same corporation in more agreements that effectively require ortions of stock or stock rights. These constructivethan one transaction, you own more than one are intended to compel the issuer todistributions are taxable if they have the sameblock of stock in the corporation. If you receive redeem the stock.result as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4),
distributions from the corporation in complete c. The redemption would not reduce theor (5) of the above discussion.
liquidation, you must divide the distribution stock’s yield.This treatment applies to a change in your
among the blocks of stock you own in the follow- stock’s conversion ratio or redemption price, a
ing proportion: the number of shares in that difference between your stock’s redemption
block over the total number of shares you own. price and issue price, a redemption that is not Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-Divide distributions in partial liquidation among treated as a sale or exchange of your stock, and ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair marketthat part of the stock that is redeemed in the any other transaction having a similar effect on value when distributed. If you receive stock orpartial liquidation. After the basis of a block of your interest in the corporation. stock rights that are not taxable to you, seestock is reduced to zero, you must report the Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of InvestmentPreferred stock redeemable at a premium.part of any later distribution for that block as a Property in chapter 4 for information on how toIf you hold preferred stock having a redemptioncapital gain. figure their basis.price higher than its issue price, the difference
Distributions less than basis. If the total (the redemption premium) generally is taxable
liquidating distributions you receive are less Fractional shares. You may not own enoughas a constructive distribution of additional stock
than the basis of your stock, you may have a stock in a corporation to receive a full share ofon the preferred stock.
capital loss. You can report a capital loss only For stock issued before October 10, 1990, stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-
after you have received the final distribution in you include the redemption premium in your dend. However, with the approval of the share-
liquidation that results in the redemption or can- income ratably over the period during which the holders, the corporation may set up a plan in
cellation of the stock. Whether you report the stock cannot be redeemed. For stock issued which fractional shares are not issued, but in-
loss as a long-term or short-term capital loss after October 9, 1990, you include the redemp- stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are given
depends on how long you held the stock. See tion premium on the basis of its economic ac- to the shareholders. Any cash you receive for
Holding Period in chapter 4. crual over the period during which the stock fractional shares under such a plan is treated as
cannot be redeemed, as if it were original issue an amount realized on the sale of the fractional
discount on a debt instrument. See Original Is-Distributions of Stock shares. You must determine your gain or loss
sue Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter. and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-and Stock Rights The redemption premium is not a construc- ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is the
tive distribution, and therefore is not taxable, inDistributions by a corporation of its own stock difference between the cash you receive and thethe following situations.are commonly known as stock dividends. Stock basis of the fractional shares sold.
rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri- 1. The stock was issued before October 10,
butions by a corporation of rights to acquire the Example. You own one share of common1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re-
corporation’s stock. Generally, stock dividends deemable solely at the option of the is- stock that you bought on January 3, 1998, for
and stock rights are not taxable to you, and you suer), and the redemption premium is $100. The corporation declared a common stock
do not report them on your return. “reasonable.” (For stock issued before Oc- dividend of 5% on June 30, 2006. The fair mar-
tober 10, 1990, only the part of the re- ket value of the stock at the time the stock
Taxable stock dividends and stock rights. demption premium that is not “reasonable” dividend was declared was $200. You were paid
Distributions of stock dividends and stock is a constructive distribution.) The redemp- $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under
rights are taxable to you if any of the following tion premium is reasonable if it is not more a plan described in the above paragraph. Youapply. than 10% of the issue price on stock not figure your gain or loss as follows:
redeemable for 5 years from the issue date1. You or any other shareholder has the
or is in the nature of a penalty for making a Fair market value of old stock .... $200.00choice to receive cash or other property
premature redemption. Fair market value of stock dividendinstead of stock or stock rights.
(cash received) .............. +  10.002. The stock was issued after October 9,2. The distribution gives cash or other prop- Fair market value of old stock and1990 (after December 19, 1995, if redeem-erty to some shareholders and an increase stock dividend ............... $210.00able solely at the option of the issuer), andin the percentage interest in the corpora- Basis (cost) of old stockthe redemption premium is “de minimis.”tion’s assets or earnings and profits to after the stock dividendThe redemption premium is de minimis if itother shareholders. (($200 ÷ $210) × $100) ......... $95.24is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the3. You or any other shareholder has the Basis (cost) of stock dividendredemption price multiplied by the numberchoice to receive cash or other property (($10 ÷ $210) × $100) .......... +  4.76of full years from the date of issue to theinstead of stock or stock rights. Total ..................... $100.00date redeemable.4. The distribution gives preferred stock to Cash received ...............  $10.003. The stock was issued after October 9,some common stock shareholders and Basis (cost) of stock dividend ..... − 4.761990, and must be redeemed at a speci-common stock to other common stock fied time or is redeemable at your option,shareholders. Gain  $5.24but the redemption is unlikely because it is5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (The subject to a contingency outside your con- Because you had held the share of stock fordistribution, however, is not taxable if it is trol (not including the possibility of default, more than 1 year at the time the stock dividendan increase in the conversion ratio of con- insolvency, etc.). was declared, your gain on the stock dividend isvertible preferred stock made solely to take 4. The stock was issued after December 19, a long-term capital gain.into account a stock dividend, stock split, 1995, and is redeemable solely at the op-or similar event that would otherwise result Scrip dividends. A corporation that de-tion of the issuer, but the redemption pre-in reducing the conversion right.) clares a stock dividend may issue you a scripmium is in the nature of a penalty for
certificate that entitles you to a fractional share.The term “stock” includes rights to acquire premature redemption or redemption is not
The certificate is generally nontaxable when youstock, and the term “shareholder” includes a more likely than not to occur. The redemp-
receive it. If you choose to have the corporationholder of rights or convertible securities. tion will be treated under a “safe harbor” as
Page 22 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 23 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sell the certificate for you and give you the pro- adjusted basis of the assets, you must re- by a brokerage firm (in “street nam e”), list the
ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be- port the excess as income. name of the brokerage firm that is shown on
tween the proceeds and the part of your basis in Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock is
These rules are the same whether the cooper-the corporation’s stock that is allocated to the held by a nominee who is the owner of record,
ative paying the dividend is a taxable orcertificate. and the nominee credited or paid you dividends
tax-exempt cooperative.However, if you receive a scrip certificate on the stock, show the name of the nominee and
that you can choose to redeem for cash instead the dividends you received or for which you wereAlaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do notof stock, the certificate is taxable when you re- credited.report these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-ceive it. You must include its fair market value in Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedport these amounts on Form 1040, line 21, Formincome on the date you receive it. on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a1040A, line 13, or Form 1040EZ, line 3. nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this
Other Distributions total on Form 1040, line 9a.
You may receive any of the following distribu- Dividends received on restricted stock. Re-How To Reporttions during the year. stricted stock is stock that you get from your
employer for services you perform and that isDividend IncomeExempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest nontransferable and subject to a substantial riskdividends you receive from a regulated invest- of forfeiture. You do not have to include theTerms you may need to knowment company (mutual fund) are not included in value of the stock in your income when you(see Glossary):your taxable income. Exempt-interest dividends receive it. However, if you get dividends on re-should be shown on box 8 of Form 1099-INT. stricted stock, you must include them in yourNomineeInformation reporting requirement. Al- income as wages, not dividends. See RestrictedRestricted stockthough exempt-interest dividends are not tax- Property in Publication 525 for information on
able, you must show them on your tax return if restricted stock dividends.
you have to file a return. This is an information Your employer should include these divi-Generally, you can use either Form 1040 orreporting requirement and does not change the Form 1040A to report your dividend income. dends in the wages shown on your Form W-2. Ifexempt-interest dividends to taxable income. Report the total of your ordinary dividends on you also get a Form 1099-DIV for these divi-See Reporting tax-exempt interest  under How line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Report dends, list them on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),To Report Interest Income, earlier. qualified dividends on line 9b. line 5, or Schedule B (Form 1040), line 5, with
If you receive capital gain distributions, you the other dividends you received. Enter a sub-Alternative minimum tax treatment. Ex-
may be able to use Form 1040A or you may total of all your dividend income several linesempt-interest dividends paid from specified pri-
have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri- above line 6. Below the subtotal, enter “Divi-vate activity bonds may be subject to the
butions, later. If you receive nondividend distri- dends on restricted stock reported as wages onalternative minimum tax. The exempt-interest
butions required to be reported as capital gains, Form 1040 (or Form 1040A), line 7,” and enterdividends subject to the alternative minimum tax
you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Form the amount of the dividends included in yourshould be shown in box 9 of Form 1099-INT.
1040EZ if you receive any dividend income. wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.See Form 6251 and its instructions for more
Subtract this amount from the subtotal and enterinformation. Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on which the result on line 6.you received $10 or more in dividends and otherDividends on insurance policies. Insurance
Election. You can choose to include thedistributions, you should receive a Formpolicy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses
value of restricted stock in gross income as pay1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive a Formto pay your premiums are not taxable. However,
for services. If you make this choice, report the1099-DIV, you must report all of your taxableyou must report as taxable interest income the
dividends on the stock like any other dividends.dividend income.interest that is paid or credited on dividends left
List them on Part II, line 5, of Schedule 1 orSee Form 1099-DIV for more information onwith the insurance company.
Schedule B, along with your other dividends (ifhow to report dividend income. If dividends on an insurance contract (other
the amount of ordinary dividends received fromthan a modified endowment contract) are distrib- Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1 all sources is more than $1,500). If you receiveuted to you, they are a partial return of the (Form 1040A), Part II, and attach it to your both a Form 1099-DIV and a Form W-2 showingpremiums you paid. Do not include them in your Form 1040A, if: these dividends, do not include the dividends ingross income until they are more than the total of • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV, your wages reported on line 7 of Form 1040 orall net premiums you paid for the contract. (For box 1a) are more than $1,500, or Form 1040A. Attach a statement to your Forminformation on the treatment of a distribution
1040 or Form 1040A explaining why the amount• You received, as a nominee, dividendsfrom a modified endowment contract, see Distri-
shown on line 7 of your Form 1040 or Formthat actually belong to someone else.bution Before Annuity Starting Date From a
1040A is different from the amount shown onNonqualified Plan  under Taxation of Nonperi- List on line 5 each payer’s name and the amount your Form W-2.odic Payments in Publication 575, Pension and of ordinary dividends you received. If you re-
Annuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu- Independent contractor. If you receivedceived a Form 1099-DIV from a brokerage firm,
tions on insurance policies on Form 1040, line restricted stock for services as an independentlist the brokerage firm as the payer.
21. contractor, the rules in the previous discussionEnter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed apply. Generally, you must treat dividends youDividends on veterans’ insurance. Divi- on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a receive on the stock as income fromdends you receive on veterans’ insurance poli- nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this self-employment.cies are not taxable. In addition, interest on total on Form 1040A, line 9a.
dividends left with the Department of Veterans Qualified dividends. Report qualified divi-Form 1040. You must fill in Schedule B, PartAffairs is not taxable. dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b ofII, and attach it to your Form 1040, if:
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in boxPatronage dividends. Generally, patronage • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,
1b is already included in box 1a. Do not adddividends you receive in money from a coopera- box 1a) are more than $1,500, or
the amount in box 1b to, or subtract it from, thetive organization are included in your income. • You received, as a nominee, dividends
amount in box 1a. Do not include any of theDo not include in your income patronage that actually belong to someone else.
following on line 9b.dividends you receive on:
If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500, • Qualified dividends you received as a• Property bought for your personal use, or you must also complete Schedule B, Part III. nominee. See Nominees later.• Capital assets or depreciable property
• Dividends on stock for which you did notbought for use in your business. But you List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, each
meet the holding period. See Holding pe-must reduce the basis (cost) of the items payer’s name and the amount of ordinary divi-
riod, earlier under Qualified Dividends.bought. If the dividend is more than the dends you received. If your securities are held
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

Page 24 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no.
RECIPIENT’S identification
number
PAYER’S federal identification
number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Dividends and
Distributions
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-DIV (keep for your records)
Copy B
This is important
tax information
and is being
furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you
are required to
file a return, a
negligence
penalty or other
sanction may be
imposed on you
if this income is
taxable and the
IRS determines
that it has not
been reported.
For Recipient
Unrecap. Sec. 1250 gain
OMB No. 1545-0110Total ordinary dividends1a
$
1b Qualified dividends
$
Total capital gain distr.2a
Collectibles (28%) gainSection 1202 gain 2d2c
$
3
5 Investment expenses
Noncash liquidation
distributions
9Cash liquidation
distributions
8
$
$
2b
$$
Nondividend distributions
Form 1099-DIV
$
76
$
Foreign tax paid Foreign country or U.S. possession
$
$
4 Federal income tax withheld
$
2006
• Dividends on any share of stock to the of Form 1099-DIV) on Schedule D (Form 1040), Nominees. If you received ordinary dividends
extent that you are obligated (whether Part II, line 13. If you do not have any other as a nominee (that is, the dividends are in your
under a short sale or otherwise) to make capital gains or losses, you may be able to name but actually belong to someone else),
related payments for positions in substan- report your capital gain distributions directly on include them on line 5 of Schedule 1 (Form
tially similar or related property. Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040A, line 10. In 1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Several
either case, see Reporting Capital Gains and• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if lines above line 6, put a subtotal of all dividend
you know or have reason to know that the Losses in chapter 4 for more information. income listed on line 5. Below this subtotal, enter
payments are not qualified dividends. The mutual fund or real estate investment “Nominee Distribution” and show the amount
• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box trust (REIT) making the distribution should tell received as a nominee. Subtract the total of your
1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent you how much of it is: nominee distributions from the subtotal. Enter
you know or have reason to know the pay- the result on line 6.• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 2b),
ments are not qualified dividends. or File Form 1099-DIV with the IRS. If you• Section 1202 gain (box 2c). received dividends as a nominee in 2006, youIf you have qualified dividends, you must fig-
must file a Form 1099-DIV for those dividendsFor information about these terms, see Capitalure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-
with the IRS. Send the Form 1099-DIV with aGain Tax Rates in chapter 4.dends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the
Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal ofForm 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched- Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc- 1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc- nue Service Center by February 28, 2007 (Apriltions, whichever applies. Enter qualified tions the part reported to you as unrecaptured 2, 2007, if you file form 1099-DIV electronically).dividends on line 2 of the worksheet. section 1250 gain. If you have a gain on qualified Give the actual owner of the dividends Copy B ofsmall business stock (section 1202 gain), followInvestment interest deducted. If you claim the Form 1099-DIV by January 31, 2007. Onthe reporting instructions under Section 1202a deduction for investment interest, you may Form 1099-DIV, you should be listed as theExclusion in chapter 4.have to reduce the amount of your qualified “Payer.” The other owner should be listed as thedividends that are eligible for the 5% or 15% tax
“Recipient.” You do not, however, have to file arate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi- Nondividend distributions. Report nondivi-
Form 1099-DIV to show payments for yourdends you choose to include in investment in- dend distributions (box 3 of Form 1099-DIV)
spouse. For more information about the report-come when figuring the limit on your investment only after your basis in the stock has been re-
ing requirements and the penalties for failure tointerest deduction. This is done on the Qualified duced to zero. After the basis of your stock has
file (or furnish) certain information returns, seeDividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or been reduced to zero, you must show this
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor- amount on Schedule D, Part I, line 1, if you held
5498, and W-2G.mation about the limit on investment interest, the stock 1 year or less. Show it on Schedule D,
see Interest Expenses in chapter 3. Part II, line 8, if you held the stock for more than
Liquidating distributions. If you receive a1 year. Enter “Nondividend Distribution Exceed-
liquidating distribution on stock, the corporationing Basis” in column (a) of Schedule D and theCapital gain distributions. How to report
will give you a Form 1099-DIV showing thename of the company. Report your gain in col-capital gain distributions depends on whether
amount of the liquidating distribution in boxes 8umn (f). Your gain is the amount of the distribu-you have any other capital gains or losses. If you
tion that is more than your basis in the stock. and 9.do, report total capital gain distributions (box 2a
Page 24 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 25 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
These persons and fiscal year taxpayers mayREMICs
obtain tax information by contacting the REMICStripped or the issuer of the CDO, if they hold their inter-A real estate mortgage investment conduit
est directly from the REMIC or issuer of the(REMIC) is an entity that is formed for the pur-Preferred Stock CDO. Publication 938, Real Estate Mortgagepose of holding a fixed pool of mortgages se-
Investment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting Infor-cured by interests in real property. A REMIC If the dividend rights are stripped from certain
mation, explains how to request this information.issues regular and residual interests to inves-preferred stock, the holder of the stripped pre-
tors. For tax purposes, a REMIC is generallyferred stock may have to include amounts in Publication 938 is available only on thetreated as a partnership with the residual inter-income equal to the amounts that would have Internet at www.irs.gov.est holders treated as the partners. The regularbeen included if the stock were a bond with interests are treated as debt instruments.original issue discount (OID). REMIC income or loss is not income or loss
If you hold a regular interest or CDO throughfrom a passive activity.Stripped preferred stock defined. Stripped a nominee (rather than directly), you can re-For more information about the qualificationspreferred stock is any stock that meets both of quest the information from the nominee.and the tax treatment that apply to a REMIC andthe following tests. the interests of investors in a REMIC, see sec- Allocated investment expenses. Regular in-1. There has been a separation in ownership tions 860A through 860G of the Internal Reve- terest holders in a REMIC may be allowed tobetween the stock and any dividend on the nue Code, and the regulations under those deduct the REMIC’s investment expenses, butstock that has not become payable. sections. only if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. A2. The stock: single-class REMIC is one that generally would
a. Is limited and preferred as to dividends, be classified as a trust for tax purposes if it hadRegular Interestb. Does not participate in corporate growth not elected REMIC status.
to any significant extent, and The single-class REMIC will report yourA REMIC can have several classes (also known
share of its investment expenses in box 5 ofas “tranches”) of regular interests. A regularc. Has a fixed redemption price.
Form 1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. Itinterest unconditionally entitles the holder to re-
will also include this amount in box 1 of Formceive a specified principal amount (or other simi-
1099-INT or box 2 of Form 1099-OID, and on thelar amount).Treatment of buyer. If you buy stripped pre-
additional written statement.A REMIC regular interest is treated as a debtferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in-
You may be able to take a deduction forinstrument for income tax purposes. Accord-clude certain amounts in your gross income
these expenses subject to a 2% limit that alsoingly, the OID, market discount, and incomewhile you hold the stock. These amounts are
applies to certain other miscellaneous itemizedreporting rules that apply to bonds and otherordinary income. They are equal to the deductions. See chapter 3 for more information.debt instruments as described earlier in thisamounts you would have included in gross in-
publication under Discount on Debt Instrumentscome if the stock were a bond that: Redemption of regular interests at maturity.apply, with certain modifications discussed be- Redemption of debt instruments at their maturity1. Was issued on the purchase date of the low. is treated as a sale or exchange. You muststock, and Generally, you report your income from a report redemptions on your tax return whether or2. Has OID equal to: regular interest on Form 1040, line 8a. For more not you realize gain or loss on the transaction.information on how to report interest and OID,a. The redemption price for the stock, mi- Your basis is your adjusted issue price, whichsee How To Report Interest Income, earlier.nus includes any OID you previously reported in
b. The price at which you bought the income.Holders must use accrual method. Holders
stock. Any amount that you receive on the retire-of regular interests must use an accrual method
ment of a debt instrument is treated in the sameof accounting to report OID and interest income.Report these amounts as other income on way as if you had sold or exchanged that instru-Because income under an accrual method is not
Form 1040, line 21. For information about OID, ment. A debt instrument is retired when it isdetermined by the receipt of cash, you may have
see Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier. reacquired or redeemed by the issuer and can-to include OID or interest income in your taxable
This treatment also applies to you if you celed.income even if you have not received any cash
acquire the stock in such a way (for example, by payments. Sale or exchange of a regular interest.gift) that your basis in the stock is determined by Some of your gain on the sale or exchange ofForms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You shouldusing a buyer’s basis. a REMIC regular interest may be ordinary in-receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form
come. The ordinary income part, if any, is:1099-OID from the REMIC. You will also receiveTreatment of person stripping stock. If you • The amount that would have been in-a written statement by March 15, 2007 (if youstrip the rights to one or more dividends from cluded in your income if the yield to matur-are a calendar year taxpayer), that providesstripped preferred stock, you are treated as hav- ity on the regular interest had been 110%additional information. The statement shoulding purchased the stock. You are treated as of the applicable federal rate at the begin-contain enough information to enable you tomaking the purchase on the date you disposed ning of your holding period, minusfigure your accrual of market discount or amor-of the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in the • The amount you included in your income.tizable bond premium.stripped preferred stock is treated as your Form 1099-INT shows the amount of interestpurchase price. The rules described in Treat- income that accrued to you for the period you Residual Interestment of buyer, earlier, apply to you. held the regular interest.
Form 1099-OID shows the amount of OID A residual interest is an interest in a REMIC that
and interest, if any, that accrued to you for the is not a regular interest. It is designated as a
period you held the regular interest. You will not residual interest by the REMIC.REMICs, FASITs, need to make any adjustments to the amounts If you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC,
reported even if you held the regular interest for you must take into account, on a quarterly basis,and Other CDOs only a part of the calendar year. However, if you your daily portion of the taxable income or net
bought the regular interest at a premium or ac- loss of the REMIC for each day during the taxHolders of interests in real estate mortgage in- quisition premium, see Refiguring OID shown on year that you hold the residual interest. Youvestment conduits (REMICs), financial asset Form 1099-OID under Original Issue Discount must report these amounts as ordinary incomesecuritization investment trusts (FASITs), and (OID), earlier. or loss.other collateralized debt obligations (CDOs)
must follow special rules for reporting income You may not get a Form 1099. Corpora- Basis in the residual interest. Your basis in
and any expenses from these investment prod- tions and other persons specified in Regulations the residual interest is increased by the amount
ucts. section 1.6049-7(c) will not receive Forms 1099. of taxable income you take into account. Your
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

Page 26 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
basis is decreased (but not below zero) by the method of accounting. Also include any OID corporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds under
amount of cash or the fair market value of any accrued on your CDO during the tax year. Basis of Investment Property in chapter 4.
property distributed to you, and by the amount of Generally, S corporation distributions, ex-Generally, you report your income from a
any net loss you have taken into account. If you cept dividend distributions, are considered a re-CDO on Form 1040, line 8a. For more informa-
sell your residual interest, you must adjust your turn of capital and reduce your basis in the stocktion about reporting these amounts on your re-
basis to reflect your share of the REMIC’s tax- of the corporation. The part of any distributionturn, see How To Report Interest Income ,
able income or net loss immediately before the that is more than your basis is treated as a gainearlier.
sale. See Wash Sales , in chapter 4, for more from the sale or exchange of property. The cor-
information about selling a residual interest. poration’s distributions may be in the form ofForms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You should
cash or property.receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form
Treatment of distributions. You must in- S corporation distributions are not treated as1099-OID. You will also receive a written state-
clude in your gross income the part of any distri- dividends except in certain cases in which thement by March 15, 2007, that provides addi-
bution that is more than your adjusted basis. corporation has accumulated earnings and prof-tional information. The statement should contain
Treat the distribution as a gain from the sale or its from years before it became an S corporation.enough information about the CDO to enable
exchange of your residual interest. you to figure your accrual of market discount or Reporting S corporation income, deduc-amortizable bond premium. tions, and credits. The S corporation shouldSchedule Q. If you hold a REMIC residual Form 1099-INT shows the amount of interest send you a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S)interest, you should receive Schedule Q (Form income paid to you for the period you held the showing your share of the S corporation’s in-1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual Interest CDO. come, credits, and deductions for the tax year.Holder of REMIC Taxable Income or Net Loss Form 1099-OID shows the amount of OID You must report your distributive share of the SAllocation, and instructions from the REMIC accrued to you and the interest, if any, paid to corporation’s income, gain, loss, deductions, oreach quarter. Schedule Q will indicate your you for the period you held the CDO. You should credits on the appropriate lines and schedules ofshare of the REMIC’s quarterly taxable income not need to make any adjustments to the your Form 1040.(or loss). Do not attach the Schedule Q to your amounts reported even if you held the CDO for For more information about your treatment oftax return. Keep it for your records. only a part of the calendar year. However, if you S corporation tax items, see Shareholder’s In-Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part IV, to bought the CDO at a premium or acquisition structions for Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).report your total share of the REMIC’s taxable premium, see Refiguring OID shown on Formincome (or loss) for each quarter included in Limit on losses and deductions. The de-1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID) ,your tax year. duction for your share of losses and deductionsearlier.For more information about reporting your shown on Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) is limitedIf you did not receive a Form 1099, see Youincome (or loss) from a residual interest in a to the adjusted basis of your stock and any debtmay not get a Form 1099 under REMICs, earlier.REMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) and the corporation owes you. Any loss or deductionSchedule E (Form 1040) instructions. not allowed because of this limit is carried overFASITs and treated as a loss or deduction in the next taxExpenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- year.A financial asset securitization investment trustgross-income limit, you may be able to claim a
(FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt obliga- Passive activity losses. Rules apply thatmiscellaneous itemized deduction for certain or-
tions such as credit card receivables, home eq- limit losses from passive activities. Your copy ofdinary and necessary expenses that you paid or
uity loans, and automobile loans. Schedule K-1 and its instructions will explain theincurred in connection with your investment in a
limits and tell you where on your return to reportREMIC. These expenses may include certain A regular interest in a FASIT is treated as a
your share of S corporation items from passiveexpense items incurred by the REMIC and debt instrument. The rules described under Col-
activities.passed through to you. The REMIC will report lateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs), earlier, ap-
these expenses to you on Schedule Q, line 3b. ply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except that a Form 8582. If you have a passive activitySee chapter 3 for information on how to report holder of a regular interest in a FASIT must use loss from an S corporation, you must completethese expenses. an accrual method of accounting to report OID Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations, toand interest income. figure the amount of the allowable loss to enter
For more information about FASITs, seeCollateralized Debt on your return. See Publication 925 for more
sections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev- information.Obligations (CDOs) enue Code.
A collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a debt Beginning January 1, 2005, the specialinstrument, other than a REMIC regular interest, rules for FASITs are repealed. How-that is secured by a pool of mortgages or other Investment Clubsever, the special rules still apply to anyCAUTION
!
evidence of debt and that has principal pay- FASIT in existence on October 22, 2004, to the
ments that are subject to acceleration. (Note: An investment club is formed when a group ofextent that regular interests issued by the FASIT
While REMIC regular interests are collateralized friends, neighbors, business associates, orbefore that date continue to remain outstanding
debt obligations, they have unique rules that do others pool their money to invest in stock orin accordance with the original terms of issu-
not apply to CDOs issued before 1987.) CDOs, other securities. The club may or may not have aance.
also known as “pay-through bonds,” are com- written agreement, a charter, or bylaws.
monly divided into different classes (also called Usually the group operates informally with
“tranches”). members pledging to pay a regular amount into
CDOs can be secured by a pool of mort- the club monthly. Some clubs have a committeeS Corporationsgages, automobile loans, equipment leases, or that gathers information on securities, selects
credit card receivables. the most promising securities, and recommendsIn general, an S corporation does not pay a taxFor more information about the qualifications that the club invest in them. Other clubs rotateon its income. Instead, its income and expensesand the tax treatment that apply to an issuer of a these responsibilities among all their members.are passed through to the shareholders, whoCDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the Internal Most clubs require all members to vote for orthen report these items on their own income taxRevenue Code and the regulations under that against all investments, sales, trades, and otherreturns.section. transactions.
If you are an S corporation shareholder, yourThe OID, market discount, and in-
share of the corporation’s current year incomecome-reporting rules that apply to bonds and Identifying number. Each club must have an
or loss and other tax items are taxed to youother debt instruments, as described earlier in employer identification number (EIN) to use
whether or not you receive any amount. Gener-this chapter under Discount on Debt Instru- when filing its return. The club’s EIN also may
ally, those items increase or decrease the basisments, also apply to a CDO. have to be given to the payer of dividends or
of your S corporation stock as appropriate. ForYou must include interest income from your other income from investments recorded in the
more information on basis adjustments for SCDO in your gross income under your regular club’s name. To obtain an EIN, first get Form
Page 26 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 27 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SS-4, Application for Employer Identification Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the part- Choosing to be taxed as a corporation. To
Number, from the Internal Revenue Service or nership. The amounts shown on Schedule K-1 choose to be taxed as a corporation, the club
your nearest Social Security Administration of- are your share of the partnership’s income, de- cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust, later) or
fice. See chapter 5 of this publication for more ductions, and credits. Report each amount on otherwise subject to special treatment under the
information about how to get this form. the appropriate lines and schedules of your in- tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to make
come tax return. the choice.Investments in name of member. When
The club’s expenses for producing or collect-an investment is recorded in the name of one
ing income, for managing investment property, Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as aclub member, this member must give his or her
or for determining any tax are listed separately corporation, it must file Form 1120 (or Formsocial security number (SSN) to the payer of
on Schedule K-1. Each individual partner who 1120-A). In that case, you do not report any of itsinvestment income. (When an investment is
itemizes deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)held in the names of two or more club members, income or expenses on your individual return.
can deduct his or her share of those expenses.the SSN of only one member must be given to All ordinary income and expenses and capital
The expenses are listed on Schedule A, line 22,the payer.) This member is considered as the gains and losses must be reported on the Form
along with other miscellaneous deductions sub-record owner for the actual owner, the invest- 1120 (or Form 1120-A). Any distribution the club
ject to the 2% limit. See chapter 3 for morement club. This member is a “nominee” and makes that qualifies as a dividend must be re-
information on the 2% limit.must file an information return with the IRS. For ported on Form 1099-DIV if total distributions to
example, the nominee member must file Form For more information about reporting your the shareholder are $10 or more for the year.1099-DIV for dividend income, showing the club income from a partnership, see the Schedule You must report any distributions that youas the owner of the dividend, his or her SSN, K-1 instructions. Also see Publication 541, Part- receive from the club on your individual return.and the EIN of the club. nerships. You should receive a copy of Form 1099-DIV
from the club showing the distributions you re-Passive activity losses. Rules apply thatTax Treatment of the Club limit losses from passive activities. Your copy of ceived.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and its instructions Some corporations can choose not to beGenerally, an investment club is treated as a will tell you where on your return to report your taxed and have earnings taxed to the sharehold-partnership for federal tax purposes unless it
share of partnership items from passive activi- ers. See S Corporations, earlier.chooses otherwise. In some situations, how-
ties. If you have a passive activity loss from aever, it is taxed as a corporation or a trust. For more information about corporations,partnership, you must complete Form 8582 to see Publication 542, Corporations.Clubs formed before 1997. Before 1997, the figure the amount of the allowable loss to enter
rules for determining how an investment club is on your tax return.
treated were different from those explained in Club as a Trustthe following discussions. An investment club No social security coverage for investmentthat existed before 1997 is treated for later years In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as aclub earnings. If an investment club partner-the same way it was treated before 1997, unless ship’s activities are limited to investing in sav- trust. In general, a trust is an arrangementit chooses to be treated a different way under the ings certificates, stock, or securities, and through which trustees take title to property fornew rules. To make that choice, the club must collecting interest or dividends for its members’ the purpose of protecting or conserving it for thefile Form 8832, Entity Classification Election. accounts, a member’s share of income is not beneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied in
earnings from self-employment. You cannot vol- chancery or probate courts. An arrangement is
untarily pay the self-employment tax to increase treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purposeClub as a Partnership your social security coverage and ultimate bene- is to vest in trustees responsibility for protecting
fits.If your club is not taxed as a corporation or a and conserving property for beneficiaries who
trust, it will be treated as a partnership. cannot share in that responsibility and so are not
associates in a joint enterprise for the conduct ofFiling requirement. If your investment club is Club as a Corporation business for profit. If you need more informationtreated as a partnership, it must file Form 1065.
about trusts, see Regulations sectionHowever, as a partner in the club, you must An investment club formed after 1996 is taxed
301.7701-4.report on your individual return your share of the as a corporation if:
club’s income, gains, losses, deductions, and • It is formed under a federal or state law
Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as acredits for the club’s tax year. (Its tax year gener- that refers to it as incorporated or as a
trust, it must file Form 1041. You should receiveally must be the same tax year as that of the corporation, body corporate, or body poli-
a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) from thepartners owning a majority interest.) You must tic,
report these items whether or not you actually trust. Report the amounts shown on Schedule• It is formed under a state law that refers to
receive any distribution from the partnership. K-1 on the appropriate lines and schedules ofit as a joint-stock company or joint-stock
your income tax return.association, orSchedule K-1. You should receive a copy of
• It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), Partner’s Share of
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 27

Page 28 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
shelters. These provisions include the follow-
ing.Abusive Tax Shelters
1. Passive activity loss and credit limits.2. The passive activity loss and credit rulesAbusive tax shelters are marketing schemes
limit the amount of losses and credits thatthat involve artificial transactions with little or no
can be claimed from passive activities andeconomic reality. They often make use of un-
limit the amount that can offset nonpassiverealistic allocations, inflated appraisals, losses
Tax Shelters and income, such as certain portfolio incomein connection with nonrecourse loans, mis-
from investments. For more detailed infor-matching of income and deductions, financing
mation about determining and reporting in-techniques that do not conform to standard com-Other come, losses, and credits from passivemercial business practices, or the mischaracter-
activities, see Publication 925.ization of the substance of the transaction.
2. Registration requirements for tax shel-Despite appearances to the contrary, the tax-Reportable
ters. Generally, before October 23, 2004,payer generally risks little.
the organizers of certain tax shelters wereAbusive tax shelters commonly involve
Transactions required to register the shelter with thepackage deals that are designed from the start
IRS. The IRS then assigned the tax shelterto generate losses, deductions, or credits that
a registration number. If you are an inves-will be far more than present or future invest-
tor in a tax shelter that was required to bement. Or, they may promise investors from theIntroduction registered, the seller (or the transferor)start that future inflated appraisals will enable
must provide you with the tax shelter regis-them, for example, to reap charitable contribu-Investments that yield tax benefits are some-
tration number at the time of sale (or trans-tion deductions based on those appraisals. (Buttimes called “tax shelters.” In some cases, Con-
fer) or within 20 days after the seller orsee the appraisal requirements discussed undergress has concluded that the loss of revenue is transferor receives the number if that dateRules To Curb Abusive Tax Shelters , later.)an acceptable side effect of special tax provi- is later. See Investor Reporting, later, forThey are commonly marketed in terms of thesions designed to encourage taxpayers to make more information about reporting this num-ratio of tax deductions allegedly available tocertain types of investments. In many cases, ber when filing your tax return.each dollar invested. This ratio (or “write-off”) ishowever, losses from tax shelters produce little 3. Disclosure of reportable transactions.frequently said to be several times greater thanor no benefit to society, or the tax benefits are You must disclose information for each re-one-to-one.exaggerated beyond those intended. Those portable transaction in which you partici-Because there are many abusive tax shel-cases are called “abusive tax shelters.” An in- pate. See Reportable Transactionters, it is not possible to list all the factors youvestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub- Disclosure Statement, later.should consider in determining whether an of-ject to restrictions, including the requirement Material advisors with respect to any re-fering is an abusive tax shelter. However, youthat it be registered, as discussed later, unless it portable transaction must disclose informa-should ask the following questions, whichis a “projected income investment” (defined tion about the transaction on Form 8264might provide a clue to the abusive nature oflater). according to the interim guidance providedthe plan.
in Notice 2004-80, which is on page 963 of• Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco-Topics Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-50 and No-nomic benefits? tice 2005-22, which is on page 756 of Inter-This chapter discusses: • Is this a transaction you would seriously nal Revenue Bulletin 2005-12. Theseconsider, apart from the tax benefits, if you• How to recognize an abusive tax shelter, notices are available athoped to make a profit?• Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-50.pdf and
• Do shelter assets really exist and, if so,shelters, at
are they insured for less than their www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb05-12.pdf , re-• Investors’ reporting requirements, and purchase price? spectively. This requirement applies to ma-• Penalties that may apply. • Is there a nontax justification for the way terial advisors who provide material aid,
profits and losses are allocated to part- assistance, or advice on any reportable
Useful Items ners? transaction after October 22, 2004.
• Do the facts and supporting documents 4. Requirement to maintain list. MaterialYou may want to see:
make economic sense? In that connec- advisors must maintain a list of persons to
tion, are there sales and resales of the tax whom they provide material aid, assis-Publication
shelter property at ever increasing prices? tance, or advice on any reportable transac-
❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods • Does the investment plan involve a gim- tion after October 22, 2004. Before
October 23, 2004, organizers and sellersmick, device, or sham to hide the eco-❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal
who acted as material advisors with re-nomic reality of the transaction?Rights, and Claims for Refund
spect to any potentially abusive tax shelter• Does the promoter offer to backdate docu-❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated (including a reportable transaction, dis-ments after the close of the year? Are you
Property cussed later) were required to maintain ainstructed to backdate checks covering
list of persons involved in the tax shelter.your investment?❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules The list must be available for inspection by• Is your debt a real debt or are you assured
the IRS, and the information required to beby the promoter that you will never have toForm (and Instructions) included on the list generally must be keptpay it?
for 7 years. See Regulations section❏ 8271 Investor Reporting of Tax Shelter • Does this transaction involve laundering 301.6112-1 for more information.Registration Number United States source income through for-
5. Confidentiality privilege. The confidenti-eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha-❏ 8275 Disclosure Statement ality privilege between you and a federallyven and owned by United States
❏ 8275-R Regulation Disclosure Statement authorized tax practitioner does not applyshareholders?
to written communications made after Oc-❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions tober 21, 2004, regarding the promotion of
❏ 8886 Reportable Transaction Disclosure your direct or indirect participation in anyRules To Curb
tax shelter.Statement Abusive Tax Shelters
6. Appraisal requirement for donated
See chapter 5 for information about getting Congress has enacted a series of income tax property. If you claim a deduction of more
these publications and forms. laws designed to halt the growth of abusive tax than $5,000 for an item or group of similar
Page 28 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 29 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
items of donated property, you generally the cumulative tax liability of any investor. In that • A transaction with contractual protection.
must get a qualified appraisal from a quali- case, the tax shelter becomes subject to the • Loss transactions.
fied appraiser and you must attach section registration rules for tax shelters, described ear- • Transactions with a brief asset holding pe-
B of Form 8283 to your tax return. If you lier. riod. This category includes transactions
claim a deduction of more than $500,000 that result in your claiming a tax credit
for the donated property, you generally (including a foreign tax credit) of moremust attach the qualified appraisal to your Authority for Disallowance of Tax than $250,000 if the asset giving rise totax return. For more information about ap- Benefits the credit was held by you for 45 days orpraisals, including exceptions, see Publica- less.The IRS has published guidance concluding thattion 561.
the claimed tax benefits of various abusive tax7. Interest on penalties. If you are assessed
shelters should be disallowed. The guidance isan accuracy-related or civil fraud penalty Note. Transactions with a significantthe conclusion of the IRS on how the law is(as discussed under Penalties, later), inter- book-tax difference that would have been re-applied to a particular set of facts. Guidance isest will be imposed on the amount of the quired to be disclosed on returns filed with duepublished in the Internal Revenue Bulletin forpenalty from the due date of the return dates (including extensions) after January 5,taxpayers’ information and also for use by IRS(including any extensions) to the date you 2006, are no longer reportable transactions.officials. So, if your return is examined and anpay the penalty. These transactions do not need to be disclosedabusive tax shelter is identified and challenged,8. Accounting method restriction. Tax on Form 8886. For more details, see Noticepublished guidance dealing with that type ofshelters generally cannot use the cash 2006-6, 2006-5 I.R.B. 385, available atshelter, which disallows certain claimed taxmethod of accounting. http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-05.pdf.shelter benefits, could serve as the basis for the9. Uniform capitalization rules. The uniform
examining official’s challenge of the tax benefits Listed transaction. A listed transaction is acapitalization rules generally apply to pro-
that you claimed. In such a case, the examiner transaction that is the same as or substantiallyducing property or acquiring it for resale.
will not compromise even if you or your repre- similar to one of the types of transactions thatUnder those rules, the direct cost and part
sentative believes that you have authority for theof the indirect cost of the property must be the IRS has determined to be a tax-avoidance
positions taken on your tax return.capitalized or included in inventory. For transaction. These transactions have been iden-
more information, see Publication 538. tified in notices, regulations, and other publishedThe courts have generally been un-
10. Denial of deduction for interest on an guidance issued by the IRS. For a list of existingsympathetic to taxpayers involved in
underpayment due to a reportable guidance, see the instructions for Form 8886.abusive tax shelter schemes and haveCAUTION
!
transaction. You cannot deduct any inter- ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of the Confidential transaction. A confidentialest you paid or accrued on any part of an cases in which these shelters have been chal- transaction is one that is offered to you underunderpayment of tax due to an understate- lenged. conditions of confidentiality and for which youment arising from a reportable transaction
have paid an advisor a minimum fee. A transac-(discussed later) if the relevant facts affect- Investor Reporting tion is offered under conditions of confidentialitying the tax treatment of the item are not
if the advisor who is paid the fee places a limit onadequately disclosed. This rule applies to You may be required to provide the following the disclosure of the tax treatment or tax struc-reportable transactions entered into in tax information. ture on you and the limit protects the advisor’syears beginning after October 22, 2004. • Reportable transaction disclosure state- tax strategies. The transaction is treated as con-
ment. fidential even if the conditions of confidentiality
• Tax shelter registration number. are not legally binding on you.Projected Income Investment
Transaction with contractual protection.
Special rules apply to a projected income in- Reportable Transaction Disclosure Generally, a transaction with contractual protec-
vestment. To qualify as a projected income in- Statement tion is a transaction in which you or a related
vestment, a tax shelter must not be expected party has the right to a full or partial refund ofUse Form 8886 to disclose information for eachto reduce the cumulative tax liability of any fees if all or part of the intended tax conse-reportable transaction in which you participated.investor during any year of the first 5 years quences of the transaction are not sustained, orGenerally, you must attach Form 8886 to yourending after the date the investment was of- a transaction for which the fees are contingentreturn for each tax year in which you participatedfered for sale. In addition, the assets of a pro- on your realizing the tax benefits from the trans-in the transaction. In addition, for the first yearjected income investment must not include or action.Form 8886 is attached to your return, you mustrelate to more than an incidental interest in:
Loss transactions. For individuals, a losssend an exact copy of the form to:• Master sound recordings,
transaction is any transaction that results in a• Motion picture or television films, Internal Revenue Service deductible loss if the gross amount of the loss is• Videotapes, OTSA Mail Stop 4915 at least $2 million in a single tax year or $41973 North Rulon White Blvd.• Lithograph plates, million in any combination of tax years. A lossOgden, Utah 84404• Copyrights, from a foreign currency transaction under Inter-• Literary, musical, or artistic compositions, nal Revenue Code section 988 is a loss transac-or If you fail to file Form 8886 as required or fail tion if the gross amount of the loss is at least
• Collectibles (such as works of art, rugs, to include any required information on the form, $50,000 in a single tax year, whether or not theantiques, metals, gems, stamps, coins, or you may have to pay a penalty. See Penalty for loss flows through from an S corporation oralcoholic beverages). failure to disclose a reportable transaction  later partnership.
under Penalties. Certain losses (such as losses from casual-Tax shelters that qualify as projected income The following discussion briefly describes re- ties, thefts, and condemnations) are exceptedinvestments are not subject to the registration portable transactions. For more details, see the from this category and do not have to be re-requirement for tax shelters, described earlier. instructions for Form 8886. ported on Form 8886. For information on otherHowever, the requirement to maintain a list that
exceptions, see Revenue Procedure 2004-66 inis in effect for tax shelters also applies to any Reportable transaction. Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-50 (or futureprojected income investment. See Requirement
A reportable transaction is any of the follow- published guidance). This Internal Revenue Bul-to maintain list, earlier.
ing. letin is available atA tax shelter that previously qualified as a
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-50.pdf.• A listed transaction.projected income investment may later be dis-
• A confidential transaction.qualified if, in one of its first 5 years, it reduces
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions Page 29

Page 30 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the penalty from the due date of the return (in- • You underpaid your tax by more thanTax Shelter Registration Number
$5,000 because of the misstatement.cluding extensions) to the date you pay the pen-
If you include on your tax return any deduction, alty. • You cannot establish that you had reason-loss, credit or other tax benefit, or any income able cause for the underpayment and thatNegligence or disregard of rules or regula-from an interest in a tax shelter required to be you acted in good faith.tions. The penalty for negligence or disregardregistered, you must report the registration num-
of rules or regulations is imposed only on theber that the tax shelter provided to you. (See The 20% penalty does not apply to any under-part of the underpayment that is due to negli-Registration requirements for tax shelters , ear- statement that is subject to the accuracy-relatedgence or disregard of rules or regulations. Thelier.) Complete and attach Form 8271 to your penalty for a reportable transaction understate-penalty will not be charged if you can show thatreturn to report the number and to provide other ment (discussed later).you had reasonable cause for understating yourinformation about the tax shelter and its bene- You may be assessed a penalty of 40% for afits. You must also attach Form 8271 to any tax and that you acted in good faith. gross valuation misstatement. If you misstateapplication for tentative refund (Form 1045) and  Negligence includes any failure to make a the value or the adjusted basis of property byto any amended return (Form 1040X) on which reasonable attempt to comply with the provi- 200% or more of the amount determined to bethese benefits are claimed or income is re- sions of the Internal Revenue Code. It also in- correct, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%,ported. cludes any failure to keep adequate books and instead of 20%, of the amount you underpaidrecords. A return position that has a reasonableTransfer of interests in a tax shelter. If you because of the gross valuation misstatement.basis is not negligence.hold an investment interest in a tax shelter and The penalty rate is also 40% if the property’sDisregard includes any careless, reckless, orlater transfer that interest to another person, you correct value or adjusted basis is zero.intentional disregard of rules or regulations.must provide the tax shelter’s registration num-
The penalty for disregard of rules and regu-ber to each person to whom you transferred your Penalty for incorrect appraisals. The per-
interest. (However, this does not apply if your lations can be avoided if all of the following are son who prepares an appraisal of the value of
interest is in a projected income investment, true. property may have to pay a penalty if:
described earlier.) You must also provide a • You keep adequate books and records. • He or she knows, or reasonably shouldstatement substantially in the following form: • You have a reasonable basis for your po- have known, that the appraisal would be
sition on the tax issue.You have acquired an interest in [name and used in connection with a return or claim
address of tax shelter] whose taxpayer • You make an adequate disclosure of your for refund, and
identification number is [if any]. The Internal position. • The claimed value of the property on aRevenue Service has issued [name of tax shelter]
return or claim for refund, which is basedthe following tax shelter registration number:  Use Form 8275 to make your disclosure, and
on that appraisal, results in a substantial[number]. You must report this registration attach it to your tax return. To disclose a position
number to the Internal Revenue Service, if you valuation misstatement or a gross valua-contrary to a regulation, use Form 8275-R. Alsoclaim any deduction, loss, credit, or other tax tion misstatement as discussed above.use Form 8886 to disclose a reportable transac-benefit or report any income by reason of your tion (discussed earlier). For details on the amount of the penalty andinvestment in [name of tax shelter]. You must
report the registration number (as well as the exceptions, see Publication 561.Substantial understatement of tax. An
name and taxpayer identification number of [name understatement is considered to be substantialof tax shelter]) on Form 8271. Form 8271 must be Penalty for failure to disclose a reportableif it is more than the greater of:attached to the return on which you claim the transaction. If you fail to include any required• 10% of the tax required to be shown ondeduction, loss, credit, or other tax benefit or information regarding a reportable transactionreport any income. Issuance of a registration the return, or (discussed earlier) on a return or statement, younumber does not indicate that this investment or • $5,000. may have to pay a penalty. The amount of thethe claimed tax benefits have been reviewed,
penalty is $10,000 if you are an individual, orAn “understatement” is the amount of tax re-examined, or approved by the Internal Revenue
Service. $50,000 if you are not. In the case of a listedquired to be shown on your return for a tax year
transaction, the amount of the penalty isminus the amount of tax shown on the return,
$100,000 if you are an individual, or $200,000 ifreduced by any rebates. The term “rebate” gen-Penalties
you are not. This penalty applies whether or noterally means a decrease in the tax shown on
Investing in an abusive tax shelter may be an there is an understatement of tax and is in addi-your original return as the result of your filing an
expensive proposition when you consider all of tion to any other penalty that may be imposed.amended return or claim for refund.
the consequences. First, the promoter generally The IRS may rescind or abate the penalty forFor other than tax shelters, you can file Formcharges a substantial fee. If your return is ex- failing to disclose a reportable transaction under8275 or Form 8275-R to disclose items thatamined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is deter- certain limited circumstances, but cannot re-could cause a substantial understatement of in-mined, you will be faced with payment of more scind the penalty for failing to disclose a listedcome tax. In that way, you can avoid the sub-tax, interest on the underpayment, possibly a transaction.stantial understatement penalty if you have a20% or 30% accuracy-related penalty, or a 75%
reasonable basis for your position on the taxcivil fraud penalty. You may also be subject to Accuracy-related penalty for a reportableissue. Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a taxthe penalty for failure to pay tax. These penalties transaction understatement. If you have areturn does not reduce the amount of the under-are explained in the following paragraphs. reportable transaction understatement, you maystatement. have to pay a penalty equal to 20% of theAccuracy-related penalties. An accuracy- Also, the understatement penalty will not be amount of that understatement. This applies torelated penalty of 20% can be imposed for un- imposed if you can show that there was reason- any item due to a listed transaction or otherderpayments of tax due to: able cause for the underpayment caused by the reportable transaction with a significant purpose• Negligence or disregard of rules or regula- understatement and that you acted in good faith. of avoiding or evading federal income tax. Thetions, An important factor in establishing reasonable penalty is 30% rather than 20% for the part of• Substantial understatement of tax, or cause and good faith will be the extent of your any reportable transaction understatement if the• Substantial valuation misstatement. effort to determine your proper tax liability under transaction was not properly disclosed. You may
the law.This penalty will not be imposed if you can show not have to pay the 20% penalty if you meet the
that you had reasonable cause for any under- strengthened reasonable cause and good faithValuation misstatement. In general, you
statement of tax and that you acted in good faith. exception.are liable for a 20% penalty for a substantial
Your failure to disclose a reportable transaction This penalty does not apply to the part of anvaluation misstatement if all of the following are
is a strong indication that you failed to act in understatement on which the fraud penalty ortrue.
good faith. gross valuation misstatement penalty is im-• The value or adjusted basis of any prop-
posed.erty claimed on the return is 150% or moreIf you are charged an accuracy-related pen-
of the correct amount.alty, interest will be imposed on the amount of
Page 30 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 31 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Civil fraud penalty. If there is any underpay- payment, an investor can be penalized with up will result if the claimed tax benefits are disal-
ment of tax on your return due to fraud, a penalty to a 25% addition to tax if the failure to pay lowed, you should consider tax shelter invest-
of 75% of the underpayment will be added to continues. ments carefully and seek competent legal and
your tax. financial advice.
Whether To InvestJoint return. The fraud penalty on a joint
return applies to a spouse only if some part of In light of the adverse tax consequences and thethe underpayment is due to the fraud of that substantial amount of penalties and interest thatspouse.
Failure to pay tax. If a deficiency is assessed
and is not paid within 10 days of the demand for
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions Page 31

Page 32 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally, • Interest expense properly allocable to
portfolio income.this is the amount of cash and the adjusted basis
of property you contribute to the activity. It also However, this interest and other expenses may3. includes money you borrow for use in the activity be subject to other limits. These limits are ex-if you are personally liable for repayment or if plained in the rest of this chapter.you use property not used in the activity as
Additional information. For more informa-security for the loan. For more information, seeInvestment tion about determining and reporting incomePublication 925.
and losses from passive activities, see Publica-
tion 925.Expenses Passive activity losses and credits. The
amount of losses and tax credits you can claim
from passive activities is limited. Generally, youTerms you may need to know are allowed to deduct passive activity losses(see Glossary): Interest Expensesonly up to the amount of your passive activity
income. Also, you can use credits from passiveAt-risk rules This section discusses interest expenses youactivities only against tax on the income from
may be able to deduct as an investor.Passive activity passive activities. There are exceptions for cer-
For information on business interest, seePortfolio income tain activities, such as rental real estate activi-
chapter 4 of Publication 535.ties.
You cannot deduct personal interest ex-
Passive activity. A passive activity gener- penses other than qualified home mortgage in-Topics ally is any activity involving the conduct of any terest, as explained in Publication 936, HomeThis chapter discusses: trade or business in which you do not materi- Mortgage Interest Deduction, and interest on
ally participate and any rental activity. How- certain student loans, as explained in Publica-• Limits on deductions,
ever, if you are involved in renting real estate, tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education.• Interest expenses, the activity is not a passive activity if both of• Bond premium amortization, the following are true. Investment Interest• Expenses of producing income, • More than one-half of the personal serv-• Nondeductible expenses, and If you borrow money to buy property you hold forices you perform during the year in all
• How to report investment expenses. investment, the interest you pay is investmenttrades or businesses are performed in real
interest. You can deduct investment interestproperty trades or businesses in which
subject to the limit discussed later. However,you materially participate.Useful Items
you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-• You perform more than 750 hours of serv-You may want to see: duce tax-exempt income. See Tax-exempt in-ices during the year in real property trades
come under Nondeductible Expenses, later. Noror businesses in which you materially par-Publication can you deduct interest expenses on straddles,ticipate.
also discussed under Nondeductible Expenses.❏ 535 Business Expenses
Investment interest does not include any❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules The term “trade or business” generally means qualified home mortgage interest or any interest
any activity that involves the conduct of a trade taken into account in computing income or loss❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and
or business, is conducted in anticipation of start- from a passive activity.Dependents
ing a trade or business, or involves certain re-
Investment property. Property held for in-search or experimental expenditures. However,Form (and Instructions) vestment includes property that produces inter-it does not include rental activities or certain
est, dividends, annuities, or royalties not derived❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized activities treated as incidental to holding prop-
in the ordinary course of a trade or business. ItDeductions erty for investment.
also includes property that produces gain or loss❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense You are considered to materially participate in (not derived in the ordinary course of a trade orDeduction an activity if you are involved on a regular, con- business) from the sale or trade of propertytinuous, and substantial basis in the operations producing these types of income or held forSee chapter 5 for information about getting of the activity. investment (other than an interest in a passivethese publications and forms. activity). Investment property also includes anOther income (nonpassive income). Gen-
interest in a trade or business activity in whicherally, you can use losses from passive activities
you did not materially participate (other than aonly to offset income from passive activities.
passive activity).You generally cannot use passive activity lossesLimits on Deductions to offset your other income, such as your wages Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.
or your portfolio income. Portfolio income in- To determine your investment interest, combineYour deductions for investment expenses may cludes gross income from interest, dividends, your share of investment interest from a partner-be limited by: annuities, or royalties that is not derived in the ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your• The at-risk rules, ordinary course of a trade or business. It also other investment interest.• The passive activity loss limits, includes gains or losses (not derived in the ordi-
• The limit on investment interest, or nary course of a trade or business) from the sale
• The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous or trade of property (other than an interest in a Allocation of Interest Expense
itemized deductions. passive activity) producing portfolio income or
If you borrow money for business or personalheld for investment. This includes capital gain
purposes as well as for investment, you mustThe at-risk rules and passive activity rules are distributions from mutual funds and real estate
allocate the debt among those purposes. Onlyexplained briefly in this section. The limit on investment trusts.
the interest expense on the part of the debt usedinvestment interest is explained later in this You cannot use passive activity losses to
for investment purposes is treated as invest-chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2% limit is offset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.
ment interest. The allocation is not affected byexplained later in this chapter under Expenses
Expenses. Do not include in the computa- the use of property that secures the debt.of Producing Income.
tion of your passive activity income or loss:
• Expenses (other than interest) that areAt-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to Example 1. You borrow $10,000 and use
clearly and directly allocable to your port-most income-producing activities. These rules $8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 to
folio income, orlimit the amount of loss you can deduct to the buy items for your home. Since 80% of the debt
Page 32 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 33 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Choosing to deduct disallowed interestis used for, and allocated to, investment pur- Additional allocation rules. For more infor-
expense before the year of disposition. Youposes, 80% of the interest on that debt is invest- mation about allocating interest expense, see
can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex-ment interest. The other 20% is nondeductible chapter 4 of Publication 535.
pense in any year before the year you dispose ofpersonal interest.
the bond, up to your net interest income from the
Debt proceeds received in cash. If you re- When To Deduct bond during the year. The rest of the disallowed
ceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds are interest expense remains deductible in the yearInvestment Interest
generally not treated as investment property. you dispose of the bond.
If you use the cash method of accounting, you
Net interest income. This is the interestmust pay the interest before you can deduct it.Debt proceeds deposited in account. If you income (including OID) from the bond that youdeposit debt proceeds in an account, that de- If you use an accrual method of accounting, include in income for the year, minus the interestposit is treated as investment property, regard- you can deduct interest over the period it ac- expense paid or accrued during the year toless of whether the account bears interest. But, if crues, regardless of when you pay it. For an purchase or carry the bond.you withdraw the funds and use them for an- exception, see Unpaid expenses owed to re-
other purpose, you must reallocate the debt to lated party under When To Report Investment Limit on interest deduction for short-termdetermine the amount considered to be for in- Expenses, later in this chapter. obligations. If the current income inclusionvestment purposes. rules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount onExample. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep- Short-Term Obligations do not apply to you, theExample 2. Assume in Example 1 that you tember 3, 2006, payable in 90 days at 12% amount you can deduct for interest expense youborrowed the money on March 1 and immedi- interest. On December 2, 2006, you paid this paid or accrued during the year to buy or carry aately bought the stock for $8,000. You did not with a new note for $1,030, due on March 2, short-term obligation is limited.buy the household items until June 1. You had 2007. If you use the cash method of accounting, The interest is deductible only to the extentdeposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had no you cannot deduct any part of the $30 interest it is more than:other transactions on the bank account until on your return for 2006 because you did not • The amount of acquisition discount or OIDJune. You did not sell the stock and you made actually pay it. If you use an accrual method, you on the obligation for the tax year, plusno principal payments on the debt. You paid may be able to deduct a portion of the interest on • The amount of any interest payable on theinterest from another account. The $8,000 is the loans through December 31, 2006, on your obligation for the year that is not includedtreated as being used for an investment pur- return for 2006. in income because of your accountingpose. The $2,000 is treated as being used for an
method (other than interest taken into ac-Interest paid in advance. Generally, if youinvestment purpose for the 3-month period.
count in determining the amount of acqui-pay interest in advance for a period that goesYour total interest expense for 3 months on this
sition discount or OID).beyond the end of the tax year, you must spreaddebt is investment interest. In June, when you
the interest over the tax years to which it belongsspend the $2,000 for household items, you must The method of determining acquisition discount
under the OID rules discussed in chapter 1. Youbegin to allocate 80% of the debt and the inter- and OID for short-term obligations is discussed
can deduct in each year only the interest for thatest expense to investment purposes and 20% to in chapter 1 under Discount on Short-Term Obli-
year.personal purposes. gations.
Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re- Interest not deducted due to limit. In theInterest on margin accounts. If you are aceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro- year you dispose of the obligation, or if youcash method taxpayer, you can deduct interestceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat choose, in another year in which you have neton margin accounts to buy taxable securities asany payment (up to the amount of the proceeds) interest income from the obligation, you caninvestment interest in the year you paid it. Youmade from any account you own, or from cash, deduct the amount of any interest expense youare considered to have paid interest on theseas made from those proceeds. This applies to were not allowed to deduct for an earlier yearaccounts only when you actually pay the brokerany payment made within 30 days before or because of the limit. Follow the same rules pro-or when payment becomes available to the bro-after the proceeds are received in cash or de- vided in the earlier discussion under Limit onker through your account. Payment may be-posited in your account. interest deduction for market discount bonds ,come available to the broker through your
If you received the loan proceeds in cash, earlier.account when the broker collects dividends or
you can treat the payment as made on the date interest for your account, or sells securities held
you received the cash instead of the date you for you or received from you. Limit on Deductionactually made the payment. You cannot deduct any interest on money
Generally, your deduction for investment inter-borrowed for personal reasons.Payments on debt may require new alloca- est expense is limited to the amount of your net
tion. As you repay a debt used for more than Limit on interest deduction for market dis- investment income.
one purpose, you must reallocate the balance. count bonds. The amount you can deduct for You can carry over the amount of investment
You must first reduce the amount allocated to interest expense you paid or accrued during the interest that you could not deduct because of
personal purposes by the repayment. You then year to buy or carry a market discount bond may this limit to the next tax year. The interest carried
reallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is be limited. This limit does not apply if you accrue over is treated as investment interest paid or
for investment purposes. the market discount and include it in your in- accrued in that next year.
come currently. You can carry over disallowed investmentExample 3. If, in Example 2 , you repay interest to the next tax year even if it is more thanUnder this limit, the interest is deductible$500 on November 1, the entire repayment is your taxable income in the year the interest wasonly to the extent it is more than:applied against the amount allocated to per- paid or accrued.1. The total interest and OID includible insonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo-
gross income for the bond for the year,cated as $8,000 for investment purposes, and
plus$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next Net Investment Income2. The market discount for the number ofreallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷
days you held the bond during the year.$9,500) of the debt and the interest expense is Determine the amount of your net investment
allocated to investment. income by subtracting your investment ex-Figure the amount in (2) above using the rules penses (other than interest expense) from yourfor figuring accrued market discount in chapter 1Pass-through entities. If you use borrowed investment income.under Market Discount Bonds.funds to buy an interest in a partnership or S
corporation, then the interest on those funds Interest not deducted due to limit. In the Investment income. This generally includes
must be allocated based on the assets of the year you dispose of the bond, you can deduct your gross income from property held fo r invest-
entity. If you contribute to the capital of the the amount of any interest expense you were not ment (such as interest, dividends , annuities, and
entity, you can make the allocation using any allowed to deduct in earlier years because of the royalties). Investment income doe s not include
reasonable method. limit. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not include qualified dividends or net capital gain the total amount on Form 8814, line 4. Subtract The $2,000 of income from the  passive activ-
unless you choose to include them. the result from the amount on Form 8814, line ity is not used in determining Ted’s net invest-
12. ment income. His investment interest deductionChoosing to include qualified dividends. for the year is limited to $6,800, the amount ofInvestment income generally does not include Example. Your 10-year-old child has tax- his net investment income.qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 1. able interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per-However, you can choose to include all or part of manent Fund dividends of $2,000. You chooseyour qualified dividends in investment income. to report this on your return. You enter $4,000 on Form 4952You make this choice by completing Form Form 8814, line 1a, $2,000 on line 2a, and4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expense$6,000 on line 4. You then enter $4,300 on FormIf you choose to include any amount of your Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest-8814, lines 6 and 12, and Form 1040, line 21.qualified dividends in investment income, you ment interest.You figure the amount of your child’s incomemust reduce your qualified dividends that are that you can consider your investment incomeeligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by Example. Jane Smith is single. Her 2006as follows:the same amount. income includes $3,000 in dividends (other than
qualified dividends) and a net capital gain of$4,300 − ($4,300 × ($2,000 ÷ $6,000))Choosing to include net capital gain. In-
$9,000 from the sale of investment property.vestment income generally does not include net You include the result, $2,867 on Form 4952, She also has a gain of $1,000 from the sale of acapital gain from disposing of investment prop- line 4a. painting given to her by an artist friend. Theerty (including capital gain distributions from mu-
painting is not a capital asset because Jane’sChild’s capital gain distributions. If parttual funds). However, you can choose to include
basis in the painting is determined by referenceof the amount you report is your child’s capitalall or part of your net capital gain in investment
to her friend’s basis in the painting. She incurredgain distributions, that part (which is reported onincome.
$12,500 of investment interest expense. HerSchedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13)You make this choice by completing Form
other investment expenses directly connectedgenerally does not count as investment income.4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.
with the production of investment income totalHowever, you can choose to include all or part ofIf you choose to include any amount of your
$980 after applying the 2% limit on miscellane-it in investment income, as explained in Choos-net capital gain in investment income, you must
ous itemized deductions on Schedule A (Forming to include net capital gain, earlier.reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for
1040).Your investment income also includes thethe lower capital gains tax rates by the same
For 2006, Jane chooses to include all of heramount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable,amount.
net capital gain in investment income. Her totalthe reduced amount figured under Child’sFor more information about the capital gains
investment income is $13,000 ($3,000 divi-Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier).rates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
dends + $9,000 net capital gain + $1,000 from
Before making either choice, consider the sale of the painting). Her net investmentInvestment expenses. Investment expensesthe overall effect on your tax liability. income is $12,020 ($13,000 total investmentinclude all income-producing expenses (otherCompare your tax if you make one or
TIP
income − $980 other investment expenses).than interest expense) relating to investmentboth of these choices with your tax if you do not. Jane’s Form 4952 is illustrated, later. Herproperty that are allowable deductions after ap-
investment interest expense deduction is limitedplying the 2% limit that applies to miscellane-Investment income of child reported on par- to $12,020, the amount of her net investmentous itemized deductions. Use the smaller of:ent’s return. Investment income includes the income. The $480 disallowed investment inter-• The investment expenses included onpart of your child’s interest and dividend income est expense is carried forward to 2007.Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22, orthat you choose to report on your return. If the
• The amount on Schedule A, line 26.child does not have qualified dividends, Alaska Exception to use of Form 4952. You do notPermanent Fund dividends, or capital gain distri- See Expenses of Producing Income, later, for a have to complete Form 4952 or attach it tobutions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form discussion of the 2% limit. your return if you meet all of the following tests.8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s Inter- • Your investment interest expense is notest and Dividends. Include it on line 4a of Form Losses from passive activities. Income or more than your investment income from4952. expenses that you used in computing income or interest and ordinary dividends minus any
loss from a passive activity are not included in qualified dividends.Example. Your 8-year-old son has interest determining your investment income or invest- • You do not have any other deductible in-income of $2,000, which you choose to report on ment expenses (including investment interest vestment expenses.your own return. You enter $2,000 on Form expense). See Publication 925 for information • You have no carryover of investment inter-8814, lines 1a and 4, and $300 on lines 6 and about passive activities. est expense from 2005.12. Also enter $300 on Form 1040, line 21. Your
investment income includes this $300. Example. Ted is a partner in a partnership If you meet all of these tests, you can deductthat operates a business. However, he does notChild’s qualified dividends. If part of the all of your investment interest.materially participate in the partnership’s busi-amount you report is your child’s qualified divi-
ness. Ted’s interest in the partnership is consid-dends, that part (which is reported on Form
ered a passive activity.1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in-
Ted’s investment income from interest andvestment income. However, you can choose to
dividends (other than qualified dividends) isinclude all or part of it in investment income, as Bond Premium$10,000. His investment expenses (other thanexplained under Choosing to include qualified
interest) are $3,200 after taking into account thedividends, earlier. Amortization2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductions.Your investment income also includes the
His investment interest expense is $8,000. Tedamount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-also has income from the partnership of $2,000.the reduced amount figured next under Child’s mium is part of your basis in the bond. If theTed figures his net investment income andAlaska Permanent Fund dividends). bond yields taxable interest, you can choose tothe limit on his investment interest expense de- amortize the premium. This generally meansChild’s Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. duction in the following way: that each year, over the life of the bond, you useIf part of the amount you report is your child’s
a part of the premium to reduce the amount ofAlaska Permanent Fund dividends, that part Total investment income ........ $10,000
interest includible in your income. If you makedoes not count as investment income. To figure Minus: Investment expenses (other
this choice, you must reduce your basis in thethe amount of your child’s income that you can than interest) ................ 3,200
bond by the amortization for the year.consider your investment income, start with the Net investment income ......... $6,800
If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, youamount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that
must amortize the premium. This amortizedamount by a percentage that is equal to the Deductible investment interest
expense for the year ........... $6,800 amount is not deductible in determining taxableAlaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by
Page 34 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 35 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jane Smith 111-00-1111
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
10,000
9,000
1,000
9,000
13,000
980
12,020
480
12,020
3,000
OMB No. 1545-0191
Investment Interest Expense Deduction4952Form
/H17075Attach to your tax return.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 51
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number
1Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2006 (see instructions)1
2Disallowed investment interest expense from 2005 Form 4952, line 72
3Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 23
4a
Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net
gain from the disposition of property held for investment)
4a
Investment expenses (see instructions)5 5
Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4h. If zero or less, enter -0-6 6
Total Investment Interest Expense
Net Investment Income
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
b Qualified dividends included on line 4a
c Subtract line 4b from line 4a
d Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment
e Enter the smaller of line 4d or your net capital gain from the disposition
of property held for investment (see instructions)
f Subtract line 4e from line 4d
Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2007. Subtract line 6 from
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-
7
Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions8
4f
4b
4c
7
8
Part III
Part I
Part II
g Enter the amount from lines 4b and 4e that you elect to include in investment income (see
instructions)
h Investment income. Add lines 4c, 4f, and 4g 4h
4g
4d
4e
(99)
2006
Step 3: determine the bond premium forincome. However, each year you must reduce How To Figure
the accrual period. To do this, multiply youryour basis in the bond (and tax-exempt interest Amortization adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of theotherwise reportable on Form 1040, line 8b) by
accrual period by your yield. Then subtract thethe amortization for the year. For bonds issued after September 27, 1985, you
result from the qualified stated interest for themust amortize bond premium using a constant
period.yield method on the basis of the bond’s yield toBond premium. Bond premium is the amount Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin-maturity, determined by using the bond’s basisby which your basis in the bond right after you ning of the first accrual period is the same asand compounding at the close of each accrual
get it is more than the total of all amounts pay- your basis. After that, it is your basis decreasedperiod.
able on the bond after you get it (other than by the amount of bond premium amortized for
payments of qualified stated interest). For exam- Constant yield method. Figure the bond pre- earlier periods and the amount of any payment
mium amortization for each accrual period asple, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000 previously made on the bond other than a pay-
follows. ment of qualified stated interest.generally would have a $50 premium if you buy it
for $1,050. Step 1: determine your yield. Your yield is Example. On February 3, 2005, you boughtthe discount rate that, when used in figuring theBasis. In general, your basis for figuring a taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has apresent value of all remaining payments to bebond premium amortization is the same as stated principal amount of $100,000, payable atmade on the bond (including payments of quali-your basis for figuring any loss on the sale of maturity on February 3, 2012, making your pre-fied stated interest), produces an amount equalthe bond. However, you may need to use a mium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). Theto your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as ofdifferent basis for: bond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000the date you got the bond. It must be constant
• Convertible bonds, on February 3 of each year. Your yield isover the term of the bond and must be figured to
8.07439% compounded annually. You choose• Bonds you got in a trade, and at least two decimal places when expressed as
to use annual accrual periods ending on Febru-• Bonds whose basis has to be determined a percentage.
ary 3 of each year. To find your bond premiumusing the basis of the person who trans- If you do not know the yield, consult your
amortization for the accrual period ending onferred the bond to you. broker or tax advisor. Databases available to
February 3, 2006, you multiply the adjusted ac-them are likely to show the yield at the date ofSee Regulations section 1.171-1(e). quisition price at the beginning of the periodpurchase.
($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract the
Dealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyone Step 2: determine the accrual periods. result ($8,881.83) from the qualified stated inter-You can choose the accrual periods to use.who holds them mainly for sale to customers in est for the period ($10,000), you find that yourThey may be of any length and may vary inthe ordinary course of a trade or business or bond premium amortization for the period islength over the term of the bond, but each ac-who would properly include bonds in inventory $1,118.17.crual period can be no longer than 1 year andat the close of the tax year) cannot claim a Special rules. For special rules that applyeach scheduled payment of principal or interestdeduction for amortizable bond premium. to variable rate bonds, inflation-indexed bonds,must occur either on the first or the final day of
See section 75 of the Internal Revenue Code and bonds that provide for alternative paymentan accrual period. The computation is simplest if
for the treatment of bond premium by a dealer in schedules or remote or incidental contingen-accrual periods are the same as the intervals
tax-exempt bonds. cies, see Regulations section 1.171-3.between interest payment dates.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
because of this limit can be carried forward to service charge subtracted from your cash divi-Bonds Issued Before
the next accrual period. dends before the dividends are used to buySeptember 28, 1985
more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in thePre-1998 election to amortize bond premium.For these bonds, you can amortize bond pre- year you pay them.Generally, if you first elected to amortize bondmium using any reasonable method. Reasona- Clerical help and office rent. You can deductpremium before 1998, the above treatment ofble methods include: office expenses, such as rent and clerical help,the premium does not apply to bonds you ac-• The straight-line method, and that you pay in connection with your investmentsquired before 1988.• The Revenue Ruling 82-10 method. and collecting the taxable income on them.Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986.
Cost of replacing missing securities. To re-The amortization of the premium on these bondsStraight-line method. Under this method, the place your taxable securities that are mislaid,is a miscellaneous itemized deduction not sub-amount of your bond premium amortization is lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to postject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.the same each month. Divide the number of an indemnity bond. You can deduct the premiumBonds acquired after October 22, 1986, butmonths you held the bond during the year by the you pay to buy the indemnity bond and thebefore 1988. The amortization of the premiumnumber of months from the beginning of the tax related incidental expenses.on these bonds is investment interest expenseyear (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to the You may, however, get a refund of part of thesubject to the investment interest limit, unlessdate of maturity or earlier call date. Then multiply bond premium if the missing securities are re-you choose to treat it as an offset to interestthe result by the bond premium (reduced by any covered within a specified time. Under certainincome on the bond.bond premium amortization claimed in earlier types of insurance policies, you can recoveryears). This gives you your bond premium amor- some of the expenses.tization for the year. If you receive the refund in the tax year you
pay the amounts, you can deduct only the differ-Revenue Ruling 82-10 method. Under this Expenses of ence between the expenses paid and themethod, the amount of your bond premium
amount refunded. If the refund is made in a lateramortization increases each month over the life Producing Income tax year, you must include the refund in incomeof the bond. This method is explained in Reve-
in the year you received it, but only to the extentnue Ruling 82-10, 1982-1 C.B. 46. You deduct investment expenses (other than that the expenses decreased your tax in the yearinterest expenses) as miscellaneous itemized you deducted them.Choosing To Amortize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To be
deductible, these expenses must be ordinary Fees to collect income. You can deduct feesYou choose to amortize the premium on taxable and necessary expenses paid or incurred: you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similarbonds by reporting the amortization for the year agent to collect investment income, such as• To produce or collect income, oron your income tax return for the first tax year for your taxable bond or mortgage interest, or your• To manage property held for producing in-which you want the choice to apply. You should dividends on shares of stock.come.attach a statement to your return that you are
Fees to buy or sell. You cannot deduct amaking this choice under section 171. See How The expenses must be directly related to the
fee you pay to a broker to acquire investmentTo Report Amortization, next. income or income-producing property, and the
property, such as stocks or bonds. You mustThis choice is binding for the year you make income must be taxable to you.
add the fee to the cost of the property. See Basisit and for later tax years. It applies to all taxable The deduction for most income-producing ex- of Investment Property in chapter 4.bonds you own in the year you make the choice penses is subject to a 2% limit that also applies You cannot deduct any broker’s fees, com-and also to those you acquire in later years. to certain other miscellaneous itemized deduc- missions, or option premiums you pay (or thatYou can change your decision to amortize tions. The amount deductible is limited to the were netted out) in connection with the sale ofbond premium only with the written approval of total of these miscellaneous deductions that is investment property. They can be used only tothe IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115, more than 2% of your adjusted gross income. figure gain or loss from the sale. See ReportingApplication for Change in Accounting Method. For information on how to report expenses of Capital Gains and Losses, in chapter 4, for moreFor more information on requesting approval, producing income, see How To Report Invest- information about the treatment of these salesee section 1C of the Appendix to Revenue ment Expenses, later. expenses.Procedure 2002-9 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
2002-3. You can find this Internal Revenue Bul- Attorney or accounting fees. You can de- Investment counsel and advice. You canletin at duct attorney or accounting fees that are neces- deduct fees you pay for counsel and advicewww.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-03.pdf. sary to produce or collect taxable income. about investments that produce taxable income.
However, in some cases, attorney or accounting This includes amounts you pay for investment
fees are part of the basis of property. See BasisHow To Report advisory services.
of Investment Property in chapter 4.Amortization Safe deposit box rent. You can deduct rent
Automatic investment service and dividend you pay for a safe deposit box if you use the boxSubtract the bond premium amortization from reinvestment plans. A bank may offer its to store taxable income-producing stocks,your interest income from these bonds. checking account customers an automatic in- bonds, or other investment-related papers andReport the bond’s interest on Schedule B vestment service so that, for a charge, each documents. If you also use the box to store(Form 1040), line 1. Several lines above line 2, customer can choose to invest a part of the tax-exempt securities or personal items, you canput a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1. checking account each month in common stock. deduct only part of the rent. See Tax-exemptBelow this subtotal, print “ABP Adjustment,” and Or, a bank that is a dividend disbursing agent for income under Nondeductible Expenses, later, tothe amortization amount. Subtract this amount a number of publicly-owned corporations may figure what part you can deduct.from the subtotal, and enter the result on line 2. set up an automatic dividend reinvestment serv- State and local transfer taxes. You cannotBond premium amortization more than inter- ice. Through that service, cash dividends are deduct the state and local transfer taxes you payest. If the amount of your bond premium amor- reinvested in more shares of stock, after the when you buy or sell securities. If you pay thesetization for an accrual period is more than the bank deducts a service charge. transfer taxes when you buy securities, youqualified stated interest for the period, you can A corporation in which you own stock also must treat them as part of the cost of the prop-deduct the difference as a miscellaneous item- may have a dividend reinvestment plan. This erty. If you pay these transfer taxes when youized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line plan lets you choose to use your dividends to sell securities, you must treat them as a reduc-27. buy more shares of stock in the corporation tion in the amount realized. But your deduction is limited to the amount instead of receiving the dividends in cash.
by which your total interest inclusions on the You can deduct the monthly service charge Trustee’s commissions for revocable trust.
bond in prior accrual periods is more than your you pay to a bank to participate in an automatic If you set up a revocable trust and have its
total bond premium deductions on the bond in investment service. If you participate in a divi- income distributed to you, you can  deduct the
prior periods. Any amount you cannot deduct dend reinvestment plan, you can deduct any commission you pay the trustee for managin g
Page 36 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 37 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the trust to the extent it is to produce or collect of income is to the total income. If the expenses
relate in part to capital gains and losses, includetaxable income or to manage property. How- Nondeductible
the gains, but not the losses, in figuring thisever, you cannot deduct any part of the commis-
proportion. To find the part of the expenses thatExpensession that is for producing or collecting
is for the tax-exempt income, divide yourtax-exempt income or for managing property
Some expenses that you incur as an investor tax-exempt income by the total income and mul-that produces tax-exempt income.
are not deductible. tiply your expenses by the result.If you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay the
Stockholders’ meetings. You cannot deductcommissions for several years in advance, you Example. You received $6,000 interest;transportation and other expenses that you paymust deduct a part of the commission each year. $4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxable.to attend stockholders’ meetings of companiesYou cannot deduct the entire amount in the year In earning this income, you had $500 of ex-in which you have no interest other than owningyou pay it. penses. You cannot specifically identify thestock. This is true even if your purpose in attend-
amount of each expense item that is for eaching is to get information that would be useful in
income item, so you must divide your expenses.Investment expenses from pass-through en- making further investments.
80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided bytities. If you hold an interest in a partnership, S Investment-related seminar. You cannot de- $6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for thecorporation, real estate mortgage investment duct expenses for attending a convention, semi- tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly offered regu- nar, or similar meeting for investment purposes. (80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deductlated investment company (mutual fund), you
Single-premium life insurance, endowment, $100 (the rest of the expenses) because theycan deduct your share of that entity’s investment
and annuity contracts. You cannot deduct are for the taxable interest.expenses. A partnership or S corporation will
interest on money you borrow to buy or carry ashow your share of these expenses on your State income taxes. If you itemize your de-single-premium life insurance, endowment, orSchedule K-1. A nonpublicly offered mutual fund ductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in-annuity contract.will indicate your share of these expenses in box come taxes on interest income that is exempt
Used as collateral. If you use a single pre-5 of Form 1099-DIV, or on an equivalent state- from federal income tax. But you cannot deduct,
mium annuity contract as collateral to obtain orment. Publicly-offered mutual funds are dis- as either taxes or investment expenses, state
continue a mortgage loan, you cannot deductcussed later. income taxes on other exempt income.
any interest on the loan that is collateralized byIf you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex- the annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter- Interest expense and carrying charges onpenses relating to your residual interest invest- est expense disallowed by multiplying the cur- straddles. You cannot deduct interest andment will be shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), rent interest rate on the mortgage loan by the carrying charges that are allocable to personalline 3b. Any expenses relating to your regular lesser of the amount of the annuity contract used property that is part of a straddle. The nonde-interest investment will appear in box 5 of Form as collateral or the amount of the loan. ductible interest and carrying charges are ad-1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. Borrowing on insurance. Generally, you ded to the basis of the straddle property.
Report your share of these investment ex- cannot deduct interest on money you borrow to However, this treatment does not apply if:
penses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to buy or carry a life insurance, endowment, or • All the offsetting positions making up the
the 2% limit, in the same manner as your other annuity contract if you plan to systematically straddle either consist of one or more
investment expenses. borrow part or all of the increases in the cash qualified covered call options and the op-
value of the contract. This rule applies to the tioned stock or consist of section 1256Including mutual fund or REMIC expenses interest on the total amount borrowed to buy or contracts (and the straddle is not part of ain income. Your share of the investment ex- carry the contract, not just the interest on the larger straddle), orpenses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offered borrowed increases in the cash value. • The straddle is a hedging transaction.mutual fund, as described above, are consid-
Tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct ex-ered to be indirect deductions through that
penses you incur to produce tax-exempt in-pass-through entity. You must include in your For information about straddles, including defini-come. Nor can you deduct interest on moneygross income an amount equal to the amount of tions of the terms used in this discussion, seeyou borrow to buy tax-exempt securities orthe expenses allocated to you, whether or not chapter 4.shares in a regulated investment company (mu-you are able to claim a deduction for those tual fund) that distributes only exempt-interest Interest includes any amount you pay or incurexpenses. If you are a shareholder in a nonpub- dividends. in connection with personal property used in alicly offered mutual fund, you must include on short sale. However, you must first apply theShort-sale expenses. The rule disallowingyour return the full amount of ordinary dividends rules discussed in Payments in lieu of dividendsa deduction for interest expenses on tax-exemptor other distributions of stock, as shown in box under Short Sales in chapter 4.securities applies to amounts you pay in con-1a of Form 1099-DIV or an equivalent state- To determine the interest on market discountnection with personal property used in a shortment. If you are a residual interest holder in a sale or amounts paid by others for the use of any bonds and short-term obligations that are part ofREMIC, you must report as ordinary income on collateral in connection with the short sale. How- a straddle, you must first apply the rules dis-Schedule E (Form 1040) the total amounts ever, it does not apply to the expenses you incur cussed under Limit on interest deduction forshown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), lines 1b and if you deposit cash as collateral for the property market discount bonds  and Limit on interest3b. If you are a REMIC regular interest holder, used in the short sale and the cash does not deduction for short-term obligations (both underyou must include the amount of any expense earn a material return during the period of the Interest Expenses, earlier).
allocation you received on Form 1040, line 8a. sale. Short sales are discussed in chapter 4.
Nondeductible amount. Figure the non-
Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxable deductible amount of interest and carrying
Publicly-offered mutual funds. Pub- income. You may have expenses that are for charges on straddle property as follows.both tax-exempt and taxable income. If you can-licly-offered mutual funds, generally, are funds 1. Add:not specifically identify what part of the ex-that are traded on an established securities ex-
penses is for each type of income, you can a. Interest on indebtedness incurred orchange. These funds do not pass investment
divide the expenses, using reasonable propor- continued to buy or carry the personalexpenses through to you. Instead, the dividend
tions based on facts and circumstances. You property, andincome they report to you in box 1a of Form must attach a statement to your return showing b. All other amounts (including charges to1099-DIV is already reduced by your share of how you divided the expenses and stating that insure, store, or transport the personalinvestment expenses. Therefore, you cannot each deduction claimed is not based on property) paid or incurred to carry thededuct the expenses on your return. tax-exempt income. personal property.Include the amount from box 1a of Form One accepted method for dividing expenses
1099-DIV in your income. is to do it in the same proportion that each type 2. Subtract from the amount in (1):
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Interest (including OID) includible in in chapter 4 for information on these expenses.) Unpaid expenses owed to related party. If
gross income for the year on the per- Also attach a completed Form 4952 if you used you use an accrual method, you cannot deduct
sonal property, that form to figure your investment interest ex- interest and other expenses owed to a related
b. Any income from the personal property pense. cash-basis person until payment is made and
treated as ordinary income on the dis- the amount is includible in the gross income ofEnter the total amount of your other invest-position of short-term government obli- that person. The relationship, for purposes ofment expenses (other than interest expenses)gations or as ordinary income under the this rule, is determined as of the end of the taxon Schedule A, line 22. List the type and amountmarket discount and short-term bond year for which the interest or expense wouldof each expense on the dotted lines next to lineprovisions — see Discount on Debt In- otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is denied22. (If necessary, you can show the requiredstruments in chapter 1, under this rule, this rule will continue to applyinformation on an attached statement.)c. The dividends includible in gross in- even if your relationship with the person ceasesFor information on how to report amortizablecome for the year from the personal
to exist before the amount is includible in theproperty, and bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza-
gross income of that person.d. Any payment on a loan of the personal tion, earlier in this chapter.
property for use in a short sale that is This rule generally applies to those relation-
includible in gross income. ships listed in chapter 4 under Related Party
Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-
nerships to partners, partners to partnerships,Basis adjustment. Add the nondeductible When To Report
shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-amount to the basis of your straddle property.
tions to shareholders.Investment Expenses
The postponement of deductions for unpaid
If you use the cash method to report income and expenses and interest under the related partyexpenses, you generally deduct your expenses,How To Report rule does not apply to original issue discountexcept for certain prepaid interest, in the year (OID), regardless of when payment is made.Investment Expenses you pay them. This rule also does not apply to loans with be-
If you use an accrual method, you generally low-market interest rates or to certain paymentsTo deduct your investment expenses, you must deduct your expenses when you incur a liability for the use of property and services when theitemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). for them, rather than when you pay them. lender or recipient has to include payments peri-Enter your deductible investment interest ex-
odically in income, even if a payment has notAlso see When To Deduct Investment Inter-pense on Schedule A, line 13. Include any de-
ductible short sale expenses. (See Short Sales est,  earlier in this chapter. been made.
Page 38 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 39 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Basis, indirect ownership of stock will be considered.
The redemption is treated as a sale or trade of• Adjusted basis,
stock if:• Figuring gain or loss,4. • The redemption is not essentially• Nontaxable trades,
equivalent to a dividend — see Dividends• Capital gains and losses, and and Other Corporate Distributions in chap-• How to report your gain or loss. ter 1,Sales and
• There is a substantially disproportionate
Useful Items redemption of stock,
Trades of You may want to see: • There is a complete redemption of all the
stock of the corporation owned by the
Publication shareholder, orInvestment
• The redemption is a distribution in partial❏ 551 Basis of Assets liquidation of a corporation.
Property ❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions
Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re-Form (and Instructions) demption or retirement of bonds or notes at their
Introduction maturity generally is treated as a sale or trade.❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds and Dis-and LossesThis chapter explains the tax treatment of sales counted Debt Instruments under Capital or Ordi-and trades of investment property. ❏ 6781 Gains and Losses From Section nary Gain or Loss, later.
1256 Contracts and Straddles In addition, a significant modification of aInvestment property. This is property that
bond is treated as a trade of the original bond forproduces investment income. Examples include ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
a new bond. For details, see Regulations sec-stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes. ❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges tion 1.1001-3.Property used in a trade or business is not in-
vestment property. Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by aSee chapter 5 for information about getting
dominant shareholder who retains control of thethese publications and forms.Form 1099-B. If you sold property such as corporation is treated as a contribution to capitalstocks, bonds, or certain commodities through a rather than as an immediate loss deductiblebroker during the year, you should receive, for from taxable income. The surrendering share-each sale, a Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Bro- holder must reallocate his or her basis in theWhat Is aker and Barter Exchange Transactions, or an surrendered shares to the shares he or sheequivalent statement from the broker. You retains.Sale or Trade?should receive the statement by January 31 of
the next year. It will show the gross proceeds Trade of investment property for an annuity.Terms you may need to knowfrom the sale. The IRS will also get a copy of The transfer of investment property to a corpora-(see Glossary):Form 1099-B from the broker. tion, trust, fund, foundation, or other organiza-
Use Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state- tion, in exchange for a fixed annuity contract that
Equity optionment received from your broker) to complete will make guaranteed annual payments to you
Futures contractSchedule D of Form 1040. For more information, for life, is a taxable trade. If the present value of
Marked to marketsee Form 1099-B transactions under Reporting the annuity is more than your basis in the prop-
Capital Gains and Losses, later. erty traded, you have a taxable gain in the yearNonequity option
of the trade. Figure the present value of theOptions dealerNominees. If someone receives gross pro- annuity according to factors used by commercialRegulated futures contractceeds as a nominee for you, that person will give insurance companies issuing annuities.Section 1256 contractyou a Form 1099-B, which will show gross pro-
ceeds received on your behalf. Short sale Transfer by inheritance. The transfer of
If you receive Form 1099-B that includes property of a decedent to the executor or admin-
gross proceeds belonging to another person, istrator of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficia-
This section explains what is a sale or trade. Itsee Nominees later under Reporting Capital ries, is not a sale or other disposition. No taxable
also explains certain transactions and eventsGains and Losses for more information. gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.
that are treated as sales or trades. Termination of certain rights and obliga-Other property transactions. Certain trans- A sale is generally a transfer of property for
tions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, orfers of property are discussed in other IRS money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to
other termination of a right or obligation (otherpublications. These include: pay money.
than a securities futures contract) with respect toA trade is a transfer of property for other• Sale of your main home, discussed in property that is a capital asset (or that would beproperty or services, and may be taxed in thePublication 523, Selling Your Home, a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated as asame way as a sale.• Installment sales, covered in Publication sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital gain537, Installment Sales, Sale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transaction or loss.• Various types of transactions involving is not a trade when you voluntarily sell property This rule does not apply to the retirement of abusiness property, discussed in Publica- for cash and immediately buy similar property to debt instrument. See Redemption or retirementtion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa- of bonds, earlier.Assets, rate transactions. But see Like-Kind Exchanges
• Transfers of property at death, covered in under Nontaxable Trades, later. Worthless SecuritiesPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and
Redemption of stock. A redemption of stockAdministrators, and Stocks, stock rights, and bonds (other thanis treated as a sale or trade and is subject to the• Disposition of an interest in a passive ac- those held for sale by a securities dealer) thatcapital gain or loss provisions unless the re-tivity, discussed in Publication 925, Pas- became worthless during the tax year aredemption is a dividend or other distribution onsive Activity and At-Risk Rules. treated as though they were sold on the last daystock. of the tax year. This affects whether your capital
Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a loss is long-term or short-term. See Holding Pe-Topics redemption is treated as a sale, trade, divi- riod, later.This chapter discusses: dend, or other distribution depends on the cir- If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make
• What a sale or trade is, cumstances in each case. Both direct and payments on a negotiable promissory note that
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 39

Page 40 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception for nonmarketable securities.you issued for stock that became worthless, you constructive sale of any other appreciated finan-
You are not treated as having made a construc-can deduct these payments as losses in the cial position, as long as you continue to hold the
tive sale solely because you entered into a con-years you actually make the payments. Do not original position. However, if you hold another
tract for sale of any stock, debt instrument, ordeduct them in the year the stock became worth- appreciated financial position and dispose of the
partnership interest that is not a marketable se-less. original position before closing the transaction
curity if it settles within 1 year of the date you that resulted in the constructive sale, you areenter into it.How to report loss. Report worthless securi- treated as if, at the same time, you construc-
ties on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8, Exception for certain closed transactions. tively sold the other appreciated financial posi-
whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d), enter Do not treat a transaction as a constructive tion.
“Worthless.” Enter the amount of your loss in sale if all of the following are true.
parentheses in column (f). 1. You closed the transaction on or before Section 1256 Contracts
the 30th day after the end of your tax year. Marked to MarketFiling a claim for refund. If you do not claim a 2. You held the appreciated financial positionloss for a worthless security on your original throughout the 60-day period beginning on If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end ofreturn for the year it becomes worthless, you can the date you closed the transaction. the tax year, you generally must treat it as soldfile a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss. 3. Your risk of loss was not reduced at any at its fair market value on the last business dayYou must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi- time during that 60-day period by holding of the tax year.vidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return certain other positions.for the year the security became worthless. You
must file it within 7 years from the date your If a closed transaction is reestablished in a Section 1256 Contractoriginal return for that year had to be filed, or 2 substantially similar position during the 60-day
years from the date you paid the tax, whichever period beginning on the date the first transaction A section 1256 contract is any:is later. (Claims not due to worthless securities was closed, this exception still applies if the • Regulated futures contract,or bad debts generally must be filed within 3 reestablished position is closed before the 30th • Foreign currency contract,day after the end of your tax year in which theyears from the date a return is filed, or 2 years • Nonequity option,first transaction was closed and, after that clos-from the date the tax is paid, whichever is later.)
• Dealer equity option, oring, (2) and (3) above are true.For more information about filing a claim, see
• Dealer securities futures contract.Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Ap- This exception also applies to successive
peal Rights, and Claims for Refund. short sales of an entire appreciated financial
position. For more information, see Revenue Regulated futures contract. This is a con-
Ruling 2003-1 in Internal Revenue BulletinConstructive Sales tract that:2003-3. This bulletin is available at • Provides that amounts that must be de-of Appreciated www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb03-03.pdf. posited to, or can be withdrawn from, yourFinancial Positions
margin account depend on daily marketAppreciated financial position. This is anyYou are treated as having made a constructive conditions (a system of marking to mar-interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a debtsale when you enter into certain transactions ket), andinstrument (including a futures or forward con-involving an appreciated financial position (de- • Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, atract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing offined later) in stock, a partnership interest, or qualified board of exchange. A qualifiedthe interest would result in a gain.certain debt instruments. You must recognize board of exchange is a domestic board of
gain as if the position were disposed of at its fair Exceptions. An appreciated financial posi- trade designated as a contract market bymarket value on the date of the constructive tion does not include the following. the Commodity Futures Trading Commis-sale. This gives you a new holding period for the 1. Any position from which all of the apprecia- sion, any board of trade or exchange ap-position that begins on the date of the construc- tion is accounted for under marked to mar- proved by the Secretary of the Treasury,tive sale. Then, when you close the transaction, ket rules, including section 1256 contracts or a national securities exchange regis-you reduce your gain (or increase your loss) by (described later under Section 1256 Con- tered with the Securities and Exchangethe gain recognized on the constructive sale. tracts Marked to Market). Commission.
2. Any position in a debt instrument if:Constructive sale. You are treated as hav-
a. The position unconditionally entitles theing made a constructive sale of an appreciated Foreign currency contract. This is a con-
holder to receive a specified principalfinancial position if you: tract that:amount,• Enter into a short sale of the same or • Requires delivery of a foreign currencyb. The interest payments (or other similarsubstantially identical property, that has positions traded through regu-amounts) with respect to the position• Enter into an offsetting notional principal lated futures contracts (or settlement ofare payable at a fixed rate or a variablecontract relating to the same or substan- which depends on the value of that type ofrate described in Regulations sectiontially identical property, foreign currency),1.860G-1(a)(3), and• Enter into a futures or forward contract to • Is traded in the interbank market, andc. The position is not convertible, eitherdeliver the same or substantially identical • Is entered into at arm’s length at a pricedirectly or indirectly, into stock of theproperty (including a forward contract that determined by reference to the price in theissuer (or any related person).provides for cash settlement), or interbank market.
3. Any hedge with respect to a position de-• Acquire the same or substantially identical
scribed in (2).property (if the appreciated financial posi- Bank forward contracts with maturity dates
tion is a short sale, an offsetting notional that are longer than the maturities ordinarilyCertain trust instruments treated as stock.principal contract, or a futures or forward available for regulated futures contracts are con-For the constructive sale rules, an interest in ancontract). sidered to meet the definition of a foreign cur-actively traded trust is treated as stock unless rency contract if the above three conditions aresubstantially all of the value of the property heldYou are also treated as having made a con- satisfied.by the trust is debt that qualifies for the excep-structive sale of an appreciated financial posi-
Special rules apply to certain foreign cur-tion to the definition of an appreciated financialtion if a person related to you enters into a
position (explained in (2) above). rency transactions. These transactions may re-transaction described above with a view toward
sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. Foravoiding the constructive sale treatment. For
details, see Internal Revenue Code section 988this purpose, a related person is any related Sale of appreciated financial position. A
and Regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) andparty described under Related Party Transac- transaction treated as a constructive sale of an
tions, later in this chapter. appreciated financial position is not treated as a 1.988-3.
Page 40 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 41 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonequity option. This is any listed option under the capital loss carryover rules, to the yearMarked to Market Rules
following the loss. (See Capital Losses  under(defined later) that is not an equity option. None-
A section 1256 contract that you hold at the end Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, later.) Fig-quity options include debt options, commodity
of the tax year will generally be treated as sold at ure your capital loss carryover as if, for the lossfutures options, currency options, and its fair market value on the last business day of year, you had an additional short-term capitalbroad-based stock index options. A the tax year, and you must recognize any gain or gain of 40% of the amount of net section 1256broad-based stock index is based upon the loss that results. That gain or loss is taken into contracts loss absorbed in the carryback yearsvalue of a group of diversified stocks or securi- account in figuring your gain or loss when you and an additional long-term capital gain of 60%ties (such as the Standard and Poor’s 500 in- later dispose of the contract, as shown in the of the absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treatdex). example under 60/40 rule, below. any capital loss carryover from losses on sectionWarrants based on a stock index that are
1256 contracts as if it were a loss from sectionHedging exception. The marked to marketeconomically, substantially identical in all mate-
1256 contracts for that year.rules do not apply to hedging transactions. Seerial respects to options based on a stock index
Hedging Transactions, later.are treated as options based on a stock index. Net section 1256 contracts loss. This
loss is the lesser of:60/40 rule. Under the marked to market sys-Cash-settled options. Cash-settled op-
• The net capital loss for your tax year de-tem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will betions based on a stock index and either traded
termined by taking into account only thetreated as a long-term capital gain or loss, andon or subject to the rules of a qualified board of gains and losses from section 1256 con-40% will be treated as a short-term capital gainexchange are nonequity options if the Securities tracts, oror loss. This is true regardless of how long youand Exchange Commission (SEC) determines
• The capital loss carryover to the next taxactually held the property.that the stock index is broad based. year determined without this election.This rule does not apply to options estab- Example. On June 23, 2005, you bought alished before the SEC determines that the stock Net section 1256 contracts gain. Thisregulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-index is broad based. gain is the lesser of:cember 31, 2005 (the last business day of your
tax year), the fair market value of the contractListed option. This is any option that is • The capital gain net income for the car-
was $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain ontraded on, or subject to the rules of, a qualified ryback year determined by taking into ac-
your 2005 tax return, treated as 60% long-term count only gains and losses from sectionboard or exchange (as discussed earlier under
and 40% short-term capital gain. 1256 contracts, orRegulated futures contract ). A listed option,
On February 2, 2006, you sold the contracthowever, does not include an option that is a • The capital gain net income for that year.
for $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,000right to acquire stock from the issuer.
gain on your 2005 return, you recognize a
Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain for$1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2006Dealer equity option. This is any listed op- any carryback year without regard to the nettax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40%tion that, for an options dealer: section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year orshort-term capital loss.• Is an equity option, any later tax year.Limited partners or entrepreneurs. The• Is bought or granted by that dealer in the
60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op-normal course of the dealer’s business ac- Traders in section 1256 contracts. Gain or
tions or dealer securities futures contracts thattivity of dealing in options, and loss from the trading of section 1256 contracts isresult in capital gain or loss allocable to limited capital gain or loss subject to the marked to• Is listed on the qualified board of ex- partners or limited entrepreneurs (defined later market rules. However, this does not apply tochange where that dealer is registered. under Hedging Transactions ). Instead, these contracts held for purposes of hedging propertygains or losses are treated as short term.An “options dealer” is any person registered if any loss from the property would be an ordi-
nary loss.with an appropriate national securities ex- Terminations and transfers. The marked to
change as a market maker or specialist in listed market rules also apply if your obligation or Treatment of underlying property. Theoptions. rights under section 1256 contracts are termi- determination of whether an individual’s gain or
nated or transferred during the tax year. In this loss from any property is ordinary or capital gainEquity option. This is any option: case, use the fair market value of each section or loss is made without regard to the fact that the
1256 contract at the time of termination or trans-• To buy or sell stock, or individual is actively engaged in dealing in orfer to determine the gain or loss. Terminations or• That is valued directly or indirectly by ref- trading section 1256 contracts related to thattransfers may result from any offsetting, deliv-erence to any stock or narrow-based se- property.ery, exercise, assignment, or lapse of your obli-curity index.
gation or rights under section 1256 contracts.
How To ReportLoss carryback election. An individual hav-Equity options include options on a group of
ing a net section 1256 contracts loss (definedstocks only if the group is a narrow-based stock If you disposed of regulated futures or foreignlater) for 2006 can elect to carry this loss back 3index. currency contracts in 2006 (or had unrealizedyears, instead of carrying it over to the next year. profit or loss on these contracts that were openDealer securities futures contract. For See How To Report, later, for information about at the end of 2005 or 2006), you should receiveany dealer in securities futures contracts or op- reporting this election on your return. Form 1099-B, or an equivalent statement, fromtions on those contracts, this is a securities The loss carried back to any year under this your broker.futures contract (or option on such a contract) election cannot be more than the net section
that: 1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, the Form 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781, Gains• Is entered into by the dealer (or, in the amount of loss carried back to an earlier tax year and Losses From Section 1256 Contracts andcannot increase or produce a net operating losscase of an option, is purchased or granted Straddles, to report your gains and losses fromfor that year.by the dealer) in the normal course of the all section 1256 contracts that are open at theThe loss is carried to the earliest carrybackdealer’s activity of dealing in this type of end of the year or that were closed out duringyear first, and any unabsorbed loss amount cancontract (or option), and the year. This includes the amount shown in boxthen be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. In• Is traded on a qualified board or exchange 11 of Form 1099-B. Then enter the net amounteach carryback year, treat 60% of the carryback(as defined under Regulated futures con- of these gains and losses on Schedule D (Formamount as a long-term capital loss and 40% as atract, earlier.) 1040). Include a copy of Form 6781 with yourshort-term capital loss from section 1256 con-
income tax return.A securities futures contract that is not a dealer tracts.
securities futures contract is treated as de- If the Form 1099-B you receive includes aIf only a portion of the net section 1256 con-
scribed later under Securities Futures Con- straddle or hedging transaction, defined later, ittracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss back,
tracts. may be necessary to show certain adjustmentsthe unabsorbed portion can be carried forward,
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 41

Page 42 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc- The limit on hedging losses does not apply to know the property’s fair market value o r the
tions for completing Part I. any hedging loss to the extent that it is more adjusted basis of the previous owner.
than all your unrecognized gains from hedging
Loss carryback election. To carry back your transactions at the end of the tax year that are Fair market value. This is the price at whichloss under the election procedures described from the trade or business in which the hedging the property would change hands between aearlier, file Form 1040X or Form 1045, Applica- transaction occurred. The term “unrecognized buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy ortion for Tentative Refund, for the year to which gain” has the same meaning as defined under sell and both having reasonable knowledge ofyou are carrying the loss with an amended Form Straddles, later. all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property,6781 and an amended Schedule D attached. around the same date, may be helpful in figuringFollow the instructions for completing Form Sale of property used in a hedge. Once you fair market value.6781 for the loss year to make this election. identify personal property as being part of a
hedging transaction, you must treat gain from its
sale or exchange as ordinary income, not capital
Property Received for ServicesHedging Transactions gain.
If you receive investment property for services,The marked to market rules, described earlier, you must include the property’s fair market valuedo not apply to hedging transactions. A trans- Self-Employment Income in income. The amount you include in incomeaction is a hedging transaction if both of the then becomes your basis in the property. If thefollowing conditions are met. Gains and losses derived in the ordinary course services were performed for a price that was
of a commodity or option dealer’s trading in1. You entered into the transaction in the nor- agreed to beforehand, this price will be acceptedsection 1256 contracts and property related tomal course of your trade or business pri- as the fair market value of the property if there isthese contracts are included in net earningsmarily to manage the risk of: no evidence to the contrary.from self-employment. In addition, the rules re-a. Price changes or currency fluctuations lating to contributions to self-employment retire- Restricted property. If you receive, as pay-on ordinary property you hold (or will ment plans apply. For information on retirement ment for services, property that is subject tohold), or plan contributions, see Publication 560, Retire- certain restrictions, your basis in the propertyb. Interest rate or price changes, or cur- ment Plans for Small Business, and Publication generally is its fair market value when it be-rency fluctuations, on your current or 590, Individual Retirement Arrangements comes substantially vested. Property becomesfuture borrowings or ordinary obliga- (IRAs). substantially vested when it is transferable or istions.
no longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture,
2. You clearly identified the transaction as whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop-
being a hedging transaction before the erty in Publication 525 for more information.
close of the day on which you entered Basis of
into it. Bargain purchases. If you buy investmentInvestment Property property at less than fair market value, as pay-This hedging transaction exception does not
ment for services, you must include the differ-apply to transactions entered into by or for any Terms you may need to know ence in income. Your basis in the property is thesyndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor- (see Glossary): price you pay plus the amount you include inporation, or other entity (other than a regular
income.corporation) that allocates more than 35% of its Basislosses to limited partners or limited entrepre- Fair market valueneurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person who
Original issue discount (OID) Property Receivedhas an interest in an enterprise (but not as a
in Taxable Tradeslimited partner) and who does not actively par-
ticipate in its management. However, an inter- Basis is a way of measuring your investment in If you received investment property in trade forest is not considered held by a limited partner property for tax purposes. You must know the other property, the basis of the new property isor entrepreneur if the interest holder actively basis of your property to determine whether you its fair market value at the time of the tradeparticipates (or did so for at least 5 full years) have a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi- unless you received the property in a nontaxablein the management of the entity, or is the tion. trade.spouse, child (including a legally adopted Investment property you buy normally has anchild), grandchild, or parent of an individual original basis equal to its cost. If you get property Example. You trade A Company stock for Bwho actively participates in the management of in some way other than buying it, such as by gift Company stock having a fair market value ofthe entity. or inheritance, its fair market value may be im- $1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A Company
portant in figuring the basis.Hedging loss limit. If you are a limited partner stock is less than $1,200, you have a taxable
or entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a gain on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the A
hedging loss you can claim is limited. A “hedging Company stock is more than $1,200, you have aCost Basis
loss” is the amount by which the allowable de- deductible loss on the trade. The basis of your B
ductions in a tax year that resulted from a hedg- The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. Company stock is $1,200. If you later sell the B
ing transaction (determined without regard to The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debt Company stock for $1,300, you will have a gain
the limit) are more than the income received or obligations, or other property or services. of $100.
accrued during the tax year from this transac-
Unstated interest. If you buy property on ation.
time-payment plan that charges little or no inter- Property ReceivedAny hedging loss that is allocated to you for
est, the basis of your property is your statedthe tax year is limited to your taxable income for in Nontaxable Trades
purchase price, minus the amount considered tothat year from the trade or business in which the
If you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec-be unstated interest. You generally have un-hedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg-
ognize gain or loss until you dispose of thestated interest if your interest rate is less thaning transaction items in determining this taxable
property you received in the trade. See Nontax-the applicable federal rate. For more informa-income. If you have a hedging loss that is disal-
able Trades, later.tion, see Unstated Interest and Original Issuelowed because of this limit, you can carry it over
Discount (OID) in Publication 537. The basis of property you received in a non-to the next tax year as a deduction resulting from
taxable or partly nontaxable trade is generallya hedging transaction.
the same as the adjusted basis of the propertyIf the hedging transaction relates to property Basis Other Than Cost
you gave up. Increase this amount by any cashother than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-
you paid, additional costs you had, and any gaining losses applies if the limited partner or entre- There are times when you must use a basis
recognized. Reduce this amount by any cash orpreneur is an individual. other than cost. In these cases, you may need to
Page 42 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 43 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
unlike property you received, any loss recog- Example 1. You were given XYZ Company • The later alternate valuation date if the
stock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stock estate qualifies for, and elects to use, al-nized, and any liability of yours that was as-
had a fair market value of $21,000. The donor’s ternate valuation.sumed or treated as assumed.
adjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid a If no federal estate tax return was filed, use thegift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain or appraised value on the date of death for stateProperty Received loss is $20,500, the donor’s adjusted basis plus inheritance or transmission taxes.the amount of gift tax paid.From Your Spouse
Appreciated property you gave the dece-If property is transferred to you from your spouse Example 2. The facts are the same as in dent. Your basis in certain appreciated prop-(or former spouse, if the transfer is incident to Example 1 except that the gift tax paid was erty that you inherited is the decedent’s adjustedyour divorce), your basis is the same as your $1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor’s ad- basis in the property immediately before deathspouse’s or former spouse’s adjusted basis just justed basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited to rather than its fair market value. This applies tobefore the transfer. See Transfers Between the fair market value of the stock at the time of appreciated property that you or your spouseSpouses, later. the gift. gave the decedent as a gift during the one-year
Recordkeeping. The transferor must Gift received after 1976. If you received period ending on the date of death. Appreciated
give you the records necessary to de- property as a gift after 1976, your basis is the property is any property whose fair market value
termine the adjusted basis and holding donor’s adjusted basis increased by the part of on the day you gave it to the decedent was moreRECORDS
period of the property as of the date of the the gift tax paid that was for the net increase in than its adjusted basis.
transfer. value of the gift. You figure this part by multiply-
ing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The More information. See Publication 551, Ba-
numerator (top part) is the net increase in value sis of Assets, for more information on the basis
of the gift and the denominator (bottom part) isProperty Received as a Gift of inherited property, including community prop-
the amount of the gift. erty, property held by a surviving tenant in a joint
To figure your basis in property that you re- The net increase in value of the gift is the fair tenancy or tenancy by the entirety, a qualified
ceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted market value of the gift minus the donor’s ad- joint interest, and a farm or closely held busi-
basis to the donor just before it was given to you, justed basis. The amount of the gift is its value ness.
its fair market value at the time it was given to for gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-
you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and the nual exclusion and marital or charitable deduc- Adjusted Basisdate it was given to you. tion that applies to the gift.
Before you can figure any gain or loss on a sale,
Example. In 2006, you received a gift ofFair market value less than donor’s adjusted exchange, or other disposition of property or
property from your mother. At the time of the gift,basis. If the fair market value of the property at figure allowable depreciation, depletion, or
the property had a fair market value of $101,000the time of the gift was less than the donor’s amortization, you usually must make certain ad-
and an adjusted basis to her of $40,000. Theadjusted basis just before the gift, your basis for justments (increases and decreases) to the ba-
amount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasgain on its sale or other disposition is the same sis of the property. The result of these
$89,000 ($101,000 minus the $12,000 annualas the donor’s adjusted basis plus or minus any adjustments to the basis is the adjusted basis.
exclusion), and your mother paid a gift tax ofrequired adjustments to basis during the period Adjustments to the basis of stocks and$21,000. You figure your basis in the followingyou hold the property. Your basis for loss is its bonds are explained in the following discussion.way:fair market value at the time of the gift plus or For information about other adjustments to ba-
minus any required adjustments to basis during sis, see Publication 551.Fair market value ............. $101,000the period you hold the property. Minus: Adjusted basis ..........  40,000
Stocks and BondsNo gain or loss. If you use the basis for Net increase in value of gift ...... $ 61,000
figuring a gain and the result is a loss, and then
The basis of stocks or bonds you own generallyGift tax paid ................ $ 21,000use the basis for figuring a loss and the result is
is the purchase price plus the costs of purchase,Multiplied by .685 ($61,000 ÷a gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss.
such as commissions and recording or transfer$89,000) .................. .685
fees. If you acquired stock or bonds other thanGift tax due to net increase in value $ 14,385Example. You receive a gift of investment
by purchase, your basis is usually determinedPlus: Adjusted basis of property toproperty having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at
your mother ................ 40,000 by fair market value or the previous owner’sthe time of the gift. The fair market value at the
Your basis in the property $ 54,385 adjusted basis as discussed earlier under Basistime of the gift is $9,000. You later sell the
Other Than Cost.property for $9,500. You have neither gain nor
The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer-loss. Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, and Part sale, part gift. If you get property in a
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam-$9,500 minus $10,000 results in a $500 loss. transfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, your
ple, if you receive more stock from nontaxableYour basis for figuring loss is $9,000, and basis is the larger of the amount you paid for the
stock dividends or stock splits, you must reduce$9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain. property or the transferor’s adjusted basis in the
the basis of your original stock. You must alsoproperty at the time of the transfer. Add to that
reduce your basis when you receive nondivi-amount the amount of any gift tax paid on theFair market value equal to or more than do-
dend distributions (discussed in chapter 1).gift, as described in the preceding discussion.nor’s adjusted basis. If the fair market value
These distributions, up to the amount of yourFor figuring loss, your basis is limited to theof the property at the time of the gift was equal to
basis, are a nontaxable return of capital.property’s fair market value at the time of theor more than the donor’s adjusted basis just
transfer.before the gift, your basis for gain or loss on its The IRS partners with companies that
sale or other disposition is the donor’s adjusted offer Schedule D software that can im-Gift tax information. For information on giftbasis plus or minus any required adjustments to port trades from many brokerage firms
TIP
tax, see Publication 950, Introduction to Estatebasis during the period you hold the property. and accounting software to help you keep trackand Gift Taxes.Also, you may be allowed to add to the donor’s of your adjusted basis in securities. To find out
adjusted basis all or part of any gift tax paid, more, go to
depending on the date of the gift. http://www.irs.gov/efile/lists/0,,id=101223,00.Property Received as Inheritance html.Gift received before 1977. If you received
If you inherited property, your basis in thatproperty as a gift before 1977, your basis in the
property generally is its fair market value (itsproperty is the donor’s adjusted basis increased Identifying stock or bonds sold. If you can
appraised value on the federal estate tax re-by the total gift tax paid on the gift. However, adequately identify the shares of stock or the
turn) on:your basis cannot be more than the fair market bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other
value of the gift at the time it was given to you. basis of the particular shares of stock or bonds.• The date of the decedent’s death, or
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 43

Page 44 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Adequate identification. You will make an (REIT) is generally figured in the same way as New and old stock not identical. If the
the basis of other stock. new stock you received as a nontaxable divi-adequate identification if you show that certifi-
dend is not identical to the old stock on which itcates representing shares of stock from a lot that Mutual fund load charges. Your cost basis was declared, the basis of the new stock isyou bought on a certain date or for a certain in a mutual fund often includes a sales fee, also calculated differently. Divide the adjusted basisprice were delivered to your broker or other known as a load charge. But, in certain cases, of the old stock between the old and the newagent. you cannot include the entire amount of a load stock in the ratio of the fair market value of eachcharge in your basis if the charge gives you aBroker holds stock. If you have left the lot of stock to the total fair market value of bothreinvestment right. For more information, seestock certificates with your broker or other lots on the date of distribution of the new stock.Publication 564.agent, you will make an adequate identification
if you: Choosing average basis for mutual fund Example. You bought a share of common
• Tell your broker or other agent the particu- shares. You can choose to use the average stock for $100. Later, the corporation distributed
lar stock to be sold or transferred at the basis of mutual fund shares if you acquired the a share of preferred stock for each share of
time of the sale or transfer, and shares at various times and prices and left them common stock held. At the date of distribution,
• Receive a written confirmation of this from on deposit in an account kept by a custodian or your common stock had a fair market value of
your broker or other agent within a reason- agent. The methods you can use to figure aver- $150 and the preferred stock had a fair market
able time. age basis are explained in Publication 564. value of $50. You figure the basis of the old and
new stock by dividing your $100 basis betweenUndistributed capital gains. If you had to them. The basis of your common stock is $75Stock identified this way is the stock sold or include in your income any undistributed capital ($150/$200 × $100), and the basis of the newtransferred even if stock certificates from a dif- gains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase your preferred stock is $25 ($50/$200 × $100).ferent lot are delivered to the broker or other basis in the stock by the difference between the
agent. amount you included and the amount of tax paid Stock bought at various times. Figure the
for you by the fund or REIT. See Undistributed basis of stock dividends received on stock youSingle stock certificate. If you bought capital gains of mutual funds and REITs  under bought at various times and at different prices bystock in different lots at different times and you Capital Gain Distributions in chapter 1. allocating to each lot of stock the share of thehold a single stock certificate for this stock, you stock dividends due to it.will make an adequate identification if you: Automatic investment service. If you partici-
• Tell your broker or other agent the particu- Taxable stock dividends. If your stock divi-pate in an automatic investment service, your
lar stock to be sold or transferred when dend is taxable when you receive it, the basis ofbasis for each share of stock, including frac-
you deliver the certificate to your broker or your new stock is its fair market value on thetional shares, bought by the bank or other agent
other agent, and date of distribution. The basis of your old stockis the purchase price plus a share of the broker’s
does not change.commission.• Receive a written confirmation of this from
your broker or other agent within a reason- Dividend reinvestment plans. If you partici- Stock splits. Figure the basis of stock splits inable time. pate in a dividend reinvestment plan and receive the same way as stock dividends if identical
stock from the corporation at a discount, your stock is distributed on the stock held.If you sell part of the stock represented by a basis is the full fair market value of the stock onsingle certificate directly to the buyer instead of the dividend payment date. You must include Stock rights. A stock right is a right to acquirethrough a broker, you will make an adequate the amount of the discount in your income. a corporation’s stock. It may be exercised, it mayidentification if you keep a written record of the be sold if it has a market value, or it may expire.particular stock that you intend to sell. Public utilities. If, before 1986, you ex- Stock rights are rarely taxable when you receivecluded from income the value of stock you hadBonds. These methods of identification them. See Distributions of Stock and Stockreceived under a qualified public utility reinvest-also apply to bonds sold or transferred. Rights under Nondividend Distributions in chap-ment plan, your basis in that stock is zero. ter 1.Identification not possible. If you buy and Stock dividends. Stock dividends are distri-sell securities at various times in varying quanti- Taxable stock rights. If you receive stockbutions made by a corporation of its own stock.ties and you cannot adequately identify the rights that are taxable, the basis of the rights isGenerally, stock dividends are not taxable toshares you sell, the basis of the securities you their fair market value at the time of distribution.you. However, see Distributions of Stock andsell is the basis of the securities you acquired The basis of the old stock does not change.Stock Rights under Nondividend Distributions infirst. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis- Nontaxable stock rights. If you receivechapter 1 for some exceptions. If the stock divi-cussed later, you cannot use the average price nontaxable stock rights and allow them to ex-dends are not taxable, you must divide yourper share to figure gain or loss on the sale of the pire, they have no basis.basis for the old stock between the old and newshares. If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stockstock.
rights and if, at the time of distribution, the stockExample. You bought 100 shares of stock New and old stock identical. If the new rights had a fair market value of 15% or more ofof XYZ Corporation in 1993 for $10 a share. In stock you received as a nontaxable dividend is the fair market value of the old stock, you mustJanuary 1994 you bought another 200 shares identical to the old stock on which the dividend divide the adjusted basis of the old stock be-for $11 a share. In July 1994 you gave your son was declared, divide the adjusted basis of the tween the old stock and the stock rights. Use a50 shares. In December 1996 you bought 100 old stock by the number of shares of old and ratio of the fair market value of each to the totalshares for $9 a share. In April 2006 you sold 130 new stock. The result is your basis for each fair market value of both at the time of distribu-shares. You cannot identify the shares you dis- share of stock. tion.posed of, so you must use the stock you ac- If the fair market value of the stock rights wasquired first to figure the basis. The shares of Example 1. You owned one share of com- less than 15%, their basis is zero. However, youstock you gave your son had a basis of $500 (50 mon stock that you bought for $45. The corpora- can choose to divide the basis of the old stock× $10). You figure the basis of the 130 shares of tion distributed two new shares of common between the old stock and the stock rights. Tostock you sold in 2006 as follows: stock for each share held. You then had three make the choice, attach a statement to yourshares of common stock. Your basis in each return for the year in which you received the50 shares (50 × $10) balance of share is $15 ($45 ÷ 3). rights, stating that you choose to divide the basisstock bought in 1993 .......... $  5 0 0
of the stock.80 shares (80 × $11) stock bought in Example 2. You owned two shares of com-January 1994 ............... 8 8 0 mon stock. You had bought one for $30 and the Basis of new stock. If you exercise theTotal basis of stock sold in 2006 $1,380 other for $45. The corporation distributed two stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its cost
new shares of common stock for each share plus the basis of the stock rights exercised.
Shares in a mutual fund or REIT. The basis held. You had six shares after the distribution—
of shares in a regulated investment company three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷ 3) and Example. You own 100 shares of ABC
(mutual fund) or a real estate investment trust three with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷ 3). Company stock, which cost you $22 per share.
Page 44 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 45 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxable However, your basis in the stock cannot be Discounted tax-exempt obligations. OID
reduced below zero. on tax-exempt obligations is generally not tax-stock rights that would allow you to buy 10 more
able. However, when you dispose of ashares at $26 per share. At the time the stock
Specialized small business investment com- tax-exempt obligation issued after September 3,rights were distributed, the stock had a market
pany stock or partnership interest. If you 1982, that you acquired after March 1, 1984, youvalue of $30, not including the stock rights. Each
bought this stock or interest as replacement must accrue OID on the obligation to determinestock right had a market value of $3. The market
property for publicly traded securities you sold at its adjusted basis. The accrued OID is added tovalue of the stock rights was less than 15% of
a gain, you must reduce the basis of the stock or the basis of the obligation to determine your gainthe market value of the stock, but you chose to interest by the amount of any postponed gain on or loss.divide the basis of your stock between the stock that sale. See Rollover of Gain From Publicly For information on determining OID on aand the rights. You figure the basis of the rights Traded Securities, later. long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is-and the basis of the old stock as follows:
sued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985  orQualified small business stock. If you Debt Instruments Issued After 1984 , whichever100 shares × $22 = $2,200, basis of old bought this stock as replacement property for applies, in Publication 1212 under Figuring OIDstock other qualified small business stock you sold at on Long-Term Debt Instruments.a gain, you must reduce the basis of this re- If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity of100 shares × $30 = $3,000, market value of placement stock by the amount of any post-old stock 1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules forponed gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on acquisition discount on short-term obligations.Qualified Small Business Stock, later.10 rights × $3 = $30, market value of rights See Discount on Short-Term Obligations  in
Short sales. If you cannot deduct payments chapter 1.
($3,000 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $2,178.22, you make to a lender in lieu of dividends on Stripped tax-exempt obligation. If you ac-new basis of old stock stock used in a short sale, the amount you pay to quired a stripped tax-exempt bond or couponthe lender is a capital expense, and you must after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on($30 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $21.78, basis of add it to the basis of the stock used to close the it to determine its adjusted basis when you dis-rights short sale. pose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds orSee Payments in lieu of dividends , later, forIf you sell the rights, the basis for figuring coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part ofinformation about deducting payments in lieu ofgain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷ 10) per right. If this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID ondividends.you exercise the rights, the basis of the stock these obligations in the manner described in
Premiums on bonds. If you buy a bond at ayou acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus the chapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons.
premium, the premium is treated as part of yourbasis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18 Increase your basis in the stripped
basis in the bond. If you choose to amortize theper share. The remaining basis of the old stock tax-exempt bond or coupon by the taxable and
premium paid on a taxable bond, you must re-is $21.78 per share. nontaxable accrued OID. Also increase your ba-
duce the basis of the bond by the amortized part sis by the interest that accrued (but was not
of the premium each year over the life of theInvestment property received in liquidation. paid, and was not previously reflected in your
bond.In general, if you receive investment property as basis) before the date you sold the bond or
Although you cannot deduct the premium ona distribution in partial or complete liquidation of coupon. In addition, for bonds acquired after
a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de- June 10, 1987, add to your basis any accrueda corporation and if you recognize gain or loss
termine your adjusted basis in the bond. You market discount not previously reflected in ba-when you acquire the property, your basis in the
must reduce the basis of the bond by the pre- sis.property is its fair market value at the time of the
mium you amortized for the period you held thedistribution.
bond.
See Bond Premium Amortization in chapterS corporation stock. You must increase 3 for more information. How To Figureyour basis in stock of an S corporation by your
pro rata share of the following items. Market discount on bonds. If you include
Gain or Lossmarket discount on a bond in income currently,• All income items of the S corporation, in-
increase the basis of your bond by the amount ofcluding tax-exempt income, that are sepa- You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade ofmarket discount you include in your income. Seerately stated and passed through to you as property by comparing the amount you realizeMarket Discount Bonds  in chapter 1 for morea shareholder. with the adjusted basis of the property.information.• The nonseparately stated income of the S
corporation. Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale orBonds purchased at par value. A bond pur-
trade is more than the adjusted basis of the• The amount of the deduction for depletion chased at par value (face amount) has no pre-
property you transfer, the difference is a gain.(other than oil and gas depletion) that is mium or discount. When you sell or otherwise
more than the basis of the property being dispose of the bond, you figure the gain or loss Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property youdepleted. by comparing the bond proceeds to the transfer is more than the amount you realize, the
purchase price of the bond. difference is a loss.You must decrease your basis in stock of an
Amount realized. The amount you realizeExample. You purchased a bond severalS corporation by your pro rata share of the
from a sale or trade of property is everything youyears ago for its par value of $10,000. You soldfollowing items.
receive for the property. This includes thethe bond this year for $10,100. You have a gain• Distributions by the S corporation that
money you receive plus the fair market value ofof $100. However, if you had sold the bond forwere not included in your income.
any property or services you receive.$9,900, you would have a loss of $100.• All loss and deduction items of the S cor- If you finance the buyer’s purchase of yourporation that are separately stated and Acquisition discount on short-term obliga- property and the debt instrument does not pro-passed through to you. tions. If you include acquisition discount on a vide for adequate stated interest, the unstatedshort-term obligation in your income currently,• Any nonseparately stated loss of the S interest that you must report as ordinary incomeincrease the basis of the obligation by thecorporation. will reduce the amount realized from the sale.amount of acquisition discount you include in• Any expense of the S corporation that is For more information, see Publication 537.your income. See Discount on Short-Term Obli-not deductible in figuring its taxable in- If a buyer of property issues a debt instru-gations in chapter 1 for more information.come and not properly chargeable to a ment to the seller of the property, the amount
capital account. Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru- realized is determined by reference to the issue
• The amount of your deduction for deple- ments. Increase the basis of a debt instrument price of the debt instrument, which may or may
tion of oil and gas wells to the extent the by the amount of OID that you include in your not be the fair market value of the debt instru-
deduction is not more than your share of income. See Original Issue Discount (OID)  in ment. See Regulations section 1.1001-1(g).
the adjusted basis of the wells. chapter 1. However, if the debt instrument was previously
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 45

Page 46 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
issued by a third party (one not part of the sale 1. The property must be business or invest- gain or loss is the difference betwe en the ad-
ment property. You must hold both the justed basis of the unlike property and its fairtransaction), the fair market value of the debt
property you trade and the property you market value.instrument is used to determine the amount real-
receive for productive use in your trade orized. Like property and money transferred. Ifbusiness or for investment. Neither prop-Fair market value. Fair market value is the conditions (1) – (6) are met, you have a nontax-erty may be property used for personalprice at which property would change hands able trade even if you pay money in addition topurposes, such as your home or family the like property.between a buyer and a seller, neither being car.
forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable 2. The property must not be held primarily for Basis of property received. You figure yourknowledge of all the relevant facts. sale. The property you trade and the prop- basis in property received in a nontaxable or
erty you receive must not be property you partly nontaxable trade as explained under Ba-Example. You trade A Company stock with sell to customers, such as merchandise. sis Other Than Cost, earlier.an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company 3. The property must not be stocks, bonds,stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which How to report. You must report the trade ofnotes, choses in action, certificates of trustis your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000 like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-or beneficial interest, or other securities or($10,000 minus $7,000). If you also receive a nized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it onevidences of indebtedness or interest, in-note for $6,000 that has an issue price of Schedule D (Form 1040) or on Form 4797,cluding partnership interests. However,$6,000, your gain is $9,000 ($10,000 plus Sales of Business Property, whichever applies.you can have a nontaxable trade of corpo-$6,000 minus $7,000). For information on using Form 4797, seerate stocks under a different rule, as dis-
chapter 4 of Publication 544.cussed later under Corporate Stocks.Debt paid off. A debt against the property,
or against you, that is paid off as a part of the 4. There must be a trade of like property. The
Corporate Stockstrade of real estate for real estate, or per-transaction or that is assumed by the buyer must
sonal property for similar personal prop-be included in the amount realized. This is true The following trades of corporate stocks gener-erty, is a trade of like property. The tradeeven if neither you nor the buyer is personally ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deductibleof an apartment house for a store building,liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or loss.or a panel truck for a pickup truck, is atrade property that is subject to a nonrecourse
trade of like property. The trade of a pieceloan, the amount you realize generally includes Corporate reorganizations. In some in-
of machinery for a store building is not athe full amount of the note assumed by the buyer stances, a company will give you common stock
trade of like property. Real property lo-even if the amount of the note is more than the for preferred stock, preferred stock for common
cated in the United States and real prop-fair market value of the property. stock, or stock in one corporation for stock in
erty located outside the United States are another corporation. If this is a result of a
not like property. Also, personal propertyExample. You sell stock that you had merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlled
used predominantly within the Unitedpledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000. corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-
States and personal property usedYour basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-
predominantly outside the United Statespays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.
are not like property.cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000
5. The property to be received must be identi- Example 1. On April 19, 2006, KP1 Corpo-plus $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000
fied in writing within 45 days after the date ration was acquired by KP2 Corporation. Youminus $6,000).
you transfer the property given up in the held 100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis ofPayment of cash. If you trade property and trade. If you received the replacement $3,500. As a result of the acquisition, you re-cash for other property, the amount you realize property before the end of the 45-day pe- ceived 70 shares of KP2 stock in exchange foris the fair market value of the property you re- riod, you automatically are treated as hav- your KP1 stock. You do not recognize gain orceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- ing met the 45-day written notice loss on the transaction. Your basis in the 70tracting the cash you pay and the adjusted basis requirement. shares of the new stock is still $3,500.of the property you trade in from the amount you 6. The property to be received must be re-realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a Example 2. On July 27, 2006, RGB Corpo-ceived by the earlier of:gain. If the result is a negative number, it is a ration divests itself of SFH Corporation. Youa. The 180th day after the date on whichloss. hold 75 shares of RGB stock with a basis ofyou transfer the property given up in the $5,400. You receive 25 shares of SFH stock astrade, orNo gain or loss. You may have to use a basis a result of the spin-off. You do not recognize anyb. The due date, including extensions, forfor figuring gain that is different from the basis gain or loss on the transaction. You receiveyour tax return for the year in which theused for figuring loss. In this case, you may have information from RGB Corporation that your ba-transfer of the property given up occurs.neither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or loss in sis in SFH stock is equal to 10.9624% of your
the discussion on the basis of property you re- basis in RGB stock ($5,400). Thus, your basis inIf you trade property with a related party in aceived as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost , SFH stock is $592.00. Your basis in RGB stocklike-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.earlier. (after the spin-off) is $4,808 ($5,400 – $592).See Related Party Transactions , later in this
chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544 Note. In the case of a spin-off, the divestingfor more information on exchanges of business corporation should send you information thatproperty and special rules for exchanges using includes details on how to allocate basis be-Nontaxable Trades qualified intermediaries or involving multiple tween the old and new stock. Keep this informa-properties. tion until the period of limitations expires for theThis section discusses trades that generally do
year in which you dispose of the stock in aPartly nontaxable exchange. If you receivenot result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss. taxable disposition. Usually, this is 3 years frommoney or unlike property in addition to the likeFor more information on nontaxable trades, see the date the return was due or filed, or 2 yearsproperty, and the preceding six conditions arechapter 1 of Publication 544. from the date the tax was paid, whichever ismet, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You are
later.taxed on any gain you realize, but only up to theLike-Kind Exchanges amount of the money and the fair market value Stock for stock of the same corporation.of the unlike property you receive. You cannotIf you trade business or investment property for You can exchange common stock for commondeduct a loss.other business or investment property of a like stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the
kind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deduct Like property and unlike property trans- same corporation without having a recognized
any loss until you sell or dispose of the prop- ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi- gain or loss. This is true for a trade between two
erty you receive. To be nontaxable, a trade tion to the like property, you must recognize gain stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-
must meet all six of the following conditions. or loss on the unlike property you give up. The holder and the corporation.
Page 46 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 47 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you receive cash for fractional shares, see trades that are part of mergers or other corpo- • A life insurance contract for another life
rate reorganizations, you will have no recog- insurance contract or for an endowment orFractional shares  under Distributions of stock
nized gain or loss if certain requirements are annuity contract,and stock rights in chapter 1.
met. For more information about the tax conse- • An endowment contract for an annuityMoney or other property received. If in an quences of converting securities of one corpora- contract or for another endowment con-otherwise nontaxable trade you receive money tion into common stock of another corporation, tract that provides for regular paymentsor other property in addition to stock, then your under circumstances such as those just de- beginning at a date not later than the be-gain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but only up to scribed, consult the respective corporations and ginning date under the old contract, orthe amount of the money or other property. Any the terms of the bond issue. This information is • An annuity contract for another annuityloss is not recognized. also available on the prospectus of the bond contract.If you received cash for fractional shares, issue.
see Fractional shares  under Distributions of
You also may not have to recognize gain or lossStock and Stock Rights in chapter 1. Property for stock of a controlled corpora-
from an exchange of a portion of an annuitytion. If you transfer property to a corporationNonqualified preferred stock. Nonquali- contract for another annuity contract. See Reve-solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,fied preferred stock is generally treated as nue Ruling 2003-76 and Notice 2003-51 in Inter-and immediately after the trade you are in con-property other than stock. Generally, this ap- nal Revenue Bulletin 2003-33. This bulletin istrol of the corporation, you ordinarily will notplies to preferred stock with one or more of the available atrecognize a gain or loss. This rule applies bothfollowing features. www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb03-33.pdf.to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-• The holder has the right to require the erty to a corporation. It does not apply if the Exchanges of contracts not included in thisissuer or a related person to redeem or corporation is an investment company. list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-purchase the stock. If you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro- ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-• The issuer or a related person is required ceeding and you transfer property to a controlled tract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.to redeem or purchase the stock. corporation under a plan, other than a reorgani-
• The issuer or a related person has the zation, you must recognize gain to the extent the
right to redeem the stock, and on the issue stock you receive in the exchange is used to pay Demutualization of Lifedate, it is more likely than not that the right off your debts. Insurance Companieswill be exercised. For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-
ration, you or your group of transferors must• The dividend rate on the stock varies with A life insurance company may change from a
own, immediately after the exchange, at leastreference to interest rates, commodity mutual company to a stock company. This is
80% of the total combined voting power of allprices, or similar indices. commonly called demutualization. If you were a
classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80% policyholder or annuitant of the mutual com-For a detailed definition of nonqualified pre- of the outstanding shares of each class of non- pany, you may have received either stock in theferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Inter- voting stock of the corporation. stock company or cash in exchange for yournal Revenue Code. If this provision applies to you, you may have equity interest in the mutual company.
to attach to your return a complete statement of If the demutualization transaction qualifiesConvertible stocks and bonds. You gener- all facts pertinent to the exchange. For details, as a tax-free reorganization under sectionally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you seeTemporary Regulations section 1.351-3T. 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gainconvert bonds into stock or preferred stock into
or loss is recognized on the exchange. YourMoney or other property received. If, in ancommon stock of the same corporation accord-
holding period for the new stock includes theotherwise nontaxable trade of property for cor-ing to a conversion privilege in the terms of the
period you held an equity interest in the mutualporate stock, you also receive money or prop-bond or the preferred stock certificate.
company as a policyholder or annuitant.erty other than stock, you may have a taxable
gain. However, you are taxed only up to the If the demutualization transaction does notExample. In November, you bought for $1 a
amount of money plus the fair market value of qualify as a tax-free reorganization under sec-right issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, on
the other property you receive. The rules for tion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, youpayment of $99, to subscribe to a bond issued
figuring taxable gain in this situation generally must recognize a capital gain or loss. Your hold-by that corporation.
follow those for a partly nontaxable exchange ing period for the stock does not include theOn December 2, you subscribed to the bond,
discussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. If period you held an equity interest in the mutualwhich was issued on December 9. The bond
the property you give up includes depreciable company.contained a clause stating that you would re-
property, the taxable gain may have to be re- If you received cash in exchange for yourceive one share of XYZ Corporation common
ported as ordinary income because of deprecia- equity interest, you must recognize a capitalstock on surrender of one bond and the payment
tion. (See chapter 3 of Publication 544.) No loss gain. If you held an equity interest for more thanof $50.
is recognized. 1 year, your gain is long-term.Later, you presented the bond and $50 and Nonqualified preferred stock (described ear-received one share of XYZ Corporation common lier under Stock for stock of the same corpora- U.S. Treasurystock. You did not have a recognized gain or tion) received is generally treated as propertyloss. This is true whether the fair market value of Notes or Bondsother than stock.the stock was more or less than $150 on the
Basis of stock or other property received.date of the conversion. You can trade certain issues of U.S. Treasury
The basis of the stock you receive is generally obligations for other issues, designated by theThe basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 +
the adjusted basis of the property you transfer. Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or loss$99 + $50). Your holding period is split. Your
Increase this amount by any amount that was recognized on the trade.holding period for the part based on your owner-
treated as a dividend, plus any gain recognized See the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S.ship of the bond ($100 basis) begins on Decem-
on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cash Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for informationber 2. Your holding period for the part based on
you received and the fair market value of any about income from these investments.your cash investment ($50 basis) begins on the
other property you received.day after you acquired the share of stock.
The basis of any other property you receive
is its fair market value on the date of the trade.Bonds for stock of another corporation.
Generally, if you convert the bonds of one corpo- Transfers BetweenInsurance Policiesration into common stock of another corporation,
according to the terms of the bond issue, you
Spousesand Annuities
must recognize gain or loss up to the difference
between the fair market value of the stock re- You will not have a recognized gain or loss if Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a
ceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds ex- the insured or annuitant is the same under both transfer of property from an individual to (or in
changed. In some instances, however, such as contracts and you trade: trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 47

Page 48 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecogni- you both must report any gain or loss not recog- • Two S corporations if the same persons
nized on the original trade on your return for the own more than 50% in value of the out-tion rule does not apply in the following situa-
year in which the later disposition occurs. standing stock of each corporation.tions.
This rule generally does not apply to: • Two corporations, one of which is an S• The recipient spouse or former spouse is
• Dispositions due to the death of either re- corporation, if the same persons owna nonresident alien.
lated party, more than 50% in value of the outstanding• Property is transferred in trust. Gain must
stock of each corporation.• Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 ofbe recognized to the extent the amount of
Publication 544), or • An executor and a beneficiary of an estatethe liabilities assumed by the trust, plus
(except in the case of a sale or trade toany liabilities on the property, exceed the • Trades and later dispositions whose main
satisfy a pecuniary bequest).adjusted basis of the property. purpose is not the avoidance of federal
income tax. • Two corporations that are members of the• An installment obligation is transferred in
same controlled group (under certain con-trust. For information on the disposition of
If a property holder’s risk of loss on the prop- ditions, however, these losses are not dis-an installment obligation, see Publication
erty is substantially diminished during any pe- allowed but must be deferred).537, Installment Sales.
riod, that period is not counted in determining • Two partnerships if the same persons• Certain stock redemptions, which are tax-
whether the property was disposed of within 2 own, directly or indirectly, more than 50%able to a spouse under the tax law, a di-
years. The property holder’s risk of loss is sub- of the capital interests or the profit inter-vorce or separation instrument, or a valid
stantially diminished by: ests in both partnerships.written agreement, discussed in Regula-
• The holding of a put on the property,tions section 1.1041-2.
• The holding by another person of a right to Multiple property sales or trades. If you sellacquire the property, orAny transfer of property to a spouse or former or trade to a related party a number of blocks of
spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is • A short sale or any other transaction. stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, you
treated by the recipient as a gift and is not must figure the gain or loss separately for each
considered a sale or exchange. The recipient’s block of stock or piece of property. The gain onLosses on Sales orbasis in the property will be the same as the each item may be taxable. However, you cannotTrades of Propertyadjusted basis of the giver immediately before deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannot
the transfer. This carryover basis rule applies reduce gains from the sales of any of theseYou cannot deduct a loss on the sale or tradewhether the adjusted basis of the transferred items by losses on the sales of any of the otherof property, other than a distribution in com-property is less than, equal to, or greater than items.plete liquidation of a corporation, if the transac-either its fair market value at the time of transfer tion is directly or indirectly between you and Indirect transactions. You cannot deductor any consideration paid by the recipient. This the following related parties. your loss on the sale of stock through yourrule applies for purposes of determining loss as • Members of your family. This includes only broker if, under a prearranged plan, a relatedwell as gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer your brothers and sisters, half-brothers party buys the same stock you had owned. Thisin trust increases the basis. and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par- does not apply to a trade between related par-A transfer of property is incident to a divorce ents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de- ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-if the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.). dental and is not prearranged.on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is • A partnership in which you directly or indi-related to the ending of the marriage. For more Constructive ownership of stock. In deter-rectly own more than 50% of the capitalinformation, see Property Settlements in Publi- mining whether a person directly or indirectlyinterest or the profits interest.cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-• A corporation in which you directly or indi- tion, the following rules apply.rectly own more than 50% in value of the
outstanding stock (see Constructive own- Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by
ership of stock, later). or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust
Related Party is considered owned proportionately by or for its• A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-
shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.ganization that is directly or indirectly con-Transactions trolled, in any manner or by any method, Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownby you or by a member of your family, the stock that is directly or indirectly owned by orSpecial rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- whether or not this control is legally en- for his or her family. Family includes only broth-erty between related parties. forceable. ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,
spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.Gain on Sale or Trade In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of prop- Rule 3. An individual owning, other than byof Depreciable Property erty is not deductible if the transaction is di- applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation isrectly or indirectly between the following considered to own the stock that is directly orYour gain from the sale or trade of property to a related parties. indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.related party may be ordinary income, rather • A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciarythan capital gain, if the property can be depreci- Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stockand beneficiary, of any trust.ated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 in constructively owned by a person under rule 1 is• Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or thePublication 544 for more information. treated as actually owned by that person. Butfiduciary and beneficiary of two different
stock constructively owned by an individualtrusts, if the same person is the grantor of
under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned byboth trusts.Like-Kind Exchanges that individual for again applying either rule 2 or• A trust fiduciary and a corporation of which rule 3 to make another person the constructiveGenerally, if you trade business or investment more than 50% in value of the outstanding owner of the stock.property for other business or investment prop- stock is directly or indirectly owned by or
erty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized. for the trust, or by or for the grantor of the Property received from a related party. If
See Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier, under Non- trust. you sell or trade at a gain property that you
taxable Trades. • A corporation and a partnership if the acquired from a related party, you recognize the
This rule also applies to trades of property same persons own more than 50% in gain only to the extent that it is more than the
between related parties, defined next under value of the outstanding stock of the cor- loss previously disallowed to the related party.
Losses on Sales or Trades of Property . How- poration and more than 50% of the capital This rule applies only if you are the original
ever, if either you or the related party disposes of interest, or the profits interest, in the part- transferee and you acquired the property by
the like property within 2 years after the trade, nership. purchase or exchange. This rule does not apply
Page 48 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 49 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
if the related party’s loss was disallowed be- or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on definition of hedging transactio n earlier,
cause of the wash sale rules, described later and the discussion of hedging transactionsthe circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of
under Wash Sales. under Commodity Futures, later.a capital asset (defined next) results in a capital
If you sell or trade at a loss property that you gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset 9. Supplies of a type you regularly use or
acquired from a related party, you cannot recog- generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De- consume in the ordinary course of your
nize the loss that was not allowed to the related pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on trade or business.
party. a sale or trade of property used in a trade or
business may be treated as either capital or Investment property. Investment property is
Example 1. Your brother sells you stock for ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In a capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale or
$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brother some situations, part of your gain or loss may be trade generally is a capital gain or loss.
cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell a capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi- Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.the same stock to an unrelated party for nary gain or loss. These are capital assets except when they are$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report- held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss fromable gain is $500 — the $2,900 gain minus the their sale or trade generally is a capital gain or$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother. Capital Assets and loss.Noncapital Assets
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of
For the most part, everything you own and usestock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog- these, including stock received as a dividend,
nized loss is only $700 — your $7,600 basis for personal purposes, pleasure, or investment are capital assets except when they are held for
minus $6,900. You cannot deduct the loss that is a capital asset. Some examples are: sale by a securities dealer. However, see
was not allowed to your brother. • Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac- Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock
count, and Losses on Small Business Investment
Company Stock, later.• A house owned and used by you and your
family, Personal use property. Property held for per-Capital Gains • Household furnishings, sonal use only, rather than for investment, is a
• A car used for pleasure or commuting, capital asset, and you must report a gain from itsand Losses • Coin or stamp collections, sale as a capital gain. However, you cannot
deduct a loss from selling personal use property.• Gems and jewelry, andTerms you may need to know
• Gold, silver, or any other metal.(see Glossary):
Any property you own is a capital asset, ex- Discounted Debt InstrumentsCall
cept the following noncapital assets. Commodity future Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,1. Property held mainly for sale to customersConversion transaction or retirement of a bond or other debt instrumentor property that will physically become aForward contract originally issued at a discount or bought at apart of the merchandise that is for sale toLimited partner discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-customers.Listed option plained in the following discussions.2. Depreciable property used in your trade orNonequity option Short-term government obligations. Treatbusiness, even if fully depreciated.Options dealer gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-3. Real property used in your trade or busi-Put ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-ness.Regulated futures contract gations) as ordinary income up to your ratable4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artisticSection 1256 contract share of the acquisition discount. This treatmentcomposition, a letter or memorandum, or applies to obligations that have a fixed maturityStraddle similar property — date not more than 1 year from the date of issue.Wash sale a. Created by your personal efforts, Acquisition discount is the stated redemption
b. Prepared or produced for you (in the price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-
case of a letter, memorandum, or simi-This section discusses the tax treatment of tion.
lar property), orgains and losses from different types of invest- However, do not treat these gains as income
c. Acquired under circumstances (for ex-ment transactions. to the extent you previously included the dis-
ample, by gift) entitling you to the basis count in income. See Discount on Short-TermCharacter of gain or loss. You need to clas- of the person who created the property Obligations in chapter 1 for more information.sify your gains and losses as either ordinary or or for whom it was prepared or pro- Short-term nongovernment obligations.capital gains or losses. You then need to classify duced. Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-your capital gains and losses as either short
gations as ordinary income up to your ratable5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired interm or long term. If you have long-term gains
share of OID. This treatment applies to obliga-the ordinary course of a trade or businessand losses, you must identify your 28% rate
tions that have a fixed maturity date of not morefor services rendered or from the sale ofgains and losses. If you have a net capital gain,
than 1 year from the date of issue.property described in (1).you must also identify any unrecaptured section
However, to the extent you previously in-1250 gain. 6. U.S. Government publications that you re-
cluded the discount in income, you do not haveThe correct classification and identification ceived from the government for free or for
to include it in income again. See Discount onhelps you figure the limit on capital losses and less than the normal sales price, or that
Short-Term Obligations, in chapter 1, for morethe correct tax on capital gains. For information you acquired under circumstances entitling
information.about determining whether your capital gain or you to the basis of someone who received
loss is short term or long term, see Holding the publications for free or for less than the Tax-exempt state and local governmentPeriod, later. For information about 28% rate normal sales price. bonds. If these bonds were originally issuedgain or loss and unrecaptured section 1250 7. Certain commodities derivative financial in- at a discount before September 4, 1982, or yougain, see Capital Gain Tax Rates under Report- struments held by commodities derivatives acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat youring Capital Gains and Losses, later. dealers. For more information, see section part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure
1221 of the Internal Revenue Code. your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these
Capital or Ordinary 8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans- bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part
action is clearly identified as a hedging of the OID.Gain or Loss
transaction before the close of the day on If the bonds were issued after September 3,
If you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss which it was acquired, originated, or en- 1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984,  in-
from a transaction, it may be either a capital gain tered into. For more information, see the crease the adjusted basis by your p art of the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 49

Page 50 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
OID to figure gain or loss. For more information years). The fraction 228/360 multiplied by the instrument’s accrued market disco unt. See Mar-
on the basis of these bonds, see Discounted ket Discount Bonds  in chapter 1. The rest of thediscount of $300 ($1,000 − $700) is equal to
tax-exempt obligations  under Stocks and gain is capital gain.$190. This is your ratable share of OID for the
Bonds, earlier in this chapter. However, a different rule applies if you dis-period you owned the bond. You must treat any
Any gain from market discount is usually pose of a market discount bond that was:part of the gain up to $190 as ordinary income.
taxable on disposition or redemption of As a result, $190 is treated as ordinary income • Issued before July 19, 1984, and
tax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bonds and $10 is capital gain. • Purchased by you before May 1, 1993.
before May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis-
count is capital gain. If you bought the bonds Long-term debt instruments issued after In that case, any gain is treated as interestafter April 30, 1993, the gain from market dis- May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov- income up to the amount of your deferred inter-count is ordinary income. ernment instrument). If you hold one of these est deduction for the year you dispose of theYou figure market discount by subtracting debt instruments, you must include a part of the bond. The rest of the gain is capital gain. (Thethe price you paid for the bond from the sum of OID in your gross income each year that you limit on the interest deduction for market dis-the original issue price of the bond and the own the instrument. Your basis in that debt in- count bonds is discussed in chapter 3 underamount of accumulated OID from the date of strument is increased by the amount of OID that When To Deduct Investment Interest.)issue that represented interest to any earlier you have included in your gross income. See
holders. For more information, see Market Dis- Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1. Report the sale or trade of a market discount
count Bonds in chapter 1. bond on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or lineIf you sell or trade the debt instrument before
A loss on the sale or other disposition of a 8. If the sale or trade results in a gain and you didmaturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if
tax-exempt state or local government bond is not choose to include market discount in incomeat the time the instrument was originally issueddeductible as a capital loss. currently, enter “Accrued Market Discount” onthere was an intention to call it before its matur-
the next line in column (a) and the amount of theity, your gain generally is ordinary income to theRedeemed before maturity. If a state or
accrued market discount as a loss in column (f).extent of the entire OID reduced by any amountslocal bond that was issued before June 9, 1980,
Also report the amount of accrued market dis-of OID previously includible in your income. Inis redeemed before it matures, the OID is not
count in column (f) as interest income on Sched-this case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain.taxable to you.
ule B (Form 1040), line 1, and identify it asIf a state or local bond issued after June 8, An intention to call a debt instrument before
“Accrued Market Discount.”1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part of maturity means there is a written or oral agree-
the OID that is earned while you hold the bond is ment or understanding not provided for in the Retirement of debt instrument. Any amount
not taxable to you. However, you must report the debt instrument between the issuer and original that you receive on the retirement of a debt
unearned part of the OID as a capital gain. holder that the issuer will redeem the debt instru- instrument is treated in the same way as if you
ment before maturity. In the case of debt instru- had sold or traded that instrument.
Example. On July 1, 1995, the date of is- ments that are part of an issue, the agreement or
Notes of individuals. If you hold an obliga-sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond understanding must be between the issuer and
tion of an individual that was issued with OIDfor $800. The face amount of the bond was the original holders of a substantial amount of after March 1, 1984, you generally must in-$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time the debt instruments in the issue. clude the OID in your income currently, andthe bond was issued, the issuer had no intention
your gain or loss on its sale or retirement isof redeeming it before it matured. The bond was Example 1. On February 4, 2004, you
generally capital gain or loss. An exception tocallable at its face amount beginning 10 years bought at original issue for $7,600, Jones Cor-
this treatment applies if the obligation is a loanafter the issue date. poration’s 10-year, 5% bond which has a stated
between individuals and all of the following re-The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of redemption price at maturity of $10,000. On
quirements are met.11 years (July 1, 2006) for its face amount of February 3, 2006, you sold the bond for $9,040.
• The lender is not in the business of lend-$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The Assume you have included $334 of the OID in
ing money.OID earned during the time you held the bond, your gross income (including the amount ac-
$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual • The amount of the loan, plus the amountcrued for 2006) and increased your basis in the
interest also is not taxable. However, you must of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000bond by that amount. Your basis is now $7,934.
report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a or less.If at the time of the original issue there was no
capital gain. • Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-intention to call the bond before maturity, your
cipal purposes of the loan.gain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized minusLong-term debt instruments issued after $7,934 adjusted basis) is capital gain.1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before July If the exception applies, or the obligation was2, 1982, if a government instrument). If you issued before March 2, 1984, you do not includeExample 2. If, in Example 1, at the time ofsell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of these the OID in your income currently. When you selloriginal issue there was an intention to call thedebt instruments, the part of your gain that is not or redeem the obligation, the part of your gainbond before maturity, your entire gain is ordinarymore than your ratable share of the OID at the that is not more than your accrued share of theincome. You figure this as follows:time of sale or redemption is ordinary income. OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest ofThe rest of the gain is capital gain. If, however, 1) Entire OID ($10,000 stated the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on thethere was an intention to call the debt instrument redemption price at maturity minus sale or redemption is capital loss.before maturity, all of your gain that is not more $7,600 issue price) .......... $2,400than the entire OID is treated as ordinary income 2) Minus: Amount previously included
at the time of the sale. This treatment of taxable in income ................ 3 3 4 Bearer Obligationsgain also applies to corporate instruments is- 3) Maximum amount of ordinary
sued after May 27, 1969, under a written com- income .................. $2,066 You cannot deduct any loss on an obligation
mitment that was binding on May 27, 1969, and required to be in registered form that is insteadBecause the amount in (3) is more than yourat all times thereafter. held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on thegain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in- sale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi-come.Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov- nary income. However, if the issuer was subject
ernment bond for $700 at original issue on April to a tax when the obligation was issued, then
Market discount bonds. If the debt instru-1, 1987, and sold it for $900 on April 21, 2006, you can deduct any loss, and any gain may
ment has market discount and you chose tofor a $200 gain. The redemption price is $1,000. qualify for capital gain treatment.
include the discount in income as it accrued,At the time of original issue, there was no inten-
Obligations required to be in registeredincrease your basis in the debt instrument by thetion to call the bond before maturity. You have
form. Any obligation must be in registeredaccrued discount to figure capital gain or loss onheld the bond for 228 full months. Do not count
form unless:its disposition. If you did not choose to includethe additional days that are less than a full
• It is issued by a natural person,the discount in income as it accrued, you mustmonth. The number of complete months from
report gain as ordinary interest income up to thedate of issue to date of maturity is 360 (30 • It is not of a type offered to the public,
Page 50 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 51 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• It has a maturity at the date of issue of not Net investment. To determine your net in-Conversion Transactions
more than 1 year, or vestment in a conversion transaction, include
Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversion the fair market value of any position at the time it• It was issued before 1983.
transaction is treated as ordinary income. This becomes part of the transaction. This means
applies to gain on the disposition or other termi- that your net investment generally will be theDeposit in Insolvent or nation of any position you held as part of a total amount you invested, less any amount you
Bankrupt Financial Institution conversion transaction that you entered into af- received for entering into the position (for exam-
ter April 30, 1993. ple, a premium you received for writing a call).If you lose money you have on deposit in a A conversion transaction is any transactionqualified financial institution that becomes in- Position with built-in loss. A special rule ap-that meets both of these tests.solvent or bankrupt, you may be able to deduct plies when a position with a built-in loss be-
1. Substantially all of your expected returnyour loss in one of three ways. comes part of a conversion transaction. A
from the transaction is due to the time built-in loss is any loss that you would have• Ordinary loss,
value of your net investment. In other realized if you had disposed of or otherwise• Casualty loss, or
words, the return on your investment is, in terminated the position at its fair market value at• Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital substance, like interest on a loan. the time it became part of the conversion trans-loss).
action.2. The transaction is one of the following.
When applying the conversion transactiona. A straddle as defined under Straddles,Ordinary loss or casualty loss. If you can rules to a position with a built-in loss, use thelater, but including any set of offsettingreasonably estimate your loss, you can choose position’s fair market value at the time it becamepositions on stock established beforeto treat the estimated loss as either an ordinary part of the transaction. But, when you dispose ofOctober 22, 2004.loss or a casualty loss in the current year. Either or otherwise terminate the position in a transac-b. Any transaction in which you acquireway, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc- tion in which you recognize gain or loss, youproperty (whether or not actively traded)tion. must recognize the built-in loss. The conversionat substantially the same time that youIf you claim an ordinary loss, report it as a transaction rules do not affect whether thecontract to sell the same property, ormiscellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule built-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capitalsubstantially identical property, at aA (Form 1040), line 22. The maximum amount loss.price set in the contract.you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you are
Netting rule for certain conversion transac-c. Any other transaction that is marketedmarried filing separately) reduced by any ex-
tions. Before determining the amount of gainor sold as producing capital gains frompected state insurance proceeds. Your loss is
treated as ordinary income, you can net certaina transaction described in (1).subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
gains and losses from positions of the samelimit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinary
conversion transaction. To do this, you have toloss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.
dispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe-If you claim a casualty loss, attach Form Amount treated as ordinary income. The
riod that is within a single tax year. You cannot4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return. amount of gain treated as ordinary income is net the built-in loss against the gain.Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your total the smaller of:
casualty losses for the year are reduced by 10% • The gain recognized on the disposition or You can net gains and losses only if
of your adjusted gross income. other termination of the position, or you identify the conversion transaction
You cannot choose either of these methods as an identified netting transaction on• The “applicable imputed income amount.” RECORDS
if: your books and records. Each position of the
• You own at least 1% of the financial insti- conversion transaction must be identified beforeApplicable imputed income amount. Fig-tution, the end of the day on which the position be-ure this amount as follows.• You are an officer of the institution, or comes part of the conversion transaction. For
1. Figure the amount of interest that would conversion transactions entered into before• You are related to such an owner or of-
have accrued on your net investment in February 20, 1996, this requirement is met if theficer. You are related if you and the owner
the conversion transaction for the period identification was made by that date.or officer are “related parties,” as defined
ending on the earlier of:earlier under Related Party Transactions, Options dealers and commodities traders.or if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, or a. The date when you dispose of the posi- These rules do not apply to options dealers andniece of the owner or officer. tion, or commodities traders.b. The date when the transaction stopsIf the actual loss that is finally determined is How to report. Use Form 6781, Gains andbeing a conversion transaction.more than the amount you deducted as an esti- Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and Strad-To figure this amount, use an interest ratemated loss, you can claim the excess loss as a dles, to report conversion transactions. See theequal to 120% of the “applicable rate,” de-bad debt. If the actual loss is less than the instructions for lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781.fined later.amount deducted as an estimated loss, you
2. Subtract from (1) the amount treated asmust include in income (in the final determina-
tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov- ordinary income from any earlier disposi- Commodity Futures
eries  in Publication 525, Taxable and tion or other termination of a position held
A commodity futures contract is a standardized,Nontaxable Income. as part of the same conversion transac-
exchange-traded contract for the sale ortion.
Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choose purchase of a fixed amount of a commodity at a
to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty loss future date for a fixed price.Applicable rate. If the term of the conver-
or an ordinary loss, you wait until the year the If the contract is a regulated futures contract,sion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rate
amount of the actual loss is determined and the rules described earlier under Section 1256is the federal short-term rate in effect under
deduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year. Contracts Marked to Market apply to it.section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Code
Report it as a short-term capital loss on Sched- The termination of a commodity futures con-during the period of the conversion transaction,
ule D (Form 1040), as explained under Nonbusi- tract generally results in capital gain or losscompounded daily.
ness Bad Debts, later. unless the contract is a hedging transaction.In all other cases, the applicable rate is the
“applicable federal rate” determined as if the Hedging transaction.  A futures contract that
conversion transaction were a debt instrument is a hedging transaction generally produces or-Sale of Annuity and compounded semi-annually. dinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg-
The rates discussed above are published byThe part of any gain on the sale of an annuity ing transaction if you enter into the contract in
the IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Or, youcontract before its maturity date that is based on the ordinary course of your business primarily to
can contact the IRS to get these rates. Seeinterest accumulated on the contract is ordinary manage the risk of interest rate or price changes
income. chapter 5 for information on contacting the IRS. or currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinary
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 51

Page 52 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property, or ordinary obligations. (Generally, or- and sold the asset for its fair market value on the your distributive share of  the partnership loss to
dinary property or obligations are those that can- date the transaction was closed. If you do not any individual section 1244 sto ck loss you may
not produce capital gain or loss under any establish the amount of net underlying long-term have before applying the ordinary los s limit.
circumstances.) For example, the offset or exer- capital gain by clear and convincing evidence, it Stock distributed by partnership. If yourcise of a futures contract that protects against is treated as zero. partnership distributes the stock to you, you can-price changes in your business inventory results not treat any later loss on that stock as anMore information. For more informationin an ordinary gain or loss. ordinary loss.about constructive ownership transactions, seeFor more information about hedging transac- section 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code. Stock sold through underwriter. Stocktions, see Regulations section 1.1221-2. Also,
sold through an underwriter is not section 1244see Hedging Transactions under Section 1256
stock unless the underwriter only acted as aContracts Marked to Market, earlier. Losses on Section 1244 selling agent for the corporation.If you have numerous transactions in (Small Business) Stock
the commodity futures market during Stock dividends and reorganizations.
You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thanthe year, the burden of proof is on you Stock you receive as a stock dividend qualifiesRECORDS
as a capital loss, a loss on the sale, trade, orto show which transactions are hedging transac- as section 1244 stock if:
worthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report thetions. Clearly identify any hedging transactions • You receive it from a small business cor-loss on Form 4797, Sales of Business Property,on your books and records before the end of the poration in which you own stock, andline 10.day you entered into the transaction. It may be • The stock you own meets the require-Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capitalhelpful to have separate brokerage accounts for ments when the stock dividend is distrib-gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.your hedging and nonhedging transactions. For uted.Do not offset gains against losses that are withinspecific requirements concerning identification
the ordinary loss limit, explained later in thisof hedging transactions and the underlying item, If you trade your section 1244 stock for newdiscussion, even if the transactions are in stockitems, or aggregate risk that is being hedged, stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza-of the same company. Report the gain onsee Regulations section 1.1221-2(f). tion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that isSchedule D (Form 1040). only a change in identity, form, or place of organ-If you must figure a net operating loss, any ization, the new stock is section 1244 stock if theordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 stockGains From Certain Constructive stock you trade meets the requirements whenis a business loss.Ownership Transactions the trade occurs.
If you hold section 1244 stock and otherOrdinary loss limit. The amount that you canIf you have a gain from a constructive ownership stock in the same corporation, not all of the stockdeduct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000transaction entered into after July 11, 1999, in- you receive as a stock dividend or in a reorgani-each year. On a joint return the limit is $100,000,volving a financial asset (discussed later) and zation will qualify as section 1244 stock. Onlyeven if only one spouse has this type of loss. Ifthe gain normally would be treated as long-term that part based on the section 1244 stock youyour loss is $110,000 and your spouse has nocapital gain, all or part of the gain may be treated hold will qualify.loss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinaryinstead as ordinary income. In addition, if any loss on a joint return. The remaining $10,000 is again is treated as ordinary income, your tax is Example. Your basis for 100 shares of Xcapital loss.increased by an interest charge. common stock is $1,000. These shares qualify
Section 1244 (small business) stock. This is as section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stockConstructive ownership transactions. The stock that was issued for money or property dividend, you receive 50 more shares of com-following are constructive ownership transac- (other than stock and securities) in a domestic mon stock, the basis of which is determined fromtions. small business corporation. During its 5 most the 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are also
• A notional principal contract in which you recent tax years before the loss, this corporation section 1244 stock.
have the right to receive all or substantially must have derived more than 50% of its gross If you also own stock in the corporation that
all of the investment yield on a financial receipts from other than royalties, rents, divi- is not section 1244 stock when you receive the
asset and you are obligated to reimburse dends, interest, annuities, and gains from sales stock dividend, you must divide the shares you
all or substantially all of any decline in and trades of stocks or securities. If the corpora- receive as a dividend between the section 1244
value of the financial asset. tion was in existence for at least 1 year, but less stock and the other stock. Only the shares from
than 5 years, the 50% test applies to the tax• A forward or futures contract to acquire a the former can be section 1244 stock.
years ending before the loss. If the corporationfinancial asset.
Contributed property. To determine ordi-was in existence less than 1 year, the 50% test• The holding of a call option and writing of nary loss on section 1244 stock you receive inapplies to the entire period the corporation wasa put option on a financial asset at sub- a trade for property, you have to reduce thein existence before the day of the loss. However,stantially the same strike price and matur-
basis of the stock if:if the corporation’s deductions (other than theity date.
• The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of thenet operating loss and dividends received de-
property, immediately before the trade,ductions) were more than its gross income dur-This provision does not apply if all the posi-
was more than its fair market value, anding this period, this 50% test does not apply.tions are marked to market. Marked to market
The corporation must have been largely an • The basis of the stock is determined byrules for section 1256 contracts are discussed in
operating company for ordinary loss treatment the basis of the property.detail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
to apply.Market, earlier. Reduce the basis of the stock by the differenceIf the stock was issued before July 19, 1984, between the adjusted basis of the property andFinancial asset. A financial asset, for this the stock must be common stock. If issued after its fair market value at the time of the trade. Youpurpose, is any equity interest in a pass-through July 18, 1984, the stock may be either common reduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss.entity. Pass-through entities include partner- or preferred. For more information about the Do not reduce the basis of the stock for anyships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest- requirements of a small business corporation or other purpose.ment companies, and real estate investment the qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec-trusts. tion 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and its Example. You transfer property with an ad-regulations.Amount of ordinary income. Long-term cap- justed basis of $1,000 and a fair market value of
ital gain is treated as ordinary income to the The stock must be issued to the person tak- $250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock.
extent it is more than the net underlying ing the loss. You must be the original owner The basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figure
long-term capital gain. The net underlying of the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treat- the ordinary loss under these rules, the basis of
long-term capital gain is the amount of net capi- ment. To claim a deductible loss on stock issued your stock is $250 ($1,000 min us $750). If you
tal gain you would have realized if you acquired to your partnership, you must have been a part- later sell the section 1244 stoc k for $200, your
the asset for its fair market value on the date the ner when the stock was issued and have re- $800 loss is an ordinary loss of $ 50 and a capital
constructive ownership transaction was opened, mained so until the time of the loss. You add loss of $750.
Page 52 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 53 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Contributions to capital. If the basis of your year and you have a short-term capital gain or unconditional contract, begin counting on the
section 1244 stock has increased, through con- loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2006, your day after you received title to it or on the day
tributions to capital or otherwise, you must treat holding period is more than 1 year and you have after you took possession of i t and assumed the
this increase as applying to stock that is not a long-term capital gain or loss. burdens and privileges of ownership, whichever
section 1244 stock when you figure an ordinary happened first. However, taking delivery or pos-Securities traded on an established market.loss on its sale. session of real property under an option agree-For securities traded on an established securi- ment is not enough to start the holding period.ties market, your holding period begins the dayExample. You buy 100 shares of section The holding period cannot start until there is anafter the trade date you bought the securities,1244 stock for $10,000. You are the original actual contract of sale. The holding period of theand ends on the trade date you sold them.owner. You later make a $2,000 contribution to seller cannot end before that time.
Do not confuse the trade date with thecapital that increases the total basis of the 100 Real property repossessed. If you sell realsettlement date, which is the date byshares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 shares property but keep a security interest in it, andwhich the stock must be delivered andfor $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You can
CAUTION
!
then later repossess the property under thepayment must be made.deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 × $10,000/$12,000) terms of the sales contract, your holding periodas an ordinary loss under these rules. The re- for a later sale includes the period you held themaining $500 is a capital loss. Example. You are a cash method, calendar property before the original sale and the periodyear taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De-Recordkeeping. You must keep rec- after the repossession. Your holding periodcember 29, 2006. According to the rules of theords sufficient to show your stock quali- does not include the time between the originalstock exchange, the sale was closed by deliveryfies as section 1244 stock. Your sale and the repossession. That is, it does not
RECORDS
of the stock 3 trading days after the sale, onrecords must also distinguish your section 1244 include the period during which the first buyerJanuary 4, 2007. You received payment of thestock from any other stock you own in the corpo- held the property.sale price on that same day. Report your gain onration.
your 2006 return, even though you received the Stock dividends. The holding period for stock
payment in 2007. The gain is long term or short you received as a taxable stock dividend begins
term depending on whether you held the stock on the date of distribution.Losses on Small Business more than 1 year. Your holding period ended on The holding period for new stock you re-Investment Company Stock December 29. If you had sold the stock at a loss, ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins on
you would also report it on your 2006 return. the same day as the holding period of the oldA small business investment company (SBIC) is
stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired inone that is licensed and operated under the U.S. Treasury notes and bonds. The holding a spin-off, which is a distribution of stock orSmall Business Investment Act of 1958. period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold at securities in a controlled corporation.If you are an investor in SBIC stock, you can auction on the basis of yield starts the day after
deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capital the Secretary of the Treasury, through news Nontaxable stock rights. Your holding period
loss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless- releases, gives notification of acceptance to for nontaxable stock rights begins on the same
ness of that stock. A gain from the sale or trade successful bidders. The holding period of U.S. day as the holding period of the underlying
of that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset your Treasury notes and bonds sold through an offer- stock. The holding period for stock acquired
gains and losses, even if they are on stock of the ing on a subscription basis at a specified yield through the exercise of stock rights begins on
same company. starts the day after the subscription is submitted. the date the right was exercised.
How to report. You report this type of ordinary Automatic investment service.  In determin- Section 1256 contracts. Gains or losses on
loss on Form 4797, Part II, line 10. In addition to ing your holding period for shares bought by the section 1256 contracts open at the end of the
the information required by the form, you must bank or other agent, full shares are considered year, or terminated during the year, are treated
include the name and address of the company bought first and any fractional shares are con- as 60% long term and 40% short term, regard-
that issued the stock. If applicable, also include sidered bought last. Your holding period starts less of how long the contracts were held. See
the reason the stock is worthless and the ap- on the day after the bank’s purchase date. If a Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market , ear-
proximate date it became worthless. Report a share was bought over more than one purchase lier.
capital gain from the sale of SBIC stock on date, your holding period for that share is a split
Option exercised. Your holding period forSchedule D of Form 1040. holding period. A part of the share is considered
property you acquire when you exercise an op-to have been bought on each date that stockShort sale. If you close a short sale of SBIC tion begins the day after you exercise the option.was bought by the bank with the proceeds ofstock with other SBIC stock that you bought only available funds. Wash sales. Your holding period for substan-for that purpose, any loss you have on the sale is
tially identical stock or securities you acquire in aa capital loss. See Short Sales , later in this Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investment
wash sale includes the period you held the oldchapter, for more information. property in a trade for other investment property
stock or securities.and your basis for the new property is deter-
mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in theHolding Period Qualified small business stock. Your hold-old property, your holding period for the new ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-freeIf you sold or traded investment property, you property begins on the day following the date rollover of gain from a sale of qualified smallmust determine your holding period for the prop- you acquired the old property. business stock, described later under Gains onerty. Your holding period determines whether Qualified Small Business Stock , includes theProperty received as a gift. If you receive aany capital gain or loss was a short-term or a period you held the old stock.gift of property and your basis is determined bylong-term capital gain or loss. the donor’s adjusted basis, your holding period Commodity futures. Futures transactions inis considered to have started on the same dayLong-term or short-term. If you hold invest- any commodity subject to the rules of a board ofthe donor’s holding period started.ment property more than 1 year, any capital gain trade or commodity exchange are long term ifIf your basis is determined by the fair marketor loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If you the contract was held for more than 6 months.value of the property, your holding period startshold the property 1 year or less, any capital gain Your holding period for a commodity re-on the day after the date of the gift.or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss. ceived in satisfaction of a commodity futuresTo determine how long you held the invest- contract, other than a regulated futures contractInherited property. If you inherit investmentment property, begin counting on the date after subject to Internal Revenue Code section 1256,property, your capital gain or loss on any laterthe day you acquired the property. The day you includes your holding period for the futures con-disposition of that property is treated as adisposed of the property is part of your holding tract if you held the contract as a capital asset.long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-period. gardless of how long you actually held the prop- Securities futures contract. Your holding pe-erty.Example. If you bought investment property riod for a security received in satisfaction of a
on February 5, 2005, and sold it on February 5, Real property bought. To figure how long securities futures contract, other than one that is
2006, your holding period is not more than 1 you have held real property bought under an a section 1256 contract, includes your h olding
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 53

Page 54 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
period for the futures contract if you held the genuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor rela- Example 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and prin-
contract as a capital asset. tionship based on a valid and enforceable obli- cipal shareholder of the Spruce Corporation,
Your holding period for a security received in gation to repay a fixed or determinable sum of guaranteed payment of a bank loan t he corpora-
satisfaction of a securities futures contract to money. tion received. The corporation defaulted on the
sell, other than one that is a section 1256 con- loan and Henry made full payment. Because heLoan or gift. For a bad debt, you must showtract, is determined by the rules that apply to guaranteed the loan to protect his investment inthat there was an intention at the time of theshort sales, discussed later under Short Sales. the corporation, Henry can take a nonbusinesstransaction to make a loan and not a gift. If you bad debt deduction.lend money to a relative or friend with the under-Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6
standing that it may not be repaid, it is consid-months or less. If you hold stock in a regu- Example 2. Milt and John are co-workers.ered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a badlated investment company (commonly called a Milt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note atdebt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a badmutual fund) or real estate investment trust their local credit union. John does not pay thedebt unless there is a true creditor-debtor rela-(REIT) for 6 months or less and then sell it at a note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off thetionship between you and the person or organi-loss (other than under a periodic liquidation note. However, since he did not enter into thezation that owes you the money.plan), special rules may apply. guarantee agreement to protect an investmentWhen minor children borrow from their par- or to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debtCapital gain distributions received. The ents to pay for their basic needs, there is no deduction.loss (after reduction for any exempt-interest divi- genuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deducteddends you received, as explained next) is Deductible in year paid. Unless you havefor such a loan.treated as a long-term capital loss up to the total rights against the borrower, discussed next, aBasis in bad debt required. To deduct aof any capital gain distributions you received payment you make on a loan you guaranteed isbad debt, you must have a basis in it—that is,and your share of any undistributed capital deductible in the year you make the payment.you must have already included the amount ingains. Any remaining loss is short-term capital
Rights against the borrower. When youyour income or loaned out your cash. For exam-loss.
make payment on a loan that you guaranteed,ple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction forExempt-interest dividends on mutual fund you may have the right to take the place of thecourt-ordered child support not paid to you bystock. If you received exempt-interest divi- lender (the right of subrogation). The debt isyour former spouse. If you are a cash methoddends on the stock, at least part of your loss is then owed to you. If you have this right, or sometaxpayer (most individuals are), you generallydisallowed. You can deduct only the amount of other right to demand payment from the bor-cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaidloss that is more than the exempt-interest divi- rower, you cannot take a bad debt deductionsalaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,dends. until these rights become totally worthless.and similar items.
Loss on stock that paid qualified dividends. When deductible. You can take a bad debt Debts owed by political parties. You can-Any loss on the sale or trade of stock must be deduction only in the year the debt becomes not take a nonbusiness bad debt deduction fortreated as a long-term capital loss to the extent worthless. You do not have to wait until a debt is any worthless debt owed to you by:you received, from that stock, qualified divi- due to determine whether it is worthless. A debt
• A political party,dends (defined in chapter 1) that are extraordi- becomes worthless when there is no longer anynary dividends. This is true regardless of how • A national, state, or local committee of achance that the amount owed will be paid.long you actually held the stock. Generally, an political party, orIt is not necessary to go to court if you canextraordinary dividend is a dividend that equals • A committee, association, or organizationshow that a judgment from the court would beor exceeds 10% (5% in the case of preferred that either accepts contributions or spendsuncollectible. You must only show that you havestock) of your adjusted basis in the stock. money to influence elections.taken reasonable steps to collect the debt.
Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-
Nonbusiness Bad Debts dence of the worthlessness of at least a part of Mechanics’ and suppliers’ liens. Workers
an unsecured and unpreferred debt. and material suppliers may file liens againstIf someone owes you money that you cannot If your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in a property because of debts owed by a builder orcollect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to financial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent or contractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid foreclo-deduct the amount owed to you when you figure Bankrupt Financial Institution, earlier. sure and loss of your property, you are entitledyour tax for the year the debt becomes worth- to repayment from the builder or contractor. Ifless. Filing a claim for refund. If you do not the debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad debtThere are two kinds of bad debts — busi- deduct a bad debt on your original return for the deduction.ness and nonbusiness. A business bad debt, year it becomes worthless, you can file a claim
generally, is one that comes from operating your for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do Insolvency of contractor. You can take atrade or business and is deductible as a busi- this, use Form 1040X to amend your return for bad debt deduction for the amount you depositness loss. All other bad debts are nonbusiness the year the debt became worthless. You must with a contractor if the contractor becomes insol-bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi- file it within 7 years from the date your original vent and you are unable to recover your deposit.tal losses. return for that year had to be filed, or 2 years If the deposit is for work unrelated to your tradefrom the date you paid the tax, whichever is or business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc-Example. An architect made personal loans later. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthless tion.to several friends who were not clients. She securities generally must be filed within 3 years
could not collect on some of these loans. They from the date a return is filed, or 2 years from the
Secondary liability on home mortgage. Ifare deductible only as nonbusiness bad debts date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) For more
the buyer of your home assumes your mort-because the architect was not in the business of information about filing a claim, see Publication
gage, you may remain secondarily liable for re-lending money and the loans do not have any 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
payment of the mortgage loan. If the buyerrelationship to her business. and Claims for Refund.
defaults on the loan and the house is then sold
Business bad debts. For information on busi- for less than the amount outstanding on theLoan guarantees. If you guarantee a debt
ness bad debts of an employee, see Publication mortgage, you may have to make up the differ-that becomes worthless, you cannot take a bad
529. For information on other business bad ence. You can take a bad debt deduction for thedebt deduction for your payments on the debt
debts, see chapter 10 of Publication 535. amount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if youunless you can show either that your reason for
cannot collect it from the buyer.making the guarantee was to protect your in-Deductible nonbusiness bad debts. To be vestment or that you entered the guaranteedeductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to- transaction with a profit motive. If you make the Worthless securities. If you own securitiestally worthless. You cannot deduct a partly guarantee as a favor to friends and do not re- that become totally worthless, you can take aworthless nonbusiness debt. ceive any consideration in return, your pay- deduction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. See
Genuine debt required. A debt must be ments are considered a gift and you cannot take Worthless Securities  under What Is a Sale or
genuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is a deduction. Trade, earlier in this chapter.
Page 54 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 55 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Recovery of a bad debt. If you deducted a 2007. Your short sale is treated as a construc- Reporting Substitute Payments
bad debt and in a later tax year you recover tive sale of an appreciated financial position
If any broker transferred your securities for use(collect) all or part of it, you may have to include because a sale of your Baker stock on the date
in a short sale, or similar transaction, and re-the amount you recover in your gross income. of the short sale would have resulted in a gain. ceived certain substitute dividend payments onHowever, you can exclude from gross income You recognize a $600 short-term capital gain your behalf while the short sale was open, thatthe amount recovered up to the amount of the from the constructive sale and your new holding broker must give you a Form 1099-MISC or adeduction that did not reduce your tax in the year period in the Baker stock begins on September similar statement, reporting the amount of thesededucted. See Recoveries in Publication 525. 3. payments. Form 1099-MISC must be used for
How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi- those substitute payments totaling $10 or more
ness bad debts as short-term capital losses on that are known on the payment’s record date toShort-Term or Long-TermSchedule D (Form 1040). be in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi-Capital Gain or LossOn Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the name tal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution,
of the debtor and “statement attached” in col- or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, orAs a general rule, you determine whether youumn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt in that are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do nothave short-term or long-term capital gain or lossparentheses in column (f). Use a separate line treat these substitute payments as dividends oron a short sale by the amount of time you actu-for each bad debt. interest. Instead, report the substitute paymentsally hold the property eventually delivered to theFor each bad debt, attach a statement to shown on Form 1099-MISC as “Other income”lender to close the short sale.your return that contains: on line 21 of Form 1040.
• A description of the debt, including the Example. Even though you do not own any Substitute payment. A substitute paymentamount, and the date it became due, means a payment in lieu of:stock of the Ace Corporation, you contract to sell• The name of the debtor, and any business 100 shares of it, which you borrow from your • Tax-exempt interest (including OID) thator family relationship between you and the has accrued while the short sale wasbroker. After 13 months, when the price of thedebtor, open, andstock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Ace• The efforts you made to collect the debt, • A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is afterCorporation stock and immediately deliver themand the transfer of stock for use in a short saleto your broker to close out the short sale. Your• Why you decided the debt was worthless. and before the closing of the short sale.loss is a short-term capital loss because yourFor example, you could show that the bor- holding period for the delivered property is lessrower has declared bankruptcy, or that le- than 1 day. Payments in lieu of dividends. If you borrowgal action to collect would probably not
stock to make a short sale, you may have toresult in payment of any part of the debt.
remit to the lender payments in lieu of the divi-Special rules. Special rules may apply to
dends distributed while you maintain your shortgains and losses from short sales of stocks,Short Sales position. You can deduct these payments only ifsecurities, and commodity and securities futures you hold the short sale open at least 46 days(other than certain straddles) if you held or ac-A short sale occurs when you agree to sell (more than 1 year in the case of an extraordinaryquired property substantially identical to prop-property you do not own (or own but do not dividend as defined below) and you itemize yourerty that sold short. But if the amount of propertywish to sell). You make this type of sale in two deductions.you sold short is more than the amount of thatsteps. You deduct these payments as investment
substantially identical property, the special rules• You sell short. You borrow property and interest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter-
do not apply to the gain or loss on the excess.deliver it to a buyer. est Expenses in chapter 3 for more information.
• You close the sale. At a later date, you If you close the short sale by the 45th dayGains and holding period. If you held the
either buy substantially identical property after the date of the short sale (1 year or less insubstantially identical property for 1 year or less
and deliver it to the lender or make deliv- the case of an extraordinary dividend), you can-on the date of the short sale, or if you acquiredery out of property that you held at the not deduct the payment in lieu of the dividendthe substantially identical property after thetime of the sale. Delivery of property bor- that you make to the lender. Instead, you mustshort sale and by the date of closing the shortrowed from another lender does not sat- increase the basis of the stock used to close thesale, then:isfy this requirement. short sale by that amount.
To determine how long a short sale is kept
open, do not include any period during whichRule 1. Your gain, if any, when you closeYou do not realize gain or loss until delivery of you hold, have an option to buy, or are under athe short sale is a short-term capital gain,property to close the short sale. You will have a contractual obligation to buy substantially identi-andcapital gain or loss if the property used to close cal stock or securities.Rule 2. The holding period of the substan-the short sale is a capital asset. If your payment is made for a liquidatingtially identical property begins on the date distribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or ifException if property becomes worthless. of the closing of the short sale or on the you buy more shares equal to a stock distribu-A different rule applies if the property sold short date of the sale of this property, whichever tion issued on the borrowed stock during yourbecomes substantially worthless. In that case, comes first. short position, you have a capital expense. Youyou must recognize gain as if the short sale were must add the payment to the cost of the stockclosed when the property became substantially Losses. If, on the date of the short sale, you sold short.worthless. held substantially identical property for more Exception. If you close the short sale withinthan 1 year, any loss you realize on the shortException for constructive sales. Entering 45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay ininto a short sale may cause you to be treated as sale is a long-term capital loss, even if you held lieu of dividends will be disallowed only to thehaving made a constructive sale of property. In the property used to close the sale for 1 year or extent the payments are more than the amountthat case, you will have to recognize gain on the less. Certain losses on short sales of stock or that you receive as ordinary income from thedate of the constructive sale. For details, see securities are also subject to wash sale treat- lender of the stock for the use of collateral withConstructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po- ment. For information, see Wash Sales, later. the short sale. This exception does not apply tositions, earlier. payments in place of extraordinary dividends.Mixed straddles. Under certain elections,
you can avoid the treatment of loss from a shortExample. On May 3, 2006, you bought 100 Extraordinary dividends. If the amount of
sale as long term under the special rule. Theseshares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000. any dividend you receive on a share of preferred
elections are for positions that are part of aOn September 3, 2006, you sold short 100 stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case of
mixed straddle. See Other elections  undershares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. You other stock) of the amount realized on the short
Mixed Straddle Elections , later, for more infor-made no other transactions involving Baker sale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi-
mation about these elections.stock for the rest of 2006 and the first 30 days of nary dividend.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 55

Page 56 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Substantially identical. In determining February 10. Add the other half ($500) to theWash Sales
whether stock or securities are substantially basis of the shares bought on February 11.
identical, you must consider all the facts andYou cannot deduct losses from sales or trades Loss and gain on same day. Loss from acircumstances in your particular case. Ordinar-of stock or securities in a wash sale. wash sale of one block of stock or securitiesily, stocks or securities of one corporation areA wash sale occurs when you sell or trade cannot be used to reduce any gains on identicalnot considered substantially identical to stocksstock or securities at a loss and within 30 days blocks sold the same day.or securities of another corporation. However,before or after the sale you:
they may be substantially identical in some• Buy substantially identical stock or securi- Example. During 2001, you bought 100cases. For example, in a reorganization, theties, shares of X stock on each of three occasions.stocks and securities of the predecessor and• Acquire substantially identical stock or se- You paid $158 a share for the first block of 100successor corporations may be substantiallycurities in a fully taxable trade, or shares, $100 a share for the second block, andidentical. $95 a share for the third block. On December 23,• Acquire a contract or option to buy sub- Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor- 2006, you sold 300 shares of X stock for $125 astantially identical stock or securities. poration are not ordinarily considered substan- share. On January 6, 2007, you bought 250tially identical to the common stock of the same shares of identical X stock. You cannot deductcorporation. However, where the bonds or pre-If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora- the loss of $33 a share on the first block becauseferred stock are convertible into common stocktion you control buys substantially identical within 30 days after the date of sale you boughtof the same corporation, the relative values,stock, you also have a wash sale. 250 identical shares of X stock. In addition, youprice changes, and other circumstances may cannot reduce the gain realized on the sale ofIf your loss was disallowed because of the make these bonds or preferred stock and the the second and third blocks of stock by this loss.wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to the common stock substantially identical. For ex-cost of the new stock or securities. The result is Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to aample, preferred stock is substantially identicalyour basis in the new stock or securities. This dealer in stock or securities if the loss is from ato the common stock if the preferred stock:adjustment postpones the loss deduction until transaction made in the ordinary course of busi-• Is convertible into common stock,the disposition of the new stock or securities. ness.• Has the same voting rights as the com-Your holding period for the new stock or securi- mon stock, Short sales. The wash sale rules apply to aties begins on the same day as the holding
• Is subject to the same dividend restric- loss realized on a short sale if you sell, or enterperiod of the stock or securities sold.
tions, into another short sale of, substantially identical
• Trades at prices that do not vary signifi-Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X stock stock or securities within a period beginning 30
cantly from the conversion ratio, andfor $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 and days before the date the short sale is complete
within 30 days from the sale you buy 100 shares • Is unrestricted as to convertibility. and ending 30 days after that date.
For purposes of the wash sale rules, a shortof the same stock for $800. Because you bought
sale is considered complete on the date thesubstantially identical stock, you cannot deduct More or less stock bought than sold. If the short sale is entered into, if:your loss of $250 on the sale. However, you add number of shares of substantially identical stockthe disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of the • On that date, you own stock or securitiesor securities you buy within 30 days before ornew stock, $800, to obtain your basis in the new identical to those sold short (or by thatafter the sale is either more or less than thestock, which is $1,050. date you enter into a contract or option tonumber of shares you sold, you must determine acquire that stock or those securities), andthe particular shares to which the wash saleExample 2. You are an employee of a cor- • You later deliver the stock or securities torules apply. You do this by matching the sharesporation that has an incentive pay plan. Under close the short sale.bought with an equal number of the shares sold.this plan, you are given 10 shares of the corpo- Match the shares bought in the same order thatration’s stock as a bonus award. You include the Otherwise, a short sale is not consideredyou bought them, beginning with the first sharesfair market value of the stock in your gross complete until the property is delivered to closebought. The shares or securities so matched areincome as additional pay. You later sell these the sale.subject to the wash sale rules.shares at a loss. If you receive another bonus This treatment also applies to losses from
award of substantially identical stock within 30 the sale, exchange, or termination of a securitiesExample 1. You bought 100 shares of M
days of the sale, you cannot deduct your loss on futures contract to sell.stock on September 24, 2005, for $5,000. On
the sale. December 18, 2005, you bought 50 shares of
Example. On June 2, you buy 100 shares ofsubstantially identical stock for $2,750. On De-
stock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares ofOptions and futures contracts. The wash cember 26, 2005, you bought 25 shares of sub-
the stock for $750 on October 6. On October 7,sale rules apply to losses from sales or trades of stantially identical stock for $1,125. On January
you buy 100 shares of the same stock for $750.contracts and options to acquire or sell stock or 6, 2006, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares you
You close the short sale on November 17 bysecurities. They do not apply to losses from bought in September. You have a $1,000 loss
delivering the shares bought on June 2. Yousales or trades of commodity futures contracts on the sale. However, because you bought 75
cannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750)and foreign currencies. See Coordination of shares of substantially identical stock within 30
because the date of entering into the short saleLoss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules under days before the sale, you cannot deduct the loss
(October 6) is considered the date the sale isStraddles, later, for information about the tax ($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the loss
complete for wash sale purposes and youtreatment of losses on the disposition of posi- ($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of the
bought substantially identical stock within 30tions in a straddle. 50 shares bought on December 18, 2005, is
days from that date.increased by two-thirds (50 ÷ 75) of the $750Securities futures contract to sell. Losses disallowed loss. The new basis of those shares Residual interests in a REMIC. The washfrom the sale, exchange, or termination of a is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25 sale rules generally will apply to the sale of yoursecurities futures contract to sell generally are shares bought on December 26, 2005, is in- residual interest in a real estate mortgage in-treated in the same manner as losses from the creased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125 vestment conduit (REMIC) if, during the periodclosing of a short sale, discussed later in this + $250). beginning 6 months before the sale of the inter-section under Short sales.
est and ending 6 months after that sale, youWarrants. The wash sale rules apply if you Example 2. You bought 100 shares of M acquire any residual interest in any REMIC orsell common stock at a loss and, at the same stock on September 24, 2005. On February 3, any interest in a taxable mortgage pool that istime, buy warrants for common stock of the 2006, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss. comparable to a residual interest. REMICs aresame corporation. But if you sell warrants at a On each of the 4 days from February 10-13, discussed in chapter 1.loss and, at the same time, buy common stock in 2006, you bought 50 shares of substantially
the same corporation, the wash sale rules apply identical stock. You cannot deduct your $1,000 How to report. Report a wash sale or trade on
only if the warrants and stock are considered loss. You must add half the disallowed loss line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040),
substantially identical, as discussed next. ($500) to the basis of the 50 shares bought on whichever is appropriate. Show the full amount
Page 56 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 57 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the loss in parentheses in column (f). On the equity options, see Section 1256 Contracts If an option requiring you to buy or sell prop-
Marked to Market, earlier. erty is exercised, see Writers of calls and puts ,next line, enter “Wash Sale” in column (a) and
Gain or loss from the sale or trade of an later.the amount of the loss not allowed as a positive
option to buy or sell property that is a capitalamount in column (f). Section 1256 contract options. Gain or lossasset in your hands, or would be if you acquired
is recognized on the exercise of an option on ait, is capital gain or loss. If the property is not, or
section 1256 contract. Section 1256 contractswould not be, a capital asset, the gain or loss isSecurities Futures Contracts are defined under Section 1256 Contractsordinary gain or loss.
Marked to Market, earlier.A securities futures contract is a contract of sale
Example 1. You purchased an option to buyfor future delivery of a single security or of a Cash settlement option. A cash settlement100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The stocknarrow-based security index. option is treated as an option to buy or sellincreases in value and you sell the option forGain or loss from the contract generally will property. A cash settlement option is any optionmore than you paid for it. Your gain is capitalbe treated in a manner similar to gain or loss that on exercise is settled in, or could be settledgain because the stock underlying the option in, cash or property other than the underlyingfrom transactions in the underlying security. This would have been a capital asset in your hands. property.means gain or loss from the sale, exchange, or
termination of the contract will generally have Example 2. The facts are the same as in How to report. Gain or loss from the closing orthe same character as gain or loss from transac- Example 1, except that the stock decreases in expiration of an option that is not a section 1256tions in the property to which the contract re- value and you sell the option for less than you contract, but that is a capital asset in your hands,lates. Any capital gain or loss on a sale, paid for it. Your loss is a capital loss. is reported on Schedule D (Form 1040).
exchange, or termination of a contract to sell If an option you purchased expired, enter theOption not exercised. If you have a loss be-property will be considered short-term, regard- expiration date in column (c) and enter “Expired”cause you did not exercise an option to buy orless of how long you hold the contract. These in column (d).sell, you are considered to have sold or tradedcontracts are not section 1256 contracts (unless If an option that you wrote expired, enter thethe option on the date that it expired.they are dealer securities futures contracts). expiration date in column (b) and enter “Expired”
in column (e).Writer of option. If you write (grant) an option,
Options how you report your gain or loss depends on
whether it was exercised.
Calls and PutsOptions are generally subject to the rules de- If you are not in the business of writing op-
scribed in this section. If the option is part of a tions and an option you write on stocks, securi- Calls and puts are options on securities and arestraddle, the loss deferral rules covered later ties, commodities, or commodity futures is not covered by the rules just discussed for options.under Straddles may also apply. For special exercised (or repurchased), the amount you re- The following are specific applications of theserules that apply to nonequity options and dealer ceive is a short-term capital gain. rules to holders and writers of options that are
bought, sold, or “closed out” in transactions on aTable 4-1. Puts and Calls national securities exchange, such as the Chi-
cago Board Options Exchange. (But see Section
1256 Contracts Marked to Market , earlier, forPuts special rules that may apply to nonequity op-
tions and dealer equity options.) These rules areWhen a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer: also presented in Table 4-1.
Calls and puts are issued by writers (grant-Is exercised Reduce your amount realized from Reduce your basis in the stock you ors) to holders for cash premiums. They aresale of the underlying stock by the buy by the amount you received for ended by exercise, closing transaction, or lapse.cost of the put. the put.
A “call option” is the right to buy from the
writer of the option, at any time before a speci-Expires Report the cost of the put as a capital Report the amount you received for
fied future date, a stated number of shares ofloss on the date it expires.* the put as a short-term capital gain.
stock at a specified price. Conversely, a “put
option” is the right to sell to the writer, at any time
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you
cost of the put and the amount you buy back the put, report the before a specified future date, a stated number
receive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you of shares at a specified price.
pay and the amount you received for
the put as a short-term capital gain
Holders of calls and puts. If you buy a call or
or loss.) a put, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capital
expenditure.
If you sell the call or the put before you
Calls exercise it, the difference between its cost and
the amount you receive for it is either a
When a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer: long-term or short-term capital gain or loss, de-
pending on how long you held it.
Is exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis Increase your amount realized on If the option expires, its cost is either ain the stock purchased. sale of the stock by the amount you long-term or short-term capital loss, dependingreceived for the call. on your holding period, which ends on the expi-
ration date.
Expires Report the cost of the call as a capital Report the amount you received for If you exercise a call, add its cost to the basisloss on the date it expires.* the call as a short-term capital gain.
of the stock you bought. If you exercise a put,
reduce your amount realized on the sale of the
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you
underlying stock by the cost of the put whencost of the call and the amount you buy back the call, report the
figuring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on thereceive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you
pay and the amount you received for sale of the underlying stock is long term or short
the call as a short-term capital gain term depending on your holding period for the
or loss.) underlying stock.
Put option as short sale. Buying a put*See Holders of calls and puts and Writers of calls and puts in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or loss
is short term or long term. option is generally treated as a short sale, and
the exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 57

Page 58 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
closing of the short sale. See Short Sales, ear- gain or loss is short term or long term de- under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Mar-
lier. If you have held the underlying stock for 1 pending upon the holding period of the ket, earlier.
year or less at the time you buy the put, any stock.
gain on the exercise, sale, or expiration of the 4. Section 1256 contracts. The facts are the Offsetting position. This is a position that
put is a short-term capital gain. The same is same as in (1), except the options were substantially reduces any risk of loss you may
true if you buy the underlying stock after you nonequity options, subject to the rules for have from holding another position. However, if
buy the put but before its exercise, sale, or section 1256 contracts. If you were a buyer a position is part of a straddle that is not an
expiration. Your holding period for the underly- of the options, you would recognize a identified straddle (described later), do not treat
ing stock begins on the earliest of: short-term capital loss of $1,600, and a it as offsetting to a position that is part of an
• The date you dispose of the stock, long-term capital loss of $2,400. If you identified straddle.
were a writer of the options, you would• The date you exercise the put, Presumed offsetting positions. Two orrecognize a short-term capital gain of• The date you sell the put, or more positions will be presumed to be offset-$1,600, and a long-term capital gain of• The date the put expires. ting if:$2,400. See Section 1256 Contracts
• The positions are established in the sameMarked to Market, earlier, for more infor-
personal property (or in a contract for thisWriters of calls and puts. If you write (grant) mation.
property), and the value of one or morea call or a put, do not include the amount you
positions varies inversely with the value ofreceive for writing it in your income at the time
one or more of the other positions,Straddlesof receipt. Carry it in a deferred account until:
• The positions are in the same personal• Your obligation expires, This section discusses the loss deferral rules property, even if this property is in a sub-• You sell, in the case of a call, or buy, in that apply to the sale or other disposition of stantially changed form, and the positions’the case of a put, the underlying stock positions in a straddle. These rules do not apply values vary inversely as described in thewhen the option is exercised, or to the straddles described under Exceptions, first condition,• You engage in a closing transaction. later. • The positions are in debt instruments with
A straddle is any set of offsetting positions on a similar maturity, and the positions’ val-If your obligation expires, the amount you re- personal property. For example, a straddle may ues vary inversely as described in the firstceived for writing the call or put is short-term consist of a purchased option to buy and a condition,capital gain. purchased option to sell on the same number of • The positions are sold or marketed as off-If a call you write is exercised and you sell shares of the security, with the same exercise setting positions, whether or not the posi-the underlying stock, increase your amount real- price and period. tions are called a straddle, spread,ized on the sale of the stock by the amount you
butterfly, or any similar name, orreceived for the call when figuring your gain or Personal property. This is any property of aloss. The gain or loss is long term or short term • The aggregate margin requirement for thetype that is actively traded. It includes stockdepending on your holding period of the stock. positions is lower than the sum of the mar-options and contracts to buy stock, but generally
gin requirements for each position if heldIf a put you write is exercised and you buy does not include stock.
separately.the underlying stock, decrease your basis in the
Straddle rules for stock. Although stockstock by the amount you received for the put.
is generally excluded from the definition of per- Related persons. To determine if two orYour holding period for the stock begins on the
sonal property when applying the straddle more positions are offsetting, you will be treateddate you buy it, not on the date you wrote the
rules, it is included in the following two situa- as holding any position that your spouse holdsput.
tions. during the same period. If you take into accountIf you enter into a closing transaction by
part or all of the gain or loss for a position held by1. The stock is of a type which is activelypaying an amount equal to the value of the call
a flowthrough entity, such as a partnership ortraded and at least one of the offsettingor put at the time of the payment, the difference
trust, you are also considered to hold that posi-positions is a position on that stock or sub-between the amount you pay and the amount
tion.stantially similar or related property.you receive for the call or put is a short-term
capital gain or loss. 2. The stock is in a corporation formed or
availed of to take positions in personal
Examples of non-dealer transactions. Loss Deferral Rulesproperty that offset positions taken by any
shareholder.1. Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is- Generally, you can deduct a loss on the disposi-sued on April 8, 2006, for $4,000. These tion of one or more positions only to the extentequity options expired in December 2006, Note. For positions established before Oc- that the loss is more than any unrecognized gainwithout being exercised. If you were a tober 22, 2004, condition (1) above does not you have on offsetting positions. Unused lossesholder (buyer) of the options, you would apply. Instead, personal property includes are treated as sustained in the next tax year.recognize a short-term capital loss of stock if condition (2) above applies or the stock
$4,000. If you were a writer of the options, was part of a straddle in which at least one of Unrecognized gain. This is:you would recognize a short-term capital the offsetting positions was: • The amount of gain you would have hadgain of $4,000. • An option to buy or sell the stock or sub- on an open position if you had sold it on2. Closing transaction. The facts are the stantially identical stock or securities, the last business day of the tax year at itssame as in (1), except that on May 10, • A securities futures contract on the stock fair market value, and2006, the options were sold for $6,000. If or substantially identical stock or securi- • The amount of gain realized on a positionyou were the holder of the options who ties, or if, as of the end of the tax year, gain hassold them, you would recognize a • A position on substantially similar or re- been realized, but not recognized.short-term capital gain of $2,000. If you lated property (other than stock).were the writer of the options and you
bought them back, you would recognize a Example. On July 1, 2006, you entered into
Position. A position is an interest in personalshort-term capital loss of $2,000. a straddle. On December 16, 2006, you closed
property. A position can be a forward or futures one position of the straddle at a loss of $15,000.3. Exercise. The facts are the same as in (1),
contract, or an option. On December 31, 2006, the end of your taxexcept that the options were exercised on
year, you have an unrecognized gain of $12,750May 27, 2006. The buyer adds the cost of An interest in a loan that is denominated in a
in the offsetting open position. On your 2006the options to the basis of the stock bought foreign currency is treated as a position in that
return, your deductible loss on the position youthrough the exercise of the options. The currency. For the straddle rules, foreign cur-
closed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750).writer adds the amount received from writ- rency for which there is an active interbank mar-
You must carry forward to 2007 the unused lossing the options to the amount realized from ket is considered to be actively-traded personal
of $12,750.selling the stock to figure gain or loss. The property. See also Foreign currency contract
Page 58 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 59 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note. If you physically settle a position es- Also, the losses from positions are deferred until not less than an amount that is $10 be low the
tablished after October 21, 2004, that is part of a applicable stock price.you dispose of all the positions in the straddle.
straddle by delivering property to which the posi- The rule discussed above for increasing the Example. On May 13, 2006, you held XYZtion relates (and you would realize a loss on that basis of each of the identified positions does not stock and you wrote an XYZ/September callposition if you terminated it), you are treated as apply. option with a strike price of $120. The closinghaving terminated the position for its fair market Qualified covered call options and op- price of one share of XYZ stock on May 12,value immediately before the settlement and as tioned stock. A straddle is not subject to the 2006, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/having sold the property used to physically settle September call options offered on May 13,loss deferral rules for straddles if both of thethe position at its fair market value. 2006, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125,following are true.
$130, and $135. Because the option has a termExceptions. The loss deferral rules do not • All of the offsetting positions consist of one
of more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, theapply to: or more qualified covered call options and
second highest strike price that is less thanthe stock to be purchased from you under1. Identified positions established after Octo- $130.25, the applicable stock price. The callthe options.ber 21, 2004, comprising an identified option is a deep-in-the-money option because• The straddle is not part of a larger strad-straddle, its strike price is lower than the LQB. Therefore,dle.2. Certain straddles consisting of qualified the option is not a qualified covered call option,covered call options and the stock to be and the loss deferral rules apply if you closed outpurchased under the options, But see Special year-end rule , later, for an ex- the option or the stock at a loss during the year.3. Hedging transactions, described earlier ception.
Capital loss on qualified covered call op-under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
A qualified covered call option is any option tions. If you hold stock and you write a quali-Market, and
you grant to purchase stock you hold (or stock fied covered call option on that stock with a4. Straddles consisting entirely of section you acquire in connection with granting the op- strike price less than the applicable stock price,1256 contracts, as described earlier under
tion), but only if all of the following are true. treat any loss from the option as long-term capi-Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market
• The option is traded on a national securi- tal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gain(but see Identified straddle, next).
ties exchange or other market approved on the sale or exchange of the stock would be
by the Secretary of the Treasury. treated as long-term capital gain. The holdingNote. For positions established before Oc- period of the stock does not include any period• The option is granted more than 30 daystober 22, 2004, the loss deferral rules also do during which you are the writer of the option.before its expiration date.not apply to a straddle that is an identified strad-
For covered call options entered into afterdle at the end of the tax year. Special year-end rule. The loss deferral
July 28, 2002, the option is granted not rules for straddles apply if all of the followingIdentified straddle. Any straddle (other more than 12 months before its expiration are true.than a straddle described in (2) or (3) above) is date or satisfies term limitation and quali- • The qualified covered call options arean identified straddle if both of the following fied benchmark requirements published in closed or the stock is disposed of at a lossconditions exist. the Internal Revenue Bulletin. during any tax year.• You clearly identified the straddle on your • The option is not a deep-in-the-money op- • Gain on disposition of the stock or gain onrecords before the close of the day on tion. the options is includible in gross income inwhich you acquired it. • You are not an options dealer who granted a later tax year.• The straddle is not part of a larger strad- the option in connection with your activity • The stock or options were held less thandle. of dealing in options. 30 days after the closing of the options or
• Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or the disposition of the stock.If there is a loss from any identified position in loss.an identified straddle, you must increase the
basis of each of the identified positions that How To Report Gains A deep-in-the-money option is an option withoffset the loss position in the identified straddle. and Losses (Form 6781)a strike price lower than the lowest qualifiedThe increase is the loss multiplied by a fraction. benchmark (LQB). The strike price is the price atThe numerator of the fraction is the unrecog- Report each position (whether or not it is part ofwhich the option is to be exercised. Strike pricesnized gain (if any) on the offsetting position and a straddle) on which you have unrecognizedare listed in the financial section of many news-the denominator of the fraction is the total unrec- gain at the end of the tax year and the amount ofpapers. The LQB is the highest available strikeognized gain on all positions that offset the loss this unrecognized gain in Part III of Form 6781.price that is less than the applicable stock price.position in the identified straddle. For this pur- Use Part II of Form 6781 to figure your gains andHowever, the LQB for an option with a term ofpose, your unrecognized gain is the excess of losses on straddles before entering thesemore than 90 days and a strike price of morethe fair market value of the identified position amounts on Schedule D (Form 1040). Include athan $50 is the second highest available strikethat is part of an identified straddle at the time copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.price that is less than the applicable stock price.you incur a loss on another identified position in
the identified straddle, over the fair market value The availability of strike prices for equity op-
of that position when you identified it as a posi- tions with flexible terms does not affect the de-
Coordination of Loss Deferral
tion in the straddle. termination of the LQB for an option that is not Rules and Wash Sale RulesNeither you nor anyone else can take into an equity option with flexible terms.
account any loss on an identified position that is Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to anyThe applicable stock price for any stock for
part of an identified straddle to the extent that disposition of a position or positions of a strad-which an option has been granted is:
the loss increases the basis of any identified dle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, then1. The closing price of the stock on the mostpositions that offset the loss position in the iden- apply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only ifrecent day on which that stock was tradedtified straddle. stocks or securities make up a position that isbefore the date on which the option was part of the straddle. If a position in the straddlegranted, orNote. For positions established before Oc- does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2.2. The opening price of the stock on the daytober 22, 2004, identified straddles have to
on which the option was granted, but onlymeet two additional conditions: Rule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-if that price is greater than 110% of the1. All of the original positions that you identify sition of shares of stock or securities that makeprice determined in (1).were acquired on the same day. up the positions of a straddle if, within a period
If the applicable stock price is $25 or less, the beginning 30 days before the date of that dispo-2. All of the positions included in item (1)
LQB will be treated as not less than 85% of the sition and ending 30 days after that date, youwere disposed of on the same day during
applicable stock price. If the applicable stock acquired substantially identical stock or securi-the tax year, or none of the positions were
price is $150 or less, the LQB will be treated as ties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to thedisposed of by the end of the tax year.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 59

Page 60 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
following tax year, subject to any further applica- of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi- Holding Period and
tion of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will also tion and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offsetting Loss Treatment Rules
apply if you entered into a contract or option to short position. Under these circumstances, the
The holding period of a position in a straddleacquire the stock or securities within the time entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2006 be-
generally begins no earlier than the date onperiod described above. See Loss carryover , cause there is a total of $10 of unrecognized
which the straddle ends (the date you no longerlater, for more information about how to treat the gain in the successor long position and offset- hold an offsetting position). This rule does notloss in the following tax year. ting short position. apply to any position you held more than 1 year
Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se- before you established the straddle. But seeExample 3. The facts are the same as incurities, this loss treatment will not apply to any Exceptions, later.Example 1, except that at year end you have $8losses you sustained in the ordinary course of
of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-your business. Example. On March 6, 2005, you acquiredtion and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offsetting gold. On January 5, 2006, you entered into anshort position. Under these circumstances, $8 ofExample. You are not a dealer in stock or offsetting short gold forward contract (nonregu-the total $10 realized loss will be disallowed forsecurities. On December 2, 2006, you bought lated futures contract). On April 1, 2006, you2006 because there is $8 of unrecognized gainstock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off- disposed of the short gold forward contract at no
in the successor long position.setting put option. On December 13, 2006, there gain or loss. On April 8, 2006, you sold the gold
was $20 of unrealized gain in the put option and at a gain. Because the gold had been held for 1
you sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By Decem- year or less before the offsetting short positionLoss carryover. If you have a disallowed lossber 16, the value of the put option had declined, was entered into, the holding period for the goldthat resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2,eliminating all unrealized gain in the position. On begins on April 1, 2006, the date the straddleyou must carry it over to the next tax year andDecember 16, you bought a second XX stock ended. Gain recognized on the sale of the goldapply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss.position that is substantially identical to the XX will be treated as short-term capital gain.For example, a loss disallowed in 2005 understock you sold on December 13. At the end of Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2006, unless thethe year there is no unrecognized gain in the put Loss treatment. Treat the loss on the sale ofsubstantially identical stock or securities (whichoption or in the XX stock. Under these circum- one or more positions (the loss position) of acaused the loss to be disallowed in 2005) werestances, the $20 loss will be disallowed for 2006 straddle as a long-term capital loss if both ofdisposed of during 2006. In addition, the carry-under Rule 1 because, within a period beginning the following are true.over loss will not be allowed in 2006 if Rule 1 or30 days before December 13, and ending 30 • You held (directly or indirectly) one orRule 2 disallows it.days after that date, you bought stock substan- more offsetting positions to the loss posi-tially identical to the XX stock you sold. tion on the date you entered into the lossExample. The facts are the same as in the
position.example under Rule 1 above. On December 30,Rule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dis- • You would have treated all gain or loss on2007, you sell the second XX stock at a $20 lossposition of less than all of the positions of a one or more of the straddle positions asand there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the putstraddle (your loss position) to the extent that long-term capital gain or loss if you hadoption. Under these circumstances, you cannotany unrecognized gain at the close of the tax sold these positions on the day you en-deduct in 2007 either the $20 loss disallowed inyear in one or more of the following positions is tered into the loss position.2006 or the $20 loss you incurred for the De-more than the amount of any loss disallowed
cember 30, 2007, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 doesunder Rule 1. Mixed straddles. Special rules apply to anot apply because the substantially identical XX• Successor positions. loss position that is part of a mixed straddlestock was sold during the year and no substan-• Offsetting positions to the loss position. and that is a non-section 1256 position. Atially identical stock or securities were bought• Offsetting positions to any successor posi- mixed straddle is a straddle:within the 61-day period. However, Rule 2 doestion. • That is not part of a larger straddle,apply because there is $40 of unrecognized gain • In which all positions are held as capitalin the put option, an offsetting position to the lossSuccessor position. A successor position assets,positions.is a position that is or was at any time offsetting • In which at least one (but not all) of theto a second position, if both of the following Capital loss carryover. If the sale of a loss positions is a section 1256 contract, andconditions are met. position would have resulted in a capital loss, • For which the mixed straddle election• The second position was offsetting to the you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss on (Election A, discussed later) has not beenloss position that was sold. the date it is allowed, even if you would treat the made.
• The successor position is entered into dur- gain or loss on any successor positions as ordi-
ing a period beginning 30 days before, nary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of a Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital lossand ending 30 days after, the sale of the loss position (in the case of section 1256 con- and 40% short-term capital loss, if all of theloss position. tracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-term following conditions apply.capital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss, • Gain or loss from the sale of one or moreyou treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 rule,Example 1. On November 1, 2006, you en- of the straddle positions that are sectioneven if you would treat any gain or loss on anytered into offsetting long and short positions in 1256 contracts would be considered gainsuccessor positions as 100% long-term ornon-section 1256 contracts. On November 12, or loss from the sale or exchange of ashort-term capital gain or loss.2006, you disposed of the long position at a $10 capital asset.loss. On November 14, you entered into a new • The sale of no position in the straddle,long position (successor position) that is offset- Exceptions. The rules for coordinating strad- other than a section 1256 contract, wouldting to the retained short position, but that is not dle losses and wash sales do not apply to the result in a long-term capital gain or loss.substantially identical to the long position dis- following loss situations. • You have not made a straddle-by-straddleposed of on November 12. You held both posi- • Loss on the sale of one or more positions identification election (Election B) or mixedtions through year end, at which time there was in a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans- straddle account election (Election C),$10 of unrecognized gain in the successor long both discussed later.actions are described under Section 1256position and no unrecognized gain in the offset- Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.)ting short position. Under these circumstances,
• Loss on the sale of a loss position in a Example. On March 1, 2006, you enteredthe entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2006
mixed straddle account. (See Mixed strad- into a long gold forward contract. On July 15,because there is $10 of unrecognized gain in the
dle account (Election C), later.) 2006, you entered into an offsetting short goldsuccessor long position.
• Loss on the sale of a position that is part regulated futures contract. You did not make an
of a straddle consisting only of sectionExample 2. The facts are the same as in election to offset gains and losses from positions
1256 contracts.Example 1, except that at year end you have $4 in a mixed straddle. On August 9, 2006, you
Page 60 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 61 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
disposed of the long forward contract at a loss. one of the three elections. Use Form 6781 to “total annual account net gain or l oss” is deter-
Because the gold forward contract was part of a indicate your election choice by checking box A, mined by netting the annual acco unt amounts
mixed straddle and the disposition of this B, or C, whichever applies. for all mixed straddle accounts that you had
non-section 1256 position would not result in established.Straddle-by-straddle identification elec-long-term capital loss, the loss recognized on The net amounts keep their long-term ortion (Election B). Under this election, youthe termination of the gold forward contract will short-term classification. However, no moremust clearly identify each position that is partbe treated as a 60% long-term and 40% than 50% of the total annual account net gain forof the identified mixed straddle by the earliershort-term capital loss. the tax year can be treated as long-term capitalof: gain. Any remaining gain is treated asExceptions. The special holding period and • The close of the day the identified mixed short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40%loss treatment for straddle positions does not straddle is established, or of the total annual account net loss can beapply to positions that: • The time the position is disposed of. treated as short-term capital loss. Any remaining• Constitute part of a hedging transaction, loss is treated as long-term capital loss.
• Are included in a straddle consisting only The election to establish one or more mixedIf you dispose of a position in the mixed straddleof section 1256 contracts, or straddle accounts for each tax year must bebefore the end of the day on which the straddle• Are included in a mixed straddle account made by the due date (without extensions) ofis established, this identification must be made(Election C), discussed later. your income tax return for the immediately pre-by the time you dispose of the position. You are
ceding tax year. If you begin trading in a newpresumed to have properly identified a mixed
class of activities during a tax year, you muststraddle if independent verification is used.Mixed Straddle Elections make the election for the new class of activitiesThe basic tax treatment of gain or loss under by the later of either:If you disposed of a position in a mixed straddle this election depends on which side of the strad-and make one of the elections described in the • The due date of your return for the imme-dle produced the total net gain or loss. If the netfollowing discussions, report your gain or loss as diately preceding tax year (without exten-gain or loss from the straddle is due to theindicated in those discussions. If you do not sions), orsection 1256 contracts, gain or loss is treated asmake any of the elections, report your gain or • 60 days after you entered into the first60% long-term capital gain or loss and 40%loss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed of mixed straddle in the new class of activi-short-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gainthe section 1256 component of the straddle, ties.or loss in Part I of Form 6781 and identify theenter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) or election by checking box B.your gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of Form You make the election on Form 6781 byIf the net gain or loss is due to the6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11 or 13 checking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in-non-section 1256 positions, gain or loss is(Part II). come tax return for the immediately precedingshort-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies.Mixed straddle election (Election A). You or loss on Part I of Schedule D and identify the Report the annual account net gain or loss fromcan elect out of the marked to market rules, election. a mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781.discussed under Section 1256 Contracts For the specific application of the rules of this In addition, you must attach a statement to FormMarked to Market , earlier, for all section 1256 election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-3T. 6781 specifically designating the class of activi-contracts that are part of a mixed straddle. In- ties for which a mixed straddle account is estab-stead, the gain and loss rules for straddles will Example. On April 1, you entered into a lished.apply to these contracts. However, if you make non-section 1256 position and an offsetting sec- For the specific application of the rules of thisthis election for an option on a section 1256 tion 1256 contract. You also made a valid elec- election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-4T.contract, the gain or loss treatment discussed tion to treat this straddle as an identified mixedearlier under Options will apply, subject to the Interest expense and carrying charges re-straddle. On April 8, you disposed of thegain and loss rules for straddles. lating to mixed straddle account positions.non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and theYou can make this election if: You cannot deduct interest and carryingsection 1256 contract at an $800 gain. Under
charges that are allocable to any positions held• At least one (but not all) of the positions is these circumstances, the $600 loss on the
in a mixed straddle account. Treat thesea section 1256 contract, and non-section 1256 position will be offset against
charges as an adjustment to the annual account• Each position forming part of the straddle the $800 gain on the section 1256 contract. The
net gain or loss and allocate them proportion-is clearly identified as being part of that net gain of $200 from the straddle will be treated
ately between the net short-term and the netstraddle on the day the first section 1256 as 60% long-term capital gain and 40%
long-term capital gains or losses.contract forming part of the straddle is ac- short-term capital gain because it is due to the
To find the amount of interest and carryingquired. section 1256 contract.
charges that is not deductible and that must be
Mixed straddle account (Election C). You added to the annual account net gain or loss,If you make this election, it will apply for all may elect to establish one or more accounts for apply the rules described earlier to the positionslater years as well. It cannot be revoked without determining gains and losses from all positions held in the mixed straddle account. See Interestthe consent of the IRS. If you made this election, in a mixed straddle. You must establish a sepa- expense and carrying charges on straddles  incheck box A of Form 6781. Do not report the rate mixed straddle account for each separate chapter 3 under Nondeductible Expense.section 1256 component in Part I. designated class of activities.
Other elections. You can avoid the 60% Generally, you must determine gain or loss Sales of Stock to ESOPslong-term capital loss treatment required for a for each position in a mixed straddle account as or Certain Cooperativesnon-section 1256 loss position that is part of a of the close of each business day of the tax year.mixed straddle, described earlier, if you choose You offset the net section 1256 contracts If you sold qualified securities held for at least 3either of the two following elections to offset against the net non-section 1256 positions to years to an employee stock ownership plangains and losses for these positions. determine the “daily account net gain or loss.” (ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative,• Election B. Make a separate identification If the daily account amount is due to you may be able to elect to postpone all or partof the positions of each mixed straddle for non-section 1256 positions, the amount is of the gain on the sale if you bought qualifiedwhich you are electing this treatment (the treated as short-term capital gain or loss. If the replacement property (certain securities) withinstraddle-by-straddle identification method). daily account amount is due to section 1256 the period that began 3 months before the sale• Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac- contracts, the amount is treated as 60% and ended 12 months after the sale. If you makecount for a class of activities for which long-term and 40% short-term capital gain or the election, you must recognize gain on thegains and losses will be recognized and loss. sale only to the extent the proceeds from theoffset on a periodic basis. sale exceed the cost of the qualified replace-On the last business day of the tax year, you
ment property.determine the “annual account net gain or loss”
These two elections are alternatives to the for each account by netting the daily account You must reduce the basis of the replac e-
mixed straddle election. You can choose only amounts for that account for the tax year. The ment property by any postponed gain. If you
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 61

Page 62 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
dispose of any replacement property, you may More information. For details, see section line directly below the line on which you reported
1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Regula- the gain. Enter the amount of gain postponed inhave to recognize all of the postponed gain.
tions section 1.1042-1T. column (f). Enter it as a loss (in parentheses).Generally, to qualify for the election the
Also, attach a schedule showing how youESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% of
figured the postponed gain, the name of thethe outstanding stock of the corporation that Rollover of Gain
SSBIC in which you purchased common stockissued the qualified securities. Also, the quali- From Publicly or a partnership interest, the date of thatfied replacement property must have been is- Traded Securities purchase, and your new basis in that SSBICsued by a domestic operating corporation.
stock or partnership interest.You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain You must make the choice to postpone gainHow to make the election. You must make gains from the sale of publicly traded securities. no later than the due date (including extensions)the election no later than the due date (including This means that if you buy certain replacement for filing your tax return for the year in which youextensions) for filing your tax return for the year property and make the choice described in this sold the securities. If your original return wasin which you sold the stock. If your original return section, you postpone part or all of your gain. filed on time, you may make the choice on anwas filed on time, you may make the election on You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis amended return filed no later than 6 monthsan amended return filed no later than 6 months of the replacement property as described in Ba- after the due date of your return (excluding ex-after the due date of your return (excluding ex- sis of replacement property , later. This tensions). Enter “Filed pursuant to sectiontensions). Enter “Filed pursuant to section postpones your gain until the year you dispose 301.9100-2” at the top of the amended return,301.9100-2” at the top of the amended return, of the replacement property. and file it at the same address you used for yourand file it at the same address you used for your You qualify to make this choice if you meet original return.original return. all the following tests. Your choice is revocable with the consent of
• You sell publicly traded securities at aHow to report and postpone gain. Report the IRS.
gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-the entire gain realized on line 8 of Schedule D.
ties traded on an established securitiesTo make the choice to postpone gain, enter Gains on Qualifiedmarket.“Section 1042 election” in column (a) of the line Small Business Stock• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.directly below the line on which you reported the
• During the 60-day period beginning on thegain. Enter in column (f) the amount of the gain This section discusses two provisions of the lawdate of the sale, you buy replacementyou are postponing or expecting to postpone. that may apply to gain from the sale or trade ofproperty. This replacement property mustEnter it as a loss (in parentheses). If the actual qualified small business stock. You may qualifybe either common stock or a partnershippostponed gain is different from the amount you for a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain.interest in a specialized small business in-report, file an amended return. You may be able to exclude part of the gain fromvestment company (SSBIC). This is anyAlso attach the following statements. your income.partnership or corporation licensed by the1. A “statement of election” that indicates you Small Business Administration under sec- Qualified small business stock. This isare making an election under section tion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest- stock that meets all the following tests.1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13, 1. It must be stock in a C corporation.that includes the following information. 1993. 2. It must have been originally issued aftera. A description of the securities sold, the August 10, 1993.date of the sale, the amount realized on Amount of gain recognized. If you make 3. The corporation must have total gross as-the sale, and the adjusted basis of the the choice described in this section, you must sets of $50 million or less at all times aftersecurities. recognize gain only up to the following amount: August 9, 1993, and before it issued theb. The name of the ESOP or cooperative • The amount realized on the sale, minus stock. Its total gross assets immediately af-to which the qualified securities were ter it issued the stock must also be $50• The cost of any common stock or partner-sold. million or less.ship interest in an SSBIC that you boughtc. For a sale that was part of a single, When figuring the corporation’s totalduring the 60-day period beginning on theinterrelated transaction under a prear- gross assets, you must also count the as-date of sale (and did not previously takeranged agreement between taxpayers sets of any predecessor of the corporation.into account on an earlier sale of publiclyinvolving other sales of qualified securi- In addition, you must treat all corporationstraded securities).ties, the names and identifying numbers that are members of the same par-of the other taxpayers under the agree- ent-subsidiary controlled group as one cor-If this amount is less than the amount of yourment and the number of shares sold by poration. gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,the other taxpayers. 4. You must have acquired the stock at itssubject to the limit described next. If this amount original issue, directly or through an under-2. A notarized “statement of purchase” is equal to or more than the amount of your gain, writer, in exchange for money or otherdescribing the qualified replacement prop- you must recognize the full amount of your gain. property (not including stock), or as pay forerty, date of purchase, and the cost of the
Limit on gain postponed. The amount of services provided to the corporation (otherproperty and declaring the property to be
gain you can postpone each year is limited to than services performed as an underwriterqualified replacement property for the qual-
the smaller of: of the stock). In certain cases, your stockified stock you sold. The statement must
may also meet this test if you acquired it• $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married andhave been notarized no later than 30 days
from another person who met this test, orfile a separate return), orafter the purchase. If you have not yet pur-
through a conversion or trade of qualified• $500,000 ($250,000 if you are marriedchased the qualified replacement property,
small business stock that you held.and file a separate return), minus theyou must attach the notarized “statement
5. The corporation must have met the activeamount of gain you postponed for all ear-of purchase” to your income tax return for
business test, defined next, and must havelier years.the year following the election year (or the
been a C corporation during substantiallyelection will not be valid).
all the time you held the stock.3. A verified written statement of the domes- Basis of replacement property. You must 6. Within the period beginning 2 years beforetic corporation whose employees are cov- subtract the amount of postponed gain from the and ending 2 years after the stock wasered by the ESOP acquiring the securities, basis of your replacement property. issued, the corporation cannot haveor of any authorized officer of the coopera-
bought more than a de minimis amount oftive, consenting to the taxes under sec- How to report and postpone gain. Report
its stock from you or a related party.tions 4978 and 4979A of the Internal the entire gain realized from the sale on line 1 or
Revenue Code on certain dispositions, and line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is 7. Within the period beginning 1 year before
prohibited allocations of the stock pur- appropriate. To make the choice to postpone and ending 1 year after the stock was is-
chased by the ESOP or cooperative. gain, enter “SSBIC Rollover” in column (a) of the sued, the corporation cannot have bought
Page 62 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 63 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
more than a de minimis amount of its stock You can make this choice if you meet all Section 1202 Exclusion
the following tests.from anyone, unless the total value of the
You generally can exclude from your income upstock it bought is 5% or less of the total • You buy replacement stock during the
to 50% of your gain from the sale or trade ofvalue of all its stock. 60-day period beginning on the date of the
qualified small business stock held by you forsale.For more information about tests 6 and 7, see more than 5 years. The exclusion can be up to• The replacement stock is qualified smallthe regulations under section 1202 of the Inter- 60% for certain empowerment zone businessbusiness stock.nal Revenue Code. stock. See Empowerment zone business stock,• The replacement stock continues to meet later.the active business requirement for smallActive business test. A corporation meets The eligible gain minus your section 1202business stock for at least the first 6this test for any period of time if, during that exclusion is a 28% rate gain. See Capital Gainmonths after you buy it.period, both the following are true. Tax Rates, later.
• It was an eligible corporation, defined be-
SSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized smallAmount of gain recognized. If you makelow.
business investment company (SSBIC) stockthe choice described in this section, you must• It used at least 80% (by value) of its as-
that you bought as replacement property forrecognize the capital gain only up to the follow-sets in the active conduct of at least one
publicly traded securities you sold at a gain, youing amount:qualified trade or business, defined below. must reduce the basis of the stock by the• The amount realized on the sale, minus
amount of any postponed gain on that earlier• The cost of any qualified small businessException for SSBIC. Any specialized
sale, as explained earlier under Rollover of Gainstock you bought during the 60-day periodsmall business investment company (SSBIC) is From Publicly Traded Securities. But do not re-beginning on the date of sale (and did nottreated as meeting the active business test. An duce your basis by that amount when figuringpreviously take into account on an earlierSSBIC is an eligible corporation that is licensed your section 1202 exclusion.sale of qualified small business stock).to operate under section 301(d) of the Small
Business Investment Act of 1958 as in effect on Limit on eligible gain. The amount of yourMay 13, 1993. If this amount is less than the amount of your gain from the stock of any one issuer that is
capital gain, you can postpone the rest of that eligible for the exclusion in 2006 is limited toEligible corporation. This is any U.S. cor-
gain. If this amount equals or is more than the the greater of:poration other than:
amount of your capital gain, you must recognize • Ten times your basis in all qualified stock• A Domestic International Sales Corpora-
the full amount of your gain. of the issuer that you sold or exchangedtion (DISC) or a former DISC,
during the year, or• A corporation that has made, or whose Basis of replacement stock. You must sub- • $10 million ($5 million for married individu-subsidiary has made, an election under tract the amount of postponed gain from the als filing separately) minus the amount ofsection 936 of the Internal Revenue Code, basis of your replacement stock. gain from the stock of the same issuer that• A regulated investment company,
you used to figure your exclusion in earlierHolding period of replacement stock. Your• A real estate investment trust (REIT), years.holding period for the replacement stock in-• A real estate mortgage investment conduit
cludes your holding period for the stock sold,(REMIC), except for the purpose of applying the 6-month How to report gain. Report the entire gain• A financial asset securitization investment holding period requirement for choosing to roll realized from the sale on Schedule D (Formtrust (FASIT), or over the gain on its sale. 1040), line 8, column (f). Directly below the line• A cooperative.
on which you report the gain, enter “SectionPass-through entity. A pass-through entity (a
1202 exclusion” in column (a) and enter thepartnership, S corporation, or mutual fund orQualified trade or business. This is any
amount of the allowable exclusion in column (f).other regulated investment company) also maytrade or business other than:
Enter it as a loss (in parentheses). If you aremake the choice to postpone gain. The benefit of• One involving services performed in the completing line 18 of Schedule D, enter as athe postponed gain applies to your share of thefields of health, law, engineering, architec- positive number the amount of the exclusion onentity’s postponed gain if you held an interest inture, accounting, actuarial science, per- line 2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in thethe entity for the entire period the entity held theforming arts, consulting, athletics, financial Schedule D instructions. But if you excludedstock.services, or brokerage services, 60% of the gain, enter 2/3 of the exclusion.If a pass-through entity sold qualified small• One whose principal asset is the reputa- business stock held for more than 6 months andtion or skill of one or more employees, More information. For information about ad-you held an interest in the entity for the entire• Any banking, insurance, financing, leas- ditional requirements that may apply, see sec-period the entity held the stock, you also maying, investing, or similar business, tion 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code.choose to postpone gain if you, rather than the• Any farming business (including the busi- pass-through entity, buy the replacement stock Empowerment zone business stock. Youness of raising or harvesting trees), within the 60-day period. can exclude up to 60% of your gain if you meet• Any business involving the production or
How to report gain. Report the entire gain all of the following additional requirements.extraction of products for which percent-
realized from the sale on line 1 or line 8 ofage depletion can be claimed, or 1. You sell or trade stock in a corporation thatSchedule D (Form 1040), whichever is appropri- qualifies as an empowerment zone busi-• Any business of operating a hotel, motel, ate. To make the choice to postpone the gain, ness during substantially all of the time yourestaurant, or similar business. enter “Section 1045 Rollover” in column (a) of held the stock, andthe line directly below the line on which you 2. You acquired the stock after December 21,Rollover of Gain reported the gain. Enter the amount of gain 2000.postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (in
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capital parentheses).
gain from the sale of qualified small business Condition (1) will still be met if the corporationYou must make the choice to postpone gain
stock held more than 6 months. This means that, ceased to qualify after the 5-year period thatno later than the due date (including extensions)
if you buy certain replacement stock and make begins on the date you acquired the stock. How-for filing your tax return for the year in which you
the choice described in this section, you post- ever, the gain that qualifies for the 60% exclu-sold the stock. If your original return was filed on
pone part or all of your gain. sion cannot be more than the gain you wouldtime, you may make the choice on an amended
You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis have had if you had sold the stock on the datereturn filed no later than 6 months after the due
of the replacement stock as described in Basis the corporation ceased to qualify.date of your return (excluding extensions). Enter
of replacement stock, later. This postpones your “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2” at the top For more information about empowerment
gain until the year you dispose of the replace- of the amended return, and file it at the same zone businesses, see Publication 954, Tax In-
ment stock. address you used for your original return. centives for Distressed Communities.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 63

Page 64 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If the net sales price is entered in column (d),Rollover of Gain
do not include the commissions and option pre-Reporting CapitalFrom Sale of miums in column (e).
Empowerment Zone Assets Gains and Losses Section 1256 contracts and straddles.
Use Form 6781 to report gains and losses fromYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain This section discusses how to report your capital section 1256 contracts and straddles before en-gains from the sale of qualified empowerment gains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). tering these amounts on Schedule D. Include azone assets. This means that if you buy certain Enter your sales and trades of stocks, bonds, copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.replacement property and make the choice de- etc., and real estate (if not reported on Formscribed in this section, you postpone part or all of Market discount bonds. Report the sale or4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, or 8824) on line 1 ofthe recognition of your gain. trade of a market discount bond on Schedule DPart I or line 8 of Part II, as appropriate. IncludeYou qualify to make this choice if you meet (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8. If the sale or tradeall these transactions even if you did not receiveall the following tests. results in a gain and you did not choose toa Form 1099-B or 1099-S (or substitute state-
• You hold a qualified empowerment zone include market discount in income currently,ment). You can use Schedule D-1 as a continua-asset for more than 1 year and sell it at a enter “Accrued Market Discount” on the next linetion schedule to report more transactions.gain. in column (a) and the amount of the accruedBe sure to add all sales price entries in
• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain. market discount as a loss in column (f). Alsocolumn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total
report the amount of accrued market discount as• During the 60-day period beginning on the on line 3. Also add all sales price entries in
interest income on Schedule B (Form 1040), linedate of the sale, you buy a replacement column (d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total
1, and identify it as “Accrued Market Discount.”qualified empowerment zone asset in the on line 10. Then add the following amounts
same zone as the asset sold. reported to you for 2006 on Forms 1099-B and
Form 1099-S transactions. If you sold orForms 1099-S (or on substitute statements):
traded reportable real estate, you generally• Proceeds from transactions involvingAny part of the gain that is ordinary should receive from the real estate reportingstocks, bonds, and other securities, andincome cannot be postponed and must person a Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Real• Gross proceeds from real estate transac-be recognized.CAUTION
!
Estate Transactions, showing the gross pro-tions (other than the sale of your main
ceeds.home if you had no taxable gain) not re-
Qualified empowerment zone asset. This “Reportable real estate” is defined as anyported on another form or schedule.
means certain stock or partnership interests in present or future ownership interest in any of
an enterprise zone business. It also includes the following:If this total is more than the total of lines 3 andcertain tangible property used in an enterprise • Improved or unimproved land, including air10, attach a statement to your return explainingzone business. You must have acquired the space,the difference.asset after December 21, 2000. • Inherently permanent structures, including
any residential, commercial, or industrialInstallment sales. You cannot use the install-Amount of gain recognized. If you make building,ment method to report a gain from the sale ofthe choice described in this section, you must • A condominium unit and its accessory fix-stock or securities traded on an established se-recognize gain only up to the following amount: tures and common elements, includingcurities market. You must report the entire gain• The amount realized on the sale, minus land, andin the year of sale (the year in which the trade• The cost of any qualified empowerment • Stock in a cooperative housing corporationdate occurs).zone asset that you bought during the (as defined in section 216 of the Internal
60-day period beginning on the date of At-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to Revenue Code).
sale (and did not previously take into ac- most income-producing activities. These rules
count in rolling over gain on an earlier sale limit the amount of loss you can deduct to the A “real estate reporting person” could include
of qualified empowerment zone assets). amount you risk losing in the activity. The at-risk the buyer’s attorney, your attorney, the title or
rules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade of escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro-
an asset used in an activity to which the at-risk ker, the buyer’s broker, or the person acquiringIf this amount is equal to or more than the rules apply. For more information, see Publica- the biggest interest in the property.amount of your gain, you must recognize the full tion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules. Your Form 1099-S will show the gross pro-amount of your gain. If this amount is less than Use Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, to figure ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol-the amount of your gain, you can postpone the the amount of loss you can deduct. low the instructions for Schedule D to reportrest of your gain by adjusting the basis of your
these transactions, and include them on line 1 orreplacement property as described next. Passive activity gains and losses. If you 8 as appropriate.have gains or losses from a passive activity, youBasis of replacement property. You must It is unlawful for any real estate reportingmay also have to report them on Form 8582. Insubtract the amount of postponed gain from the person to separately charge you for complyingsome cases, the loss may be limited under thebasis of the qualified empowerment zone assets with the requirement to file Form 1099-S.passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and itsyou bought as replacement property. separate instructions for more information about
Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds asreporting capital gains and losses from a pas-How to report and postpone capital gain. a nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are insive activity.Report the entire gain realized from the sale on your name but actually belong to someone
Schedule D (Form 1040), line 8, as you other- Form 1099-B transactions. If you sold prop- else), report on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10,
wise would without regard to the choice to post- erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi- only the proceeds that belong to you. Then add
pone gain. To make the choice to postpone gain, ties, through a broker, you should receive Form the following amounts reported to you for 2006
enter “Section 1397B Rollover” in column (a) of 1099-B or an equivalent statement from the bro- on Forms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute
the line directly below the line on which you ker. Use the Form 1099-B or equivalent state- statements) that you are not reporting on an-
reported the gain. Enter the amount of gain ment to complete Schedule D. other form or schedule included with your re-
postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (in Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of turn:
parentheses). Form 1099-B as the gross sales price in column 1. Proceeds from transactions involving(d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, stocks, bonds, and other securities, andMore information. For more information whichever applies. However, if the broker ad- 2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-about empowerment zones, see Publication vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that gross tions (other than the sale of your main954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Communi- proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions home if you are not required to report it).ties. For more information about this rollover of and option premiums were reported to the IRS,
gain, see section 1397B of the Internal Revenue enter that net sales price in column (d) of either
Code. line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies. If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total of
Page 64 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 65 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
lines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your return Short-term gains and losses. Capital gain or • The only amounts you would have to re-
explaining the reason for the difference. loss on the sale or trade of investment property port on Schedule D are capital gain distri-
held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or butions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (orFile Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with the loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If the substitute statement).IRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi- amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show it • You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c,nee in 2006, you must file a Form 1099-B or in parentheses. or 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substituteForm 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS. You combine your share of short-term capital statement).Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with a gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital lossU.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve- If both of the above statements are true, reportcarryover, with your other short-term capitalnue Service Center by February 28, 2007 (April your capital gain distributions directly on line 13gains and losses to figure your net short-term2, 2007, if you file Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S of Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also,capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.electronically). Give the actual owner of the pro- use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gainceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or Form Long-term gains and losses. A capital gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to1099-S by January 31, 2007. On Form 1099-B, or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop- figure your tax.you should be listed as the “Payer.” The other erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capital
You can report your capital gain distributionsowner should be listed as the “Recipient.” On gain or loss. You report it in Part II of Schedule
on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on FormForm 1099-S, you should be listed as the “Filer.” D. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,
1040, if both of the following are true.The other owner should be listed as the “Trans- show it in parentheses.
feror.” You do not, however, have to file a Form You also report the following in Part II of • None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substitute
1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceeds for Schedule D: statements) you received have an amount
your spouse. For more information about the in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.• Undistributed long-term capital gains from
reporting requirements and the penalties for fail- a regulated investment company (mutual • You do not have to file Form 1040 for any
ure to file (or furnish) certain information returns, fund) or real estate investment trust other capital gains or losses.
see the General Instructions for Forms 1099, (REIT),
1098, 5498, and W-2G. • Your share of long-term capital gains or Total net gain or loss. To figure your total netlosses from partnerships, S corporations,Sale of property bought at various times. If gain or loss, combine your net short-term capitaland fiduciaries,you sell a block of stock or other property that gain or loss (line 7) with your net long-term• All capital gain distributions from mutualyou bought at various times, report the capital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result onfunds and REITs not reported directly onshort-term gain or loss from the sale on one line Schedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses areline 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Formin Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain or more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next.1040, andloss on one line in Part II. Enter “Various” in If both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 of
column (b) for the “Date acquired.” See the • Long-term capital loss carryovers. Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital GainComprehensive Example later in this chapter. Tax Rates, later.The result after combining these items withSale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba- your other long-term capital gains and losses issis any expense of sale such as broker’s fees, Capital Lossesyour net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 ofcommissions, state and local transfer taxes, and Schedule D). If your capital losses are more than your capitaloption premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in
gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule Capital gain distributions only. You do
Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,D, whichever applies, unless you reported the not have to file Schedule D if both of the follow-
net sales price amount in column (d). ing are true. enclosed in parentheses.
Worksheet 4-1. Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet to figure your capital loss carryovers from 2006 to 2007 if Schedule D, line 21, is a loss and (a) that loss is a
smaller loss than the loss on Schedule D, line 16, or (b) Form 1040, line 41, reduced by any amount on your Form 8914, line 6, is
less than zero. Otherwise, you do not have any carryovers.
1. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 41. If a loss, enclose the amount in parentheses ............. 1.
2. Did you file Form 8914 (to claim an exemption amount for housing someone displaced by Hurricane
Katrina)?
No. Enter -0-.
Yes. Enter the amount from your Form 8914, line 6 ..................................... 2.
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1. If the result is less than zero, enclose it in parentheses ................. 3.
4. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 21, as a positive amount ................................ 4.
5. Combine lines 3 and 4. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... 5.
6. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 5 ................................................... 6.
If line 7 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 7; otherwise, enter -0- on line 7 and go to line 11.
7. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 7, as a positive amount ................................. 7.
8. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 15. If a loss, enter -0- .................... 8.
9. Add lines 6 and 8 ............................................................... 9.
10. Short-term capital loss carryover to 2007.  Subtract line 9 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0- ....... 10.
If line 15 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 11; otherwise, skip lines 11 through 15.
11. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 15, as a positive amount ................................ 11.
12. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 7 ................................... 12.
13. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0- ........................... 13.
14. Add lines 12 and 13 ............................................................. 14.
15. Long-term capital loss carryover to 2007.  Subtract line 14 from line 11. If zero or less, enter -0- ..... 15.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 65

Page 66 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Limit on deduction. Your allowable capital If their capital loss had been $2,000, their Investment interest deducted. If you claim a
loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the capital loss deduction would have been $2,000. deduction for investment interest, y ou may have
lesser of: They would have no carryover. to reduce the amount of your net capital gain
that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.• $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file Use short-term losses first. When you fig- Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gaina separate return), or ure your capital loss carryover, use your you choose to include in investment income• Your total net loss as shown on line 16 of short-term capital losses first, even if you in- when figuring the limit on your investment inter-Schedule D. curred them after a long-term capital loss. If you est deduction. This is done on the Schedule Dhave not reached the limit on the capital lossYou can use your total net loss to reduce your Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends anddeduction after using the short-term capitalincome dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit. Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa-losses, use the long-term capital losses until you tion about the limit on investment interest, seereach the limit.Capital loss carryover. If you have a total net Interest Expenses in chapter 3.loss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more than Decedent’s capital loss. A capital loss
the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you sustained by a decedent during his or her last 28% rate gain. This gain includes gain or losscan carry over the unused part to the next year tax year (or carried over to that year from an from the sale of collectibles and the eligible gainand treat it as if you had incurred it in that next earlier year) can be deducted only on the final from the sale of qualified small business stockyear. If part of the loss is still unused, you can return filed for the decedent. The capital loss minus the section 1202 exclusion.carry it over to later years until it is completely limits discussed earlier still apply in this situa- Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain orused up. tion. The decedent’s estate cannot deduct any loss from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,When you figure the amount of any capital of the loss or carry it over to following years. antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-loss carryover to the next year, you must take
Joint and separate returns. If you and your num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev-the current year’s allowable deduction into ac-
spouse once filed separate returns and are now erage held more than 1 year.count, whether or not you claimed it and whether
filing a joint return, combine your separate capi- Collectibles gain includes gain from the saleor not you filed a return for the current year.
tal loss carryovers. However, if you and your of an interest in a partnership, S corporation, orWhen you carry over a loss, it remains long spouse once filed a joint return and are now trust due to unrealized appreciation of col-term or short term. A long-term capital loss you filing separate returns, any capital loss carryover lectibles.carry over to the next tax year will reduce that from the joint return can be deducted only on theyear’s long-term capital gains before it reduces Gain on qualified small business stock. Ifreturn of the spouse who actually had the loss.that year’s short-term capital gains. you realized a gain from qualified small business
stock that you held more than 5 years, youFiguring your carryover. The amount of Capital Gain Tax Rates generally can exclude up to 50% of your gainyour capital loss carryover is the amount of
from your income. The exclusion can be up toyour total net loss that is more than the lesser The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are 60% for certain empowerment zone businessof: generally lower than the tax rates that apply to stock. The eligible gain minus your section 1202other income. These lower rates are called the1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for exclusion is a 28% rate gain. See Gains onmaximum capital gain rates.the year, or Qualified Small Business Stock , earlier in thisThe term “net capital gain” means the2. Your taxable income increased by your al- chapter.amount by which your net long-term capital gainlowable capital loss deduction for the year
for the year is more than your net short-termand your deduction for personal exemp- Unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Generally,capital loss.tions. this is any part of your capital gain from sellingFor 2006, the maximum capital gain ratesIf your deductions are more than your gross section 1250 property (real property) that is dueare 5%, 15%, 25%, and 28%. See Table 4-2 forincome for the tax year, use your negative tax- to depreciation (but not more than your net sec-details.able income in computing the amount in item (2). tion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the
If you figure your tax using the maxi- 28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250Complete Worksheet 4-1 to determine the
mum capital gain rate and the regular Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructionspart of your capital loss for 2006 that you can
tax computation results in a lower tax, to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain.carry over to 2007.
TIP
the regular tax computation applies. For more information about section 1250 prop-
erty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 ofExample. Bob and Gloria sold securities in
Publication 544.2006. The sales resulted in a capital loss of Example. All of your net capital gain is from
$7,000. They had no other capital transactions. selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate would
Their taxable income was $26,000. On their joint be 28%. Because you are single and your tax- Tax computation using maximum capital
2006 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un- able income is $25,000, none of your taxable gains rates. Use the Qualified Dividends and
used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000), income will be taxed above the 15% rate. The Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule D
can be carried over to 2007. 28% rate does not apply. Tax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure
your tax if you have qualified dividends or net
Table 4-2. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate? capital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched-
ule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains.
THEN your maximum Schedule D Tax Worksheet. You mustIF your net capital gain is from ... capital gain rate is ... use the Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the
Schedule D instructions to figure your tax if:collectibles gain 28%
• You have to file Schedule D, andeligible gain on qualified small business stock minus the • Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or linesection 1202 exclusion 28% 19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), is
more than zero.unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25%
See the Comprehensive Example  later for another gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25%
example of how to figure your tax using theor higher 15%
Schedule D Tax Worksheet.
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is lower Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Taxthan 25% 5% Worksheet. If you do not have to use the
Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained1“Other gain” means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. above) and any of the following apply, use the
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax
Worksheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or
Page 66 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 67 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040A (whichever you file) to figure your a long-term loss, regardless of how long she and 2006 profit.) These amounts are s hown in boxes
tax. 8, 9, and 10 of the Form 1099-B she receivedher father actually held the stock. She enters the
from her broker for these transactions. Box 11loss in column (f) of line 8.• You received qualified dividends. (See
shows her combined profit of $15,000 ($27,000Qualified Dividends in chapter 1.) In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.
− $1,000 − $11,000). She reports this gain in• You do not have to file Schedule D and stock for $5,000. She had bought 100 of those
Part I of Form 6781 (not shown). She showsyou received capital gain distributions. shares in 1995, for $1,000. She had bought 100
40% ($6,000) as short-term gain on line 4 of(See Capital gain distributions only ear- more shares in 1997 for $2,200, and an addi-
Schedule D and 60% ($9,000) as long-term gainlier.) tional 300 shares in 2000 for $1,500. Her total
on line 11 of Schedule D.basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $300• Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are both
The Form 1099-B that Emily received frommore than zero. ($5,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she
her broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown later.enters in column (f) of line 8.
In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co. Capital loss carryover from 2005. EmilyAlternative minimum tax. These capital gain
stock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi- has a capital loss carryover to 2006 of $800, ofrates are also used in figuring alternative mini-
ness stock that she had bought in September which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500mum tax.
2001. Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 is long-term capital loss. She enters these
gain, which she enters in column (f) of line 8. amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. SheComprehensive Example also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-Because she held the stock more than 5 years,
ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-she has a $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. SheEmily Jones is single and, in addition to wages
sheet.claims the exclusion on the line below by enter-from her job, she has income from stocks and
ing $1,500 as a loss in column (f). She also She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-other securities. For the 2006 tax year, she had
enters the exclusion as a positive amount on line over Worksheet in her 2005 edition of Publica-the following capital gains and losses, which she
2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. tion 550 (not shown), so she could properlyreports on Schedule D. Her filled-in Schedule D
report her loss carryover for the 2006 tax yearis shown at the end of this example. She received a Form 1099-B (not shown)
without refiguring it.from her broker for each of these transactions.Capital gains and losses—Schedule D.
The entries shown in box 2 of these forms totalEmily sold stock in two different companies that Tax computation. Because Emily has gains$14,100.she held for less than a year. In June, she sold on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D, she100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she had Reconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emily checks the “Yes” box on line 17 and goes to linebought in February. She had an adjusted basis makes sure that the total of the amounts re- 18. On line 18 she enters $1,000 from line 7 ofof $1,150 in the stock and sold it for $400, for a ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched- the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18loss of $750. In July, she sold 25 shares of ule D is not less than the total of the amounts is greater than zero, she checks the “No” box onComputer Co. stock that she bought in June. shown on the Forms 1099-B she received from line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax WorksheetShe had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,000 her broker. For 2006, the total of lines 3 and 10 to figure her tax.and sold it for $2,500, for a gain of $500. She of Schedule D is $14,100, which is the same After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13reports these short-term transactions on line 1 in amount reported by the broker on Forms 1099-B of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofPart I of Schedule D. (not shown). Form 1040 through line 43. She enters theEmily had three other stock sales that she
amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of theForm 6781. On June 2, 2006, Emily had areports as long-term transactions on line 8 in
Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out therealized loss from a regulated futures contract ofPart II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60
rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax is$11,000. She also had an unrealized marked toshares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited
$3,236. This is less than the tax she would havemarket gain on open contracts of $27,000 at thethe Car stock from her father. Its fair market
figured without the capital gain tax rates, $4,126.end of 2006. She had reported an unrealizedvalue at the time of his death was $2,500, which
 .marked to market gain of $1,000 on her 2005 taxbecame her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.
return. (This $1,000 must be subtracted from herBecause she had inherited the stock, her loss is  .
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 67

Page 68 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR) to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b (or Form 1040NR, line 10b); or
• Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) is zero or less.
Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41).
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) ............................ 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b (or Form
1040NR, line 10b) ................................ 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4g . . . 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e* . . . 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- .......... 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0- ...................... 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D ......... 7. 9,900
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 ..................... 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0- ...................... 9. 9,900
10. Add lines 6 and 9 ......................................................... 10. 9,900
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D ................................ 11. 1,000
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11 ............................................. 12. 1,000
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10. ............................................................. 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. .............................................. 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of:
}
• The amount on line 1 or
• $30,650 if single or married filing separately;
....... 15. 30,000
$61,300 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
$41,050 if head of household
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15 ............................... 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ......... 17. 20,100
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 ........................................... /H1707518. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip lines 19 and 20 and go to line 21. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15 ................................................ /H1707519. 8,900
20. Multiply line 19 by 5% (.05) .............................................................. 20. 445
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 21 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 21.
21. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13 ................................ 21.
22. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-) ................ 22.
23. Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0- ............................... /H1707523.
24. Multiply line 23 by 15% (.15) .............................................................. 24.
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 25 through 30 and go to line 31. Otherwise, go to line 25.
25. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19 .................. 25.
26. Add lines 10 and 18 .............................. 26.
27. Enter the amount from line 1 above .................... 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- .................... 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0- ............................... /H1707529.
30. Multiply line 29 by 25% (.25) .............................................................. 30.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 31 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 31.
31. Add lines 18, 19, 23, and 29 .................................................. 31.
32. Subtract line 31 from line 1 ................................................... 32.
33. Multiply line 32 by 28% (.28) .............................................................. 33.
34. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ...... 34. 2,791
35. Add lines 20, 24, 30, 33, and 34 ........................................................... 35. 3,236
36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ....... 36. 4,126
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends).  Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 36.
Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41) ................................ 37. 3,236
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
Page 68 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 69 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28% Rate Gain Worksheet—Line 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of
Schedules D and D-1 ........................................................... 1.
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any section 1202 exclusion
you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 60% of the gain . . . 2. 1,500.00
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824 ............................ 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
............. 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), 5. ( 500.00)box 11, code C ................................................................
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0- ..................... 6. -0-
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18 ............................................................. 7. 1,000.00
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
OMB No. 1545-0715PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale or exchange1a Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
TransactionsCUSIP no.1b
Stocks, bonds, etc.2 Reported
to IRS
Gross proceeds
$
Gross proceeds less commissions and option premiums
PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number Bartering3 Federal income tax withheld4
$$
RECIPIENT’S name No. of shares exchanged 5
Street address (including apt. no.) Description 7
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-B
/H20854
(keep for your records)
CORRECTED (if checked)
Form 1099-B
8
$
Profit or (loss) realized in
2006
9 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2005
10 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts–12/31/2006
11 Aggregate profit or (loss)
$
$$
Classes of stock
exchanged
6
CORPORATION’S name
12 If the box is checked, the recipient cannot take a loss on
their tax return based on the amount in box 2
2006XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, PA 18605
10-1111111 111-00-1111
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36309
RFC
(11,000)
27,000
1,000
15,000
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 69

Page 70 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily Jones 111 00 1111
100 sh
Trucking Co.
25 sh
Computer Co.
2-12-06
6-29-06
6-12-06
7-30-06
400
2,500
1,150
2,000 500
2,900
6,000
300
60 sh
Car Co.
500 sh
Furniture Co.
20 sh
Toy Co.
INHERITED
VARIOUS
9-28-01
2-3-06
6-29-06
12-15-06
2,100
5,000
4,100
11,200
2,500
4,700
1,100
300
500
(750)
5,450
(400)
3,000
9,000
9,900
Section 1202
exclusion (1,500)
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 2 in
column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 10 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f)
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts. Add lines 8 and 9 in
column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-2 of the instructions
14
15
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 15 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ( )
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to
Part III on the back 15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 or Form 1040NR instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2006Cat. No. 11338H
()
4 4
Part I
Part II
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
7
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
2006
Page 70 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 71 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
15,350
1,000
/H12011
/H12011
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2006
Summary
Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result. If line 16 is a loss, skip lines 17 through 20, and
go to line 21. If a gain, enter the gain on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14. Then go
to line 17 below
16
16
18
Part III
Page 2
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-8 of the
instructions /H17075
Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank?
19
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2006
21
Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on
page D-9 of the instructions /H17075
20
If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, the smaller of:21
19
● The loss on line 16 or
● ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) /H20854
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or the Instructions for Form 1040NR). Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below.
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete the
Schedule D Tax Worksheet on page D-10 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and
22 below.
Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or Form 1040NR, line 10b?22
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR).
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
( )
Are lines 15 and 16 both gains?17
Yes. Go to line 18.
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22.
Note. When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 71

Page 72 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This statement should be attached to eitherHow To Report
your 2006 individual income tax return or aSpecial Rules for
request for an extension of time to file thatTransactions from trading activities result in cap-
return. The statement must include the follow-ital gains and losses and must be reported onTraders in Securities
ing information.Schedule D (Form 1040). Losses from these
transactions are subject to the limit on capital • That you are making an election underSpecial rules apply if you are a trader in securi-
losses explained earlier in this chapter. section 475(f) of the Internal Revenueties in the business of buying and selling secur-
Code.ities for your own account. To be engaged in
Mark-to-market election made. If you madebusiness as a trader in securities, you must • The first tax year for which the election is
the mark-to-market election, you should reportmeet all the following conditions. effective.
all gains and losses from trading as ordinary• You must seek to profit from daily market • The trade or business for which you are
gains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, insteadmovements in the prices of securities and making the election.
of as capital gains and losses on Schedule D. Innot from dividends, interest, or capital ap-
that case, securities held at the end of the yearpreciation. If you are not required to file a 2006 income
in your business as a trader are marked to mar- tax return, you make the election by placing the• Your activity must be substantial.
ket by treating them as if they were sold (and above statement in your books and records no• You must carry on the activity with con- reacquired) for fair market value on the last later than March 15, 2007. Attach a copy of thetinuity and regularity. business day of the year. But do not mark to statement to your 2007 return.
market any securities you held for investment. After making the election to change to theThe following facts and circumstances Report sales from those securities on Schedule mark-to-market method of accounting, you mustshould be considered in determining if your ac- D, not Form 4797. change your method of accounting for securitiestivity is a securities trading business.
under Revenue Procedure 2002-9 (or its suc-• Typical holding periods for securities Expenses. Interest expense and other invest- cessor). Revenue Procedure 2002-9 requiresbought and sold. ment expenses that an investor would deduct on you to file Form 3115, Application for Change in• The frequency and dollar amount of your Schedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by a Accounting Method. Follow its instructions. La-trades during the year. trader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or bel the Form 3115 as filed under “Section 10A of• The extent to which you pursue the activity Loss From Business, if the expenses are from the Appendix of Rev. Proc. 2002-9.”to produce income for a livelihood. the trading business. Commissions and other Once you make the election, it will apply to• The amount of time you devote to the ac- costs of acquiring or disposing of securities are 2007 and all later tax years, unless you gettivity. not deductible but must be used to figure gain or permission from IRS to revoke it. The effect of
loss. The limit on investment interest expense, making the election is described underIf your trading activities are not a business, which applies to investors, does not apply to Mark-to-market election made, earlier.you are considered an investor, and not a trader. interest paid or incurred in a trading business. For more information on this election, seeIt does not matter whether you call yourself a Revenue Procedure 99-17, on page 52 of Inter-trader or a “day trader.” Self-employment tax. Gains and losses from nal Revenue Bulletin 1999-7 at
selling securities as part of a trading business www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb99-07.pdf.Note. You may be a trader in some securi- are not subject to self-employment tax. This is
ties and have other securities you hold for in- true whether the election is made or not.
vestment. The special rules discussed here do
not apply to the securities held for investment.
You must keep detailed records to distinguish
How To Make the
the securities. The securities held for investment Mark-to-Market Election
must be identified as such in your records on the
day you got them (for example, by holding them To make the mark-to-market election for 2007,
in a separate brokerage account). you must file a statement by April 17, 2007.
Page 72 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 73 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Download forms, instructions, and publica- Walk-in. Many products and services
tions. are available on a walk-in basis.
• Order IRS products online.5. • Products. You can walk in to many post• Research your tax questions online.
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up• Search publications online by topic or
certain forms, instructions, and publica-keyword.
tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, groceryHow To Get Tax • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) stores, copy centers, city and county gov-published in the last few years. ernment offices, credit unions, and office• Figure your withholding allowances usingHelp supply stores have a collection of productsour withholding calculator. available to print from a CD or photocopy• Sign up to receive local and national tax from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRSYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, news by email. offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- • Get information on starting and operating enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenuetions, and get information from the IRS in sev- a small business. Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-eral ways. By selecting the method that is best
able for research purposes.for you, you will have quick and easy access to
• Services. You can walk in to your localtax help.
Phone. Many services are available Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
by phone. ness day for personal, face-to-face taxContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The
help. An employee can explain IRS letters,Taxpayer Advocate Service is an independent • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica- request adjustments to your tax account,organization within the IRS whose employees tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur- or help you set up a payment plan. If youassist taxpayers who are experiencing eco- rent-year forms, instructions, and need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-nomic harm, who are seeking help in resolving publications, and prior-year forms and in- tions about how the tax law applies to yourtax problems that have not been resolved structions. You should receive your order individual tax return, or you’re more com-through normal channels, or who believe that an within 10 days. fortable talking with someone in person,IRS system or procedure is not working as it
visit your local Taxpayer Assistance• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withshould.
Center where you can spread out youryour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.You can contact the Taxpayer Advocate
records and talk with an IRS representa-• Solving problems. You can getService by calling toll-free 1-877-777-4778 or
tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-face-to-face help solving tax problemsTTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi-
essary, but if you prefer, you can call yourevery business day in IRS Taxpayer As-ble for assistance. You can also call or write to
local Center and leave a message re-sistance Centers. An employee can ex-your local taxpayer advocate, whose phone
questing an appointment to resolve a taxplain IRS letters, request adjustments tonumber and address are listed in your local
account issue. A representative will callyour account, or help you set up a pay-telephone directory and in Publication 1546, The
you back within 2 business days to sched-ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS - How to
ule an in-person appointment at your con-tance Center for an appointment. To findGet Help With Unresolved Tax Problems. You
venience. To find the number, go tothe number, go tocan file Form 911, Application for Taxpayer As-
www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in thewww.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in thesistance Order, or ask an IRS employee to com-
phone book under United States Govern-phone book under United States Govern-plete it on your behalf. For more information, go
ment, Internal Revenue Service.ment, Internal Revenue Service.to www.irs.gov/advocate.
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessLow income tax clinics (LITCs). LITCs are Mail. You can send your order forto TTY/TDD equipment, callindependent organizations that provide low in- forms, instructions, and publications to1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or tocome taxpayers with representation in federal the address below. You should receiveorder forms and publications.tax controversies with the IRS for free or for a a response within 10 business days after your• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-nominal charge. The clinics also provide tax request is received.ten to pre-recorded messages coveringeducation and outreach for taxpayers with lim- various tax topics.ited English proficiency or who speak English as
• Refund information. To check the status ofa second language. Publication 4134, Low In- National Distribution Centeryour 2006 refund, call 1-800-829-4477come Taxpayer Clinic List, provides information P.O. Box 8903and press 1 for automated refund informa-on clinics in your area. It is available at www.irs. Bloomington, IL 61702-8903tion or call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure togov or at your local IRS office.
wait at least 6 weeks from the date you CD for tax products. You can order
filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec- Publication 1796, IRS Tax ProductsFree tax services. To find out what services tronically). Have your 2006 tax return CD, and obtain:are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to available because you will need to know • A CD that is released twice so you haveFree Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax your social security number, your filing the latest products. The first release shipspublications and describes other free tax infor- status, and the exact whole dollar amount in January and the final release ships inmation services, including tax education and of your refund. March.assistance programs and a list of TeleTax top-
• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-ics.
lications.Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-Internet. You can access the IRS ices. To ensure IRS representatives give accu- • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-website at www.irs.gov 24 hours a rate, courteous, and professional answers, we tions.day, 7 days a week to: use several methods to evaluate the quality of • Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD -• E-file your return. Find out about commer- our telephone services. One method is for a Ships with the final release.cial tax preparation and e-file services second IRS representative to listen in on or • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andavailable free to eligible taxpayers. record random telephone calls. Another is to ask finding aid.• Check the status of your 2006 refund. some callers to complete a short survey at the • Tax law frequently asked questions.Click on Where’s My Refund. Wait at least end of the call. • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-6 weeks from the date you filed your re- sponse system.turn (3 weeks if you filed electronically).
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxHave your 2006 tax return available be-
forms.cause you will need to know your social
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.security number, your filing status, and the
exact whole dollar amount of your refund. • Toll-free and email technical support.
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 73

Page 74 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Buy the CD from National Technical Informa- • All the business tax forms, instructions, • A site map of the CD to help you navigate
tion Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for and publications needed to successfully the pages of the CD with ease.
$25 (no handling fee) or call 1-877-CDFORMS manage a business. • An interactive “Teens in Biz” module that
(1-877-233-6767) toll free to buy the CD for $25 • Tax law changes for 2006. gives practical tips for teens about starting
(plus a $5 handling fee). Price is subject to their own business, creating a business• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
change. plan, and filing taxes.finding aid.
• Web links to various government agen-CD for small businesses. Publica- An updated version of this CD is availablecies, business associations, and IRS orga-tion 3207, The Small Business Re- each year in early April. You can get a free copynizations.source Guide CD for 2006, is a must by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting• “Rate the Product” survey—your opportu-for every small business owner or any taxpayer www.irs.gov/smallbiz.nity to suggest changes for future editions.about to start a business. This year’s CD in-
cludes:
• Helpful information, such as how to pre-
pare a business plan, find financing for
your business, and much more.
Page 74 Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help

Page 75 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
The definitions in this glossary 2. The transaction is one of the you borrowed that is allocable to activity. However, the rental o f real
following. property held for investment.are the meanings of the terms as estate is not a passive activity if
used in this publication. The same both of the following are true.a. A straddle, including any Limited partner: A partnerterm used in another publication • More than one-half of the per-set of offsetting positions whose participation in partnershipmay have a slightly different mean- sonal services you performon stock. activities is restricted, and whoseing. during the year in all trades orb. Any transaction in which personal liability for partnership businesses are performed inyou acquire property debts is limited to the amount ofAccrual method: An accounting real property trades or busi-(whether or not actively money or other property that he ormethod under which you report nesses in which you materi-traded) at substantially the she contributed or may have toyour income when you earn it, ally participate.same time that you con- contribute.whether or not you have received it. tract to sell the same prop- • You perform more than 750You generally deduct your ex- erty or substantially hours of services during theListed option: Any option that ispenses when you incur a liability for identical property at a price year in real property trades ortraded on, or subject to the rules of,them, rather than when you pay set in the contract. a qualified board or exchange. businesses in which you ma-them. c. Any other transaction that terially participate.
Marked to market rule: Theis marketed or sold as pro-At-risk rules: Rules that limit the treatment of each section 1256ducing capital gains from aamount of loss you may deduct to Portfolio income: Gross incomecontract (defined later) held by atransaction described inthe amount you risk losing in the from interest, dividends, annuities,taxpayer at the close of the year as(1).activity. or royalties that is not derived in theif it were sold for its fair market ordinary course of a trade or busi-value on the last business day ofBasis: Basis is the amount of ness. It includes gains from theDemand loan: A loan payable in the year.your investment in property for tax sale or trade of property (other thanfull at any time upon demand by thepurposes. The basis of property an interest in a passive activity)Market discount: The stated re-lender.you buy is usually the cost. Basis is producing portfolio income or helddemption price of a bond at matur-used to figure gain or loss on the Dividend: A distribution of for investment.ity minus your basis in the bondsale or disposition of investment money or other property made by a immediately after you acquire it.property. Premium: The amount by whichcorporation to its shareholders out Market discount arises when the
your cost or other basis in a bondof its earnings and profits. value of a debt obligation de-Below-market loan: A demand right after you get it is more thancreases after its issue date.loan (defined later) on which inter- Equity option: Any option: the total of all amounts payable onest is payable at a rate below the • To buy or sell stock, or Market discount bond: Any the bond after you get it (other thanapplicable federal rate, or a term bond having market discount ex- payments of qualified stated inter-• That is valued directly or indi-loan where the amount loaned is cept: est).rectly by reference to anymore than the present value of all stock or narrow-based secur- • Short-term obligations withpayments due under the loan. Private activity bond: A bondity index. fixed maturity dates of up to 1 that is part of a state or local gov-year from the date of issue,Call: An option that entitles the ernment bond issue of which:purchaser to buy, at any time • Tax-exempt obligations thatFair market value: The price at
before a specified future date, 1. More than 10% of the pro-you bought before May 1,which property would change
property such as a stated number ceeds are to be used for a1993,hands between a willing buyer and
of shares of stock at a specified private business use, anda willing seller, both having reason- • U.S. savings bonds, and
price. able knowledge of the relevant 2. More than 10% of the pay-• Certain installment obliga-
facts. ment of the principal or inter-tions.Cash method: An accounting est is:method under which you report Forgone interest: The amount
a. Secured by an interest inNominee: A person who re-your income in the year in which of interest that would be payable for
ceives, in his or her name, income property to be used for ayou actually or constructively re- any period if interest accrued at the
that actually belongs to someone private business use (orceive it. You generally deduct your applicable federal rate and was
else. payments for the property),expenses in the year you pay them. payable annually on December 31,
orminus any interest payable on the Nonequity option: Any listedCommodities trader: A person b. Derived from payments forloan for that period. option that is not an equity option,who is actively engaged in trading property (or borrowedsuch as debt options, commoditysection 1256 contracts and is regis- Forward contract: A contract to money) used for a privatefutures options, currency options,tered with a domestic board of deliver a substantially fixed amount business use.and broad-based stock index op-trade designated as a contract of property (including cash) for a
tions.market by the Commodities Fu- substantially fixed price.
Put: An option that entitles thetures Trading Commission. Options dealer: Any person reg-Futures contract: An ex- purchaser to sell, at any timeistered with an appropriate nationalchange-traded contract to buy orCommodity future: A contract before a specified future date,securities exchange as a marketsell a specified commodity or finan-made on a commodity exchange, property such as a stated numbermaker or specialist in listed op-cial instrument at a specified pricecalling for the sale or purchase of a of shares of stock at a specifiedtions.at a specified future date. See alsofixed amount of a commodity at a price.
Commodity future.future date for a fixed price. Original issue discount (OID): Real estate mortgage invest-The amount by which the statedGift loan: Any below-market loanConversion transaction: Any ment conduit (REMIC): An en-redemption price at maturity of awhere the forgone interest is in thetransaction that you entered into tity that is formed for the purpose ofdebt instrument is more than its is-nature of a gift.after April 30, 1993, that meets holding a fixed pool of mortgagessue price.both of these tests. secured by interests in real prop-Interest: Compensation for the
erty, with multiple classes of inter-1. Substantially all of your ex- Passive activity: An activity in-use or forbearance of money.
ests held by investors. Thesepected return from the trans- volving the conduct of a trade or
interests may be either regular oraction is due to the time value Investment interest: The inter- business in which you do not ma-
of your net investment. est you paid or accrued on money terially participate and any rental residual.
Publication 550 (2006) Page 75

Page 76 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Regulated futures contract: A nontransferable and is subject to a buyer and, at a later date, you buy a. Is limited and preferred as
substantial risk of forfeiture. to dividends,substantially identical property andsection 1256 contract that:
deliver it to the lender. b. Does not participate in cor-• Provides that amounts that Section 1256 contract: Any: porate growth to any signif-must be deposited to, or may Straddle: Generally, a set of off-• Regulated futures contract, icant extent, andbe withdrawn from, your mar- setting positions on personal prop-• Foreign currency contract as c. Has a fixed redemptiongin account depend on daily erty. A straddle may consist of adefined in chapter 4 under price.market conditions (a system purchased option to buy and a pur-Section 1256 Contractsof marking to market), and chased option to sell on the sameMarked to Market,• Is traded on, or subject to the number of shares of the security, Term loan: Any loan that is not a• Nonequity option,rules of, a qualified board of with the same exercise price and demand loan.• Dealer equity option, orexchange, such as a domes- period.• Dealer securities futures con- Wash sale: A sale of stock or se-tic board of trade designated tract. Stripped preferred stock: curities at a loss within 30 daysas a contract market by the
before or after you buy or acquire inStock that meets the followingCommodity Futures Trading
Securities futures contract: A a fully taxable trade, or acquire atests.Commission or any board of
contract of sale for future delivery contract or option to buy, substan-trade or exchange approved 1. There has been a separationof a single security or of a nar- tially identical stock or securities.by the Secretary of the Trea- in ownership between therow-based security index.sury. stock and any dividend on the
stock that has not becomeShort sale: The sale of property
payable.Restricted stock: Stock you get that you generally do not own. You
for services you perform that is borrow the property to deliver to a 2. The stock: ■
Page 76 Publication 550 (2006)

Page 77 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Private activity ......... 12, 75 Custodian account for ....... 3 Market discount bonds (SeeA
Gifts to ..................... 5 Market discount bonds)Redemption or retirementAbusive tax shelters (See Tax
Investment income of .....3 ,  3 4o f ....................... 3 9 Original issue discount (Seeshelters)
Qualified dividends ......... 3 4 Original issue discount (OID))Sold between interestAccounting fees ............. 3 6
Savings account with parent asdates .................... 1 1 Short-term obligations ..... 1 5 ,Accrual method ...... 7 ,  16, 25, trustee .................... 5 49State and local33, 75 U.S. savings bond owner .... 8government .............. 4 9 Stripped bonds andAccuracy-related penalty ..... 5 coupons ................. 1 4Stripped ............ 12, 14, 45 Clerical help ................. 3 6Acquisition discount .... 16, 45 Tax-exempt ................ 4 9 Discounted debtCo-owners of U.S. savingsAdjusted basis ....... 21, 43, 45 Traded flat .................. 6 instruments ............... 1 3bonds ...................... 8Alaska Permanent Fund U.S. savings (See U.S. savings Discounted tax-exemptCollateralized debt obligationsdividends ............. 23, 34 bonds) obligations ................ 4 5(CDOs) .................... 2 6Amortization of bond U.S. Treasury (See U.S. Dividends: (See also FormComments on publication .... 2premium ............... 34-36 Treasury bills, notes, and 1099-DIV) .......... 19-24, 75Commodities traders ........ 7 5Annuities: bonds) Alaska PermanentCommodity futures ...... 51, 53,Borrowing on ............... 3 7 Brokerage fees .......... 36, 65 Fund ................ 23, 3475Interest on .................. 6 Exempt-interest ...... 5 ,  23, 54Community property:Life insurance proceeds used to Extraordinary .............. 5 5U.S. savings bonds .......... 8b u y...................... 1 2 C Holding period ............. 2 0Constructive ownershipSale of ..................... 5 1 Calls and puts ........... 57, 75 Insurance policies .......... 2 3transactions .......... 48, 52Single-premium ............ 3 7 Table 4-1 .................. 5 8 Money market funds ........ 2 1Constructive receipt ......... 1 6Trade for ............... 39, 47 Capital assets ............... 4 9 Nominees .............. 19, 24Constructive sales .......... 4 0Applicable federal rate ....... 6 Capital gain Ordinary ................... 2 0
Contractors, insolvencyAppreciated financial distributions ...... 21, 24, 34, Patronage ................. 2 3
of ......................... 5 4positions .................. 4 0 54 Payments in lieu of ......... 5 5
ConversionArbitrage bonds ............. 1 2 Qualified ............ 20, 23, 34Capital gain tax
transactions .......... 51, 75 Qualified foreignAssistance (See Tax help) computation .............. 6 7
Convertible stocks and corporation .............. 2 0At-risk rules .......... 32, 64, 75 Capital gains and
bonds ..................... 4 7 Received in January ........ 2 0losses .................. 49-54Attorneys’ fees.............. 3 6
Reinvestment plans .... 21, 36,Cooperatives, sales of stockConstructive ownershipAutomatic investment 44to ......................... 6 1transactions ............. 5 2service ............. 36, 44, 53 Reporting requirements .... 1 9 ,Corporate distributions ..... 1 9Definition .................. 4 9
23-24Capital gain ......... 24, 34, 54Empowerment zone
Restricted stock ............ 2 3Constructive ............... 2 2B assets ................... 6 4
Sale or trade vs. ............ 3 9Dividends (See Dividends)Investment property ........ 4 9Backup withholding .......... 3
Scrip ...................... 2 2Fractional shares ........... 2 2Long-term ............. 55, 65Bad debts ............... 51, 54 Sold stock ................. 2 0Liquidating ............. 21, 24Long-term debtBankrupt financial institutions: Stock .................. 44, 53Nondividend ........... 21, 24instruments .............. 5 0Deposit in .................. 5 1 Underreported .............. 3Return of capital ............ 2 1Losses, limit on ............ 6 6Bargain purchases .......... 4 2 Veterans’ insurance ......5 ,  2 3Stock rights ................ 2 2Passive activities ........... 6 4Basis ................. 42-47, 75 Divorce ................. 43, 47Undistributed capitalQualified covered callAdjusted ............ 21, 43, 45 gains .................... 2 1options .................. 5 9Cost ....................... 4 2 CorporateQualified small businessInherited property .......... 4 3 Ereorganizations ........... 4 6stock .................... 6 2Investment property ........ 4 2 Education Savings BondReporting requirements .... 5 9 , Cost basis ................... 4 2Like-kind exchanges ........ 4 6 Program ............... 10-1163, 64 Coupon bonds .............. 1 6Other than cost ............. 4 2 Interest excluded under ..... 1 8Rollover of gain from sale ofREITs ..................... 4 4 Recordkeepingsecurities ................ 6 2REMIC, residual interest .... 2 5 D requirements ............. 1 1Short-term ............. 55, 65Replacement stock ......... 6 3 Day traders .................. 7 2 Employee stock ownershipTax rates .................. 6 6Stocks and bonds ...... 21, 22, plans (ESOPs), sales of stock28% rate gain worksheet, Dealer equity options ........ 4 135, 43 to ......................... 6 1completed sample ..... 6 6 Dealer securities futuresBearer obligations ....... 14, 50 Table 4-2 ................ 6 6 Employer identificationcontracts .................. 4 1Below-market loans ..... 6-7, 75 numbers (EINs) ........... 2 6Capital loss carryover ...... 6 0 , Debt instruments, retirementBonds: 65, 67 Empowerment zone ......... 6 4of ......................... 5 0Accrued interest on ......... 1 9 Worksheet 4-1 ............. 6 6 Endowment contracts ....... 3 7Decedents ............... 43, 66Amortization of premium .... 3 4 Cash method ...... 7 ,  16, 33, 75 U.S. savings bond interest, Enterprise zone facilityArbitrage ................... 1 2 Reporting options for savings reporting of ............... 9 bonds ..................... 1 2Basis .................. 35, 43 bond interest .............. 7 Demand loans ............... 7 5 Equity option ............ 41, 75Capital asset ............... 4 9 Cash-settled options ........ 4 1 Demutualization ............. 4 7 Estate income received byConvertible ................ 4 7 Casualty losses ............. 5 1 beneficiary ................. 3Deposits, loss on ............ 5 1Coupon .................... 1 6
CDOs (Collateralized debt Exempt-interest dividends onEnterprise zone facility ...... 1 2 Discount on debt
obligations) ............... 2 6 mutual fund stock ......... 5 4Federally guaranteed ....... 1 2 instruments ............ 13-16
Certificates of depositIdentification ............... 4 3 Certificates of deposit ....... 1 4 Expenses of producing
(CDs) ..................... 1 4Market discount .... 12, 33, 45, Election to report all interest as income .................... 3 6
Children:50, 64, 75 OID ..................... 1 6
Alaska Permanent FundNew York Liberty bonds .... 1 2 Face-amount certificates .... 1 4
Fdividends ................ 3 4Par value .................. 4 5 Gain or loss treatment ...... 4 9
Capital gain distributions .... 3 4Premiums on ........ 35, 45, 75 Inflation-indexed ........... 1 4 Face-amount certificates .... 1 4
Publication 550 (2006) Page 77

Page 78 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fair market value .... 42, 43, 46, Installment sale Local government obligationsG
75 payments ................. 6 ( See State or local governmentGains on qualified small
obligations)Insurance dividends ......... 6Federal guarantee on business stock ............ 6 2
Money market funds ......... 5bonds ..................... 1 2 Long-term capital gains andGains on sales or trades: (See
Nominee distributions ........ 5 losses ................. 55, 65Fees to buy or sell .......... 3 6 also Capital gains and
Prepaid insurance Long-term debtlosses) ............. 45, 48, 49Financial asset securitization
premiums ................. 6 instruments ............... 5 0investment trusts Gifts .............. 5 ,  43, 53, 75
Reporting ............... 16-19(FASITs) .................. 2 6 Losses on sales or trades: (SeeGlossary ................. 75-76 Seller-financed also Capital gains andForeign currency Government obligations ..... 1 6 mortgage ............ 16, 19 losses) .................... 4 9transactions .............. 4 0
Tax refunds ................. 6 Amount calculation ......... 4 5Foreign income .............. 2 Tax-exempt ............ 12, 17 Carryback election ..... 41, 42HForgone interest ............ 7 5 Taxable ............ 5-6, 11, 12 Mutual fund or REIT stock heldHedging transactions ...... 4 1 ,Form 1040 ............... 17, 23 U.S. savings bonds, person 6 months or less ......... 5 442, 51Schedule B ................ 1 7 responsible for tax (Table Passive activities ....... 26, 27,Help (See Tax help)Form 1040, Schedule D ..... 5 5 , 1-2) ...................... 8 32, 34Holding period:56, 63, 67 Underreported .............. 3 Related parties ............. 4 8Investment property ........ 5 3Worksheet, completed Usurious interest ............ 6 Section 1244 (small business)Replacement stock ......... 6 3sample .................. 6 8 VA insurance dividends ...... 5 stock .................... 5 2Straddles .................. 6 0Form 1040A ............. 16, 23 Small business investmentInvestment clubs ......... 26-27
Form 1040X ................. 4 0 company stock ........... 5 3Investment counsel and
Form 1041 ................... 2 7 Wash sales ................ 5 9advice ..................... 3 6IForm 1065 ................... 2 7 Investment expenses ..... 32-38Income from sources outsideSchedule K-1 .............. 2 7 Allocated .................. 2 5U.S. ........................ 2 MForm 1066, Schedule Q ...... 2 6 At-risk rules ................ 3 2Income tax treaties (Table Mark-to-market election ..... 7 2Deductible ................. 3 6Form 1096 ............ 19, 24, 65 1-3) ....................... 2 1 Marked to market rules ..... 4 1 ,Limits on deductions ........ 3 2Form 1099-B ..... 39, 64, 65, 67 Indian tribal government .... 1 2 72, 75Nondeductible ............. 3 7Form 1099-DIV .... 3 ,  19, 23, 24 Individual retirement Market discount bonds ..... 1 2 ,Pass-through entities ....... 3 7Form 1099-INT ...... 3 ,  5 ,  9 ,  1 7 , arrangements (IRAs): 15, 33, 45, 50, 64, 75Reporting requirements ..... 3 819, 25, 26 Interest income .............. 5 Accrued marketInvestment income ........... 3Form 1099-MISC ......... 19, 55 discount ................. 1 5Inflation-indexed debt Children .................3 ,  3 4Form 1099-OID ....5 ,  13, 18, 25, instruments ............... 1 4 Maximum rate of capital gainsGeneral Information ......... 326 (Table 4-2) ................ 6 6Inherited property: Net income ................ 3 3Form 1099-S ............ 64, 65 Mechanics’ and suppliers’Basis ...................... 4 3 Records to keep ............. 3Form 1120 ................... 2 7 liens ...................... 5 4Holding period ............. 5 3 Reporting of (Table 1-1) ..... 5Transfer by inheritance ..... 3 9Form 1120-A ................ 2 7 Meetings, expenses ofInvestment property ......... 3 2 attending .................. 3 7Insolvency ofForm 2439 ................... 2 1 Basis ...................... 4 2contractors ............... 5 4 Missing children, photographsForm 3115 ............. 8 ,  36, 72 Definition .................. 3 9 of .......................... 2Installment sales ............ 6 4Form 4684 ................... 5 1 Gain or loss treatment ...... 4 9
Mixed straddles ......... 55, 60Insurance:Form 4797 ............ 46, 52, 53 Gift, received as ............ 4 3
Borrowing on ............... 3 7 Money market funds ........ 2 1Form 4952 ................... 3 4 Holding period ............. 5 3
Interest income .............. 5Dividends, interest on .....6 ,  2 3 Liquidation, received in ..... 4 5Form 6198 ................... 6 4
Interest option on ........... 1 2 More information (See Tax help)Nontaxable trades, receivedForm 6781 ..... 41, 51, 59, 64, 67
Life insurance companies, Mortgages:i n ....................... 4 2Form 8271 ................... 3 0 demutualization .......... 4 7 Revenue bonds ............ 1 2Sales and trades ........... 3 9Form 8275 ................... 3 0 Life, paid to beneficiary ..... 1 1 Secondary liability onServices, received for ....... 4 2Form 8275-R ................ 3 0 Prepaid premiums ........... 6 home .................... 5 4Spouse, received from ...... 4 3Form 8582 ................... 2 6 Single-premium life ......... 3 7 Seller-financed ............. 1 9Taxable trades, receivedForm 8614 .................... 3 Trades ..................... 4 7 i n ....................... 4 2 Municipal bonds: (See also State
Form 8615 .................... 3 Veterans’ dividends, interest or local government
Form 8815 ............... 10, 18 o n.....................5 ,  2 3 obligations) ......... 12, 17, 49
JForm 8824 ................... 4 6 Interest expenses: Mutual funds ..... 21, 32, 34, 37,
Joint accounts ............... 4Form 8832 ................... 2 7 Allocation of ................ 3 2 44, 54
Joint and separateInvestment interest ..... 32, 75 publicly offered ............. 3 7Form 8886 ............... 29, 30
returns ................ 31, 66Limit on .................. 3 3Form:
When to deduct .......... 3 31066 (Schedule Q) ......... 3 7 NMargin accounts ........... 3 33115 ....................... 8 New York Liberty bonds ..... 1 2LPaid in advance ............ 3 34952 ...................... 3 4 Nominee distributions:Life insurance companies:Straddles .................. 3 7Form SS-4 ................... 2 6 Dividends .............. 19, 24demutualization ............ 4 7Unstated ................... 4 2Form W-8BEN ................ 4 Interest income ...........5 ,  1 9Like-kind exchanges .... 46, 48Interest income .............. 5Form W-9 .................... 3 Original issue discount ...... 1 3Basis of propertyAnnuity contracts ............ 6Forward contracts ........... 7 5 Nominee, defined ........... 7 5received ................. 4 6Bonds traded flat ............ 6Fractional shares ........ 22, 53 Nonbusiness bad debts .... 5 1 ,Reporting requirements ..... 4 6Certificates of deposits ...... 5Free tax services ............ 7 3 54Limited partners ............. 7 5Condemnation awards ....... 6Frozen deposits ...........6 ,  1 9 Noncapital assets ........... 4 9LiquidatingDeferred interest
Futures contracts: Nondeductible investmentdistributions .......... 21, 45accounts ................. 5
expenses ................. 3 7Definition .................. 7 5 Listed options ........... 41, 75Dividends on deposit or share
Regulated ............. 40, 76 Nondividendaccounts ................. 5 Loans:
distributions .............. 2 1Securities ........... 53, 56, 57 Frozen deposits ..........6 ,  1 9 Below-market .......... 6-7, 75
Nonequity options ....... 41, 75Futures, commodity ..... 51, 53, Gift for opening account ..... 5 Gift and demand .........6 ,  7 5
75 Individual retirement Guarantees ................ 5 4 Nonqualified preferred
arrangements (IRAs) ...... 5Wash sales ................ 5 6 Term ....................6 ,  7 6 stock ...................... 4 7
Page 78 Publication 550 (2006)

Page 79 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonresident aliens: Puts and calls ........... 57, 75 Revocable trust, trustee’s State or local government
Table 4-1 .................. 5 8 commissions for .......... 3 6 obligations ................ 1 2Backup withholding .......... 4
Market discount bonds (SeeRollover of gain from sale:Nontaxable return of
Market discount bonds)capital .................... 2 1 Empowerment zone
Q Private activity bonds ...... 1 2 ,assets ................... 6 4Nontaxable stock rights ..... 5 3
Qualified dividends .......... 2 3 75Securities .............. 62, 63Nontaxable trades ....... 46, 53
Qualified small business Registration requirement .... 1 2Notes: stock ............... 45, 53, 62 Tax-exempt interest ........ 1 2Individuals, bought at Gains on ................... 6 2 S Taxable interest ............ 1 2discount ................. 5 0
S corporations .......... 26, 45 Stock:U.S. Treasury (See U.S.
Basis ........... 21, 22, 43, 63Safe deposit box ............ 3 6Treasury bills, notes, and R Capital asset ............... 4 9Sales and trades of investmentbonds) Real estate investment trusts Constructive ownership ..... 4 8property ................ 39-72(REITs) ............. 21, 44, 54 Convertible ................ 4 7Definition .................. 3 9Real estate mortgageO Corporate .................. 4 6Savings bonds (See U.S.investment conduits Dividends (See Dividends)Office expenses ............. 3 6 savings bonds)(REMICs) ........ 25-26, 37, 75 Fractional shares ....... 22, 53Options .................. 57-58 SBIC stock (See Small businessRegular interest ............ 2 5 Identification ............... 4 3Calls and puts .......... 57, 75 investment company stock)Residual interest ....... 25, 56 Installment sales ........... 6 4Cash settlement ........ 41, 57 Scrip dividends ............. 2 2Recordkeeping .............. 5 3 Nonqualified preferredDealer equity ............... 4 1 Section 1202 gain ........... 6 3Recordkeeping requirements: stock .................... 4 7Deep-in-the-money ......... 5 9 Section 1244 stock .......... 5 2Education Savings Bond Public utility,Equity ................. 41, 75 Section 1256 contracts ..... 4 0 ,Program ................. 1 1 reinvestment ............. 4 4Gain or loss ............ 57, 59 53, 57, 64, 76Investment income .......... 3 Redemption of ............. 3 9Holding period ............. 5 3 Net gain on ................ 4 1Small business stock ....... 5 3 Replacement stock ......... 6 3Listed ................. 41, 75 Net loss on ................ 4 1Redemption of stock ........ 3 9 Restricted stock ........ 23, 76Nonequity .............. 41, 75 Reporting requirements ..... 4 1Redemption or retirement of Rights .............. 22, 44, 53Qualified covered call ....... 5 9 Securities:bonds ..................... 3 9 S corporations ............. 4 5Reporting requirements ..... 5 7 Holding period ............. 5 3Regulated futures Sales to ESOPs orSection 1256 contracts .... 4 0 , Installment sales ........... 6 4contract ............... 40, 76 cooperatives ............. 6 157 Lost, stolen, etc., cost of Small business ......... 45, 53REITs (See Real estateWash sales ................ 5 6 replacing ................ 3 6 Specialized small businessinvestment trusts (REITs))Options dealer .............. 7 5 Rollover of gain from investment company ..... 4 5Related partyOrdinary gains and sale ................. 62, 63 Splits ...................... 4 4transactions ....... 38, 48-49losses ................. 49, 51 Traders in .................. 7 2 Straddles (See Straddles)Related persons ............. 5 8Original issue discount Stripped preferred stock . . . 25,Worthless .............. 39, 54REMICs (See Real estate(OID) ........ 12, 13-15, 45, 75 76Securities futuresmortgage investment conduitsAdjustment to .............. 1 9 Surrender of ............... 3 9contracts ....... 41, 53, 57, 76(REMICs))Reporting requirements ..... 1 3 Trades ..................... 4 6Self-employment income .... 4 2Reorganizations,Rules ...................... 1 4 Trust instruments treatedSelf-employment tax ........ 7 2corporate ................. 4 6 a s....................... 4 0Seller-financedReporting requirements: Straddles ................. 58-61mortgages ................ 1 9P Bad debts .................. 5 5 Defined .................... 7 6Bond premium Short sales .................. 5 5Pass-through entities: Holding period ............. 6 0amortization ............. 3 6 Adjusted basis ............. 4 5Rollover of gain ............ 6 3 Interest expense and carryingCapital gains and Defined .................... 7 6Passive activities ............ 7 5 charges ................. 3 7losses ............ 59, 63, 64 Expenses of ............... 3 7Gains and losses ....... 26, 27, Loss deferral rules .......... 5 8Dividend income ........... 2 3 Extraordinary dividends ..... 5 532, 34, 64 Mixed .............. 55, 60, 61Exempt-interest dividends .... 5 Puts ....................... 5 7Patronage dividends ........ 2 3 Reporting requirements ..... 6 4Interest on U.S. savings Small business investmentPenalties: Stripped bonds andbonds ..................7 ,  8 company stock ........... 5 3Accuracy-related .........5 ,  3 0 coupons ........... 12, 14, 45Investment expenses ....... 3 8 Short-term capital gains andBackup withholding .......... 4 Stripped preferred stock ... 2 5 ,Like-kind exchanges ........ 4 6 losses ................. 55, 65Civil fraud .................. 3 1 76Options .................... 5 7 Short-termEarly withdrawal ..........5 ,  1 9 Original issue discount ...... 1 3 Substitute payments ........ 5 5obligations ...... 15-16, 45, 49Failure to pay tax ........... 3 1 S corporation income, Suggestions forInterest deduction, limitFailure to supply SSN ....... 3 deductions, and publication ................. 2o n....................... 3 3Substantial credits ................... 2 6understatement .......... 3 0 Sixty/forty rule .............. 4 1Section 1256 contracts ..... 4 1
Valuation misstatement ..... 3 0 Small business investmentState or local government T
Political parties: company stock ........ 53, 63obligations ............... 1 2 Tables:Debts owed by ............. 5 4 Reporting requirements ..... 5 3Straddles .................. 6 4 Capital gains maximum rate
Portfolio income ............ 7 5 Small business stock ....... 4 5 ,Substitute payments ........ 5 5 (Table 4-2) ............... 6 6
53, 62Tax-exempt interestPreferred stock: Income tax treaties (Table
income .................. 1 7Nonqualified ............... 4 7 Social security number (SSN): 1-3) ..................... 2 1
Trades ..................... 7 2Redeemable at a Custodial accounts .......... 3 Investment income, reporting of
Wash sales ................ 5 6premium ................. 2 2 Joint accounts .............. 3 (Table 1-1) ................ 5
Stripped ............... 25, 76 Repossession of real Requirement to give ......... 3 Puts and calls (Table
property ................... 5 3Premiums on bonds ..... 35, 45, 4-1) ..................... 5 8Specialized small business
75 Restricted property .......... 4 2 U.S. savings bonds, personinvestment company
Private activity bonds ...... 1 2 , responsible for tax (TableRestricted stock ......... 23, 76 stock .................. 45, 63
75 1-2) ...................... 8Retirement of debt Spouses:
Public utility stock Tax help ..................... 7 3instrument ................ 5 0 Transfers between: (See also
reinvestment .............. 4 4 Tax rates:Related partyReturn of capital (See
Publications (See Tax help) transactions) ...... 43, 47, 48Nondividend distributions) Capital gain and losses ..... 6 6
Publication 550 (2006) Page 79

Page 80 of 80 of Publication 550 8:25 -  8-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax refunds: Taxpayer identification Treaties, income tax (Table V
Interest on .................. 6 numbers (TINs): 1-3) ....................... 2 1 Veterans’ insurance:
Aliens ...................... 2Tax shelters .............. 28-31 Trust income received by Dividends on ............... 2 3
Penalties .................. 3 0 Term loans ................6 ,  7 6 beneficiary ................. 3
Projected income Trade or business ........... 3 2 Trustee’s commission for Winvestment ............... 2 9 revocable trust ............ 3 6Traders in securities ........ 7 2 Warrants .................... 5 6Registration number ........ 3 0 TTY/TDD information ........ 7 3Trades: Wash sales ........... 56-57, 76Reporting requirements ..... 2 9 Insurance .................. 4 7 Holding period ............. 5 3Rules to curb abuse ........ 2 8 Investment property ........ 3 9 U Loss deferral rules,Tax-exempt bonds .......... 4 9 Like-kind ............... 46, 48 straddles ................ 5 9U.S. savings bonds: (See alsoTax-exempt income: Nontaxable ......... 42, 46, 53 Reporting requirements ..... 5 6Education Savings BondExpenses of ............... 3 7 Reporting requirements ..... 7 2 Program) .......... 6 ,  7-11, 11 Withholding, backup ......... 3Interest on ............. 12, 17 Stock ...................... 4 6 Reporting interest on ......6 ,  7 Worksheets:Tax-exempt obligations .... 1 2 , Taxable .................... 4 2 Retirement or profit-sharing Capital gains, 28% rate14, 45 U.S. Treasury notes or plan, distributed from ...... 9 worksheet, completedbonds ................... 4 7Taxable income, expenses Worksheet ............... 1 8 sample .................. 6 9of ......................... 3 7 Treasury bills, notes, and bonds Tax, responsible person (Table Capital loss carryover ....... 6 6(See U.S. Treasury bills, notes,Taxes: 1-2) ...................... 8 Worthless securities .... 39, 54and bonds)State and local transfer ..... 3 6 U.S. Treasury bills, notes, andState income ............... 3 7 Treasury inflation-indexed ■bonds ........ 6 ,  11-12, 47, 53securities ................. 1 4Taxpayer Advocate .......... 7 3 Usurious interest ............. 6Treasury inflation-protected
securities (TIPS) ...... 11, 14
Page 80 Publication 550 (2006)