Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P550.cvt ( 6-Nov-2002) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 ContentsCat. No. 15093R
Important Changes for 2002......... 2Department
of the Important Changes for 2003......... 2InvestmentTreasury
Important Reminders.............. 2Internal
Revenue Income and Introduction..................... 2Service
Chapter 1. Investment Income........ 3
Expenses General Information............. 3
Interest Income................ 4
Discount on Debt Instruments...... 12(Including Capital When To Report Interest Income.... 16
How To Report Interest Income..... 16Gains and Losses) Dividends and Other Corporate
Distributions............... 19
How To Report Dividend
Income ................... 21For use in preparing Stripped Preferred Stock.......... 22
REMICs, FASITs, and Other
CDOs .................... 232002 Returns S Corporations................ 24
Investment Clubs............... 24
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters............ 26
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses...... 29
Limits on Deductions............ 29
Interest Expenses.............. 29
Bond Premium Amortization........ 31
Expenses of Producing Income..... 32
Nondeductible Expenses.......... 33
How To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 34
When To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 34
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property............ 36
What is a Sale or Trade?.......... 36
Basis of Investment Property....... 39
How To Figure Gain or Loss....... 42
Nontaxable Trades.............. 43
Transfers Between Spouses....... 44
Related Party Transactions........ 44
Capital Gains and Losses......... 45
Capital or Ordinary Gain or
Loss..................... 46
Holding Period............... 50
Nonbusiness Bad Debts......... 50
Short Sales................. 51
Wash Sales ................. 52
Options.................... 53
Straddles................... 55
Sales of Stock to ESOPs or
Certain Cooperatives......... 58
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded Securities...... 59
Gains on Qualified Small
Business Stock............. 59
Rollover on Gain From Sale
of Empowerment Zone
Assets ................... 60
Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses ................... 61
Special Rules for Traders in
Securities................. 68

Page 2 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help...... 69 Sale of DC Zone assets. Beginning in 2003, you must include another person’s SSN on your
return and that person does not have and cannotinvestments in District of Columbia Enterprise
Glossary ....................... 70 get an SSN, enter that person’s ITIN.Zone (DC Zone) assets held more than 5 years
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitlewill qualify for a special tax benefit. If you sell or
Index.......................... 72 you to social security benefits or change yourtrade a DC Zone asset at a gain, you will not
employment or immigration status under U.S.have to include any qualified capital gain in your
law.gross income. This exclusion applies to an inter-
est in, or property of, certain businesses operat-Photographs of missing children.The Inter-Important Changes ing in the District of Columbia. For morenal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theinformation, see Publication 954, Tax IncentivesNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-for 2002 for Empowerment Zones and Other Distresseddren. Photographs of missing children selected
Communities. by the Center may appear in this publication onReporting interest and dividends.Interest pages that would otherwise be blank. You canor ordinary dividend income that exceeds a cer- help bring these children home by looking at thetain amount must be reported on a separate photographs and calling 1–800–THE-LOSTschedule. For 2002, this amount has increased. (1–800– 843–5678) if you recognize a child.Important RemindersIf you file Form 1040A, you must now attach
Schedule 1 to your return if your interest or
dividend income is more than $1,500; if you file8% capital gain rate.The 10% capital gain
Form 1040, you must now attach Schedule B torate was lowered to 8% for qualified 5-year gain.
Introductionyour return if your interest or dividend income isFor more information, see Capital Gain Tax
more than $1,500. Before 2002, you had toRates in chapter 4. This publication provides information on the taxattach Schedule 1 or Schedule B if your interest treatment of investment income and expenses.or dividend income was more than $400. 18% capital gain rate.Beginning in 2006, theIt explains what investment income is taxable20% capital gain rate will be lowered to 18% forand what investment expenses are deductible. ItInterest on New York Liberty bonds.New qualified 5-year gain from property. explains when and how to show these items onYork Liberty bonds are bonds issued after your tax return. It also explains how to determineMarch 9, 2002, to finance the construction andU.S. property acquired from a foreign per-and report gains and losses on the disposition ofrehabilitation of real property in a newly desig-son. If you acquire a U.S. real property inter-investment property and provides informationnated “Liberty Zone ”of New York City. Interestest from a foreign person or firm, you may haveon property trades and tax shelters.on these bonds is tax exempt. to withhold income tax on the amount you payThere is a glossary at the end of this publica-for the property (including cash, the fair marketTax shelter disclosure statement.You must tion that defines many of the terms used.value of other property, and any assumed liabil-file a disclosure statement for each reportable
ity). Domestic or foreign corporations, partner-tax shelter transaction in which you participated, Investment income. This generally includesships, trusts, and estates may also have todirectly or indirectly, if your income tax liability interest, dividends, capital gains, and otherwithhold on certain distributions and other trans-was affected by the transaction. See Tax Shelter types of distributions.
actions involving U.S. real property interests. IfDisclosure Statement under Investor Reporting
you fail to withhold, you may be held liable forin chapter 2. Investment expenses. These include interest
the tax, penalties that apply, and interest. Forpaid or incurred to acquire investment property
more information, see Publication 515, With- and expenses to manage or collect income from
holding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and For-investment property.
eign Entities.Important Changes
Comments and suggestions. We welcomeForeign source income. If you are a U.S.for 2003 your comments about this publication and yourcitizen with investment income from sourcessuggestions for future editions.outside the United States (foreign income), youReportable transactions.You may have to You can e-mail us while visiting our web sitemust report that income on your tax return un-disclose information about certain transactions at www.irs.gov.less it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether(called “reportable transactions”) in which you You can write to us at the following address:you reside inside or outside the United Statesparticipated, directly or indirectly. This disclo-
and whether or not you receive a Form 1099sure requirement applies to reportable transac- Internal Revenue Servicefrom the foreign payer.tions entered into after 2002. Reportable Tax Forms and Publicationstransactions include transactions that are the W:CAR:MP:FPAlien’s individual taxpayer identificationsame or substantially similar to tax avoidance 1111 Constitution Ave. NWnumber (ITIN).The IRS will issue an ITIN to atransactions identified by the IRS, transactions Washington, DC 20224nonresident or resident alien who does not havethat are offered under conditions of confidential-
and is not eligible to get a social security numberity, and transactions that result in large losses.
(SSN). To apply for an ITIN, file Form W–7,You must disclose information about reportable We respond to many letters by telephone.
Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identifi-transactions on Form 8886, Reportable Trans- Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
cation Number, with the IRS. Enter your ITINaction Disclosure Statement. For more informa- clude your daytime phone number, including the
wherever an SSN is requested on a tax return. Iftion, see the instructions for Form 8886. area code, in your correspondence.
Page 2

Page 3 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 5 for information about gettingCustodian account for your child.If your
these publications and forms. child is the actual owner of an account that is
recorded in your name as custodian for the child,
1. give the child’s SSN to the payer. For example,
you must give your child’s SSN to the payer of
dividends on stock owned by your child, even
General Information
though the dividends are paid to you as custo-
Investment A few items of general interest are covered here.dian.
Recordkeeping. You should keep a Penalty for failure to supply SSN.You will
Income list showing sources and amounts ofbe subject to a penalty if, when required, you fail
investment income that you receiveto:RECORDS
during the year. Also, keep the forms you re-
1) Include your SSN on any return, state-ceive that show your investment income (FormsTopics
ment, or other document,1099–INT, Interest Income, and 1099–DIV,This chapter discusses: Dividends and Distributions, for example) as an 2) Give your SSN to another person who hasimportant part of your records.• Interest income, to include it on any return, statement, or
other document, or• Dividends and other corporate distribu-Tax on investment income of a child undertions, 3) Include the SSN of another person on anyage 14. Part of a child’s 2002 investment in-
return, statement, or other document.come may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. This• Real estate mortgage investment conduits
may happen if all of the following are true.(REMICs), financial asset securitization in- The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-
vestment trusts (FASITs), and other collat- mum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.1) The child was under age 14 at the end oferalized debt obligations (CDOs), You will not be subject to this penalty if you2002. A child born on January 1, 1989, is
can show that your failure to provide the SSN• S corporations, and considered to be age 14 at the end of
was due to a reasonable cause and not to willful2002.• Investment clubs. neglect.2) The child had more than $1,500 of invest-If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also bement income (such as taxable interest andUseful Items subject to backup withholding.dividends) and has to file a tax return.You may want to see:
3) Either parent was alive at the end of 2002.Backup withholding. Your investment in-
Publication come is generally not subject to regular with-If all of these statements are true, Form 8615 holding. However, it may be subject to backupmust be completed and attached to the child’s❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income withholding to ensure that income tax is col-tax return. If any of these statements is not true,
lected on the income. Under backup withhold-❏ 537 Installment Sales Form 8615 is not required and the child’s income
ing, the bank, broker, or other payer of interest,is taxed at his or her own tax rate.❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions original issue discount (OID), dividends, cashHowever, the parent can choose to include
patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold,❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangementsthe child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s
as income tax, a percentage of the amount you(IRAs) return if certain requirements are met. Use
are paid. For 2003, the percentage is 30%.Form 8814 for this purpose.❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules Backup withholding applies if:For more information about the tax on invest-
❏ 1212 List of Original Issue Discount ment income of children and the parents’ elec-
1) You do not give the payer your identifica-Instruments tion, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for Children
tion number (either a social security num-and Dependents.
Form (and Instructions) ber or an employer identification number)
Beneficiary of an estate or trust.Interest, in the required manner,
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040)Interest and dividends, and other investment income you re-2) The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) noti-Ordinary Dividends ceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust isfies the payer that you gave an incorrectgenerally taxable income. You should receive a❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A)Interest and identification number,Schedule K–1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary’sOrdinary Dividends for Form 1040A
Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from 3) The IRS notifies the payer that you areFilers
the fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K–1 and itssubject to backup withholding on interest
❏ 1099 General Instructions for Forms instructions will tell you where to report the in-or dividends because you have underre-
1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G come on your Form 1040. ported interest or dividends on your in-
come tax return, or❏ 3115 Application for Change in Social security number (SSN). You mustAccounting Method 4) You are required, but fail, to certify thatgive your name and SSN to any person required
you are not subject to backup withholdingby federal tax law to make a return, statement,❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax —
for the reason described in (3).or other document that relates to you. This in-Individuals
cludes payers of interest and dividends.❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations Certification.For new accounts paying in-SSN for joint account.If the funds in a jointterest or dividends, you must certify under pen-❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 14 Whoaccount belong to one person, list that person’salties of perjury that your social security numberHave Investment Income of More name first on the account and give that person’s(SSN) is correct and that you are not subject toThan $1,500 SSN to the payer. (For information on who ownsbackup withholding. Your payer will give you athe funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’s Form W–9 , Request for Taxpayer Identificationlater.) If the joint account contains combinedInterest and Dividends Number and Certification, or similar form, tofunds, give the SSN of the person whose namemake this certification. If you fail to make this❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Seriesis listed first on the account. certification, backup withholding may begin im-EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds These rules apply both to joint ownership bymediately on your new account or investment.Issued After 1989 a married couple and to joint ownership by other
Underreported interest and dividends.❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record individuals. For example, if you open a joint
You will be considered to have underreportedRedemption of Series EE and I savings account with your child using funds be-
your interest and dividends if the IRS has deter-U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After longing to the child, list the child’s name first on
mined for a tax year that:1989 the account and give the child’s SSN.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

Page 4 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If the IRS determines that backup withhold-Penalties.There are civil and criminal pen-
1) You failed to include any part of a reporta-ing should stop, it will provide you with a certifi-alties for giving false information to avoid
ble interest or dividend payment requiredcation and will notify the payers who were sent backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500.
to be shown on your return, or notices earlier. The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of
up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or2) You were required to file a return and toHow to stop backup withholding due to anboth.include a reportable interest or dividendincorrect identification number.If you have
payment on that return, but you failed tobeen notified by a payer that you are subject toWhere to report investment income.Tablefile the return. backup withholding because you have provided1–1  gives an overview of the forms and sched-
an incorrect SSN or employer identificationules to use to report some common types ofHow to stop backup withholding due to number, you can stop it by following the instruc-investment income. But, see the rest of thisunderreporting.If you have been notified thattions the payer gives you. publication for detailed information about report-you underreported interest or dividends, you can ing investment income.Reporting backup withholding.If backuprequest a determination from the IRS to prevent
withholding is deducted from your interest orbackup withholding from starting or to stop Joint accounts.If two or more persons hold
dividend income or other reportable payment,backup withholding once it has begun. You must property (such as a savings account, bond, or
the bank or other business must give you anshow that at least one of the following situations stock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or
information return for the year (for example, aapplies. tenants in common, each person’s share of any
Form 1099–INT) that indicates the amount with-interest or dividends from the property is deter-
held. The information return will show any1) No underreporting occurred. mined by local law.
backup withholding as “Federal income tax with-2) You have a bona fide dispute with the IRSheld.” Example. You and your husband have aabout whether underreporting occurred.
joint money market account. Under state law,Nonresident aliens.Generally, payments3) Backup withholding will cause or is caus- half the income from the account belongs to you,made to nonresident aliens are not subject toing an undue hardship, and it is unlikely and half belongs to your husband. If you filebackup withholding. You can use Formthat you will underreport interest and divi- separate returns, you each report half of theW–8BEN , Certificate of Foreign Status of Bene-dends in the future. income.ficial Owner for United States Tax Withholding,
4) You have corrected the underreporting by to certify exempt status. However, this does notIncome from property given to a child.
filing a return if you did not previously file exempt you from the 30% (or lower treaty) with-Property you give as a parent to your child under
one and by paying all taxes, penalties, and holding rate that may apply to your investmentthe Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the
interest due for any underreported interest income. For information on the 30% rate, seeUniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law,
or dividend payments. Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens. becomes the child’s property.
Income from the property is taxable to the
Table 1–1. Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal
obligation to support the child is taxable to the(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this
parent or guardian having that legal obligation.publication, especially How To Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend
Income) in chapter 1. Savings account with parent as trustee.
Interest income from a savings account openedIncome If you file Form 1040 If you can file Form If you can file Form
for a child who is a minor, but placed in the name1040A 1040EZ
and subject to the order of the parents as trust-
ees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of the
Taxable interest that Line 8a (You may need to Line 8a (You may need Line 2
totals $1,500 or less file Schedule B as well.) to file Schedule 1 as state in which the child resides, both of the
well.) following are true.
1) The savings account legally belongs to theOrdinary dividends that Line 9 (You may need to Line 9 (You may need to
total $1,500 or less file Schedule B as well.) file Schedule 1 as well.) child.
2) The parents are not legally permitted toTaxable interest that Line 8a; also use Line 9; also use use any of the funds to support the child.totals more than Schedule B Schedule 1
$1,500
Accuracy-related penalty.An accuracy-re-
lated penalty of 20% can be charged for under-Ordinary dividends that Line 9; also use Schedule Line 9; also use
total more than $1,500 B Schedule 1 payments of tax due to negligence or disregard
of rules or regulations or substantial understate-
Savings bond interest Schedule B; also use Schedule 1; also use ment of tax. For information on the penalty and
you will exclude Form 8815 Form 8815 any interest that applies, see Penalties in chap-
because of higher ter 2.education expenses You cannot use Form
1040EZ
Capital gain Line 13 Line 10
Interest Incomedistributions (if you do
not have to file
Terms you may need to knowSchedule D)
(see Glossary):
Capital gain Schedule D, line 13
distributions (if you
Accrual methodhave to file Schedule
D)
Below-market loan
Cash methodGain or loss from sale Line 13; also use You cannot use Form
of stocks or bonds Schedule D 1040A Demand loan
Forgone interestGain or loss from Line 13; also use
exchanges of Schedule D and Form Gift loaninvestment property 8824
Interest
Page 4 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 5 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nominee Interest on VA dividends.Interest on insur- of your net investment income. See Interest Ex-
ance dividends that you leave on deposit withpenses in chapter 3.Original issue discount the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not
Example. You deposited $5,000 with aPrivate activity bond taxable. This includes interest paid on dividends
bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank toon converted United States Government LifeTerm loan make up the $10,000 minimum deposit requiredInsurance policies and on National Service Life
to buy a 6–month money market certificate. TheInsurance policies.
certificate earned $575 at maturity in 2002, butThis section discusses the tax treatment of dif-Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).you received only $265, which represented theferent types of interest income. Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.$575 you earned minus $310 interest chargedIn general, any interest that you receive orInterest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. Youon your $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Formthat is credited to your account and can begenerally do not include it in your income until1099–INT for 2002 showing the $575 interestwithdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have toyou make withdrawals from the IRA. See Publi-you earned. The bank also gives you a state-be entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to thiscation 590 for more information. ment showing that you paid $310 interest forrule are discussed later. 2002. You must include the $575 in your in-
come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-Taxable Interest — GeneralForm 1099–INT. Interest income is generally ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subjectreported to you on Form 1099–INT, or a similarTaxable interest includes interest you receiveto the net investment income limit.statement, by banks, savings and loans, andfrom bank accounts, loans you make to others,other payers of interest. This form shows you the Gift for opening account.If you receive non-and other sources. The following are someinterest you received during the year. Keep this cash gifts or services for making deposits or forsources of taxable interest.form for your records. You do not have to attach opening an account in a savings institution, you
it to your tax return. may have to report the value as interest.Dividends that are actually interest.Certain
Report on your tax return the total amount of For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts ordistributions commonly called dividends are ac-
interest income that you receive for the tax year. services valued at more than $10 must be re-tually interest. You must report as interest
This includes amounts reported to you on Form ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 orso-called “dividends” on deposits or on share
1099–INT and amounts for which you did not more, gifts or services valued at more than $20accounts in:
must be reported as interest. The value is deter-receive a Form 1099–INT.
• Cooperative banks, mined by the cost to the financial institution.Nominees. Generally, if someone receives
• Credit unions,interest as a nominee for you, that person will Example. You open a savings account atgive you a Form 1099–INT showing the interest• Domestic building and loan associations,your local bank and deposit $800. The accountreceived on your behalf. earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-• Domestic savings and loan associations,If you receive a Form 1099–INT that in- culator. If no other interest is credited to your
cludes amounts belonging to another person,• Federal savings and loan associations,account during the year, the Form 1099–INT
see the discussion on nominee distributions,and you receive will show $35 interest for the year.
later, under How To Report Interest Income. You must report $35 interest income on your tax• Mutual savings banks. return.Incorrect amount. If you receive a Form
1099–INT that shows an incorrect amount (or Interest on insurance dividends.Interest onMoney market funds. Generally, amountsother incorrect information), you should ask the insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-you receive from money market funds should beissuer for a corrected form. The new Form surance company that can be withdrawn annu-reported as dividends, not as interest.1099–INT you receive will be marked “Cor- ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited torected.” your account. However, if you can withdraw itMoney market certificates, savings certifi-
only on the anniversary date of the policy (orcates, and other deferred interest accounts.Form 1099–OID. Reportable interest income other specified date), the interest is taxable inIf you open any of these accounts, interest maymay also be shown on Form 1099–OID, Origi- the year that date occurs.be paid at fixed intervals of 1 year or less duringnal Issue Discount. For more information aboutthe term of the account. You generally mustamounts shown on this form, see Original Issue Prepaid insurance premiums.Any increaseinclude this interest in your income when youDiscount (OID), later in this chapter. in the value of prepaid insurance premiums,actually receive it or are entitled to receive itadvance premiums, or premium deposit funds iswithout paying a substantial penalty. The sameExempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-is true for accounts that mature in 1 year or lessdividends you receive from a regulated invest- ums due on insurance policies or made avail-and pay interest in a single payment at maturity.ment company (mutual fund) are not included in able for you to withdraw.If interest is deferred for more than 1 year, seeyour taxable income. (However, see Original Issue Discount (OID), later. U.S. obligations.Interest on U.S. obligations,Information-reporting requirement, next.) You
such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes and bonds,will receive a notice from the mutual fund tellingInterest subject to penalty for early
issued by any agency or instrumentality of theyou the amount of the exempt-interest dividendswithdrawal. If you withdraw funds from a de-
United States is taxable for federal income taxthat you received. Exempt-interest dividendsferred interest account before maturity, you may
purposes.are not shown on Form 1099–DIV or Form have to pay a penalty. You must report the total
1099–INT. amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-Interest on tax refunds.Interest you receive
count during the year, without subtracting theon tax refunds is taxable income.Information-reporting requirement.Al- penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-though exempt-interest dividends are not taxa- Interest on condemnation award.If the con-ings under How To Report Interest Income,ble, you must show them on your tax return if demning authority pays you interest to compen-later, for more information on how to report theyou have to file. This is an information-reporting sate you for a delay in payment of an award, theinterest and deduct the penalty.requirement and does not change the interest is taxable.exempt-interest dividends to taxable income.Money borrowed to invest in money mar-
See How To Report Interest Income, later. ket certificate.The interest you pay on moneyInstallment sale payments.If a contract for
borrowed from a bank or savings institution to the sale or exchange of property provides for
Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid frommeet the minimum deposit required for a money deferred payments, it also usually provides for
specified private activity bonds may be subjectmarket certificate from the institution and the interest payable with the deferred payments.
to the alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251interest you earn on the certificate are two sepa- That interest is taxable when you receive it. If
and its instructions for more information aboutrate items. You must report the total interest you little or no interest is provided for in a deferred
this tax. (Private activity bonds are discussedearn on the certificate in your income. If you payment contract, part of each payment may be
later under State or Local Government Obliga-itemize deductions, you can deduct the interest treated as interest. See Unstated Interest and
tions.) you pay as investment interest, up to the amountOriginal Issue Discount in Publication 537.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

Page 6 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Interest on annuity contract.Accumulated Loans subject to the rules.The rules for Term loans. A term loan is any loan that is
interest on an annuity contract you sell before its below-market loans apply to: not a demand loan. A term loan is a below-mar-
maturity date is taxable. ket loan if the amount of the loan is more than
• Gift loans, the present value of all payments due under the
loan.Usurious interest.Usurious interest is inter-• Pay-related loans,
est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as A lender who makes a below-market term• Corporation-shareholder loans,interest unless state law automatically changes loan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer-
it to a payment on the principal. • Tax avoidance loans, and ring an additional lump-sum cash payment to
the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to capi-• Loans to qualified continuing care facilitiesInterest income on frozen deposits.Ex- tal, etc.) on the date the loan is made. The(made after October 11, 1985) under aclude from your gross income interest on frozen amount of this payment is the amount of the loancontinuing care contract.deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the minus the present value, at the applicable fed-
year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de- eral rate, of all payments due under the loan. AnA pay-related loan is any below-market loanposit because: equal amount is treated as original issue dis-between an employer and an employee or be-count (OID). The lender must report the annualtween an independent contractor and a person1) The financial institution is bankrupt or in- part of the OID as interest income. The borrowerfor whom the contractor provides services.solvent, or may be able to deduct the OID as interest ex-A tax avoidance loan is any below-marketpense. See Original Issue Discount (OID), later.2) The state in which the institution is locatedloan where the avoidance of federal tax is one ofhas placed limits on withdrawals becausethe main purposes of the interest arrangement.Exceptions to the below-market loan rules.other financial institutions in the state are
Exceptions to the below-market loan rules arebankrupt or insolvent. Forgone interest.For any period, forgone in-discussed here.terest is:The amount of interest you must exclude is
Exception for loans of $10,000 or less.the interest that was credited on the frozen de-
1) The amount of interest that would be pay-The rules for below-market loans do not apply toposits minus the sum of:
able for that period if interest accrued onany day on which the total outstanding amount
the loan at the applicable federal rate andof loans between the borrower and lender is1) The net amount you withdrew from these
was payable annually on December 31, $10,000 or less. This exception applies only to:deposits during the year, and
minus2) The amount you could have withdrawn as 1) Gift loans between individuals if the gift2) Any interest actually payable on the loanof the end of the year (not reduced by any loan is not directly used to buy or carryfor the period.penalty for premature withdrawals of a income-producing assets, andtime deposit).
Applicable federal rate.Applicable federal2) Pay-related loans or corporation-share-If you receive a Form 1099–INT for interestrates are published by the IRS each month in theholder loans if the avoidance of federal taxincome on deposits that were frozen at the endInternal Revenue Bulletin. You can also contact is not a principal purpose of the interestof 2002, see Frozen deposits under How To the IRS to get these rates. See chapter 5 forarrangement.Report Interest Income for information aboutways to get this information. This exception does not apply to a term loanreporting this interest income exclusion on your
described in (2) above that previously has beentax return. Rules for below-market loans.The rules thatsubject to the below-market loan rules. ThoseThe interest you exclude is treated asapply to a below-market loan depend on rules will continue to apply even if the outstand-credited to your account in the following year.whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, oring balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.You must include it in income in the year you canterm loan.
withdraw it. Exception for loans to continuing care fa-Gift and demand loans.A gift loan is anycilities.Loans to qualified continuing care fa-below-market loan where the forgone interest isExample. $100 of interest was credited on cilities under continuing care contracts are notin the nature of a gift.your frozen deposit during the year. You with- subject to the rules for below-market loans forA demand loan is a loan payable in full at anydrew $80 but could not withdraw any more as of the calendar year if the lender or the lender’stime upon demand by the lender. A demand loanthe end of the year. You must include $80 in spouse is 65 or older at the end of the year. Foris a below-market loan if no interest is chargedyour income for the year. You must exclude $20. 2002, this exception applies only to the part ofor if interest is charged at a rate below thethe total outstanding loan balance that isapplicable federal rate.Bonds traded flat.If you buy a bond at a $148,800 or less.
discount when interest has been defaulted orA demand loan or gift loan that is a Exception for loans without significant taxwhen the interest has accrued but has not beenbelow-market loan is generally treated as aneffect. Loans are excluded from thepaid, that interest is not income and is not taxa-arm’s-length transaction in which the lender isbelow-market loan rules if their interest arrange-ble as interest if paid later. When you receive atreated as having made: ments do not have a significant effect on thepayment of that interest, it is a return of capital
federal tax liability of the borrower or the lender.1) A loan to the borrower in exchange for athat reduces the remaining cost basis. Interest
These loans include:note that requires the payment of interestthat accrues after the date of purchase, how-
at the applicable federal rate, andever, is taxable interest income for the year
1) Loans made available by the lender to thereceived or accrued. See Bonds Sold Between 2) An additional payment to the borrower ingeneral public on the same terms and con-Interest Dates, later in this chapter. an amount equal to the forgone interest. ditions that are consistent with the lender’s
customary business practice,The borrower is generally treated as transferringBelow-Market Loans the additional payment back to the lender as2) Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or
interest. The lender must report that amount asIf you make a below-market gift or demand loan, municipal government that are made avail-
interest income.you must report as interest income any forgone able under a program of general applica-
The lender’s additional payment to the bor-interest (defined later) from that loan. The tion to the public,
rower is treated as a gift, dividend, contributionbelow-market loan rules and exceptions are de- 3) Certain employee-relocation loans,to capital, pay for services, or other payment,scribed in this section. For more information,
depending on the substance of the transaction.see section 7872 of the Internal Revenue Code 4) Certain loans from a foreign person, un-
The borrower may have to report this paymentand its regulations. less the interest income would be effec-
as taxable income, depending on its classifica-If you receive a below-market loan, you may tively connected with the conduct of a U.S.
tion.be able to deduct the forgone interest as well as trade or business and would not be ex-
These transfers are considered to occur an-any interest that you actually paid, but not if it is empt from U.S. tax under an income tax
nually, generally on December 31.personal interest. treaty,
Page 6 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 7 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5) Gift loans to a charitable organization, con-Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cash date and not previously reported for all your
method of accounting, as most individual tax- bonds.tributions to which are deductible, if the
payers do, you generally report the interest ontotal outstanding amount of loans between Once you choose to report the interest each
U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But seethe organization and lender is $250,000 or year, you must continue to do so for all series
the discussion of Series EE and series I bonds,less at all times during the tax year, and EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and for
below. any you get later, unless you request permission6) Other loans on which the interest arrange- to change, as explained next.ment can be shown to have no significantSeries HH bonds. These bonds are issued ateffect on the federal tax liability of the Change from method 2. To change fromface value. Interest is paid twice a year by directlender or the borrower. method 2 to method 1, you must request permis-deposit to your bank account. If you are a cashsion from the IRS. Permission for the change ismethod taxpayer, you must report interest onFor a loan described in (6) above, all the automatically granted if you send the IRS athese bonds as income in the year you receive it.facts and circumstances are used to determine if statement that meets all the following require-the interest arrangement has a significant effectSeries HH bonds were first offered in 1980.ments.on the federal tax liability of the lender or bor-Before 1980, series H bonds were issued. Se-
rower. Some factors to be considered are:ries H bonds are treated the same as series HH1) You have typed or printed at the top,bonds. If you are a cash method taxpayer, you“Change in Method of Accounting Under• Whether items of income and deductionmust report the interest when you receive it.Section 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc.generated by the loan offset each other,Series H bonds have a maturity period of 3099–49 ” (or later update).• The amount of these items, years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.
2) It includes your name and social security• The cost to you of complying with the number under the label in (1).Series EE and series I bonds.Interest onbelow-market loan rules, if they were tothese bonds is payable when you redeem the3) It identifies the savings bonds for whichapply, and bonds. The difference between the purchase you are requesting this change.
• Any reasons other than taxes for structur-price and the redemption value is taxable inter-
4) It includes your agreement to:ing the transaction as a below-marketest.
loan. Series EE bonds were first offered in Julya) Report all interest on any bonds ac-1980. They have a maturity period of 30 years. quired during or after the year ofIf you structure a transaction to meet thisBefore July 1980, series E bonds were issued. change when the interest is realizedexception, and one of the principal purposes ofThe original 10-year maturity period of series Eupon disposition, redemption, or finalstructuring the transaction in that way is thebonds has been extended to 40 years for bonds maturity, whichever is earliest, andavoidance of federal tax, the loan will be consid-issued before December 1965 and 30 years for
b) Report all interest on the bonds ac-ered a tax-avoidance loan and this exception willbonds issued after November 1965. Series EE
quired before the year of change whennot apply. and series E bonds are issued at a discount. The
the interest is realized upon disposition,face value is payable to you at maturity.Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of redemption, or final maturity, whicheverSeries I bonds were first offered in 1998.$100,000 or less.For gift loans between indi- is earliest, with the exception of the in-These are inflation-indexed bonds issued atviduals, if the outstanding loans between the terest reported in prior tax years.their face amount with a maturity period of 30lender and borrower total $100,000 or less, the
years. The face value plus accrued interest isforgone interest to be included in income by the 5) It includes your signature.payable to you at maturity.lender and deducted by the borrower is limited to
If you use the cash method of reporting in-You must attach this statement to your tax re-the amount of the borrower’s net investment
come, you can report the interest on series EE,turn for the year of change, which you must fileincome for the year. If the borrower’s net invest-
series E, and series I bonds in either of theby the due date (including extensions).ment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated as
following ways.zero. This limit does not apply to a loan if the You can have an automatic extension of 6
avoidance of federal tax is one of the main months from the due date of your return (includ-1) Method 1. Postpone reporting the interestpurposes of the interest arrangement. ing extensions) to file the statement with anuntil the earlier of the year you cash oramended return. To get this extension, you mustdispose of the bonds or the year in whichEffective dates.These rules apply to term have filed your original return by the due datethey mature. (However, see Savingsloans made after June 6, 1984, and to demand (including extensions). At the top of the state-bonds traded, later.) Note. Series E bondsloans outstanding after that date. ment, write “Filed pursuant to sectionissued in 1962 and 1972 matured in 2002.301.9100–2.”If you have used method 1, you generallyU.S. Savings Bonds By the date you file the original state-must report the interest on these bonds on
ment, you must also send a copy to theyour 2002 return.This section provides tax information on U.S. address below.savings bonds. It explains how to report the2) Method 2. Choose to report the increase Internal Revenue Serviceinterest income on these bonds and how to treatin redemption value as interest each year.Attention: CC:PA:Ttransfers of these bonds. P.O. Box 7604You must use the same method for all series EE,
For other information on U.S. savings Benjamin Franklin Stationseries E, and series I bonds you own. If you do
bonds, write to: Washington, DC 20044.not choose method 2 by reporting the increase
in redemption value as interest each year, youIf you use a private delivery service, send theBureau of the Public Debt must use method 1. copy to the Internal Revenue Service, Attention:Savings Bond Operations Office CC:PA:T, Room 6561, 1111 Constitution Ave-If you plan to cash your bonds in theP.O. Box 1328 nue, NW, Washington, DC 20224.same year that you will pay for higherParkersburg, WV 26106–1328. Instead of filing this statement, you can re-educational expenses, you may want
TIP
quest permission to change from method 2 toto use method 1 because you may be able toOr, on the Internet, visit:
method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,exclude the interest from your income. To learnwww. savingsbonds.gov
follow the form instructions for an automatichow, see Education Savings Bond Program,
change. No user fee is required.later.
Accrual method taxpayers.If you use an ac- Change from method 1. If you want to Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in
crual method of accounting, you must reportchange your method of reporting the interest the names of co-owners, such as you and your
interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as itfrom method 1 to method 2, you can do so child or you and your spouse, interest on the
accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interestwithout permission from the IRS. In the year of bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who
until you receive it or until the bonds mature. change you must report all interest accrued to bought the bond.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Page 8 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
has to report at that time the interest earnedTable 1–2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
before the bonds were reissued.
IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ...
Example 1. You and your spouse eachyou buy a bond in your name and the name of you. spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 seriesanother person as co-owners, using only your EE savings bond. The bond was issued to youown funds and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-
pone reporting interest on the bond. You lateryou buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond.
who is the sole owner of the bond have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one
in your name and one in your spouse’s name. Atyou and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportionthat time neither you nor your spouse has toco-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond. report the interest earned to the date of reissue.purchase price
Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EEyou and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate
property state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generallysavings bond entirely with your own funds. The
property report one-half of the interest. bond was issued to you and your spouse as
co-owners. You both postponed reporting inter-
est on the bond. You later have the bond reis-
One co-owner’s funds used. If you used interest under this choice. However, see Tax on sued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and
your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the taxinvestment income of a child under age 14,one in your spouse’s name. You must report half
on the interest. This is true even if you let theearlier, under General Information. Neither you the interest earned to the date of reissue.
other co-owner redeem the bond and keep allnor your child can change the way you report the
Transfer to a trust.If you own series E, seriesthe proceeds. Under these circumstances, sinceinterest unless you request permission from the
EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to athe other co-owner will receive a Form IRS, as discussed earlier under Change from
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must1099–INT at the time of redemption, the othermethod 2.
include in your income for that year the interestco-owner must provide you with another Form
Ownership transferred.If you bought seriesearned to the date of transfer if you have not1099–INT showing the amount of interest from
E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely withthe bond that is taxable to you. The co-owner already reported it. However, if you are consid-
your own funds and had them reissued in yourwho redeemed the bond is a “nominee.” See ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in
co-owner’s name or beneficiary’s name alone,Nominee distributions under How To Report In- value both before and after the transfer contin-
terest Income, later, for more information about you must include in your gross income for theues to be taxable to you, you can continue to
how a person who is a nominee reports interestyear of reissue all interest that you earned ondefer reporting the interest earned each year.
income belonging to another person. these bonds and have not previously reported.You must include the total interest in your in-
But, if the bonds were reissued in your namecome in the year you cash or dispose of theBoth co-owners’ funds used. If you and alone, you do not have to report the interestbonds or the year the bonds finally mature,the other co-owner each contribute part of theaccrued at that time. whichever is earlier.bond’s purchase price, the interest is generallyThis same rule applies when bonds (other The same rules apply to previously unre-taxable to each of you, in proportion to thethan bonds held as community property) areported interest on series EE or series E bonds ifamount each of you paid.
transferred between spouses or incident to di-the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or
Community property. If you and your vorce. series H bonds you acquired in a trade for the
spouse live in a community property state and series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds
hold bonds as community property, one-half ofExample. You bought series EE bonds en-traded, later.
the interest is considered received by each oftirely with your own funds. You did not choose to
you. If you file separate returns, each of you Decedents. The manner of reporting interestreport the accrued interest each year. Later, you
generally must report one-half of the bond inter- income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds,transfer the bonds to your former spouse under
est. For more information about community after the death of the owner, depends on thea divorce agreement. You must include the de-
property, see Publication 555, Community Prop- accounting and income-reporting method previ-ferred accrued interest, from the date of the
erty. ously used by the decedent.original issue of the bonds to the date of transfer,
in your income in the year of transfer. YourTable 1–2. These rules are also shown in Decedent who reported interest each year.former spouse includes in income the interest onTable 1–2. If the bonds transferred because of death werethe bonds from the date of transfer to the date ofowned by a person who used an accrualredemption.Child as only owner.Interest on U.S. savings method, or who used the cash method and had
bonds bought for and registered only in the chosen to report the interest each year, thePurchased jointly. If you and aname of your child is income to your child, even interest earned in the year of death up to theco-owner each contributed funds to buy seriesif you paid for the bonds and are named as date of death must be reported on that person’sE, series EE, or series I bonds jointly and laterbeneficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E, final return. The person who acquires the bondshave the bonds reissued in the co-owner’s nameor series I bonds, the interest on the bonds is includes in income only interest earned after thealone, you must include in your gross income forincome to your child in the earlier of the year the date of death.the year of reissue your share of all the interestbonds are cashed or disposed of or the year theearned on the bonds that you have not previ-Decedent who postponed reporting inter-bonds mature, unless your child chooses to re-ously reported. At the time of reissue, the formerest. If the transferred bonds were owned by aport the interest income each year. co-owner does not have to include in gross in-decedent who had used the cash method andcome his or her share of the interest earned thatChoice to report interest each year.The had not chosen to report the interest each year,was not reported before the transfer. This inter-choice to report the accrued interest each year and who had bought the bonds entirely with hisest, however, as well as all interest earned aftercan be made either by your child or by you for or her own funds, all interest earned beforethe reissue, is income to the former co-owner.your child. This choice is made by filing an in- death must be reported in one of the following
come tax return that shows all the interestThis income-reporting rule also applies whenways.
earned to date, and by stating on the return thatthe bonds are reissued in the name of your
your child chooses to report the interest eachformer co-owner and a new co-owner. But the1) The surviving spouse or personal repre-
year. Either you or your child should keep a copynew co-owner will report only his or her share ofsentative (executor, administrator, etc.)
of this return. the interest earned after the transfer. who files the final income tax return of the
decedent can choose to include on thatIf bonds that you and a co-owner boughtUnless your child is otherwise required to file
return all of the interest earned on thejointly are reissued to each of you separately ina tax return for any year after making this choice,
bonds before the decedent’s death. Thethe same proportion as your contribution to theyour child does not have to file a return only to
person who acquires the bonds then in-purchase price, neither you nor your co-ownerreport the annual accrual of U.S. savings bond
Page 8 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 9 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cludes in income only interest earned after series H bonds but not received as of the date of Form 1099–INT should show the interest as the
the date of death. your aunt’s death. You must report any interest difference between the amount you received
received during the year as income on yourand the amount paid for the bond. However,2) If the choice in (1) is not made, the interestreturn. The part of the interest that was payableyour Form 1099–INT may show more interestearned up to the date of death is income inbut not received before your aunt’s death isthan you have to include on your income taxrespect of the decedent. It should not beincome in respect of the decedent and mayreturn. For example, this may happen if any ofincluded in the decedent’s final return. Allqualify for the estate tax deduction. For informa-the following are true.of the interest earned both before and aftertion on when to report the interest on the seriesthe decedent’s death (except any part re-E bonds traded, see Savings bonds traded, 1) You chose to report the increase in theported by the estate on its income tax re-later. redemption value of the bond each year.turn) is income to the person who acquires The interest shown on your Formthe bonds. If that person uses the cashSavings bonds distributed from a retirement 1099–INT will not be reduced by amountsmethod and does not choose to report theor profit-sharing plan.If you acquire a U.S. previously included in income.interest each year, he or she can postponesavings bond in a taxable distribution from a
reporting it until the year the bonds areretirement or profit-sharing plan, your income for2) You received the bond from a decedent.
cashed or disposed of or the year theythe year of distribution includes the bond’s re-The interest shown on your Form
mature, whichever is earlier. In the yeardemption value (its cost plus the interest ac-1099–INT will not be reduced by any inter-
that person reports the interest, he or shecrued before the distribution). When you redeemest reported by the decedent before death,
can claim a deduction for any federal es-the bond (whether in the year of distribution oror on the decedent’s final return, or by the
tate tax that was paid on the part of thelater), your interest income includes only theestate on the estate’s income tax return.
interest included in the decedent’s estate.interest accrued after the bond was distributed.3) Ownership of the bond was transferred.To figure the interest reported as a taxable distri-For more information on income in respect of a The interest shown on your Formbution and your interest income when you re-decedent, see Publication 559, Survivors, Exec- 1099–INT will not be reduced by interestdeem the bond, see Worksheet for savingsutors, and Administrators. that accrued before the transfer.bonds distributed from a retirement or
profit-sharing plan under How To Report Interest4) You were named as a co-owner and theExample 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax-Income, later. other co-owner contributed funds to buypayer, died and left you a $1,000 series EE
the bond. The interest shown on yourbond. He had bought the bond for $500 and hadSavings bonds traded. If you postponed re- Form 1099–INT will not be reduced by thenot chosen to report the interest each year. Atporting the interest on your series EE or series Eamount you received as nominee for thethe date of death, interest of $200 had accruedbonds, you did not recognize taxable income other co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier inon the bond and its value of $700 was includedwhen you traded the bonds for series HH or this section, for more information about thein your uncle’s estate. Your uncle’s executorseries H bonds, unless you received cash in thereporting requirements.)chose not to include the $200 accrued interest intrade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-
your uncle’s final income tax return. The $200 isries HH bonds.) Any cash you received is in-5) You received the bond in a taxable distri-income in respect of the decedent. come up to the amount of the interest earned onbution from a retirement or profit-sharing
You are a cash method taxpayer and do notthe bonds traded. When your series HH or se-plan. The interest shown on your Form
choose to report the interest each year as it isries H bonds mature, or if you dispose of them1099–INT will not be reduced by the inter-
earned. If you cash the bond when it reachesbefore maturity, you report as interest the differ-est portion of the amount taxable as a dis-
maturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter-ence between their redemption value and yourtribution from the plan and not taxable as
est income—the difference between maturitycost. Your cost is the sum of the amount youinterest. (This amount is generally shown
value of $1,000 and the original cost of $500.paid for the traded series EE or series E bondson Form 1099–R, Distributions From Pen-
For that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane-plus any amount you had to pay at the time ofsions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Shar-
ous itemized deduction not subject to thethe trade. ing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc.,
2%-of-adjusted- gross-income limit) any federal for the year of distribution.)estate tax paid because the $200 interest wasExample 1. You own series E bonds with
For more information on including the correctincluded in your uncle’s estate. accrued interest of $523 and a redemption value
amount of interest on your return, see U.S. sav-of $2,723 and have postponed reporting the
ings bond interest previously reported or Nomi-Example 2. If, in Example 1, the executor interest. You trade the bonds for $2,500 in series
nee distributions under How To Report Interesthad chosen to include the $200 accrued interestHH bonds and $223 in cash. You must report the
Income, later.in your uncle’s final return, you would report only$223 as taxable income in the year of the trade.
$300 as interest when you cashed the bond at Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-maturity. $300 is the interest earned after yourExample 2. The facts are the same as in empt from state and local taxes. Theuncle’s death. Example 1. You hold the series HH bonds until Form 1099–INT you receive will indi-
TIP
maturity, when you receive $2,500. You mustcate the amount that is for U.S. savings bondsExample 3. If, in Example 1, you make or report $300 as interest income in the year ofinterest in box 3. Do not include this income onhave made the choice to report the increase inmaturity. This is the difference between theiryour state or local income tax return.redemption value as interest each year, youredemption value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200
include in gross income for the year you acquire(the amount you paid for the series E bonds). (It
the bond all of the unreported increase in valueis also the difference between the accrued inter-
Education Savings Bond Programof all series E, series EE, and series I bonds youest of $523 on the series E bonds and the $223
hold, including the $200 on the bond you inher-cash received on the trade.) You may be able to exclude from income all orited from your uncle. Choice to report interest in year of trade.part of the interest you receive on the redemp-
You can choose to treat all of the previouslytion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during theExample 4. When your aunt died, she unreported accrued interest on series EE oryear if you pay qualified higher educational ex-owned series H bonds that she had acquired in aseries E bonds traded for series HH bonds aspenses during the same year. This exclusion istrade for series E bonds. You were the benefi-income in the year of the trade. If you make thisknown as the Education Savings Bond Program.ciary of these bonds. Your aunt used the cashchoice, it is treated as a change from method 1.If you are married, you can qualify for thismethod and did not choose to report the interestSee Change from method 1 under Series EE exclusion only if you file a joint return with youron the series E bonds each year as it accrued.and series I bonds, earlier. spouse.Your aunt’s executor chose not to include any
interest earned before your aunt’s death on herForm 1099–INT for U.S. savings bond
final return. Form 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of In-interest.When you cash a bond, the bank or
terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings BondsThe income in respect of the decedent is the other payer that redeems it must give you a
Issued After 1989, to figure your exclusion. At-sum of the unreported interest on the series E Form 1099–INT if the interest part of the pay-
tach the form to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.bonds and the interest, if any, payable on the ment you receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Page 10 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified U.S. savings bonds.A qualified 3) Figure how much of a distribution from a 22 of Form 1040A or line 36 of Form 1040)
qualified tuition program you can exclude figured before the interest exclusion, and modi-U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued
from your income. fied by adding back any:after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be
issued either in your name (sole owner) or inFor information about these benefits, see Publi-1) Foreign earned income exclusion,your and your spouse’s names (co-owners).cation 970.
You must be at least 24 years old before the 2) Foreign housing exclusion or deduction,
Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in-bond’s issue date. 3) Exclusion of income for bona fide re-terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav-
sidents of American Samoa,The date a bond is issued may be ear-ings bonds you redeem during the year are not
lier than the date the bond is pur-more than your qualified higher educational ex-4) Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,chased because bonds are issued asCAUTION
!
penses for the year, you can exclude all of the
5) Exclusion for adoption benefits receivedof the first day of the month in which they areinterest. If the proceeds are more than the ex-
under an employer’s adoption assistancepurchased. penses, you can exclude only part of the inter-
program,est.
Beneficiary.You can designate any individ-To determine the excludable amount, multi-6) Deduction for tuition and fees, andual (including a child) as a beneficiary of theply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.7) Deduction for student loan interest.bond. The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the
qualified higher educational expenses you paidUse the worksheet in the instructions for lineVerification by IRS.If you claim the exclu-
during the year. The denominator (bottom part)9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If yousion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp-of the fraction is the total proceeds you receivedclaim any of the exclusion or deduction itemstion information from the Department of during the year. listed above (except items 6 and 7), add theTreasury.
amount of the exclusion or deduction (except
Example. In February 2002, Mark and any deduction for tuition and fees or student loanQualified expenses.Qualified higher educa-Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-interest) to the amount on line 5 of the work-tional expenses are tuition and fees required forries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in Aprilsheet, and enter the total on Form 8815, line 9,you, your spouse, or your dependent (for whom1994. They received proceeds of $7,280, repre-as your modified AGI.you claim an exemption) to attend an eligiblesenting principal of $5,000 and interest of
Royalties included in modified AGI.Be-educational institution. $2,280. In 2002, they paid $4,000 of their
cause the deduction for interest expenses attrib-Qualified expenses include any contributiondaughter’s college tuition. They are not claiming
utable to royalties and other investments isyou make to a qualified tuition program or to aan education credit for that amount, and they do
limited to your net investment income (see In-not have a Coverdell ESA. They can excludeCoverdell education savings account. For infor-
vestment Interest in chapter 3), you cannot fig-$1,253 ($2,280 × ($4,000 ÷ $7,280)) of interestmation about these programs, see Publication ure the deduction until you have figured thisin 2002. They must pay tax on the remaining970, Tax Benefits for Education. interest exclusion. Therefore, if you had interest$1,027 ($2,280 − $1,253) interest.Qualified expenses do not include expenses expenses attributable to royalties and deducti-for room and board or for courses involvingFiguring the interest part of the proceedsble on Schedule E (Form 1040), you must makesports, games, or hobbies that are not part of a(Form 8815, line 6).To figure the amount ofa special computation of your deductible interestdegree or certificate granting program. interest to report on Form 8815, line 6, use thewithout regard to this exclusion to figure the net
Line 6 Worksheet in the Form 8815 instructions.royalty income included in your modified AGI.Eligible educational institutions.These
You can use a “dummy” Form 4952, Invest-institutions include most public, private, and If you previously reported any interest
ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make thefrom savings bonds cashed duringnonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational
special computation. On this form, include in2002, use the Alternate Line 6 Work-schools that are accredited and are eligible to
your net investment income your total interestsheet below instead.participate in student aid programs run by the
income for the year from series EE and I U.S.Department of Education. savings bonds. Use the deductible interestAlternate Line 6 WorksheetReduction for certain benefits.You must amount from this form only to figure your modi-
reduce your qualified higher educational ex- fied AGI. Do not attach this form to your tax1. Enter the amount from Form 8815,
penses by certain benefits the student may haveline 5.................... return.
received. These benefits include: 2. Enter the face value of all post-1989 After you figure this interest exclusion, use a
series EE bonds cashed in 2002 . . separate Form 4952 to figure your actual deduc-
1) Qualified scholarships that are exempt3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50) tion for investment interest expenses, and at-
4. Enter the face value of all series Ifrom tax (see Publication 520, Scholar- tach that form to your return.
bonds cashed in 2002..........ships and Fellowships, for information on Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter-5. Add lines 3 and 4............qualified scholarships), and est exclusion, you must keep a written6. Subtract line 5 from line 1.......
2) Any other nontaxable payments (other record of the qualified U.S. savings7. Enter the amount of interest
RECORDS
than gifts, bequests, or inheritances) re- bonds you redeem. Your record must includereported as income in previous
ceived for educational expenses, such as: the serial number, issue date, face value, andyears ....................
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter thetotal redemption proceeds (principal and inter-
a) Veterans’ educational assistance bene-result here and on Form 8815, line 6 est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818 ,
fits, Optional Form To Record Redemption of Series
Modified adjusted gross income limit. EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989,b) Benefits under a qualified tuition pro-The interest exclusion is limited if your modifiedto record this information. You should also keepgram, or adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is: bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-
c) Certain employer-provided educational mentation that shows you paid qualified higher• $57,600 to $72,600 for taxpayers filing sin-assistance benefits. educational expenses during the year.gle or head of household, and
• $86,400 to $116,400 for married taxpayersEffect of other education benefits.Do not U.S. Treasury Bills,filing jointly, or for a qualifying widow(er)include in your qualified expenses any expensewith dependent child. Notes, and Bondsused to:
You do not qualify for the interest exclusion ifTreasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts1) Figure an education credit on Form 8863,your modified AGI is equal to or more than the(obligations) of the U.S. Government.upper limit for your filing status.2) Figure how much of a distribution from a Interest income from Treasury bills, notes,
Coverdell ESA you can exclude from yourModified AGI. Modified AGI, for purposes and bonds is subject to federal income tax, but is
income, or of this exclusion, is adjusted gross income (line exempt from all state and local income taxes.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 11 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You should receive Form 1099–INT showing Retirement, sale, or redemption.For infor- issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a
the amount of interest (in box 3) that was paid to mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption of U.S. possession, or any of their political subdivi-
you for the year. U.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or-sions. Political subdivisions include:
dinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non-Payments of principal and interest generally • Port authorities,taxable Trades in chapter 4 for informationwill be credited to your designated checking or
• Toll road commissions,about trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer-savings account by direct deposit through the
tain other designated issues.TREASURY DIRECT system. • Utility services authorities,
Treasury bills.These bills generally have a • Community redevelopment agencies, andBonds Sold Between
4-week, 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week maturity • Qualified volunteer fire departments (forInterest Datesperiod. They are issued at a discount in the certain obligations issued after 1980).amount of $1,000 and multiples of $1,000. TheIf you sell a bond between interest paymentdifference between the discounted price you pay There are other requirements for tax-exemptdates, part of the sales price represents interestfor the bills and the face value you receive at bonds. Contact the issuing state or local govern-accrued to the date of sale. You must report thatmaturity is interest income. Generally, you re- ment agency or see sections 103 and 141part of the sales price as interest income for theport this interest income when the bill is paid at through 150 of the Internal Revenue Code andyear of sale.maturity. See Discount on Short-Term Obliga- the related regulations.If you buy a bond between interest paymenttions under Discount on Debt Instruments, later. dates, part of the purchase price represents Obligations that are not bonds. Inter-If you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur-interest accrued before the date of purchase. est on a state or local government obli-ity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you willWhen that interest is paid to you, treat it as agation may be tax exempt even if thereceive payment for the difference between the
TIP
return of your capital investment, rather thanobligation is not a bond. For example, interest onproceeds of the maturing bill (par amount lessinterest income, by reducing your basis in thea debt evidenced only by an ordinary writtenany tax withheld) and the purchase price of thebond. See Accrued interest on bonds under agreement of purchase and sale may be taxnew Treasury security. However, you must re-How To Report Interest Income, later in thisexempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer onport the full amount of the interest income onchapter, for information on reporting the pay-default by the state or political subdivision mayeach of your Treasury bills at the time it reachesment. be tax exempt.maturity.
InsuranceTreasury notes and bonds. Treasury notes Registration requirement.A bond issued af-
have maturity periods of more than 1 year, rang- ter June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis-Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-ing up to 10 years. Maturity periods for Treasury tered form for the interest to be tax exempt.ciary of the insured person are usually not taxa-bonds are longer than 10 years. Both of theseble. But if you receive the proceeds in Indian tribal government.Bonds issued afterTreasury issues generally are issued in denomi-installments, you must usually report part of1982 by an Indian tribal government are treatednations of $1,000 to $1 million. Both notes andeach installment payment as interest income.as issued by a state. Interest on these bonds isbonds generally pay interest every 6 months.For more information about insurance pro-generally tax exempt if the bonds are part of anGenerally, you report this interest for the yearceeds received in installments, see Publicationissue of which substantially all of the proceedspaid. When the notes or bonds mature, you can525. are to be used in the exercise of any essentialredeem these securities for face value.
government function. However, interest on pri-Treasury notes and bonds are usually soldInterest option on insurance.If you leave lifevate activity bonds (other than certain bonds forby auction with competitive bidding. If, afterinsurance proceeds on deposit with an insur-tribal manufacturing facilities) is taxable.compiling the competitive bids, a determinationance company under an agreement to pay inter-
is made that the purchase price is less than theest only, the interest paid to you is taxable.Original issue discount.Original issue dis-face value, you will receive a refund for the count (OID) on tax-exempt state or local govern-difference between the purchase price and theAnnuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-ment bonds is treated as tax-exempt interest.face value. This amount is considered originalance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-For information on the treatment of OIDissue discount. However, the original issue dis-ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income,when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, seecount rules (discussed later) do not apply if thenot as interest income. See Publication 939,Tax-exempt state and local government bondsdiscount is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) ofGeneral Rule for Pensions and Annuities, for under Discounted Debt Instruments in chapterthe face amount multiplied by the number of fullinformation on taxation of pension and annuity4.years from the date of original issue to maturity.income.
See De minimis OID under Original Issue Dis- Stripped bonds or coupons. For special
count (OID), later. If the purchase price is deter- rules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga-State or Local
mined to be more than the face amount, the tions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons underGovernment Obligationsdifference is a premium. (See Bond Premium Original Issue Discount (OID), later.
Amortization in chapter 3.) Interest you receive on an obligation issued by aInformation reporting requirement.If you
state or local government is generally not taxa-For other information on these notes or must file a tax return, you are required to show
ble. The issuer should be able to tell youbonds, write to: any tax-exempt interest you received on your
whether the interest is taxable. The issuerreturn. This is an information-reporting require-
should also give you a periodic (or year-end)Treasury Direct ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-
statement showing the tax treatment of the obli-Attn: Customer Information est to taxable interest. See Reporting
gation. If you invested in the obligation through aP.O. Box 9150 tax-exempt interest under How To Report Inter-
trust, a fund, or other organization, that organi-Minneapolis, MN 55480–9150. est Income, later in this chapter. That discussion
zation should give you this information. also explains what to do if you receive a Form
Or, on the Internet, visit: 1099–INT for tax-exempt interest.Even if interest on the obligation is notwww. publicdebt.treas.gov subject to income tax, you may have to
report capital gain or loss when you sellCAUTION
!
Taxable Interestit. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax may
apply to other dispositions of the obligation.Treasury inflation-indexed securities. Interest on some state or local obligations is
These securities pay interest twice a year at a taxable.
fixed rate, based on a principal amount that is
adjusted to take into account inflation and defla- Federally guaranteed bonds. Interest onTax-Exempt Interest
tion. For the tax treatment of these securities, federally guaranteed state or local obligations
see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments under Interest on a bond used to finance government issued after 1983 is generally taxable. This rule
Original Issue Discount (OID), later. operations generally is not taxable if the bond is does not apply to interest on obligations guaran-
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

Page 12 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
teed by the following U.S. Government agen- Interest that you receive on these tax-ex- taxable (but see State or Local Government
cies. empt bonds (except qualified 501(c)(3) bonds Obligations, earlier, for exceptions). See also
and New York Liberty bonds), if issued afterREMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs, later, for• Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran-August 7, 1986, generally is a “tax preference information about applying the rules discussedtee was under the Northwest Power Act asitem” and may be subject to the alternative mini- in this section to the regular interest holder of ain effect on July 18, 1984). mum tax. See Form 6251 and its instructions for real estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi-
• Department of Veterans Affairs. more information. nancial asset securitization investment trust, or
other CDO.• Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora- Enterprise zone facility bonds.Interest on
tion. certain private activity bonds issued by a state or
Original Issuelocal government to finance a facility used in an• Federal Housing Administration. empowerment zone or enterprise community isDiscount (OID)
• Federal National Mortgage Association.tax exempt. For information on these bonds, see
OID is a form of interest. You generally includePublication 954.• Government National Mortgage Corpora- OID in your income as it accrues over the term oftion. New York Liberty bonds. New York Liberty the debt instrument, whether or not you receive
bonds are bonds issued after March 9, 2002, toany payments from the issuer.• Resolution Funding Corporation.
finance the construction and rehabilitation ofA debt instrument generally has OID when• Student Loan Marketing Association. real property in a newly designated “Libertythe instrument is issued for a price that is lessZone” of New York City. Interest on these bondsthan its stated redemption price at maturity. OIDis tax exempt.Mortgage revenue bonds. The proceeds of is the difference between the stated redemption
these bonds are used to finance mortgage loans price at maturity and the issue price.Market discount. Market discount on afor homebuyers. Generally, interest on state or All instruments that pay no interest beforetax-exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If youlocal government home mortgage bonds issued maturity are presumed to be issued at a dis-bought the bond after April 30, 1993, you canafter April 24, 1979, is taxable unless the bonds count. Zero coupon bonds are one example ofchoose to accrue the market discount over theare qualified mortgage bonds or qualified veter- these instruments.period you own the bond and include it in yourans’ mortgage bonds. The OID accrual rules generally do not applyincome currently, as taxable interest. See Mar-
to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-ket Discount Bonds under Discount on DebtArbitrage bonds.Interest on arbitrage bonds turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).Instruments, later. If you do not make thatissued by state or local governments after Octo- See Discount on Short-Term Obligations, later.choice, or if you bought the bond before May 1,ber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is a1993, any gain from market discount is taxableFor information about the sale of a debt in-bond any portion of the proceeds of which iswhen you dispose of the bond. strument with OID, see chapter 4.expected to be used to buy (or to replace fundsFor more information on the treatment ofused to buy) higher yielding investments. Amarket discount when you dispose of a tax-ex-De minimis OID. You can treat the discountbond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuerempt bond, see Discounted Debt Instrumentsas zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025)intentionally uses any part of the proceeds of theunder Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss in chap- of the stated redemption price at maturity multi-issue in this manner. ter 4. plied by the number of full years from the date of
original issue to maturity. This small discount isPrivate activity bonds.Interest on a private
known as “de minimis” OID.activity bond that is not a qualified bond (defined
below) is taxable. Generally, a private activity
Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond withDiscount onbond is part of a state or local government bond
a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,issue that meets both of the following require-
issued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofDebt Instrumentsments.
1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10
Terms you may need to know1) More than 10% of the proceeds of the is- (the number of full years from the date of original
(see Glossary):sue is to be used for a private business issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20
use. discount is less than $25, the OID is treated as
zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you willMarket discount2) More than 10% of the payment of the prin- recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)cipal or interest is: Market discount bond
Example 2. The facts are the same as ina) Secured by an interest in property to beOriginal issue discount (OID) Example 1, except that the bond was issued atused for a private business use (or pay-
Premium $950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discountments for this property), or
is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you
b) Derived from payments for property (or must include the OID in income as it accrues
borrowed money) used for a private In general, a debt instrument, such as a bond,over the term of the bond.
business use. note, debenture, or other evidence of indebted-Debt instrument bought after original is-ness, that bears no interest or bears interest at asue. If you buy a debt instrument with deAlso, a bond is generally considered a privatelower than current market rate will usually beminimis OID at a premium, the discount is notactivity bond if the amount of the proceeds toissued at less than its face amount. This dis-includible in income. If you buy a debt instrumentbe used to make or finance loans to personscount is, in effect, additional interest income.with de minimis OID at a discount, the discountother than government units is more than 5%The following are some of the types of dis-is reported under the market discount rules. Seeof the proceeds or $5 million (whichever iscounted debt instruments. Market Discount Bonds, later in this chapter.less). • Corporate bonds.
Qualified bond.Interest on a private activ- Exceptions to reporting OID.The OID rules• Municipal bonds.ity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. A discussed here do not apply to the following debt
qualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (includ-• Certificates of deposit. instruments. 
ing an enterprise zone facility bond or New York• Notes between individuals.Liberty bond), qualified student loan bond, quali- 1) Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see
fied small issue bond (including a tribal manu-• Stripped bonds and coupons. Stripped tax-exempt obligations, later.)
facturing facility bond), qualified redevelopment• Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). 2) U.S. savings bonds.bond, qualified mortgage bond, qualified veter-
ans’ mortgage bond, or qualified 501(c)(3) bond The discount on these instruments (except mu- 3) Short-term debt instruments (those with a
(a bond issued for the benefit of certain tax-ex- nicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. The fixed maturity date of not more than 1 year
empt organizations). discount on municipal bonds generally is not from the date of issue).
Page 12 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 13 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4) Obligations issued by an individual beforePremium. You bought a debt instrument atEffect on basis. Your basis in the instru-
a premium if its adjusted basis immediately after ment is increased by the amount of OID that youMarch 2, 1984.
purchase was greater than the total of allinclude in your gross income.5) Loans between individuals, if all the follow-amounts payable on the instrument after theing are true. Debt instruments issued after 1984.Forpurchase date, other than qualified stated inter-
these debt instruments, you report the total OIDest.a) The lender is not in the business of that applies each year regardless of whetherIf you bought an OID debt instrument at alending money. you hold that debt instrument as a capital asset.premium, you generally do not have to report
b) The amount of the loan, plus the any OID as ordinary income. Effect on basis. Your basis in the instru-amount of any outstanding prior loans ment is increased by the amount of OID that youQualified stated interest.In general, this isbetween the same individuals, is include in your gross income.stated interest that is unconditionally payable in$10,000 or less.
cash or property (other than debt instruments of
c) Avoiding any federal tax is not one ofthe issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate.
the principal purposes of the loan. Certificates of Deposit (CDs)Acquisition premium. You bought a debt
instrument at an acquisition premium if both ofIf you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1
the following are true. year, you must include in income each year a
part of the total interest due and report it in theForm 1099–OID 1) You did not pay a premium. same manner as other OID.
The issuer of the debt instrument (or your bro- This also applies to similar deposit arrange-2) The instrument’s adjusted basis immedi-
ker, if you held the instrument through a broker) ments with banks, building and loan associa-ately after purchase (including purchase at
should give you Form 1099–OID, Original Issue tions, etc., including:original issue) was greater than its ad-
Discount, or a similar statement, if the total OIDjusted issue price. This is the issue price• Time deposits,for the calendar year is $10 or more. Form plus the OID previously accrued, minus
1099–OID will show, in box 1, the amount of any payment previously made on the in- • Bonus plans,
OID for the part of the year that you held thestrument other than qualified stated inter-• Savings certificates,bond. It also will show, in box 2, the statedest.
interest that you must include in your income. A • Deferred income certificates,Acquisition premium reduces the amount of OIDcopy of Form 1099–OID will be sent to the IRS. • Bonus savings certificates, andincludible in your income. For information aboutDo not file your copy with your return. Keep it forfiguring the correct amount of OID to include inyour records. • Growth savings certificates.your income, see Figuring OID on Long-TermIn most cases, you must report the entireDebt Instruments in Publication 1212.amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099–OID as Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generallyinterest income. But see Refiguring OID shown Refiguring periodic interest shown on Formmust be in registered form. Bearer CDs are CDson Form 1099–OID, later in this discussion, and1099–OID. If you disposed of a debt instru-that are not in registered form. They are notalso Original issue discount (OID) adjustmentment or acquired it from another holder duringissued in the depositor’s name and are transfer-under How To Report Interest Income, later in the year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest able from one individual to another.this chapter, for more information. Dates, earlier, for information about the treat-Banks must provide the IRS and the personment of periodic interest that may be shown inredeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099–INT.Form 1099–OID not received. If you had box 2 of Form 1099–OID for that instrument.
OID for the year but did not receive a Form Time deposit open account arrangement.1099–OID, see Publication 1212, which lists This is an arrangement with a fixed maturity datetotal OID on certain debt instruments and hasApplying the OID Rules in which you make deposits on a schedule ar-information that will help you figure OID. If your ranged between you and your bank. But there isThe rules for reporting OID depend on the datedebt instrument is not listed in Publication 1212, no actual or constructive receipt of interest untilthe long-term debt instrument was issued.consult the issuer for further information about the fixed maturity date is reached. For instance,
the accrued OID for the year. Debt instruments issued after 1954 and you and your bank enter into an arrangement
before May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if aunder which you agree to deposit $100 eachNominee. If someone else is the holder ofgovernment instrument). For these instru-month for a period of 5 years. Interest will berecord (the registered owner) of an OID instru-ments, you do not report the OID until the yearcompounded twice a year at 71/2%, but payablement that belongs to you and receives a Formyou sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. Ifonly at the end of the 5-year period. You must1099–OID on your behalf, that person must givea gain results and the instrument is a capitalinclude a part of the interest in your income asyou a Form 1099–OID. asset, the amount of the gain equal to the OID isOID each year. Each year the bank must give
If you receive a Form 1099–OID that in-ordinary interest income. The rest of the gain isyou a Form 1099–OID to show you the amount
cludes amounts belonging to another person,capital gain. If there is a loss on the sale of theyou must include in your income for the year.
see Nominee distributions under How To Report instrument, the entire loss is a capital loss and
Interest Income, later. Redemption before maturity.If, before theno reporting of OID is required.
maturity date, you redeem a deferred interestIn general, the amount of gain that is ordinary
Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099–OID. account for less than its stated redemption priceinterest income equals the following amount:
You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 of at maturity, you can deduct the amount of OID
Form 1099–OID if either of the following apply. that you previously included in income but did
Number of full not receive.1) You bought the debt instrument after itsmonths you held Original
original issue and paid a premium or anthe instrument × Issue Renewable certificates.If you renew a CD atacquisition premium. Number of full Discount maturity, it is treated as a redemption and a
months from date purchase of a new certificate. This is true re-2) The debt instrument is a stripped bond orof original issue gardless of the terms of renewal.a stripped coupon (including certain zeroto date of maturitycoupon instruments). See Figuring OID
under Stripped Bonds and Coupons, later Debt instruments issued after May 27, 1969Face-Amount Certificatesin this chapter. (after July 1, 1982, if a government instru-
See Original issue discount (OID) adjustmentment), and before 1985.If you hold these These certificates are subject to the OID rules.
under How To Report Interest Income, later in debt instruments as capital assets, you must They are a form of endowment contracts issued
this chapter, for information about reporting theinclude a part of the discount in your gross by insurance or investment companies for either
correct amount of OID. income each year that you own the instruments. a lump-sum payment or periodic payments, with
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

Page 14 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the face amount becoming payable on the ma- Treat any item you keep as an OID bond When you buy a market discount bond, you
turity date of the certificate. originally issued and bought by you on the sale can choose to accrue the market discount over
In general, the difference between the face date of the other items. If you keep the bond, the period you own the bond and include it in
amount and the amount you paid for the contract treat the amount of the redemption price of the your income currently as interest income. If you
is OID. You must include a part of the OID in bond that is more than the basis of the bond as do not make this choice, the following rules
your income over the term of the certificate. the OID. If you keep the coupons, treat the generally apply. 
The issuer must give you a statement on amount payable on the coupons that is more
1) You must treat any gain when you disposeForm 1099–OID indicating the amount you than the basis of the coupons as the OID.
of the bond as ordinary interest income, upmust include in your income each year. Buyer. If you buy a stripped bond or strippedto the amount of the accrued market dis-
coupon, treat it as if it were originally issued oncount. See Discounted Debt Instruments
the date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond,under Capital Gains and Losses in chapterInflation-Indexed treat as OID any excess of the stated redemp-4.Debt Instruments tion price at maturity over your purchase price. If
2) You must treat any partial payment of prin-you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID anyIf you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument cipal on the bond as ordinary interest in-excess of the amount payable on the due date of(other than a series I U.S. savings bond), you come, up to the amount of the accruedthe coupon over your purchase price.must report as OID any increase in the market discount. See Partial principal pay-inflation-adjusted principal amount of the instru-Figuring OID. The rules for figuring OID on ments, later in this discussion.ment that occurs while you held the instrumentstripped bonds and stripped coupons depend onduring the year. In general, an inflation-indexed 3) If you borrow money to buy or carry thethe date the debt instruments were purchased,debt instrument is a debt instrument on which bond, your deduction for interest paid onnot the date issued.the payments are adjusted for inflation and de- the debt is limited. See Deferral of interestYou must refigure the OID shown on theflation (such as Treasury Inflation-Indexed Se- deduction for market discount bonds underForm 1099–OID you receive for a stripped bondcurities). You should receive Form 1099–OID When To Deduct Investment Interest inor coupon. For information about figuring thefrom the payer showing the amount you must chapter 3.correct amount of OID on these instruments toreport as OID and any qualified stated interestinclude in your income, see Figuring OID onpaid to you during the year. For more informa-Stripped Bonds and Coupons in PublicationMarket discount. Market discount is thetion, see Publication 1212. 1212. However, owners of stripped bonds andamount of the stated redemption price of a bond
coupons should not rely on the OID shown inat maturity that is more than your basis in the
Section II of Publication 1212, because thebond immediately after you acquire it. You treatStripped Bonds and Coupons amounts listed in Section II for stripped bonds ormarket discount as zero if it is less than
coupons are figured without reference to theone-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated redemp-If you strip one or more coupons from a bond
date or price at which you acquired them.tion price of the bond multiplied by the number ofand sell the bond or the coupons, the bond and
full years to maturity (after you acquire thecoupons are treated as separate debt instru-Stripped inflation-indexed debt instru-bond).ments issued with OID. ments. OID on stripped inflation-indexed debt
If a market discount bond also has OID, theThe holder of a stripped bond has the right toinstruments is figured under the discount bond
market discount is the sum of the bond’s issuereceive the principal (redemption price) pay-method. This method is described in section
price and the total OID includible in the grossment. The holder of a stripped coupon has the1.1275–7(e) of the regulations.
income of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, theright to receive interest on the bond.
Stripped tax-exempt obligations.You do total OID that accrued) before you acquired theStripped bonds and stripped coupons in-
not have to pay tax on OID on any strippedbond, reduced by your basis in the bond immedi-clude:
tax-exempt bond or coupon that you boughtately after you acquired it.
1) Zero coupon instruments available throughbefore June 11, 1987. However, if you acquired
the Department of the Treasury’s Separateit after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OIDBonds acquired at original issue.Generally,
Trading of Registered Interest and Princi-on it to determine its basis when you dispose ofa bond that you acquired at original issue is not a
pal of Securities (STRIPS) program andit. See Original issue discount (OID) on debtmarket discount bond. If your adjusted basis in a
government-sponsored enterprises suchinstruments under Stocks and Bonds in chapter bond is determined by reference to the adjusted
as the Resolution Funding Corporation4. basis of another person who acquired the bond
and the Financing Corporation, and You may have to pay tax on part of the OIDat original issue, you are also considered to
on stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons thathave acquired it at original issue.2) Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se-you bought after June 10, 1987. For informationcurities that represent ownership interests Exceptions. A bond you acquired at origi-on figuring the taxable part, see Tax-Exemptin those securities, such as obligations nal issue can be a market discount bond if eitherBonds and Coupons under Figuring OID onbacked by U.S. Treasury bonds that are of the following is true.Stripped Bonds and Coupons in Publicationoffered primarily by brokerage firms.1212. 1) Your cost basis in the bond is less than the
bond’s issue price.Seller.If you strip coupons from a bond andMarket Discount Bondssell the bond or coupons, include in income the 2) The bond is issued in exchange for a mar-
interest that accrued while you held the bond ket discount bond under a plan of reorgan-A market discount bond is any bond having
before the date of sale to the extent you did not ization. (This does not apply if the bond ismarket discount except:
previously include this interest in your income. issued in exchange for a market discount
For an obligation acquired after October 22,1) Short-term obligations (those with fixedbond issued before July 19, 1984, and the
1986, you must also include the market discountmaturity dates of up to 1 year from the terms and interest rates of both bonds are
that accrued before the date of sale of the date of issue), the same.)
stripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you did2) Tax-exempt obligations that you boughtnot previously include this discount in your in- Accrued market discount.The accrued mar-before May 1, 1993,come. ket discount is figured in one of two ways.Add the interest and market discount that3) U.S. savings bonds, and
you include in income to the basis of the bond Ratable accrual method.Treat the market4) Certain installment obligations.and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be- discount as accruing in equal daily installments
tween the items you keep and the items you sell, Market discount arises when the value of a during the period you hold the bond. Figure the
based on the fair market value of the items. The debt obligation decreases after its issue date, daily installments by dividing the market dis-
difference between the sale price of the bond (or generally because of an increase in interest count by the number of days after the date you
coupon) and the allocated basis of the bond (or rates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar- acquired the bond, up to and including its matur-
coupon) is your gain or loss from the sale. ket, it may have market discount. ity date. Multiply the daily installments by the
Page 14 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 15 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
number of days you held the bond to figure your The numerator (top part) of the fraction is thetion discount is the stated redemption price at
accrued market discount. OID for the period, and the denominator (bottom maturity minus your basis. 
part) is the total remaining OID at the beginningIf you choose to use the constant yieldConstant yield method. Instead of usingof the period. method to figure accrued acquisition discount,the ratable accrual method, you can choose toUnder method (3) above, figure accruedtreat the cost of acquiring the obligation as thefigure the accrued discount using a constantmarket discount for a period by multiplying theissue price. If you choose to use this method,interest rate (the constant yield method). Maketotal remaining market discount by a fraction.you cannot change your choice.this choice by attaching to your timely filed returnThe numerator is the stated interest paid in thea statement identifying the bond and stating thataccrual period, and the denominator is the totalNongovernment obligations. For an obliga-you are making a constant interest rate election.stated interest remaining to be paid at the begin-tion listed above that is not a government obliga-The choice takes effect on the date you acquiredning of the accrual period. tion, the amount you include in your income forthe bond. If you choose to use this method for the current year is the accrued OID, if any, plusany bond, you cannot change your choice for any other accrued interest payable. If youDiscount onthat bond. choose the constant yield method to figure ac-For information about using the constantShort-Term Obligations crued OID, apply it by using the obligation’syield method, see Figuring OID using the con- issue price.When you buy a short-term obligation (one withstant yield method under Debt Instruments Is-
a fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from thesued After 1984 in Publication 1212. To use this Choosing to include accrued acquisition
date of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga-method to figure market discount (instead of discount instead of OID.You can choose to
tion, you can generally choose to include anyOID), treat the bond as having been issued on report accrued acquisition discount (defined
discount and interest payable on the obligationthe date you acquired it. Treat the amount of earlier under Government obligations) rather
in income currently. If you do not make thisyour basis (immediately after you acquired the than accrued OID on these short-term obliga-
choice, the following rules generally apply.bond) as the issue price. Then apply the formula tions. Your choice will apply to the year for which
shown in Publication 1212. it is made and to all later years and cannot be1) You must treat any gain when you sell,changed without the consent of the IRS.Choosing to include market discount in in- exchange, or redeem the obligation as or-You must make your choice by the due datecome currently. You can make this choice if dinary income, up to the amount of theof your return, including extensions, for the firstyou have not revoked a prior choice to includeratable share of the discount. See Dis- year for which you are making the choice. Attachmarket discount in income currently within thecounted Debt Instruments under Capital a statement to your return or amended returnlast 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at-Gains and Losses in chapter 4. indicating:taching to your timely filed return a statement in2) If you borrow money to buy or carry thewhich you: obligation, your deduction for interest paid 1) Your name, address, and social security
on the debt is limited. See Deferral of inter- number,1) State that you have included market dis-
est deduction for short-term obligationscount in your gross income for the year 2) The choice you are making and that it isunder When To Deduct Investment Inter-under section 1278(b) of the Internal Rev- being made under section 1283(c)(2) ofest in chapter 3.enue Code, and the Internal Revenue Code,
2) Describe the method you used to figure 3) The period for which the choice is beingShort-term obligations for which no choicethe accrued market discount for the year. made and the obligation to which it ap-is available.You must include any discount or
plies, andinterest in current income as it accrues for anyOnce you make this choice, it will apply to all
short-term obligation (other than a tax-exemptmarket discount bonds that you acquire during 4) Any other information necessary to showobligation) that is:the tax year and in later tax years. You cannot you are entitled to make this choice.
revoke your choice without the consent of the1) Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer,IRS. Choosing to include accrued discount andAlso see Election To Report All Interest as2) Held primarily for sale to customers in theother interest in current income.If you ac-OID, later. If you make that election, you mustordinary course of your trade or business,quire short-term discount obligations that are notuse the constant yield method. 3) Held by a bank, regulated investment com-subject to the rules for current inclusion in in-
Effect on basis.You increase the basis of pany, or common trust fund, come of the accrued discount or other interest,
your bonds by the amount of market discount you can choose to have those rules apply. This4) Held by certain pass-through entities,you include in your income. choice applies to all short-term obligations you
5) Identified as part of a hedging transaction,acquire during the year and in all later years.Partial principal payments.If you receive a or You cannot change this choice without the con-partial payment of principal on a market discount sent of the IRS.6) A stripped bond or stripped coupon heldbond that you acquired after October 22, 1986,
The procedures to use in making this choiceby the person who stripped the bond orand you did not choose to include the discount in
are the same as those described for choosing tocoupon (or by any other person whose ba-income currently, you must treat the payment as
include acquisition discount instead of OID onsis in the obligation is determined by refer-ordinary interest income up to the amount of the
nongovernment obligations in current income.ence to the basis in the hands of thatbond’s accrued market discount. Reduce the
However, you should indicate that you are mak-person).amount of accrued market discount reportable
ing the choice under section 1282(b)(2) of theas interest at disposition by that amount.
Internal Revenue Code.You can choose to figure accrued marketEffect on basis.Increase the basis of your
Also see the following discussion. If youdiscount for this purpose: obligation by the amount of discount you include
make the election to report all interest currentlyin income currently.
1) On the basis of the constant yield method, as OID, you must use the constant yield method.
Figuring the accrued discount.Figure thedescribed earlier,
accrued discount by using either the ratable Election To Report2) In proportion to the accrual of OID for anyaccrual method or the constant yield methodaccrual period, if the debt instrument has All Interest as OIDdiscussed previously in Accrued market dis-OID, or count under Market Discount Bonds, earlier. Generally, you can elect to treat all interest on a3) In proportion to the amount of stated inter-Government obligations. For an obligation debt instrument acquired during the tax year asest paid in the accrual period, if the debtdescribed above that is a short-term govern- OID and include it in income currently. For pur-instrument has no OID. ment obligation, the amount you include in your poses of this election, interest includes stated
Under method (2) above, figure accrued income for the current year is the accrued acqui- interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimis
market discount for a period by multiplying the sition discount, if any, plus any other accrued OID, market discount, de minimis market dis-
total remaining market discount by a fraction. interest payable on the obligation. The acquisi- count, and unstated interest as adjusted by any
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

Page 16 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amortizable bond premium or acquisition pre- interest in your income as you earn it. You would 3) You had a financial account in a foreign
mium. See Treasury Regulation 1.1272–3. report the interest as follows: 2000, $80; 2001, country, unless the combined value of all
$249.60; and 2002, $179.20. foreign accounts was $10,000 or less dur-
ing all of 2002 or the accounts were with
Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds is certain U.S. military banking facilities,
taxable in the year the coupon becomes due andWhen To Report 4) You acquired taxable bonds after 1987payable. It does not matter when you mail theand choose to reduce interest income fromcoupon for payment.Interest Income the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-
mium (discussed in chapter 3 under BondTerms you may need to know Premium Amortization), or(see Glossary):
5) You are reporting OID in an amount moreHow To Report
or less than the amount shown on FormAccrual method 1099–OID.Interest Income
Cash method
Schedule B. You must complete Part I ofTerms you may need to know
Schedule B (Form 1040) if you file Form 1040(see Glossary):When to report your interest income depends on and any of the following apply.
whether you use the cash method or an accrual
Nominee 1) Your taxable interest income is more thanmethod to report income.
$1,500.Original issue discount (OID)Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use
2) You are claiming the interest exclusionthe cash method. If you use this method, you
under the Education Savings Bond Pro-generally report your interest income in the yearGenerally, you report all of your taxable interestgram (discussed earlier).in which you actually or constructively receive it.income on line 8a, Form 1040; line 8a, FormHowever, there are special rules for reporting 3) You had a foreign account.1040A; or line 2, Form 1040EZ.the discount on certain debt instruments. See
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interest4) You received interest from a seller-fi-U.S. Savings Bonds and Discount on Debt In-
income is more than $1,500. Instead, you mustnanced mortgage, and the buyer used thestruments, earlier.
use Form 1040A or Form 1040. property as a home.
Example. On September 1, 2000, you In addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ if5) You received a Form 1099–INT for tax-ex-loaned another individual $2,000 at 12% com-you must use Form 1040, as described later, orempt interest.pounded annually. You are not in the businessif any of the statements listed under Schedule B,
6) You received a Form 1099–INT for U.S.of lending money. The note stated that principallater, are true.
savings bond interest that includesand interest would be due on August 31, 2002.
amounts you reported before 2002.Form 1040A. You must complete Part I ofIn 2002, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) if you file Form 1040Apal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash 7) You received, as a nominee, interest thatand any of the following are true. method, you must include in income on your actually belongs to someone else.2002 return the $508.80 interest you received in
1) Your taxable interest income is more than8) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter-that year.
$1,500. est on frozen deposits.Constructive receipt.You constructively
2) You are claiming the interest exclusion9) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter-receive income when it is credited to your ac-
under the Education Savings Bond Pro- est on a bond that you bought betweencount or made available to you. You do not need
gram (discussed earlier). interest payment dates.to have physical possession of it. For example,
you are considered to receive interest, divi-3) You received interest from a seller-fi-10) Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list isdends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-nanced mortgage, and the buyer used the true.count in a bank, savings and loan, or similarproperty as a home. On line 1, Part I, list each payer’s name and thefinancial institution, or interest on life insurance
4) You received a Form 1099–INT for tax-ex-amount received from each. If you received apolicy dividends left to accumulate, when they
empt interest. Form 1099–INT or Form 1099–OID from a bro-are credited to your account and subject to your
kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet5) You received a Form 1099–INT for U.S.
entered in your passbook. savings bond interest that includes Reporting tax-exempt interest.Report theYou constructively receive income on the amounts you reported before 2002. total of your tax-exempt interest (such as inter-deposit or account even if you must: est or accrued OID on certain state and munici-6) You received, as a nominee, interest thatpal bonds) and exempt-interest dividends from a1) Make withdrawals in multiples of even actually belongs to someone else. mutual fund on line 8b of Form 1040A or Formamounts, 7) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter-1040. If you file Form 1040EZ, print “TEI” in the
2) Give a notice to withdraw before making est on frozen deposits. space to the right of the words “Form 1040EZ”
the withdrawal, on line 2. After “TEI,” show the amount of yourList each payer’s name and the amount of inter-tax-exempt interest, but do not add tax-exempt3) Withdraw all or part of the account to with-est income received from each payer on line 1. Ifinterest in the total on Form 1040EZ, line 2.draw the earnings, or you received a Form 1099–INT or Form You should not have received a Form1099–OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-4) Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless 1099–INT for tax-exempt interest. But if you did,age firm as the payer.the interest you are to receive on an early you must fill in Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) orYou cannot use Form 1040A if you must usewithdrawal or redemption is substantially Schedule B (Form 1040). See the Schedule 1 orForm 1040, as described next.less than the interest payable at maturity. Schedule B instructions for how to report this. Be
sure to also show this tax-exempt interest on lineForm 1040. You must use Form 1040 insteadAccrual method. If you use an accrual 8b.of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:method, you report your interest income when Do not report interest from an individ-you earn it, whether or not you have received it.1) You forfeited interest income because of ual retirement arrangement (IRA) asInterest is earned over the term of the debtthe early withdrawal of a time deposit, tax-exempt interest.CAUTION
!
instrument.
2) You received or paid accrued interest on
Example. If, in the previous example, you securities transferred between interestForm 1099–INT. Your taxable interest in-
use an accrual method, you must include the payment dates, come, except for interest from U.S. savings
Page 16 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 17 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional)PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0112
Interest Income
Interest income not included in box 31PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
$
Early withdrawal penalty Interest on U.S. Savings
Bonds and Treas. obligations
32RECIPIENT’S name
$$
Federal income tax withheld4Street address (including apt. no.)
$
Foreign country or U.S.
possession
7Foreign tax paid6City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (optional)
$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-INT
Investment expenses5
$
2002
bonds and Treasury obligations, is shown in box1099–OID under Original Issue Discount (OID),accrued. (See Choice to report interest each
1 of Form 1099–INT. Add this amount to any earlier. year under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.)
other taxable interest income you received. YouYou must report all taxable OID even if youIn March 2002, you redeemed one of the
must report all of your taxable interest incomedo not receive a Form 1099–OID. bonds — a $1,000 series EE bond. The bond
even if you do not receive a Form 1099–INT. was originally issued in March 1984. When youBox 2 of Form 1099–OID shows any taxable
If you forfeited interest income because of redeemed the bond, you received $1,522.00 forinterest on the obligation other than OID. Add
the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de- it.this amount to the OID shown in box 1 and
ductible amount will be shown on Form include the result in your total taxable income.The Form 1099–INT you received shows
1099–INT, in box 2. See Penalty on early with- interest income of $1,022.00. However, sinceIf you forfeited interest or principal on thedrawal of savings, later. the interest on your savings bonds was reportedobligation because of an early withdrawal, theBox 3 of Form 1099–INT shows the amount yearly, you need only include the $31.20 interestdeductible amount will be shown in box 3. Seeof interest income you received from U.S. sav- that accrued from January 2002 to March 2002.Penalty on early withdrawal of savings, later.ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and You received no other taxable interest forBox 4 of Form 1099–OID will contain anTreasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3 2002. You file Form 1040A.amount if you were subject to backup withhold-to any other taxable interest income you re-ing. Report the amount from box 4 on Form On line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 was1040EZ, line 7, on Form 1040A, line 39, or onenter your interest income as shown on Formpreviously included in your interest income. IfForm 1040, line 62. 1099–INT — $1,022.00. (If you had other taxa-part of the amount shown in box 3 was previ- ble interest income, you would enter it next andBox 7 of Form 1099–OID shows investmentously included in your interest income, see U.S. then enter a subtotal, as described earlier,expenses you may be able to deduct as ansavings bond interest previously reported, later. before going to the next step.) Several linesitemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-If you redeemed U.S. savings bonds you bought above line 2, write “U.S. Savings Bond Interestment expenses.after 1989 and you paid qualified educational Previously Reported” and enter $990.80expenses, see Interest excluded under the Edu-U.S. savings bond interest previously ($1,022.00 − $31.20). Subtract $990.80 fromcation Savings Bond Program, later. reported. If you received a Form 1099–INT$1,022.00 and write $31.20 on line 2. EnterBox 4 (federal income tax withheld) of Formfor U.S. savings bond interest, the form may$31.20 on line 4 of Schedule 1 and on line 8a of1099–INT will contain an amount if you wereshow interest you do not have to report. SeeForm 1040A.subject to backup withholding. Report theForm 1099–INT for U.S. savings bond interestamount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7, onunder U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier. Example 2. Your uncle died and left you aForm 1040A, line 39, or on Form 1040, line 62. $1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bondOn line 1, Part I of Schedule B (Form 1040),Box 5 of Form 1099–INT shows investment when it reaches maturity.or on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),expenses you may be able to deduct as an report all the interest shown on your Form Your uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $500itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-1099–INT. Then follow these steps. of the amount you receive upon redemption isment expenses. interest income. Your uncle’s executor includedIf there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of Form1) Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotalin your uncle’s final return $200 of the interest1099–INT, you must file Form 1040. You may of all interest listed on line 1. that had accrued at the time of your uncle’sbe able to take a credit for the amount shown in death. You have to include only $300 in your2) Below the subtotal write “U.S. Savingsbox 6 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct this income.Bond Interest Previously Reported” andamount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as “Other
The bank where you redeem the bond givesenter amounts previously reported or inter-taxes.” To take the credit, you may have to file
you a Form 1099–INT showing interest incomeest accrued before you received the bond.Form 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor-
of $500. You also receive a Form 1099–INTmation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit 3) Subtract these amounts from the subtotalshowing taxable interest income of $300 fromfor Individuals. and enter the result on line 2. your savings account.
Form 1099–OID. The taxable OID on a dis- You file Form 1040 and you complete
counted obligation for the part of the year youExample 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav- Schedule B. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list the
owned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099–OID. ings bonds for you when you were a child. The $500 and $300 interest amounts shown on your
Include this amount in your total taxable interest bonds were issued in your name, and the inter- Forms 1099. Several lines above line 2, you put
income. But see Refiguring OID shown on Formest on the bonds was reported each year as it a subtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, write
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Page 18 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
D. Write the amount of interest shown $48.68“U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Re- the full amount shown as interest on the Form
on your Form 1099–INT....... 1099–INT on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Formported” and enter the $200 interest included in
E. Subtract the amount on line C from $43.041040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Then, be-your uncle’s final return. Subtract the $200 fromthe amount on line D. This is the low a subtotal of all interest income listed, writethe subtotal and write $600 on line 2. You thenamount you include in “U.S. Savings “Nominee Distribution” and the amount that ac-complete the rest of the form. Bond Interest Previously Reported” tually belongs to someone else. Subtract that
Worksheet for savings bonds distributed amount from the interest income subtotal. EnterSubtract $43.04 from the subtotal and enter thefrom a retirement or profit-sharing plan.If the result on line 2 and also on line 8a of Formresult on line 2 of Schedule B. You then com-
you cashed a savings bond acquired in a taxable 1040A or 1040.plete the rest of the form.
distribution from a retirement or profit-sharing File Form 1099–INT with the IRS.If youInterest excluded under the Education Sav-plan (as discussed under U.S. Savings Bonds, received interest as a nominee in 2002, youings Bond Program. Use Form 8815, to fig-earlier), your interest income does not include must file a Form 1099–INT for that interest withure your interest exclusion when you redeemthe interest accrued before the distribution and the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099–INT with aqualified savings bonds and pay qualified highertaxed as a distribution from the plan. Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittaleducational expenses during the same year.
of U.S. Information Returns, to your InternalFor more information on the exclusion andUse the worksheet below to figure the
Revenue Service Center by February 28, 2003qualified higher educational expenses, see theamount you subtract from the interest
(March 31, 2003 if you file Form 1099–INTearlier discussion under Education Savingsshown on Form 1099–INT.
electronically). Give the actual owner of the in-Bond Program.
terest Copy B of the Form 1099–INT by JanuaryYou must show your total interest from quali-
31, 2003. On Form 1099–INT, you should befied savings bonds that you cashed during 2002A. Write the amount of cash received listed as the “Payer.” Prepare one Formon line 6 of Form 8815 and on line 1 of eitherupon redemption of the bond....
1099–INT for each other owner and show thatSchedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Schedule B (FormB. Write the value of the bond at the
person as the “Recipient.” However, you do nottime of distribution by the plan.... 1040). After completing Form 8815, enter the
have to file Form 1099–INT to show paymentsC. Subtract the amount on line B from result from line 14 (Form 8815) on line 3 of
for your spouse. For more information about thethe amount on line A. This is the Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or line 3 of Schedule
reporting requirements and the penalties for fail-amount of interest accrued on the B (Form 1040).
ure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,bond since it was distributed by the
Interest on seller-financed mortgage.If anplan ..................... see the General Instructions for Forms 1099,
individual buys his or her home from you in aD. Write the amount of interest shown 1098, 5498, and W2–G.
sale that you finance, you must report theon your Form 1099–INT....... Similar rules apply to OID reported to you as
buyer’s name, address, and social security num-E. Subtract the amount on line C from a nominee on Form 1099–OID. You must file a
the amount on line D. This is the ber on line 1 of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or lineForm 1099–OID with Form 1096 to show the
amount you include in “U.S. Savings 1 of Schedule B (Form 1040). If you do not, youproper distributions of the OID.Bond Interest Previously Reported” may have to pay a $50 penalty. The buyer may
have to pay a $50 penalty if he or she does notExample. You and your sister have a jointYour employer should tell you the value ofgive you this information. savings account that paid $1,500 interest foreach bond on the date it was distributed. You must also give your name, address, and2002. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds in
social security number (or employer identifica-this account, and you and she have agreed toExample. You received a distribution of se-tion number) to the buyer. If you do not, you mayshare the yearly interest income in proportion tories EE U.S. savings bonds in December 2000have to pay a $50 penalty. the amount that each of you has invested. Be-
from your company’s profit-sharing plan. cause your social security number was given toFrozen deposits.Even if you receive a Formthe bank, you received a Form 1099–INT forIn March 2002, you redeemed a $100 series1099–INT for interest on deposits that you could2002 that includes the interest income earnedEE bond that was part of the distribution younot withdraw at the end of 2002, you must ex-belonging to your sister. This amount is $450, orreceived in 2000. You received $98.68 for theclude these amounts from your gross income.30% of the total interest of $1,500.bond the company bought in May 1990. The (See Interest income on frozen deposits under You must give your sister a Form 1099–INTvalue of the bond at the time of distribution inInterest Income, earlier.) Do not include thisby January 31, 2003, showing $450 of interest2000 was $93.04. (This is the amount you in-income on line 8a of Form 1040A or Form 1040.income that she earned for 2002. You must alsocluded on your 2000 return.) The bank gave youIn Part I of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Part I ofsend a copy of the nominee Form 1099–INT,Schedule B (Form 1040), include the full amounta Form 1099–INT that shows $48.68 interest along with Form 1096, to the Internal Revenueof interest shown on your Form 1099–INT on(the total interest from the date the bond was Service Center by February 28, 2003 (March 31,line 1. Several lines above line 2, put a subtotalpurchased to the date of redemption). Since a 2003, if you file Form 1099–INT electronically).of all interest income. Below this subtotal, writepart of the interest was included in your income Show your own name, address, and social se-“Frozen Deposits” and show the amount of inter-in 2000, you need to include in your 2002 in- curity number as that of the “Payer” on the Formest that you are excluding. Subtract this amountcome only the interest that accrued after the 1099–INT. Show your sister’s name, address,from the subtotal and write the result on line 2.bond was distributed to you. and social security number in the blocks pro-
vided for identification of the “Recipient.”Accrued interest on bonds.If you received aOn line 1 of Schedule B (Form 1040), include
When you prepare your own federal incomeForm 1099–INT that reflects accrued interestall the interest shown on your Form 1099–INT
tax return, report the total amount of interestpaid on a bond you bought between interestas well as any other taxable interest income you
income, $1,500, on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1payment dates, include the full amount shownreceived. Several lines above line 2, put a sub- (Form 1040A) or line 1, Part I of Schedule Bas interest on the Form 1099–INT on line 1, Parttotal of all interest listed on line 1. Below this (Form 1040), and identify the name of the bankI of Schedule B (Form 1040). Then, below asubtotal write “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previ- that paid this interest. Show the amount belong-subtotal of all interest income listed, write “Ac-ously Reported” and enter the amount figured ing to your sister, $450, as a subtraction from acrued Interest” and the amount of accrued inter-on the worksheet below. subtotal of all interest on Schedule 1 (or Sched-est that you paid to the seller. That amount is
ule B) and identify this subtraction as a “Nomi-taxable to the seller, not you. Subtract that
A. Write the amount of cash received $98.68 nee Distribution.” (Your sister will report theamount from the interest income subtotal. Enter
upon redemption of the bond.... $450 of interest income on her own tax return, ifthe result on line 2 and also on Form 1040, line
B. Write the value of the bond at the 93.04 she has to file a return, and identify you as the8a.
time of distribution by the plan.... payer of that amount.)For more information, see Bonds Sold Be-
C. Subtract the amount on line B from $5.64tween Interest Dates, earlier. Original issue discount (OID) adjustment.Ifthe amount on line A. This is the
Nominee distributions. If you received a you are reporting OID in an amount greater oramount of interest accrued on the
Form 1099–INT that includes an amount you less than the amount shown on Form 1099–OIDbond since it was distributed by the
plan ..................... received as a nominee for the real owner, report or other written statement (such as for a REMIC
Page 18 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 19 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
regular interest), include the full amount of OID See also Reporting Substitute Payments under Capital Gain Distributions
shown on your Form 1099–OID or other state-Short Sales in chapter 4.
ment on line 1, Part I of Schedule B (Form Capital gain distributions (also called capitalIncorrect amount shown on a Form 1099.If1040). If the OID to be reported is less than the gain dividends) are paid to you or credited toyou receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrectamount shown on Form 1099–OID, show the your account by regulated investment compa-amount (or other incorrect information), youOID you do not have to report below a subtotal nies (commonly called mutual funds) and realshould ask the issuer for a corrected form. Theof the interest and OID listed. Identify the estate investment trusts (REITs). They will benew Form 1099 you receive will be marked “Cor-amount as “OID Adjustment” and subtract it from shown in box 2a of the Form 1099–DIV yourected.”the subtotal. If the OID to be reported is greater receive from the mutual fund or REIT.
than the amount shown on Form 1099–OID, Report capital gain distributions as long-termDividends on stock sold. If stock is sold,
show the additional OID below the subtotal. capital gains, regardless of how long you ownedexchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a
Identify the amount as “OID Adjustment” and your shares in the mutual fund or REIT. Seedividend is declared, but before it is paid, the
add it to the subtotal. Capital gain distributions under How To Reportowner of record (usually the payee shown on the
Dividend Income, later in this chapter.dividend check) must include the dividend inPenalty on early withdrawal of savings.If income.you withdraw funds from a time-savings or other Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds
Dividends received in January.If a regu-deferred interest account before maturity, you and REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs
lated investment company (mutual fund) or realmay be charged a penalty. The Form 1099–INT keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on
estate investment trust (REIT) declares a divi-or similar statement given to you by the financial them. You must treat your share of these gains
dend (including any exempt-interest dividend orinstitution will show the total amount of interest as distributions, even though you did not actu-
capital gain distribution) in October, November,in box 1 and will show the penalty separately in ally receive them. However, they are not in-
or December payable to shareholders of recordbox 2. You must include in income all the inter- cluded on Form 1099–DIV. Instead, they are
on a date in one of those months but actuallyest shown in box 1. You can deduct the penalty reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share-
pays the dividend during January of the nexton line 32, Form 1040. Deduct the entire penalty holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capital
calendar year, you are considered to have re-even if it is more than your interest income. Gains.
ceived the dividend on December 31. You reportThe Form 2439 will also show how much, if
the dividend in the year it was declared.any, of the undistributed capital gains is:
• Qualified 5–year gain (box 1c),Dividends and Ordinary Dividends
• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1d),Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com-Other Corporate ormon type of distribution from a corporation. They
• Gain from qualified small business stockDistributions are paid out of the earnings and profits of a
(section 1202 gain, box 1e).corporation and are ordinary income to you. This
Dividends are distributions of money, stock, ormeans they are not capital gains. You can as-For information about these terms, see Capitalother property paid to you by a corporation. Yousume that any dividend you receive on commonGain Tax Rates in chapter 4.also may receive dividends through a partner-or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unless
Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a ofship, an estate, a trust, or an association that isthe paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi-
Form 2439) as long-term capital gains in columntaxed as a corporation. However, some nary dividends will be shown in box 1 of the
(f) on line 11 of Schedule D (Form 1040). Enteramounts you receive that are called dividendsForm 1099–DIV you receive.
on line 5 of the Qualified 5–Year Gain Work-are actually interest income. (See Dividends that
Dividends used to buy more stock.  The sheet in the Schedule D instructions the partare actually interest under Taxable Interest —
corporation in which you own stock may have areported to you as qualified 5–year gain. EnterGeneral, earlier.)
dividend reinvestment plan. This plan lets youon line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250The most common kinds of distributions are:
choose to use your dividends to buy (through anGain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions• Ordinary dividends, agent) more shares of stock in the corporationthe part reported to you as unrecaptured section
instead of receiving the dividends in cash. If you1250 gain. For any gain on qualified small busi-• Capital gain distributions, and
are a member of this type of plan and you useness stock, follow the reporting instructions• Nontaxable distributions. your dividends to buy more stock at a priceunder Section 1202 Exclusion in chapter 4.
equal to its fair market value, you still mustMost distributions are paid in cash (check). The tax paid on these gains by the mutual
report the dividends as income.However, distributions can consist of more fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.
If you are a member of a dividend reinvest-stock, stock rights, other property, or services. You take credit for this tax by including it on line
ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a price68, Form 1040, and checking box a on that line.
less than its fair market value, you must reportForm 1099–DIV. Most corporations use Form Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return, and
as dividend income the fair market value of the1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to show keep Copy C for your records.
additional stock on the dividend payment date.you the distributions you received from them Basis adjustment. Increase your basis inYou also must report as dividend income anyduring the year. Keep this form with your rec- your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, byservice charge subtracted from your cash divi-ords. You do not have to attach it to your tax the difference between the gain you report anddends before the dividends are used to buy thereturn. Even if you do not receive Form the credit you claim for the tax paid.additional stock. But you may be able to deduct1099–DIV, you must still report all of your taxa-
the service charge. See Expenses of Producingble dividend income.
Income in chapter 3. Nontaxable DistributionsNominees. If someone receives distribu- In some dividend reinvestment plans, you
tions as a nominee for you, that person will give You may receive a return of capital or a tax-freecan invest more cash to buy shares of stock at a
you a Form 1099–DIV, which will show distribu- distribution of more shares of stock or stockprice less than fair market value. If you choose
tions received on your behalf. rights. These distributions are not treated theto do this, you must report as dividend income
If you receive a Form 1099–DIV that in- same as ordinary dividends or capital gain distri-the difference between the cash you invest and
cludes amounts belonging to another person, butions.the fair market value of the stock you buy. When
see Nominees under How To Report Dividend figuring this amount, use the fair market value of
Income, later, for more information. the stock on the dividend payment date.
Return of Capital
Form 1099–MISC. Certain substitute pay-Money market funds. Report amounts you
ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interest receive from money market funds as dividend A return of capital is a distribution that is not paid
that are received by a broker on your behalf income. Money market funds are a type of mu- out of the earnings and profits of a corporation. It
must be reported to you on Form 1099–MISC, tual fund and should not be confused with bank is a return of your investment in the stock of the
Miscellaneous Income, or a similar statement. money market accounts that pay interest.company. You should receive a Form
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

Page 20 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1099–DIV or other statement from the corpora- loss as a long-term or short-term capital loss after October 9, 1990, you include the redemp-
tion showing you what part of the distribution is a depends on how long you held the stock. See tion premium on the basis of its economic ac-
return of capital. On Form 1099–DIV, a nontax-Holding Period in chapter 4. crual over the period during which the stock
able return of capital will be shown in box 3. If cannot be redeemed, as if it were original issue
you do not receive such a statement, you report discount on a debt instrument. See Original Is-
Distributions of Stockthe distribution as an ordinary dividend. sue Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter.
and Stock Rights The redemption premium is not a construc-Basis adjustment.A return of capital reduces tive distribution, and therefore is not taxable, inthe basis of your stock. It is not taxed until yourDistributions by a corporation of its own stockthe following situations.basis in the stock is fully recovered. If you buyare commonly known as stock dividends. Stock
stock in a corporation in different lots at different 1) The stock was issued before October 10,rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri-
times, and you cannot definitely identify the 1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re-butions by a corporation of rights to acquire the
shares subject to the return of capital, reduce deemable solely at the option of the is-corporation’s stock. Generally, stock dividends
the basis of your earliest purchases first. suer), and the redemption premium isand stock rights are not taxable to you, and you
When the basis of your stock has been re- “reasonable.” (For stock issued before Oc-do not report them on your return.
duced to zero, report any additional return of tober 10, 1990, only the part of the re-
capital that you receive as a capital gain.Taxable stock dividends and stock rights. demption premium that is not “reasonable”
Whether you report it as a long-term or Distributions of stock dividends and stock rightsis a constructive distribution.) The redemp-
short-term capital gain depends on how long are taxable to you if any of the following apply.tion premium is reasonable if it is not more
you have held the stock. See Holding Period in than 10% of the issue price on stock not1) You or any other shareholder has thechapter 4. redeemable for 5 years from the issuechoice to receive cash or other property date or is in the nature of a penalty forinstead of stock or stock rights.Example. You bought stock in 1990 for making a premature redemption.
$100. In 1993, you received a return of capital of2) The distribution gives cash or other prop-2) The stock was issued after October 9,$80. You did not include this amount in yourerty to some shareholders and an increase1990 (after December 19, 1995, if redeem-income, but you reduced the basis of your stockin the percentage interest in the able solely at the option of the issuer), andto $20. You received a return of capital of $30 incorporation’s assets or earnings and prof-the redemption premium is “de minimis.”2002. The first $20 of this amount reduced yourits to other shareholders. The redemption premium is de minimis if itbasis to zero. You report the other $10 as a
is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the3) The distribution is in convertible preferredlong-term capital gain for 2002. You must report
redemption price multiplied by the numberstock and has the same result as in (2).as a long-term capital gain any return of capital
of full years from the date of issue to theyou receive on this stock in later years. 4) The distribution gives preferred stock todate redeemable.some common stock shareholders andLiquidating distributions.Liquidating distri- 3) The stock was issued after October 9,common stock to other common stockbutions, sometimes called liquidating dividends, 1990, and must be redeemed at a speci-shareholders.are distributions you receive during a partial or fied time or is redeemable at your option,complete liquidation of a corporation. These dis-5) The distribution is on preferred stock. (Thebut the redemption is unlikely because it istributions are, at least in part, one form of adistribution, however, is not taxable if it issubject to a contingency outside your con-return of capital. They may be paid in one oran increase in the conversion ratio of con-trol (not including the possibility of default,more installments. You will receive Form vertible preferred stock made solely to insolvency, etc.).1099–DIV from the corporation showing you thetake into account a stock dividend, stock
amount of the liquidating distribution in box 8 or 4) The stock was issued after December 19,split, or similar event that would otherwise
9. 1995, and is redeemable solely at the op-result in reducing the conversion right.)
Any liquidating distribution you receive is not tion of the issuer, but the redemption pre-The term “stock” includes rights to acquiretaxable to you until you have recovered the mium is in the nature of a penalty forstock, and the term “shareholder” includes abasis of your stock. After the basis of your stock premature redemption or redemption is notholder of rights or convertible securities.has been reduced to zero, you must report the more likely than not to occur. The redemp-If you receive taxable stock dividends orliquidating distribution as a capital gain (except tion will be treated under a “safe harbor”stock rights, include their fair market value at thein certain instances involving collapsible corpo- as not more likely than not to occur if all oftime of the distribution in your income.rations). Whether you report the gain as a the following are true.
long-term or short-term capital gain depends onConstructive distributions.You must treat a) You and the issuer are not relatedhow long you have held the stock. See Holding certain transactions that increase your propor-under the rules discussed in chapter 4Period in chapter 4. tionate interest in the earnings and profits orunder Losses on Sales or Trades ofStock acquired at different times.If you assets of a corporation as if they were distribu-Property, substituting “20%” for “50%.”acquired stock in the same corporation in moretions of stock or stock rights. These constructive
b) There are no plans, arrangements, orthan one transaction, you own more than onedistributions are taxable if they have the same
agreements that effectively require orblock of stock in the corporation. If you receiveresult as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4),
are intended to compel the issuer todistributions from the corporation in completeor (5) of the above discussion.
redeem the stock.liquidation, you must divide the distributionThis treatment applies to a change in your
among the blocks of stock you own in the follow-stock’s conversion ratio or redemption price, ac) The redemption would not reduce theing proportion: the number of shares in thatdifference between your stock’s redemption stock’s yield.block over the total number of shares you own.price and issue price, a redemption that is not
Divide distributions in partial liquidation amongtreated as a sale or exchange of your stock, and
Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-that part of the stock that is redeemed in theany other transaction having a similar effect on
ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair marketpartial liquidation. After the basis of a block ofyour interest in the corporation.
value when distributed. If you receive stock orstock is reduced to zero, you must report thePreferred stock redeemable at a premium.stock rights that are not taxable to you, seepart of any later distribution for that block as aIf you hold preferred stock having a redemptionStocks and Bonds in chapter 4 for information oncapital gain. price higher than its issue price, the differencehow to figure their basis.Distributions less than basis.If the total (the redemption premium) generally is taxable
liquidating distributions you receive are less as a constructive distribution of additional stockFractional shares.You may not own enough
than the basis of your stock, you may have a on the preferred stock. stock in a corporation to receive a full share of
capital loss. You can report a capital loss only For stock issued before October 10, 1990, stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-
after you have received the final distribution in you include the redemption premium in your dend. However, with the approval of the share-
liquidation that results in the redemption or can- income ratably over the period during which the holders, the corporation may set up a plan in
cellation of the stock. Whether you report the stock cannot be redeemed. For stock issued which fractional shares are not issued, but in-
Page 20 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 21 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are given See Reporting tax-exempt interest under How If you receive capital gain distributions, you
to the shareholders. Any cash you receive forTo Report Interest Income, earlier. may be able to use Form 1040A or you may
fractional shares under such a plan is treated as have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-Alternative minimum tax treatment.an amount realized on the sale of the fractional butions, later. If you receive nontaxable distribu-Exempt-interest dividends paid from specifiedshares. You must determine your gain or loss tions required to be reported as capital gains,private activity bonds may be subject to theand report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched- you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Formalternative minimum tax. See Form 6251 and itsule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is the 1040EZ if you receive any dividend income.instructions for more information.difference between the cash you receive and the Form 1099–DIV. If you owned stock on whichbasis of the fractional shares sold. Dividends on insurance policies.Insurance you received $10 or more in dividends and otherpolicy dividends that the insurer keeps and usesdistributions, you should receive a FormExample. You own one share of common to pay your premiums are not taxable. However,1099–DIV. Even if you do not receive a Formstock that you bought on January 3, 1994, foryou must report as taxable interest income the1099–DIV, you must report all of your taxable$100. The corporation declared a common stockinterest that is paid or credited on dividends leftdividend income. dividend of 5% on June 30, 2002. The fair mar-with the insurance company. See Form 1099–DIV for more informationket value of the stock at the time the stock If dividends on an insurance contract (otheron how to report dividend income.dividend was declared was $200. You were paidthan a modified endowment contract) are distrib-
$10 for the fractional-share stock dividend underuted to you, they are a partial return of theForm 1040A. You must complete Part II ofa plan described in the above paragraph. Youpremiums you paid. Do not include them in yourSchedule 1 (Form 1040A) and attach it to yourfigure your gain or loss as follows: gross income until they are more than the total ofForm 1040A, if:
all net premiums you paid for the contract. (ForFair market value of old stock.... $200.00 1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1 of Forminformation on the treatment of a distributionFair market value of stock dividend 1099–DIV) are more than $1,500, orfrom a modified endowment contract, see Distri-(cash received).............. +  10.00 bution Before Annuity Starting Date From a2) You received, as a nominee, dividendsFair market value of old stock and Nonqualified Plan under Taxation of Nonperi- that actually belong to someone else.stock dividend............... $210.00 odic Payments in Publication 575, Pension andBasis (cost) of old stock List on line 5 each payer’s name and the amountAnnuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu-after the stock dividend of ordinary dividends you received. If you re-tions on insurance policies on line 16b (Form(($200 ÷ $210) × $100)......... $95.24 ceived a Form 1099–DIV from a brokerage firm,1040) or line 12b (Form 1040A).Basis (cost) of stock dividend list the brokerage firm as the payer.(($10 ÷ $210) × $100).......... +  4.76 Dividends on veterans’ insurance. Divi- Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedTotal..................... $100.00 dends you receive on veterans’ insurance poli-on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a
Cash received...............  $10.00 cies are not taxable. In addition, interest onnominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this
Basis (cost) of stock dividend..... − 4.76 dividends left with the Department of Veteranstotal on line 9, Form 1040A.
Affairs is not taxable.Gain  $5.24 Form 1040. You must fill in Part II of Schedule
B and attach it to your Form 1040, if:Patronage dividends. Generally, patronageBecause you had held the share of stock fordividends you receive in money from a coopera-more than 1 year at the time the stock dividend 1) Your ordinary dividends ( box 1 of Formtive organization are included in your income.was declared, your gain on the stock dividend is 1099–DIV) are more than $1,500, orDo not include in your income patronagea long-term capital gain. dividends you receive on: 2) You received, as a nominee, dividends
Scrip dividends. A corporation that de- that actually belong to someone else.1) Property bought for your personal use, orclares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip
If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,certificate that entitles you to a fractional share.2) Capital assets or depreciable propertyyou must also complete Part III of Schedule B.The certificate is generally nontaxable when youbought for use in your business. But youList on line 5, Part II of Schedule B, eachreceive it. If you choose to have the corporationmust reduce the basis (cost) of the itemspayer’s name and the amount of ordinary divi-sell the certificate for you and give you the pro-bought. If the dividend is more than thedends you received. If your securities are heldceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be-adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-by a brokerage firm (in “street name”), list thetween the proceeds and the part of your basis inport the excess as income. name of the brokerage firm that is shown onthe corporation’s stock that is allocated to the
Form 1099–DIV as the payer. If your stock isThese rules are the same whether the coop-certificate.
held by a nominee who is the owner of record,erative paying the dividend is a taxable orHowever, if you receive a scrip certificate
and the nominee credited or paid you dividendstax-exempt cooperative.that you can choose to redeem for cash instead
on the stock, show the name of the nominee andof stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do not the dividends you received or for which you wereceive it. You must include its fair market value inreport these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-credited.income on the date you receive it. port these amounts on line 21 of Form 1040, lineEnter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed
13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as aOther Distributions nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this
total on line 9, Form 1040.You may receive any of the following distribu-
tions during the year. Dividends received on restricted stock.Re-
How To Report stricted stock is stock that you get from yourExempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest employer for services you perform and that isDividend Incomedividends you receive from a regulated invest- nontransferable and subject to a substantial riskment company (mutual fund) are not included in of forfeiture. You do not have to include theTerms you may need to knowyour taxable income. You will receive a notice value of the stock in your income when you(see Glossary):from the mutual fund telling you the amount of receive it. However, if you get dividends on re-the exempt-interest dividends you received. stricted stock, you must include them in yourExempt-interest dividends are not shown onNominee income as wages, not dividends. See RestrictedForm 1099–DIV or Form 1099–INT. Property in Publication 525 for information onRestricted stock
Information reporting requirement.Al- restricted stock dividends.
though exempt-interest dividends are not taxa- Your employer should include these divi-
ble, you must show them on your tax return if Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or dends in the wages shown on your Form W–2. If
you have to file a return. This is an information Form 1040A to report your dividend income. you also get a Form 1099–DIV for these divi-
reporting requirement and does not change the Report the total of your ordinary dividends on dends, list them on line 5 of Schedule 1 (Form
exempt-interest dividends to taxable income. line 9 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. 1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040), with the
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

Page 22 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0110
Dividends and
Distributions
RECIPIENT’S identification numberPAYER’S Federal identification number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (optional)
Form 1099-DIV Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue Service
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-DIV
Federal income tax withheld4
$
Cash liquidation distr.8
$
Foreign tax paid6
$
3 Nontaxable distributions
$
5 Investment expenses
Noncash liquidation distr.9
$
7 Foreign country or U.S. possession
$
$
Total capital gain distr.2a
2d Unrecap. sec. 1250 gain
$$
Qualified 5-year gain2c
$
Section 1202 gain2e
$
Ordinary dividends1
$
28% rate gain2b
2002
other dividends you received. Enter a subtotal of• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 2d),Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal
all your dividend income several lines above lineor of U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal
6. Below the subtotal, write “Dividends on re- Revenue Service Center by February 28, 2003• Section 1202 gain (box 2e).stricted stock reported as wages on line 7, Form (March 31, 2003 if you file Form 1099–DIV
1040,” and enter the amount of the dividends For information about these terms, see Capital electronically). Give the actual owner of the divi-
included in your wages on line 7, Form 1040.Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. dends Copy B of the Form 1099–DIV by Janu-
Subtract this amount from the subtotal and enter ary 31, 2003. On Form 1099–DIV, you shouldEnter on line 5 of the Qualified 5–Year Gainthe result on line 6. be listed as the “Payer.” The other owner shouldWorksheet in the Schedule D instructions thebe listed as the “Recipient.” You do not, how-Election. You can choose to include the part reported to you as qualified 5–year gain.ever, have to file a Form 1099–DIV to showvalue of restricted stock in gross income as payEnter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section payments for your spouse. For more informationfor services. If you make this choice, report the1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-about the reporting requirements and the penal-dividends on the stock like any other dividends.tions the part reported to you as unrecapturedties for failure to file (or furnish) certain informa-List them on line 5, Part II of Schedule 1 orsection 1250 gain. If you have a gain on qualifiedtion returns, see the General Instructions forSchedule B, along with your other dividends (ifsmall business stock (section 1202 gain), followForms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G.the amount of ordinary dividends received fromthe reporting instructions under Section 1202
all sources is more than $1,500). If you receiveExclusion in chapter 4. Liquidating distributions.If you receive aboth a Form 1099–DIV and a Form W–2 show- liquidating distribution on stock, the corporationNontaxable (return of capital) distributions.ing these dividends, do not include the dividends will give you a Form 1099–DIV showing theReport return of capital distributions (box 3 ofin your wages reported on line 7, Form 1040. amount of the liquidating distribution in boxes 8Form 1099–DIV) only after your basis in theAttach a statement to your Form 1040 explain- and 9.stock has been reduced to zero. After the basising why the amount shown on line 7 of your
of your stock has been reduced to zero, youForm 1040 is different from the amount shown
must show this amount on line 1, Part I ofon your Form W–2.
Schedule D, if you held the stock 1 year or less.Independent contractor.If you received StrippedShow it on line 8, Part II of Schedule D, if yourestricted stock for services as an independentheld the stock for more than 1 year. Write “Divi-contractor, the rules in the previous discussion Preferred Stockdend R.O.C. Exceeding Basis” in column (a) ofapply. Generally, you must treat dividends youSchedule D and the name of the company. Re-receive on the stock as income from self-em-    If the dividend rights are stripped from certainport your gain in column (f). Your gain is theployment. preferred stock, the holder of the stripped pre-amount of the distribution that is more than your
ferred stock may have to include amounts inbasis in the stock.Capital gain distributions.How to report income equal to the amounts that would havecapital gain distributions depends on whether been included if the stock were a bond withNominees. If you received ordinary dividendsyou have any other capital gains or losses. If youas a nominee (that is, the dividends are in your original issue discount (OID).do, report capital gain distributions (box 2a ofname but actually belong to someone else),Form 1099–DIV) in column (f) of line 13, Part II Stripped preferred stock defined.Strippedinclude them on line 5 of Schedule 1 (Formof Schedule D (Form 1040). If you do not have preferred stock is any stock that meets both of1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Severalany other capital gains or losses, you may be the following tests.lines above line 6, put a subtotal of all dividendable to report your capital gain distributions di-income listed on line 5. Below this subtotal, writerectly on line 13 of Form 1040 or line 10 of Form 1) There has been a separation in ownership“Nominee Distribution” and show the amounts1040A. In either case, see Reporting Capital between the stock and any dividend on thereceived as a nominee. Subtract the total of yourGains and Losses in chapter 4 for more informa- stock that has not become payable.nominee distributions from the subtotal. Entertion. the result on line 6. 2) The stock:The mutual fund or real estate investment
File Form 1099–DIV with the IRS.If youtrust (REIT) making the distribution should tell a) Is limited and preferred as to dividends,received dividends as a nominee in 2002, youyou how much of it is: must file a Form 1099–DIV for those dividendsb) Does not participate in corporate
with the IRS. Send the Form 1099–DIV with a• Qualified 5–year gain (box 2c), growth to any significant extent, and
Page 22 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 23 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c) Has a fixed redemption price. be classified as a trust for tax purposes if it hadRegular Interest
not elected REMIC status.
A REMIC can have several classes (also knownThe single-class REMIC will report your
as “tranches”) of regular interests. A regularshare of its investment expenses in box 5 ofTreatment of buyer.If you buy stripped pre-interest unconditionally entitles the holder to re-Form 1099–INT or box 7 of Form 1099–OID. Itferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in-ceive a specified principal amount (or other simi-will also include this amount in box 1 of Formclude certain amounts in your gross incomelar amount). 1099–INT or box 2 of Form 1099–OID, and onwhile you hold the stock. These amounts areA REMIC regular interest is treated as a debtthe additional written statement.ordinary income. They are equal to the amountsinstrument for income tax purposes. Accord-You may be able to take a deduction foryou would have included in gross income if theingly, the OID, market discount, and incomethese expenses subject to a 2% limit that alsostock were a bond that: reporting rules that apply to bonds and otherapplies to certain other miscellaneous itemized
debt instruments as described earlier in thisdeductions. See chapter 3 for more information.
1) Was issued on the purchase date of thepublication under Discount on Debt InstrumentsRedemption of regular interests at maturity.stock, and apply, with certain modifications discussed be-Redemption of debt instruments at their maturitylow.2) Has OID equal to: is treated as a sale or exchange. You mustGenerally, you report your income from areport redemptions on your tax return whether ora) The redemption price for the stock, mi-regular interest on line 8a, Form 1040. For morenot you realize gain or loss on the transaction.nus information on how to report interest and OID,Your basis is your adjusted issue price, whichsee How To Report Interest Income, earlier.b) The price at which you bought the includes any OID you previously reported in
stock. income.Holders must use accrual method.Holders Any amount that you receive on the retire-of regular interests must use an accrual methodReport these amounts as other income on line ment of a debt instrument is treated in the sameof accounting to report OID and interest income.21 of Form 1040. For information about OID, way as if you had sold or exchanged that instru-Because income under an accrual method is notsee Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier. ment. A debt instrument is retired when it isdetermined by the receipt of cash, you may havereacquired or redeemed by the issuer and can-This treatment also applies to you if youto include OID or interest income in your taxableceled.acquire the stock in such a way (for example, byincome even if you have not received any cash
gift) that your basis in the stock is determined bypayments. Sale or exchange of a regular interest.
using a buyer’s basis. Some of your gain on the sale or exchange of a
Forms 1099–INT and 1099–OID. You REMIC regular interest may be ordinary income.
should receive a copy of Form 1099–INT orThe ordinary income part, if any, is:Treatment of person stripping stock.If you Form 1099–OID from the REMIC. You will alsostrip the rights to one or more dividends from • The amount that would have been in-receive a written statement by March 17, 2003 (ifstripped preferred stock, you are treated as hav- cluded in your income if the yield to matur-you are a calendar year taxpayer), that provides
ing purchased the stock. You are treated as ity on the regular interest had been 110%additional information. The statement should
of the applicable federal rate at the begin-making the purchase on the date you disposedcontain enough information to enable you to
ning of your holding period, minusof the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in thefigure your accrual of market discount or amor-
stripped preferred stock is treated as yourtizable bond premium. • The amount you included in your income.purchase price. The rules described in Treat- Form 1099–INT shows the amount of inter-
ment of buyer, earlier, apply to you. est income that accrued to you for the period youResidual Interestheld the regular interest.
Form 1099–OID shows the amount of OID A residual interest is an interest in a REMIC that
and interest, if any, that accrued to you for theis not a regular interest. It is designated as a
period you held the regular interest. You will notREMICs, FASITs, residual interest by the REMIC.
need to make any adjustments to the amountsIf you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC,
and Other CDOs reported even if you held the regular interest foryou must take into account, on a quarterly basis,
only a part of the calendar year. However, if youyour daily portion of the taxable income or netHolders of interests in real estate mortgage in-bought the regular interest at a premium or ac-loss of the REMIC for each day during the tax
vestment conduits (REMICs), financial assetquisition premium, see Refiguring OID shown onyear that you hold the residual interest. You
Form 1099–OID under Original Issue Discountsecuritization investment trusts (FASITs), and must report these amounts as ordinary income
(OID), earlier.other collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) or loss.
must follow special rules for reporting income
Basis in the residual interest.Your basis inYou may not get a Form 1099. Corpora-and any expenses from these investment prod-
the residual interest is increased by the amounttions and other persons specified in Regulationucts.
of taxable income you take into account. Your1.6049–7(c) will not receive Forms 1099. These
basis is decreased (but not below zero) by thepersons and fiscal year taxpayers may obtainREMICs amount of cash or the fair market value of anytax information by contacting the REMIC or the
property distributed to you, and by the amount ofissuer of the CDO, if they hold their interestA real estate mortgage investment conduit
any net loss you have taken into account. If youdirectly from the REMIC or issuer of the CDO.(REMIC) is an entity that is formed for the pur-
sell your residual interest, you must adjust yourPublication 938, Real Estate Mortgage Invest-pose of holding a fixed pool of mortgages se-
basis to reflect your share of the REMIC’s taxa-ment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting Information,cured by interests in real property. A REMIC ble income or net loss immediately before theexplains how to request this information.issues regular and residual interests to inves- sale. See Wash Sales, in chapter 4, for moretors. For tax purposes, a REMIC is generally Publication 938 is available only on theinformation about selling a residual interest.treated as a partnership with the residual inter-Internet at www.irs.gov.
est holders treated as the partners. The regular Treatment of distributions.You must in-
interests are treated as debt instruments. clude in your gross income the part of any distri-
If you hold a regular interest or CDO throughbution that is more than your adjusted basis.REMIC income or loss is not income or lossa nominee (rather than directly), you can re-Treat the distribution as a gain from the sale orfrom a passive activity. quest the information from the nominee. exchange of your residual interest.For more information about the qualifications
and the tax treatment that apply to a REMIC andAllocated investment expenses.Regular in- Schedule Q. If you hold a REMIC residual
the interests of investors in a REMIC, see sec-terest holders in a REMIC may be allowed to interest, you should receive Schedule Q (Form
tions 860A through 860G of the Internal Reve-deduct the REMIC’s investment expenses, but 1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual Interest
nue Code, and the regulations under thoseonly if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. A Holder of REMIC Taxable Income or Net Loss
sections. single-class REMIC is one that generally wouldAllocation, and instructions from the REMIC
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

Page 24 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
each quarter. Schedule Q will indicate your you for the period you held the CDO. You should ited to the adjusted basis of your stock and any
share of the REMIC’s quarterly taxable incomenot need to make any adjustments to the debt the corporation owes you. Any loss or de-
(or loss). Do not attach the Schedule Q to your amounts reported even if you held the CDO for duction not allowed because of this limit is car-
tax return. Keep it for your records. only a part of the calendar year. However, if you ried over and treated as a loss or deduction in
Use Part IV of Schedule E (Form 1040) to bought the CDO at a premium or acquisition the next tax year.
report your total share of the REMIC’s taxable premium, see Refiguring OID shown on Form Passive activity losses.Rules apply thatincome (or loss) for each quarter included in1099–OID  under Original Issue Discount (OID),limit losses from passive activities. Your copy ofyour tax year. earlier. Schedule K–1 and its instructions will explainFor more information about reporting yourIf you did not receive a Form 1099, see You the limits and tell you where on your return toincome (or loss) from a residual interest in amay not get a Form 1099 under REMICs, earlier.report your share of S corporation items fromREMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) and passive activities.Schedule E (Form 1040) instructions. FASITs Form 8582. If you have a passive activity
Expenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- loss from an S corporation, you must completeA financial asset securitization investment
gross-income limit, you may be able to claim a Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations, totrust (FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt
miscellaneous itemized deduction for certain or- figure the amount of the allowable loss to enterobligations such as credit card receivables,
dinary and necessary expenses that you paid or on your return. See Publication 925 for morehome equity loans, and automobile loans.
incurred in connection with your investment in a information.A regular interest in a FASIT is treated as aREMIC. These expenses may include certaindebt instrument. The rules described under Col-expense items incurred by the REMIC and laterized Debt Obligations (CDOs), earlier, ap-passed through to you. The REMIC will reportply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except that athese expenses to you on line 3b of Schedule Q. Investment Clubsholder of a regular interest in a FASIT must useSee chapter 3 for information on how to reportan accrual method of accounting to report OIDthese expenses. An investment club is formed when a group ofand interest income.
friends, neighbors, business associates, orFor more information about FASITs, see
others pool their money to invest in stock orCollateralized Debt sections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev-
other securities. The club may or may not have aenue Code.Obligations (CDOs)
written agreement, a charter, or bylaws.
Usually the group operates informally withA collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a
members pledging to pay a regular amount intodebt instrument, other than a REMIC regular
the club monthly. Some clubs have a committeeinterest, that is secured by a pool of mortgagesS Corporations that gathers information on securities, selectsor other evidence of debt and that has principal
the most promising securities, and recommendspayments that are subject to acceleration.In general, an S corporation does not pay a taxthat the club invest in them. Other clubs rotate(Note: While REMIC regular interests are collat-on its income. Instead, its income and expensesthese responsibilities among all their members.eralized debt obligations, they have unique rulesare passed through to the shareholders, whoMost clubs require all members to vote for orthat do not apply to CDOs issued before 1987.)then report these items on their own income taxagainst all investments, sales, trades, and otherCDOs, also known as “pay-through bonds,” arereturns. transactions.commonly divided into different classes (alsoIf you are an S corporation shareholder, your
called “tranches”). share of the corporation’s current year incomeIdentifying number.Each club must have anCDOs can be secured by a pool of mort-or loss and other tax items are taxed to youemployer identification number (EIN) to usegages, automobile loans, equipment leases, orwhether or not you receive any amount. Gener-when filing its return. The club’s EIN also maycredit card receivables. ally, those items increase or decrease the basishave to be given to the payer of dividends orFor more information about the qualificationsof your S corporation stock as appropriate. Forother income from investments recorded in theand the tax treatment that apply to an issuer of amore information on basis adjustments for Sclub’s name. To obtain an EIN, first get FormCDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the Internalcorporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds under SS–4 , Application for Employer IdentificationRevenue Code and the regulations under thatBasis of Investment Property in chapter 4. Number, from the Internal Revenue Service orsection. Generally, S corporation distributions, ex-your nearest Social Security Administration of-The OID, market discount, and income-re-cept dividend distributions, are considered a re-fice. See chapter 5 of this publication for moreporting rules that apply to bonds and other debtturn of capital and reduce your basis in the stockinformation about how to get this form.instruments, as described earlier in this chapterof the corporation. The part of any distributionInvestments in name of member. Whenunder Discount on Debt Instruments, also apply that is more than your basis is treated as a gainan investment is recorded in the name of oneto a CDO. from the sale or exchange of property. Theclub member, this member must give his or herYou must include interest income from yourcorporation’s distributions may be in the form ofsocial security number (SSN) to the payer ofCDO in your gross income under your regularcash or property. investment income. (When an investment ismethod of accounting. Also include any OID S corporation distributions are not treated asheld in the names of two or more club members,accrued on your CDO during the tax year. dividends except in certain cases in which thethe SSN of only one member must be given toGenerally, you report your income from acorporation has accumulated earnings and prof-the payer.) This member is considered as theCDO on line 8a, Form 1040. For more informa-its from years before it became an S corporation.record owner for the actual owner, the invest-tion about reporting these amounts on your re-
ment club. This member is a “nominee” andturn, see How To Report Interest Income, Reporting S corporation income, deduc- must file an information return with the IRS. Forearlier. tions, and credits.The S corporation shouldexample, the nominee member must file Formsend you a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S)Forms 1099–INT and 1099–OID. You 1099–DIV for dividend income, showing theshowing your share of the S corporation’s in-should receive a copy of Form 1099–INT or club as the owner of the dividend, his or hercome, credits, and deductions for the tax year.Form 1099–OID. You will also receive a written SSN, and the EIN of the club.You must report your distributive share of the Sstatement by March 17, 2003, that provides ad-corporation’s income, gain, loss, deductions, orTax treatment of the club.Generally, an in-ditional information. The statement should con-credits on the appropriate lines and schedules ofvestment club is treated as a partnership fortain enough information about the CDO to your Form 1040. federal tax purposes unless it chooses other-enable you to figure your accrual of market dis-For more information about your treatment of wise. In some situations, however, it is taxed ascount or amortizable bond premium. S corporation tax items, see Shareholder’s In-a corporation or a trust.Form 1099–INT shows the amount of inter-structions for Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S).est income paid to you for the period you held Clubs formed before 1997. Before 1997,
the CDO. Limit on losses and deductions.The de- the rules for determining how an investment club
Form 1099–OID shows the amount of OID duction for your share of losses and deductions is treated were different from those explained in
accrued to you and the interest, if any, paid to shown on Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S) is lim- the following discussions. An investment club
Page 24 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 25 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that existed before 1997 is treated for later years Schedule K–1 (Form 1065) and its instructions 1120–A). In that case, you do not report any of
the same way it was treated before 1997, unlesswill tell you where on your return to report yourits income or expenses on your individual return.
it chooses to be treated a different way under theshare of partnership items from passive activi-All ordinary income and expenses and capital
new rules. To make that choice, the club mustties. If you have a passive activity loss from agains and losses must be reported on the Form
file Form 8832, Entity Classification Election.partnership, you must complete Form 8582 to 1120 (or Form 1120–A). Any distribution the
figure the amount of the allowable loss to enterclub makes that qualifies as a dividend must be
on your tax return.Club as a Partnership reported on Form 1099–DIV if total distributions
to the shareholder are $10 or more for the year.If your club is not taxed as a corporation or aNo social security coverage for investment You must report any distributions that youtrust, it will be treated as a partnership.club earnings. If an investment club receive from the club on your individual return.Club files Form 1065.If your investment clubpartnership’s activities are limited to investing inYou should receive a copy of Form 1099–DIVis treated as a partnership, it must file Formsavings certificates, stock, or securities, and col-from the club showing the distributions you re-1065. However, as a partner in the club, youlecting interest or dividends for its members’ceived.must report on your individual return your shareaccounts, a member’s share of income is not
of the club’s income, gains, losses, deductions, Some corporations can choose not to beearnings from self-employment. You cannot vol-
and credits for the club’s tax year. (Its tax year taxed and have earnings taxed to the sharehold-untarily pay the self-employment tax to increasegenerally must be the same tax year as that of ers. See S Corporations, earlier.your social security coverage and ultimate bene-the partners owning a majority interest.) Youfits. For more information about corporations,must report these items whether or not you actu- see Publication 542, Corporations.ally receive any distribution from the partner-Club as a Corporationship.
Club as a TrustYou should receive a copy of Schedule K–1An investment club formed after 1996 is taxed(Form 1065), Partner’s Share of Income, Cred-as a corporation if: In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as aits, Deductions, etc., from the partnership. The
trust. In general, a trust is an arrangementamounts shown on Schedule K–1 are your 1) It is formed under a federal or state lawthrough which trustees take title to property forshare of the partnership’s income, deductions,that refers to it as incorporated or as athe purpose of protecting or conserving it for theand credits. Report each amount on the appro-corporation, body corporate, or body poli-beneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied inpriate lines and schedules of your income taxtic, chancery or probate courts. An arrangement isreturn.
The club’s expenses for producing or collect- treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purpose2) It is formed under a state law that refers to
ing income, for managing investment property, is to vest in trustees responsibility for protectingit as a joint-stock company or joint-stock
or for determining any tax are listed separately and conserving property for beneficiaries whoassociation, or
on Schedule K–1. Each individual partner who cannot share in that responsibility and so are not3) It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.itemizes deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) associates in a joint enterprise for the conduct ofcan deduct his or her share of those expenses. business for profit. If you need more informationThe expenses are listed on line 22 of Schedule about trusts, see section 301.7701–4 of theChoosing to be taxed as a corporation.ToA along with other miscellaneous deductions regulations.choose to be taxed as a corporation, the clubsubject to the 2% limit. See chapter 3 for more
cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust, later) orinformation on the 2% limit.
otherwise subject to special treatment under theFor more information about reporting your Club files Form 1041.If your club is taxed as
tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to makeincome from a partnership, see the Schedule a trust, it must file Form 1041. You should re-
the choice.K–1 instructions. Also see Publication 541, ceive a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form 1041) from
Partnerships. the trust. Report the amounts shown on Sched-
ule K–1 on the appropriate lines and schedulesClub files Form 1120.If your club is taxed asPassive activity losses.Rules apply that
a corporation, it must file Form 1120 (or Formof your income tax return.limit losses from passive activities. Your copy of
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

Page 26 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ization of the substance of the transaction. come, losses, and credits from passive
Despite appearances to the contrary, the tax-activities, see Publication 925.
payer generally risks little. 2) Registration of tax shelters. Generally,2. Abusive tax shelters commonly involve the organizers of certain tax shelters mustpackage deals that are designed from the startregister the shelter with the IRS. The IRSto generate losses, deductions, or credits thatwill then assign the tax shelter a registra-will be far more than present or future invest-tion number. If you are an investor in a taxTax Shelters ment. Or, they may promise investors from theshelter, the seller (or the transferor) muststart that future inflated appraisals will enableprovide you with the tax shelter registrationthem, for example, to reap charitable contribu-number at the time of sale (or transfer) ortion deductions based on those appraisals. (ButIntroduction within 20 days after the seller or transferorsee the appraisal requirements discussed underreceives the number if that date is later.Investments that yield tax benefits are some-Curbing Abusive Tax Shelters.) They are com- See Investor Reporting, later, for more in-times called “tax shelters.” In some cases, Con-monly marketed in terms of the ratio of tax de-formation about reporting this numbergress has concluded that the loss of revenue isductions allegedly available to each dollar when filing your tax return.an acceptable side effect of special tax provi-invested. This ratio (or “write-off”) is frequentlysions designed to encourage taxpayers to makesaid to be several times greater than 3) List of tax shelter investors. Organizerscertain types of investments. In many cases,one-to-one. and sellers of any potentially abusive taxhowever, losses from tax shelters produce littleSince there are many abusive tax shelters, itshelter must maintain a list identifyingor no benefit to society, or the tax benefits areis not possible to list all the factors you shouldeach investor. The list must be availableexaggerated beyond those intended. Those consider in determining whether an offering isfor inspection by the IRS, and the informa-cases are called “abusive tax shelters.” An in-an abusive tax shelter. However, you should asktion required to be included on the list gen-vestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub-the following questions, which might provide aerally must be kept for 7 years. Seeject to restrictions, including the requirementclue to the abusive nature of the plan. Transfer of interests in a tax shelter, later,that it be registered, as discussed later, unless it for more information.• Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco-is a projected income investment (defined later).
nomic benefits? 4) Appraisals of donated property. Gener-
ally, if you donate property valued at moreTopics • Is this a transaction you would seriously
than $5,000 ($10,000 in the case of pri-This chapter discusses: consider, apart from the tax benefits, if you
vately traded stock), you must get a writtenhoped to make a profit?
“qualified” appraisal of the property’s fair• How to recognize an abusive tax shelter,
• Do shelter assets really exist and, if so,market value and attach an appraisal sum-• Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax are they insured for less than their mary to your income tax return. The ap-shelters, purchase price? praisal must be done by a “qualified”
• Investors’ reporting requirements, and appraiser who is not the taxpayer, a party• Is there a nontax justification for the way
to a transaction in which the taxpayer ac-profits and losses are allocated to part-• Penalties that may apply. quired the property, the donee, or an em-ners?
ployee or related party of any of the
• Do the facts and supporting documents preceding persons. (Related parties areUseful Items make economic sense? In that connec- defined under Related Party TransactionsYou may want to see: tion, are there sales and resales of the taxin chapter 4.) For more information aboutshelter property at ever increasing prices?appraisals, see Publication 561.Publication
• Does the investment plan involve a gim-5) Interest on penalties. If you are assessed❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods mick, device, or sham to hide the eco- an accuracy-related or civil fraud penaltynomic reality of the transaction?❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal (as discussed under Penalties, later), inter-
Rights, and Claims for Refund est will be imposed on the amount of the• Does the promoter offer to backdate docu-
penalty from the due date of the returnments after the close of the year? Are you❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated
(including any extensions) to the date youinstructed to backdate checks coveringProperty
pay the penalty.your investment?❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
6) Accounting methods and capitalization• Is your debt a real debt or are you assured
rules. Tax shelters generally cannot useby the promoter that you will never have toForm (and Instructions)
the cash method of accounting. Also, uni-pay it?
❏ 8271 Investor Reporting of Tax Shelter form capitalization rules generally apply to• Does this transaction involve launderingRegistration Number producing property or acquiring it for re-United States source income through for- sale. Under those rules, the direct cost and❏ 8275 Disclosure Statement eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha-part of the indirect cost of the propertyven and owned by United States❏ 8275–R Regulation Disclosure must be capitalized or included in inven-shareholders?Statement tory. For more information, see Publication
538.
See chapter 5 for information about gettingCurbing Abusivethese publications and forms. Tax Shelters Projected income investment.Special rules
apply to a projected income investment. To
Congress has enacted a series of income taxqualify as a projected income investment, a tax
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive taxshelter must not be expected to reduce the cu-Abusive Tax Shelters shelters. These provisions include the following.mulative tax liability of any investor during any
year of the first 5 years ending after the date theAbusive tax shelters are marketing schemes 1)Passive activity losses and credits.  The investment was offered for sale. In addition, thethat involve artificial transactions with little or no passive activity loss and credit rules limitassets of a projected income investment musteconomic reality. They often make use of un- the amount of losses and credits that cannot include or relate to more than an incidentalrealistic allocations, inflated appraisals, losses be claimed from passive activities and limitinterest in: in connection with nonrecourse loans, mis- the amount that can offset nonpassive in-
matching of income and deductions, financing come, such as certain portfolio income1) Master sound recordings,techniques that do not conform to standard com- from investments. For more detailed infor-
2) Motion picture or television films,mercial business practices, or the mischaracter- mation about determining and reporting in-
Page 26 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters

Page 27 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) Videotapes, official’s challenge of the tax benefits that you Tax Shelter Registration Number
claimed. In such a case, the examiner will not4) Lithograph plates, If you include on your tax return any deduction,compromise even if you or your representative
loss, credit or other tax benefit, or any income,5) Copyrights, believes that you have authority for the positionsfrom an interest in a tax shelter required to betaken on your tax return.6) Literary, musical, or artistic compositions, registered, you must report the registration num-or The courts have generally been un-ber that the tax shelter provided to you. (See
sympathetic to taxpayers involved inRegistration of tax shelters, earlier.) Complete7) Collectibles (such as works of art, rugs,
abusive tax shelter schemes and haveand attach Form 8271 to your return to reportCAUTION
!
antiques, metals, gems, stamps, coins, or
ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of thethe number and to provide other informationalcoholic beverages).
cases in which these shelters have been chal-about the tax shelter and its benefits. You mustTax shelters that qualify as projected incomelenged. also attach Form 8271 to any application forinvestments are not subject to the registration tentative refund (Form 1045) and to anyrules for tax shelters, described earlier. How- amended return (Form 1040X) on which theseever, the requirement to maintain a list of inves-Investor Reporting benefits are claimed or income is reported. If youtors that is in effect for tax shelters also applies do not include the registration number with yourYou may be required to provide the followingto any projected income investment, except for return, you will be subject to a penalty of $250information.one an investor later transfers. See Transfer of for each such failure, unless the failure is due tointerests in a tax shelter, later. reasonable cause.1) Tax shelter disclosure statement.A tax shelter that previously qualified as a Transfer of interests in a tax shelter.If youprojected income investment may later be dis-2) Tax shelter registration number. hold an investment interest in a tax shelter andqualified if, in one of its first 5 years, it reduces later transfer that interest to another person, youthe cumulative tax liability of any investor. In that must provide the tax shelter’s registration num-case, the tax shelter becomes subject to the ber to each person to whom you transferred yourTax Shelter Disclosure Statementregistration rules for tax shelters, described ear- interest. (However, this does not apply if yourlier. For each reportable tax shelter transaction in interest is in a projected income investment,
which you participated directly or indirectly, youdescribed earlier.) You must also provide a no-
must attach a disclosure statement to your re- tice substantially in the following form:Pre-filing notification letter.If you are an in-
turn for each year that your tax liability is af-vestor in an abusive tax shelter promotion, the You have acquired an interest in [name and
fected by your participation in the transaction. InIRS may send you a “pre-filing notification letter” address of tax shelter] whose taxpayer
identification number is [if any]. The Internaladdition, for the first year a disclosure statementif it determines that it is highly likely that there is:
Revenue Service has issued [name of tax shelter]is attached to your return, you must send a copy
the following tax shelter registration number:to:1) A gross valuation overstatement, or [number]. You must report this registration
number to the Internal Revenue Service, if you2) A false or fraudulent statement regarding
claim any deduction, loss, credit, or other taxInternal Revenue Servicethe tax benefits to be derived from the tax
benefit or report any income by reason of yourLM:PFTG:OTSAshelter entity or arrangement. investment in [name of tax shelter]. You mustLarge & Mid-Size Business Division report the registration number (as well as theThis letter will advise you that, based upon a1111 Constitution Avenue, NW name and taxpayer identification number of [namereview of the promotion, it is believed that theWashington, DC 20224. of tax shelter]) on Form 8271. Form 8271 must bepurported tax benefits are not allowable. The
attached to the return on which you claim theletter also will advise you of the possible tax deduction, loss, credit, or other tax benefit orconsequences if you claim the benefits on your report any income. Issuance of a registrationReportable tax shelter transaction.Disclo-income tax return. number does not indicate that this investment or
sure is required for a reportable tax shelterthe claimed tax benefits have been reviewed,You also may receive a notification lettertransaction that is a listed transaction. A trans-examined, or approved by the Internal Revenueafter you file your tax return. If you have already Service.action is a listed transaction if it is the same as orclaimed the benefits on your tax return, you will The following requirements also apply.substantially similar to a transaction determinedbe advised that you can file an amended return.
to be a tax avoidance transaction and identifiedHowever, any penalties that apply still can be 1) Maintaining a list. You must maintain aas a listed transaction in a notice, regulation, orasserted. list identifying each person to whom youother published guidance. Notice 2001–51, intransferred your interest. Or, you may re-If you claim the benefits after receiving theInternal Revenue Bulletin 2001–34, identifiesquire a designated person or seller topre-filing notification or if you fail to amend yourthese transactions. There may be subsequent maintain the list. However, see Specialreturn, you will be notified that your tax return isguidance identifying additional listed transac-rule for projected income investment, later,being examined. Normal audit and appeal pro-tions. for an exception to this requirement. If youcedures will be followed during the examination,
choose to delegate this requirement, youSee section 1.6011–4T of the regulations forand accuracy-related, civil or criminal fraud, and
must give the designated person or sellermore details including:other penalties will be considered and, when
all of the information that you would other-appropriate, asserted. For information on the
• Definitions of reportable transaction, listedwise have to maintain on the list.examination of returns, see Publication 556.
transaction, and substantially similar.2) Providing notice. If the tax shelter is not a
• Form and content of the disclosure state-projected income investment, describedRevenue rulings. The IRS has published nu-
ment. earlier, you must provide a notice to eachmerous revenue rulings concluding that the
person to whom you transferred your inter-claimed tax benefits of various abusive tax shel-• Filing requirements for the disclosure est. This notice must be substantially inters should be disallowed. A revenue ruling isstatement. the following form:the conclusion of the IRS on how the law is
applied to a particular set of facts. Revenue
Beginning January 1, 2003, certainrulings are published in the Internal Revenue
transactions not previously classifiedBulletin for taxpayers’ guidance and information
as reportable transactions must alsoand also for use by IRS officials. So, if your
CAUTION
!
be disclosed. You must use Form 8886, Report-return is examined and an abusive tax shelter is
able Transaction Disclosure Statement, to re-identified and challenged, a published revenue
port transactions entered into after 2002. Forruling dealing with that type of shelter, which
more information, see the instructions for Formdisallows certain claimed tax shelter benefits,
8886.could serve as the basis for the examining
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters Page 27

Page 28 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-You have acquired an interest in [name and reasonable basis for your position on the tax
address of tax shelter]. If you transfer yourtions. The penalty for negligence or disregardissue.
interest in this tax shelter to another person,of rules or regulations is imposed only on theAlso, the understatement penalty will not be
you are required by the Internal Revenuepart of the underpayment that is due to negli-imposed if you can show that there was reason-
Service to keep a list containing that gence or disregard of rules or regulations. Theable cause for the underpayment caused by the
person’s name, address, taxpayer penalty will not be charged if you can show thatunderstatement and that you acted in good faith.identification number, the date on which youyou had reasonable cause for understating yourAn important factor in establishing reasonabletransferred the interest, and the name,tax and that you acted in good faith. cause and good faith will be the extent of youraddress, and tax shelter registration numberNegligence includes any failure to make aeffort to determine your proper tax liability underof this tax shelter. If you do not want to keepreasonable attempt to comply with the provi-the law.such a list, you must (1) send the sions of the Internal Revenue Code.information specified above to [name and Valuation misstatement.In general, youDisregard includes any careless, reckless, oraddress of designated person], who will are liable for a 20% penalty for a substantialintentional disregard. The penalty for disregardkeep the list for this tax shelter, and (2) give valuation misstatement if all of the following areof rules and regulations can be avoided if both ofa copy of this notice to the person to whom true.the following are true.you transfer your interest.
1) The value or adjusted basis of any prop-• You have a reasonable basis for your po-If you do not maintain the required list of erty claimed on the return is 200% or moresition on the tax issue.investors, or do not delegate a designated per- of the correct amount.son or seller to maintain the list, you will be• You make an adequate disclosure of your
subject to a penalty of $50 for each person 2) You underpaid your tax by more thanposition.
required to be on the list. But, you will not have to $5,000 because of the misstatement.
Use Form 8275 to make your disclosure, andpay the penalty if you can show that the failure to 3) You cannot establish that you had reason-attach it to your tax return. To disclose a positioncomply with this requirement was due to reason- able cause for the underpayment and thatcontrary to a regulation, use Form 8275–R.able cause and not willful neglect. The maxi- you acted in good faith.mum penalty under this provision is $100,000Substantial understatement of tax.An
for each tax shelter in each calendar year. You may be assessed a penalty of 40% for aunderstatement is considered to be substantial if
gross valuation misstatement. If you misstateit is more than the greater of:
the value or the adjusted basis of property byPenalties
1) 10% of the tax required to be shown on400% or more of the amount determined to be
the return, or correct, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%,Investing in an abusive tax shelter may be an
instead of 20%, of the amount you underpaidexpensive proposition when you consider all of2) $5,000. because of the gross valuation misstatement.the consequences. First, the promoter generally
An “understatement” is the amount of tax re-The penalty rate is also 40% if the property’scharges a substantial fee. If your return is ex-
quired to be shown on your return for a tax yearcorrect value or adjusted basis is zero.amined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is deter-
minus the amount of tax shown on the return,mined, you will be faced with payment of more Civil fraud penalty.If there is any underpay-reduced by any rebates. The term “rebate” gen-tax, interest on the underpayment, possibly a ment of tax on your return due to fraud, a penaltyerally means a decrease in the tax shown on20% accuracy-related penalty, or a 75% civil of 75% of the underpayment will be added toyour original return as the result of your filing anfraud penalty. You may also be subject to the your tax.amended return or claim for refund.penalty for failure to pay tax. These penalties are
Two special rules apply in the case of anexplained in the following paragraphs. Joint return.The fraud penalty on a joint
understatement due to a tax shelter. return applies to a spouse only if some part ofAccuracy-related penalties.An accuracy- the underpayment is due to the fraud of thatrelated penalty of 20% can be imposed for un-1) An understatement of tax does not includespouse.derpayments of tax due to: any tax due to a tax shelter item (such as
Failure to pay tax.If a deficiency is assessedan item of income, gain, loss, deduction, or1) Negligence or disregard of rules or regula- and is not paid within 10 days of the demand forcredit) if you had substantial authority fortions, payment, an investor can be penalized with upthe tax treatment of the item and reasona-
to a 25% addition to tax if the failure to pay2) Substantial understatement of tax, or bly believed that the tax treatment chosen
continues.was more likely than not the proper one.3) Substantial valuation misstatement.
2) Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a taxThis penalty will not be imposed if you can show Whether To Investreturn does not reduce the amount of thethat you had reasonable cause for any under-understatement.statement of tax and that you acted in good faith. In light of the adverse tax consequences and the
If you are charged an accuracy-related pen- For other than tax shelters, you can file Form substantial amount of penalties and interest that
alty, interest will be imposed on the amount of 8275 or Form 8275–R to disclose items that will result if the claimed tax benefits are disal-
the penalty from the due date of the return (in- could cause a substantial understatement of in- lowed, you should consider tax shelter invest-
cluding extensions) to the date you pay the pen- come tax. In that way, you can avoid the sub- ments carefully and seek competent legal and
alty. stantial understatement penalty if you have a financial advice.
Page 28 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters

Page 29 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
explained later in this chapter under Expenses Expenses. Do not include in the computa-
tion of your passive activity income or loss:of Producing Income.
1) Expenses (other than interest) that are3. At-risk rules.Special at-risk rules apply to clearly and directly allocable to your portfo-most income-producing activities. These ruleslio income, orlimit the amount of loss you can deduct to the
amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally,2) Interest expense properly allocable to port-Investment this is the amount of cash and the adjusted basisfolio income.
of property you contribute to the activity. It alsoHowever, this interest and other expenses mayincludes money you borrow for use in the activityExpenses be subject to other limits. These limits are ex-if you are personally liable for repayment or ifplained in the rest of this chapter.you use property not used in the activity as
security for the loan. For more information, seeAdditional information.For more informa-Terms you may need to know
Publication 925. tion about determining and reporting income(see Glossary):
and losses from passive activities, see Publica-
tion 925.Passive activity losses and credits.TheAt-risk rules amount of losses and tax credits you can claim
from passive activities is limited. Generally, youPassive activity
are allowed to deduct passive activity lossesPortfolio income only up to the amount of your passive activityInterest Expenses
income. Also, you can use credits from passive
This section discusses interest expenses youactivities only against tax on the income from
Topics may be able to deduct as an investor.passive activities. There are exceptions for cer-
For information on business interest, seetain activities, such as rental real estate activi-This chapter discusses:
chapter 5 of Publication 535.ties.
You cannot deduct personal interest ex-• Limits on deductions, Passive activity.A passive activity gener-penses other than qualified home mortgage in-• Interest expenses, ally is any activity involving the conduct of any terest, as explained in Publication 936, Hometrade or business in which you do not materiallyMortgage Interest Deduction, and interest on• Bond premium amortization, participate and any rental activity. However, ifcertain student loans, as explained in Publica-• Expenses of producing income, you are involved in renting real estate, the activ-tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education.ity is not a passive activity if both of the following• Nondeductible expenses, and are true. Investment Interest• How to report investment expenses.
1) More than one-half of the personal serv-If you borrow money to buy property you hold forices you perform during the year in allinvestment, the interest you pay is investmentUseful Items trades or businesses are performed in realinterest. You can deduct investment interestYou may want to see: property trades or businesses in which yousubject to the limit discussed later. However,materially participate. you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-Publication
2) You perform more than 750 hours of serv- duce tax-exempt income. See Tax-exempt in-
❏ 535 Business Expenses come under Nondeductible Expenses, later. Norices during the year in real property trades
can you deduct interest expenses on straddles,or businesses in which you materially par-❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules also discussed under Nondeductible Expenses.ticipate.
❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and Investment interest does not include anyThe term trade or business generally meansDependents qualified home mortgage interest or any interestany activity that involves the conduct of a tradetaken into account in computing income or lossor business, is conducted in anticipation of start-Form (and Instructions) from a passive activity.ing a trade or business, or involves certain re-
Investment property.Property held for in-search or experimental expenditures. However,❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized
vestment includes property that produces inter-it does not include rental activities or certainDeductions
est, dividends, annuities, or royalties not derivedactivities treated as incidental to holding prop-❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense in the ordinary course of a trade or business. Iterty for investment.Deduction also includes property that produces gain or lossYou are considered to materially participate
(not derived in the ordinary course of a trade orin an activity if you are involved on a regular,See chapter 5 for information about getting business) from the sale or trade of propertycontinuous, and substantial basis in the opera-these publications and forms. producing these types of income or held fortions of the activity.
investment (other than an interest in a passive
Other income (nonpassive income).Gen- activity). Investment property also includes an
erally, you can use losses from passive activitiesinterest in a trade or business activity in which
only to offset income from passive activities.you did not materially participate (other than aLimits on Deductions
You generally cannot use passive activity lossespassive activity).
to offset your other income, such as your wagesYour deductions for investment expenses may Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.or your portfolio income. Portfolio income in-be limited by: To determine your investment interest, combinecludes gross income from interest, dividends,your share of investment interest from a partner-• The at-risk rules, annuities, or royalties that is not derived in theship, S corporation, estate, or trust with yourordinary course of a trade or business. It also• The passive activity loss limits, other investment interest.includes gains or losses (not derived in the ordi-
• The limit on investment interest, or nary course of a trade or business) from the sale
or trade of property (other than an interest in a• The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous Allocation of Interest Expensepassive activity) producing portfolio income oritemized deductions.
held for investment. This includes capital gainIf you borrow money for business or personal
distributions from mutual funds and real estateThe at-risk rules and passive activity rules are purposes as well as for investment, you must
investment trusts.explained briefly in this section. The limit on allocate the debt among those purposes. Only
You cannot use passive activity losses toinvestment interest is explained later in this the interest expense on the part of the debt used
offset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2% limit is for investment purposes is treated as invest-
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 29

Page 30 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Choosing to deduct disallowed interestment interest. The allocation is not affected by entity, you can make the allocation using any
expense before the year of disposition.Youthe use of property that secures the debt. reasonable method.
can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex-Additional allocation rules.For more infor-Example 1. You borrow $10,000 and use pense in any year before the year you dispose ofmation about allocating interest expense, see$8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 to the bond, up to your net interest income from thechapter 5 of Publication 535.buy items for your home. Since 80% of the debt bond during the year. The rest of the disallowed
is used for, and allocated to, investment pur- interest expense remains deductible in the year
poses, 80% of the interest on that debt is invest- you dispose of the bond.
When To Deductment interest. The other 20% is nondeductible Net interest income.This is the interestInvestment Interestpersonal interest. income (including OID) from the bond that you
If you use the cash method of accounting, youinclude in income for the year, minus the interestDebt proceeds received in cash.If you re- must pay the interest before you can deduct it.expense paid or accrued during the year toceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds areIf you use an accrual method of accounting,purchase or carry the bond.generally not treated as investment property.you can deduct interest over the period it ac-
Deferral of interest deduction for short-termcrues, regardless of when you pay it. For anDebt proceeds deposited in account.If you obligations.If the current income inclusionexception, see Unpaid expenses owed to re-deposit debt proceeds in an account, that de- rules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount onlated party under When To Report Investmentposit is treated as investment property, regard- Short-Term Obligations do not apply to you, theExpenses, later in this chapter.less of whether the account bears interest. But, if amount you can deduct for interest expense youyou withdraw the funds and use them for an- paid or accrued during the year to buy or carry aExample. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep-other purpose, you must reallocate the debt to short-term obligation is limited.tember 6, 2002, payable in 90 days at 12%determine the amount considered to be for in- The interest is deductible only to the extent itinterest. On December 5, 2002, you paid thisvestment purposes. is more than:with a new note for $1,030, due on March 5,
2003. If you use the cash method of accounting,Example 2. Assume in Example 1 that you 1) The amount of acquisition discount or OIDyou cannot deduct any part of the $30 interestborrowed the money on March 1 and immedi- on the obligation for the tax year, pluson your return for 2002 because you did notately bought the stock for $8,000. You did notactually pay it. If you use an accrual method, you2) The amount of any interest payable on thebuy the household items until June 1. You hadmay be able to deduct a portion of the interest onobligation for the year that is not includeddeposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had nothe loans through December 31, 2002, on yourin income because of your accountingother transactions on the bank account andreturn for 2002. method (other than interest taken into ac-made no principal payments on the debt. The
count in determining the amount of acqui-$2,000 is treated as being used for an invest-Interest paid in advance.Generally, if you sition discount or OID).ment purpose for the 3-month period. Your totalpay interest in advance for a period that goes
interest expense for 3 months on this debt isbeyond the end of the tax year, you must spreadThe method of determining acquisition discount
investment interest. In June, you must begin tothe interest over the tax years to which it belongsand OID for short-term obligations is discussed
allocate 80% of the debt and the interest ex-under the OID rules. You can deduct in eachin chapter 1 under Discount on Short-Term Obli-
pense to investment purposes and 20% to per-year only the interest for that year. gations.
sonal purposes. Interest on margin accounts.If you are a Disallowed interest expense.In the year
Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re- cash method taxpayer, you can deduct interestyou dispose of the obligation, or if you choose, in
ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-on margin accounts to buy taxable securities asanother year in which you have net interest
ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treatinvestment interest in the year you paid it. Youincome from the obligation, you can deduct the
any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)are considered to have paid interest on theseamount of any interest expense you were not
made from any account you own, or from cash,accounts only when you actually pay the brokerallowed to deduct for an earlier year. Follow the
as made from those proceeds. This applies toor when payment becomes available to the bro-same rules provided in the earlier discussion
any payment made within 30 days before or ker through your account. Payment may be-under Deferral of interest deduction for market
after the proceeds are received in cash or de-come available to the broker through yourdiscount bonds.
posited in your account. account when the broker collects dividends or
interest for your account, or sells securities heldIf you received the loan proceeds in cash, Limit on Deductionfor you or received from you.you can treat the payment as made on the date
You cannot deduct any interest on moneyyou received the cash instead of the date you Generally, your deduction for investment inter-
borrowed for personal reasons.actually made the payment. est expense is limited to the amount of your net
investment income.Deferral of interest deduction for market dis-Payments on debt may require new alloca- You can carry over the amount of investmentcount bonds. The amount you can deduct fortion. As you repay a debt used for more than interest that you could not deduct because ofinterest expense you paid or accrued during theone purpose, you must reallocate the balance. this limit to the next tax year. The interest carriedyear to buy or carry a market discount bond mayYou must first reduce the amount allocated to over is treated as investment interest paid orbe limited. This limit does not apply if you accruepersonal purposes by the repayment. You then accrued in that next year.the market discount and include it in your in-reallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is You can carry over disallowed investmentcome currently.for investment purposes. interest to the next tax year even if it is more thanUnder this limit, the interest is deductible
your taxable income in the year the interest wasonly to the extent it is more than:Example 3. If, in Example 2, you repay paid or accrued.$500 on November 1, the entire repayment is1) The total interest and OID includible inapplied against the amount allocated to per-gross income for the bond for the year,sonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo- Net Investment Incomepluscated as $8,000 for investment purposes, and
2) The market discount for the number of$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next Determine the amount of your net investment
days you held the bond during the year.reallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷ income by subtracting your investment ex-
$9,500) of the debt and the interest expense is penses (other than interest expense) from yourFigure the amount in (2) above using the rulesallocated to investment. investment income.for figuring accrued market discount in chapter 1
under Market Discount Bonds.Pass-through entities.If you use borrowed Investment income. This generally includes
funds to buy an interest in a partnership or SDisallowed interest expense.In the year your gross income from property held for invest-
corporation, then the interest on those funds you dispose of the bond, you can deduct the ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and
must be allocated based on the assets of the amount of any interest expense you were not royalties). Investment income does not include
entity. If you contribute to the capital of the allowed to deduct in earlier years. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. 
Page 30 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 31 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Choosing to include net capital gain.In- the amount figured under Child’s Alaska Perma-investment income − $980 other investment ex-
vestment income generally does not include netnent Fund dividends, earlier). penses).
capital gain from disposing of investment prop- Jane’s Form 4952 is illustrated at the end of
Investment expenses. Investment expenseserty (including capital gain distributions from mu- the chapter. Her investment interest expense
include all income-producing expenses (othertual funds). However, you can choose to include deduction is limited to $11,020, the amount of
than interest expense) relating to investmentall or part of your net capital gain in investment her net investment income. The $1,480 disal-
property that are allowable deductions after ap-income. lowed investment interest expense is carried
plying the 2% limit that applies to miscellaneousYou make this choice by completing line 4e forward to 2003.itemized deductions. Use the smaller of:of Form 4952 according to its instructions.
Exception to use of Form 4952.You do notIf you choose to include any amount of your1) The investment expenses included on linehave to complete Form 4952 or attach it to yournet capital gain in investment income, you must22 of Schedule A (Form 1040), or return if you meet all of the following tests.reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for
2) The amount on line 26 of Schedule A.the lower capital gains tax rates by the same • Your investment interest expense is notamount. See Expenses of Producing Income, later, for a more than your investment income fromFor more information about the capital gainsdiscussion of the 2% limit. interest and ordinary dividends.rates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
• You do not have any other deductible in-Losses from passive activities.Income orBefore making this choice, consider vestment expenses.expenses that you used in computing income orthe overall effect on your tax liability.loss from a passive activity are not included in• You have no carryover of investment inter-Compare your tax if you make this
TIP
determining your investment income or invest-est expense from 2001.choice with your tax if you do not. ment expenses (including investment interest
If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct allexpense). See Publication 925 for information
Investment income of child reported on of your investment interest.about passive activities.
parent’s return.Investment income includes
the part of your child’s interest and dividendExample. Ted is a partner in a partnership
income that you choose to report on your return.that operates a business. However, he does not
If the child does not have Alaska Permanentmaterially participate in the partnership’s busi-Bond PremiumFund dividends or capital gain distributions, thisness. Ted’s interest in the partnership is consid-
is the amount on line 6 of Form 8814, Parents’ ered a passive activity. Amortization
Election To Report Child’s Interest and Divi-Ted’s investment income from interest anddends. Include it on line 4a of Form 4952. If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-dividends is $10,000. His investment expenses
mium is part of your basis in the bond. If the(other than interest) are $3,200 after taking intoExample. Your 8-year-old son has interest bond yields taxable interest, you can choose toaccount the 2% limit on miscellaneous itemizedincome of $2,000, which you choose to report on amortize the premium. This generally meansdeductions. His investment interest expense isyour own return. You enter $2,000 on lines 1a that each year, over the life of the bond, you use$8,000. Ted also has income from the partner-and 4 of Form 8814 and $500 on line 6 of Form a part of the premium to reduce the amount ofship of $2,000.8814 and line 21 of Form 1040. Your investment interest includible in your income. If you makeTed figures his net investment income andincome includes this $500. this choice, you must reduce your basis in thethe limit on his investment interest expense de-
bond by the amortization for the year.Child’s Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.duction in the following way:
If part of the amount you report is your child’s If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, you
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that partTotal investment income........ $10,000 must amortize the premium. This amortized
does not count as investment income. To figure Minus: Investment expenses (other amount is not deductible in determining taxable
than interest)................ 3,200the amount of your child’s income that you can income. However, each year you must reduce
Net investment income......... $6,800consider your investment income, start with the your basis in the bond by the amortization for the
amount on line 6 of Form 8814. Multiply that year.Deductible investment interestamount by a percentage that is equal to the
expense for the year........... $6,800Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by Bond premium. Bond premium is the amount
the total amount of interest and dividend income by which your basis in the bond right after youThe $2,000 of income from the passive activ-on lines 1a and 2 of Form 8814. Subtract the get it is more than the total of all amounts pay-ity is not used in determining Ted’s net invest-result from the amount on line 6 of Form 8814. able on the bond after you get it (other thanment income. His investment interest deduction
payments of qualified stated interest). For exam-for the year is limited to $6,800, the amount ofExample. Your 10-year-old child has taxa- ple, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000his net investment income.ble interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per- generally would have a $50 premium if you buy itmanent Fund dividends of $2,000. You choose for $1,050.to report this on your return. You enter $4,000 onForm 4952 Basis. In general, your basis for figuringline 1a of Form 8814, $2,000 on line 2, and
bond premium amortization is the same as your$6,000 on line 4. You then enter $4,500 on line 6Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expense
basis for figuring any loss on the sale of theof Form 8814 and line 21 of Form 1040. YouDeduction, to figure your deduction for invest-
bond. However, you may need to use a differentfigure the amount of your child’s income that youment interest.
basis for convertible bonds, bonds you got in acan consider your investment income as follows:
trade, and bonds whose basis has to be deter-Example. Jane Smith is single. Her 2002
$4,500 − ($4,500 × ($2,000 ÷ $6,000)) mined using the basis of the person who trans-income includes $3,000 in dividends and a net
ferred the bond to you. See section 1.171–1(e)capital gain of $9,000 from the sale of invest-You include this $3,000 on line 4a of Form 4952. of the regulations.ment property. She incurred $12,500 of invest-
Child’s capital gain distributions.If part ment interest expense. Her other investment
Dealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyoneof the amount you report is your child’s capitalexpenses directly connected with the production
who holds them mainly for sale to customers ingain distributions, that part (which is reported onof investment income total $980 after applying
the ordinary course of a trade or business orline 13 of Schedule D or line 13 of Form 1040)the 2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-
who would properly include bonds in inventorygenerally does not count as investment income.tions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
at the close of the tax year) cannot claim aHowever, you can choose to include all or part ofFor 2002, Jane chooses to include all of her
deduction for amortizable bond premium.it in investment income, as explained in Choos- net capital gain in investment income. Her total
ing to include net capital gain, earlier. See section 75 of the Internal Revenue Codeinvestment income is $12,000 ($3,000 divi-
for the treatment of bond premium by a dealer indends + $9,000 net capital gain). Her net invest-Your investment income also includes the
tax-exempt bonds.ment income is $11,020 ($12,000 totalamount on line 6 of Form 8814 (or, if applicable,
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the premium does not apply to bonds you ac-Bonds Issued BeforeHow To Figure
quired before 1988.September 28, 1985Amortization
Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986.For these bonds, you can amortize bond pre-For bonds issued after September 27, 1985, you The amortization of the premium on these bondsmium using any reasonable method. Reasona-must amortize bond premium using a constant is a miscellaneous itemized deduction not sub-ble methods include: yield method on the basis of the bond’s yield to ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.
maturity, determined by using the bond’s basis1) The straight-line method, and Bonds acquired after October 22, 1986, butand compounding at the close of each accrual before 1988.The amortization of the premium2) The Revenue Ruling 82–10 method.period. on these bonds is investment interest expense
subject to the investment interest limit, unlessStraight-line method.Under this method, theConstant yield method.Figure the bond pre- you choose to treat it as an offset to interestamount of your bond premium amortization ismium amortization for each accrual period as income on the bond.the same each month. Divide the number offollows. months you held the bond during the year by the
number of months from the beginning of the taxStep 1: determine your yield.Your yield is
year (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to thethe discount rate that, when used in figuring the
date of maturity or earlier call date. Then multiplyExpenses ofpresent value of all remaining payments to be
the result by the bond premium (reduced by anymade on the bond (including payments of quali-
Producing Incomebond premium amortization claimed in earlierfied stated interest), produces an amount equal
years). This gives you your bond premium amor-to your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as of You deduct investment expenses (other thantization for the year.the date you got the bond. It must be constant interest expenses) as miscellaneous itemizedover the term of the bond and must be figured toRevenue Ruling 82–10 method. Under this deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To beat least two decimal places when expressed asmethod, the amount of your bond premium deductible, these expenses must be ordinarya percentage. amortization increases each month over the lifeand necessary expenses paid or incurred: If you do not know the yield, consult yourof the bond. This method is explained in Reve-
broker or tax advisor. nue Ruling 82–10. 1) To produce or collect income, or
Step 2: determine the accrual periods. 2) To manage property held for producing in-Choosing To AmortizeYou can choose the accrual periods to use. come.
They may be of any length and may vary inYou choose to amortize the premium on taxableThe expenses must be directly related to thelength over the term of the bond, but each ac-bonds by reporting the amortization for the yearincome or income-producing property, and thecrual period can be no longer than 1 year andon your income tax return for the first tax year forincome must be taxable to you.each scheduled payment of principal or interestwhich you want the choice to apply. You shouldThe deduction for most income-producingmust occur either on the first or the final day ofattach a statement to your return that you areexpenses is subject to a 2% limit that alsoan accrual period. The computation is simplest ifmaking this choice under section 171. See How applies to certain other miscellaneous itemizedaccrual periods are the same as the intervalsTo Report Amortization, next. deductions. The amount deductible is limited tobetween interest payment dates. This choice is binding for the year you makethe total of these miscellaneous deductions that
Step 3: determine the bond premium for it and for later tax years. It applies to all taxableis more than 2% of your adjusted gross income.
bonds you own in the year you make the choicethe accrual period.To do this, multiply your For information on how to report expenses of
and also to those you acquire in later years.adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of the producing income, see How To Report Invest-
You can change your decision to amortizeaccrual period by your yield. Then subtract the ment Expenses, later.
bond premium only with the written approval ofresult from the qualified stated interest for the
the IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115,period. Attorney or accounting fees.You can de-
Application for Change in Accounting Method. duct attorney or accounting fees that are neces-Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin-
sary to produce or collect taxable income.ning of the first accrual period is the same as
However, in some cases, attorney or accountingHow To Reportyour basis. After that, it is your basis decreased
fees are part of the basis of property. See Basisby the amount of bond premium amortized forAmortization
of Investment Property in chapter 4.earlier periods and the amount of any payment
Subtract the bond premium amortization frompreviously made on the bond other than a pay-
Automatic investment service and dividendyour interest income from these bonds.ment of qualified stated interest. reinvestment plans. A bank may offer itsReport the bond’s interest on line 1 of Sched-
checking account customers an automatic in-Example. On February 1, 2001, you bought ule B (Form 1040). Several lines above line 2,
vestment service so that, for a charge, eachput a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1.a taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has a
customer can choose to invest a part of theBelow this subtotal, print “ABP Adjustment,” andstated principal amount of $100,000, payable at
checking account each month in common stock.the amortization amount. Subtract this amountmaturity on February 1, 2008, making your pre- Or, a bank that is a dividend disbursing agent forfrom the subtotal, and enter the result on line 2.mium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). The a number of publicly-owned corporations maybond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000Bond premium amortization more than in-set up an automatic dividend reinvestment serv-on February 1 of each year. Your yield isterest.If the amount of your bond premiumice. Through that service, cash dividends are8.0745% compounded annually. You choose toamortization for an accrual period is more thanreinvested in more shares of stock, after theuse annual accrual periods ending on Februarythe qualified stated interest for the period, youbank deducts a service charge.1 of each year. To find your bond premiumcan deduct the difference as a miscellaneousA corporation in which you own stock alsoamortization for the accrual period ending onitemized deduction on line 27 of Schedule Amay have a dividend reinvestment plan. ThisFebruary 1, 2002, you multiply the adjusted ac-(Form 1040). plan lets you choose to use your dividends toquisition price at the beginning of the period But your deduction is limited to the amountbuy more shares of stock in the corporation($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract theby which your total interest inclusions on theinstead of receiving the dividends in cash.result ($8,882) from the qualified stated interestbond in prior accrual periods is more than yourYou can deduct the monthly service chargefor the period ($10,000), you find that your bondtotal bond premium deductions on the bond inyou pay to a bank to participate in an automaticpremium amortization for the period is $1,118.prior periods. Any amount you cannot deductinvestment service. If you participate in a divi-because of this limit can be carried forward toSpecial rules.For special rules that apply dend reinvestment plan, you can deduct anythe next accrual period.to variable rate bonds, inflation-indexed bonds, service charge subtracted from your cash divi-
and bonds that provide for alternative paymentPre-1998 election to amortize bond premium.dends before the dividends are used to buy
schedules or remote or incidental contingen-Generally, if you first elected to amortize bond more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in the
cies, see section 1.171–3 of the regulations.premium before 1998, the above treatment of year you pay them.
Page 32 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 33 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Clerical help and office rent.You can deduct tax-exempt income or for managing property to attend stockholders’ meetings of companies
office expenses, such as rent and clerical help, that produces tax-exempt income.in which you have no interest other than owning
that you pay in connection with your investments If you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay thestock. This is true even if your purpose in attend-
and collecting the taxable income on them. commissions for several years in advance, youing is to get information that would be useful in
must deduct a part of the commission each year.making further investments.Cost of replacing missing securities.To re- You cannot deduct the entire amount in the yearplace your taxable securities that are mislaid,you pay it. Investment-related seminar.You cannot de-lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to post duct expenses for attending a convention, semi-Investment expenses from pass-throughan indemnity bond. You can deduct the premium nar, or similar meeting for investment purposes.entities.If you hold an interest in a partner-you pay to buy the indemnity bond and the
ship, S corporation, real estate mortgage invest-related incidental expenses. Single-premium life insurance, endowment,ment conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly offeredYou may, however, get a refund of part of the and annuity contracts.You cannot deductregulated investment company (mutual fund),bond premium if the missing securities are re- interest on money you borrow to buy or carry ayou can deduct your share of that entity’s invest-covered within a specified time. Under certain single-premium life insurance, endowment, orment expenses. A partnership or S corporationtypes of insurance policies, you can recover annuity contract.will show your share of these expenses on yoursome of the expenses.
Schedule K–1. A nonpublicly offered mutualIf you receive the refund in the tax year you Used as collateral.If you use a single pre-
fund will indicate your share of these expensespay the amounts, you can deduct only the differ- mium annuity contract as collateral to obtain or
in box 5 of Form 1099–DIV, or on an equivalentence between the expenses paid and the continue a mortgage loan, you cannot deduct
statement. Publicly-offered mutual funds areamount refunded. If the refund is made in a later any interest on the loan that is collateralized by
discussed later.tax year, you must include the refund in income the annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter-
If you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex-in the year you received it, but only to the extent est expense disallowed by multiplying the cur-
penses relating to your residual interest invest-that the expenses decreased your tax in the year rent interest rate on the mortgage loan by the
ment will be shown on line 3b of Schedule Qyou deducted them. lesser of the amount of the annuity contract used
(Form 1066). Any expenses relating to youras collateral or the amount of the loan.Fees to collect income.You can deduct feesregular interest investment will appear in box 5
you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similarof Form 1099–INT or box 7 of Form 1099–OID.Borrowing on insurance. Generally, youagent to collect investment income, such asReport your share of these investment ex-cannot deduct interest on money you borrow toyour taxable bond or mortgage interest, or yourpenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject tobuy or carry a life insurance, endowment, ordividends on shares of stock. the 2% limit, in the same manner as your otherannuity contract if you plan to systematically
investment expenses.Fees to buy or sell.You cannot deduct a borrow part or all of the increases in the cash
fee you pay to a broker to acquire investment value of the contract. This rule applies to theIncluding mutual fund or REMIC expenses
property, such as stocks or bonds. You must interest on the total amount borrowed to buy orin income. Your share of the investment ex-
add the fee to the cost of the property. See Basis carry the contract, not just the interest on thepenses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offered
of Investment Property in chapter 4. borrowed increases in the cash value.mutual fund, as described above, are consid-
You cannot deduct any broker’s fees, com-ered to be indirect deductions through that
missions, or option premiums you pay (or that Tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct ex-pass-through entity. You must include in your
were netted out) in connection with the sale of penses you incur to produce tax-exempt in-gross income an amount equal to the amount of
investment property. They can be used only to come. Nor can you deduct interest on moneythe expenses allocated to you, whether or not
figure gain or loss from the sale. See Reporting you borrow to buy tax-exempt securities oryou are able to claim a deduction for those
Capital Gains and Losses, in chapter 4, for more shares in a regulated investment company (mu-expenses. If you are a shareholder in a nonpub-
information about the treatment of these sale tual fund) that distributes only exempt-interestlicly offered mutual fund, you must include on
expenses. dividends.your return the full amount of ordinary dividends
or other distributions of stock, as shown in box 1Investment counsel and advice. You can Short-sale expenses.The rule disallowingof Form 1099–DIV or an equivalent statement.deduct fees you pay for counsel and advice a deduction for interest expenses on tax-exemptIf you are a residual interest holder in a REMIC,about investments that produce taxable income. securities applies to amounts you pay in con-you must report as ordinary income on ScheduleThis includes amounts you pay for investment nection with personal property used in a shortE (Form 1040) the total amounts shown on linesadvisory services. sale or amounts paid by others for the use of any1b and 3b of Schedule Q (Form 1066). If you arecollateral in connection with the short sale. How-Safe deposit box rent.You can deduct rent a REMIC regular interest holder, you must in-ever, it does not apply to the expenses you incuryou pay for a safe deposit box if you use the boxclude the amount of any expense allocation youif you deposit cash as collateral for the propertyto store taxable income-producing stocks,received on line 8a of Form 1040. used in the short sale and the cash does notbonds, or other investment-related papers and earn a material return during the period of thePublicly-offered mutual funds.Publicly-of-documents. If you also use the box to store sale. Short sales are discussed in chapter 4.fered mutual funds, generally, are funds that aretax-exempt securities or personal items, you cantraded on an established securities exchange.Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxablededuct only part of the rent. See Tax-exempt These funds do not pass investment expensesincome. You may have expenses that are forincome under Nondeductible Expenses, later, tothrough to you. Instead, the dividend incomeboth tax-exempt and taxable income. If you can-figure what part you can deduct. they report to you in box 1 of Form 1099–DIV isnot specifically identify what part of the ex-already reduced by your share of investmentState and local transfer taxes.You cannot penses is for each type of income, you canexpenses. Therefore, you cannot deduct the ex-deduct the state and local transfer taxes you pay divide the expenses, using reasonable propor-penses on your return.when you buy or sell securities. If you pay these tions based on facts and circumstances. YouInclude the amount from box 1 of Formtransfer taxes when you buy securities, you must attach a statement to your return showing1099–DIV in your income.must treat them as part of the cost of the prop- how you divided the expenses and stating thaterty. If you pay these transfer taxes when you each deduction claimed is not based on tax-ex-sell securities, you must treat them as a reduc- empt income.tion in the amount realized. One accepted method for dividing expensesNondeductible is to do it in the same proportion that each typeTrustee’s commissions for revocable trust.
of income is to the total income. If the expensesIf you set up a revocable trust and have itsExpenses relate in part to capital gains and losses, includeincome distributed to you, you can deduct the
the gains, but not the losses, in figuring thiscommission you pay the trustee for managingSome expenses that you incur as an investorproportion. To find the part of the expenses thatthe trust to the extent it is to produce or collectare not deductible. is for the tax-exempt income, divide your tax-ex-taxable income or to manage property. How-
empt income by the total income and multiplyever, you cannot deduct any part of the commis-Stockholders’ meetings.You cannot deduct
your expenses by the result.sion that is for producing or collecting transportation and other expenses that you pay
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You received $6,000 interest; a) Interest on indebtedness incurred or the total on line 23 with your other miscellaneous
$4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxable. continued to buy or carry the personaldeductions that are subject to the 2% limit.
In earning this income, you had $500 of ex- property, and For information on how to report amortizable
penses. You cannot specifically identify the bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza-b) All other amounts (including charges toamount of each expense item that is for each tion, earlier in this chapter.insure, store, or transport the personalincome item, so you must divide your expenses. property) paid or incurred to carry the80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided by
personal property.$6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for the
tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400 When To Report2) Subtract from the amount in (1):(80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deduct
$100 (the rest of the expenses) because theya) Interest (including OID) includible inInvestment Expensesare for the taxable interest. gross income for the year on the per-
State income taxes.If you itemize your de- sonal property, If you use the cash method to report income and
ductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in- expenses, you generally deduct your expenses,b) Any income from the personal propertycome taxes on interest income that is exempt except for certain prepaid interest, in the yeartreated as ordinary income on the dis-from federal income tax. But you cannot deduct, you pay them.position of short-term government obli-as either taxes or investment expenses, state If you use an accrual method, you generallygations or as ordinary income under theincome taxes on other exempt income. deduct your expenses when you incur a liabilitymarket discount and short-term bond
Interest expense and carrying charges on for them, rather than when you pay them.provisions — see Discount on Debt In-
straddles. You cannot deduct interest and Also see When To Deduct Investment Inter-struments in chapter 1,carrying charges that are allocable to personal est, earlier in this chapter.c) The dividends includible in gross in-property that is part of a straddle. The nonde-
come for the year from the personalductible interest and carrying charges are added Unpaid expenses owed to related party.Ifproperty, andto the basis of the straddle property. However, you use an accrual method, you cannot deductthis treatment does not apply if: interest and other expenses owed to a relatedd) Any payment on a loan of the personal
cash-basis person until payment is made andproperty for use in a short sale that is1) All the offsetting positions making up the
the amount is includible in the gross income ofincludible in gross income.straddle either consist of one or more qual-
that person. The relationship, for purposes ofified covered call options and the optioned
this rule, is determined as of the end of the taxstock or consist of section 1256 contractsBasis adjustment. Add the nondeductibleyear for which the interest or expense would(and the straddle is not part of a largeramount to the basis of your straddle property.otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is deniedstraddle), or
under this rule, this rule will continue to apply2) The straddle is a hedging transaction. even if your relationship with the person ceases
For information about straddles, including defini- to exist before the amount is includible in theHow To Reporttions of the terms used in this discussion, see gross income of that person.
chapter 4. This rule generally applies to those relation-Investment ExpensesInterest includes any amount you pay or in- ships listed in chapter 4 under Related Party
cur in connection with personal property used in Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-To deduct your investment expenses, you musta short sale. However, you must first apply the nerships to partners, partners to partnerships,itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).rules discussed in Short Sale Expenses under shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-Enter your deductible investment interest ex-Short Sales in chapter 4. tions to shareholders.pense on line 13, Schedule A. Include any de-To determine the interest on market discount The postponement of deductions for unpaidductible short sale expenses. (See Short Salesbonds and short-term obligations that are part of
expenses and interest under the related partyin chapter 4 for information on these expenses.)a straddle, you must first apply the rules dis-
rule does not apply to original issue discountAlso attach a completed Form 4952 if you usedcussed under Deferral of interest deduction for
(OID), regardless of when payment is made.that form to figure your investment interest ex-market discount bonds and Deferral of interest
This rule also does not apply to loans withpense.deduction for short-term obligations (both under
below-market interest rates or to certain pay-Interest Expenses, earlier). Enter the total amount of your other invest-
ments for the use of property and services whenment expenses (other than interest expenses)Nondeductible amount. Figure the nonde- the lender or recipient has to include paymentson line 22, Schedule A. List the type and amountductible amount of interest and carrying charges periodically in income, even if a payment has notof each expense on the dotted lines next to lineon straddle property as follows. been made.22. (If necessary, you can show the required
1) Add: information on an attached statement.) Include
Page 34 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 35 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jane Smith 111-00-1111
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
9,000
9,000
0
9,000
12,000
980
11,020
1,480
11,020
OMB No. 1545-0191
Investment Interest Expense Deduction4952Form
/H17075Attach to your tax return.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 72
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number
1Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2002. See instructions1
2Disallowed investment interest expense from 2001 Form 4952, line 72
3Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 23
4a
Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net gain from the disposition of
property held for investment)
4a
Investment expenses. See instructions5 5
Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4f. If zero or less, enter -0-6 6
Total Investment Interest Expense
Net Investment Income
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
b Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment
c Net capital gain from the disposition of property held for investment
d Subtract line 4c from line 4b. If zero or less, enter -0-
e Enter the amount from line 4c that you elect to include in investment income. Do not enter more
than the amount on line 4b. See instructions /H17075
f Investment income. Add lines 4a, 4d, and 4e
Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2003. Subtract line 6 from
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-
7
Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions8
4f
4b
4c
4d
4e
7
8
Part III
Part I
Part II
(99)
2002
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Capital gains and losses, and
1) The redemption is not essentially
• How to report your gain or loss. equivalent to a dividend — see Dividends
4. and Other Corporate Distributions in chap-
ter 1,Useful Items
You may want to see: 2) There is a substantially disproportionate
redemption of stock,Sales and
Publication 3) There is a complete redemption of all the
stock of the corporation owned by the❏ 551 Basis of AssetsTrades of
shareholder, or❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions
4) The redemption is a distribution in partialInvestment liquidation of a corporation.Form (and Instructions)
❏ Schedule D (Form 1040)Capital Gains Redemption or retirement of bonds.A re-Property
and Losses demption or retirement of bonds or notes at their
maturity generally is treated as a sale or trade.❏ 6781 Gains and Losses From Section See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds and Dis-1256 Contracts and StraddlesIntroduction counted Debt Instruments under Capital or Ordi-
❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsnary Gain or Loss, later.This chapter explains the tax treatment of sales
In addition, a significant modification of aand trades of investment property. ❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges bond is treated as a trade of the original bond for
a new bond. For details, see section 1.1001–3Investment property.This is property that See chapter 5 for information about gettingof the regulations.produces investment income. Examples includethese publications and forms.stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes. Surrender of stock.A surrender of stock by aProperty used in a trade or business is not in- dominant shareholder who retains control of thevestment property. corporation is treated as a contribution to capital
rather than as an immediate loss deductibleWhat Is aForm 1099–B. If you sold property such as from taxable income. The surrendering share-stocks, bonds, or certain commodities through aSale or Trade? holder must reallocate his or her basis in thebroker during the year, you should receive, for surrendered shares to the shares he or sheeach sale, a Form 1099–B, Proceeds From Terms you may need to know retains.Broker and Barter Exchange Transactions, or an (see Glossary): Trade of investment property for an annuity.equivalent statement from the broker. You
The transfer of investment property to a corpora-should receive the statement by January 31 of
Equity option tion, trust, fund, foundation, or other organiza-the next year. It will show the gross proceeds
tion, in exchange for a fixed annuity contract thatfrom the sale. The IRS will also get a copy ofFutures contract will make guaranteed annual payments to youForm 1099–B from the broker.
Marked to market for life, is a taxable trade. If the present value ofUse Form 1099–B (or an equivalent state-
the annuity is more than your basis in the prop-ment received from your broker) to completeNonequity option erty traded, you have a taxable gain in the yearSchedule D of Form 1040. For more information,
Options dealer of the trade. Figure the present value of thesee Form 1099–B transactions under Reporting
annuity according to factors used by commercialCapital Gains and Losses, later. Regulated futures contract insurance companies issuing annuities.
Section 1256 contractOther property transactions.Certain trans- Transfer by inheritance.The transfer offers of property are discussed in other IRS publi-Short sale property of a decedent to the executor or admin-cations. These include: istrator of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficia-
• Sale of your main home, discussed in ries, is not a sale or other disposition. No taxable
This section explains what is a sale or trade. ItPublication 523, Selling Your Home, gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.
also explains certain transactions and events
Termination of certain rights and obliga-• Installment sales, covered in Publicationthat are treated as sales or trades.
tions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, or537, Installment Sales, A sale is generally a transfer of property for
other termination of a right or obligation (othermoney or a mortgage, note, or other promise to• Various types of transactions involving than a securities futures contract) with respect topay money. A trade is a transfer of property forbusiness property, discussed in Publica- property that is a capital asset (or that would beother property or services, and may be taxed intion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated as athe same way as a sale.Assets, sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital gain
Sale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transactionor loss.• Transfers of property at death, covered in
is not a trade when you voluntarily sell propertyThis rule does not apply to the retirement of aPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and
for cash and immediately buy similar property todebt instrument. See Redemption or retirementAdministrators, and
replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-of bonds, earlier.• Disposition of an interest in a passive ac-rate transactions. But see Like-Kind Exchangestivity, discussed in Publication 925, Pas- under Nontaxable Trades, later. Worthless Securitiessive Activity and At-Risk Rules.
Redemption of stock.A redemption of stockStocks, stock rights, and bonds (other thanis treated as a sale or trade and is subject to thethose held for sale by a securities dealer) thatTopics capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-became worthless during the tax year areThis chapter discusses: demption is a dividend or other distribution ontreated as though they were sold on the last daystock. of the tax year. This affects whether your capital• What a sale or trade is,
Dividend versus sale or trade.Whether a loss is long-term or short-term. See Holding Pe-• Basis, redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,riod, later.
or other distribution depends on the circum- If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make• Adjusted basis,
stances in each case. Both direct and indirect payments on a negotiable promissory note that• Figuring gain or loss, ownership of stock will be considered. The re- you issued for stock that became worthless, you
• Nontaxable trades, demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if: can deduct these payments as losses in the
Page 36 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 37 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
years you actually make the payments. Do not or partnership interest that is not a marketable tively sold the other appreciated financial posi-
deduct them in the year the stock became worth- security is not a constructive sale if it settles tion.
less. within 1 year of the date you enter into it.
Section 1256 ContractsException for certain closed transactions.How to report loss.Report worthless securi-Do not treat a transaction as a constructive saleMarked to Marketties on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Formif all of the following are true.1040), whichever applies. In columns (c) and If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end of(d), print “Worthless.” Enter the amount of your1) You closed the transaction before the endthe tax year, you generally must treat it as soldloss in parentheses in column (f). of the 30th day after the end of your taxat its fair market value on the last business day
year. of the tax year.Filing a claim for refund.If you do not claim a
loss for a worthless security on your original2) You held the appreciated financial position
return for the year it becomes worthless, you canthroughout the 60-day period beginning onSection 1256 Contractfile a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss.the date you closed the transaction.
You must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi- A section 1256 contract is any:3) Your risk of loss was not reduced at anyvidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return time during that 60-day period by holdingfor the year the security became worthless. You 1) Regulated futures contract,certain other positions.must file it within 7 years from the date your
2) Foreign currency contract,original return for that year had to be filed, or 2If a closed transaction is reestablished in a
years from the date you paid the tax, whicheversubstantially similar position during the 60-day3) Nonequity option,
is later. (Claims not due to worthless securitiesperiod beginning on the date the first transaction4) Dealer equity option, oror bad debts generally must be filed within 3was closed, this exception still applies if the
years from the date a return is filed, or 2 yearsreestablished position is closed before the end5) Dealer securities futures contract.
from the date the tax is paid.) For more informa-of the 30th day after the end of your tax year in
tion about filing a claim, see Publication 556,which the first transaction was closed and, afterRegulated futures contract.This is a con-Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights, andthat closing, (2) and (3) above are true.tract that: Claims for Refund. Appreciated financial position.This is any 1) Provides that amounts that must be de-interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a debtposited to, or can be withdrawn from, yourConstructive Sales instrument (including a futures or forward con-margin account depend on daily marketof Appreciated tract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing ofconditions (a system of marking to mar-the interest would result in a gain.Financial Positions ket), and
Exceptions. An appreciated financial posi-2) Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, aYou are treated as having made a constructivetion does not include the following. qualified board of exchange. A qualifiedsale when you enter into certain transactions
board of exchange is a domestic board ofinvolving an appreciated financial position (de-1) Any position from which all of the appreci-
trade designated as a contract market byfined later) in stock, a partnership interest, oration is accounted for under marked to
the Commodity Futures Trading Commis-certain debt instruments. You must recognizemarket rules, including section 1256 con-
sion, any board of trade or exchange ap-gain as if the position were disposed of at its fairtracts (described later under Section 1256
proved by the Secretary of the Treasury,market value on the date of the constructiveContracts Marked to Market).
or a national securities exchange regis-sale. This gives you a new holding period for the
2) Any position in a debt instrument if: tered with the Securities and Exchangeposition that begins on the date of the construc-
Commission.tive sale. Then, when you close the transaction,a) The position unconditionally entitles theyou reduce your gain (or increase your loss) byholder to receive a specified principalthe gain recognized on the constructive sale. Foreign currency contract.This is a contractamount, that:Constructive sale.You are treated as having b) The interest payments (or other similar
made a constructive sale of an appreciated fi- 1) Requires delivery of a foreign currencyamounts) with respect to the position
nancial position if you: that has positions traded through regulatedare payable at a fixed rate or a variable
futures contracts (or settlement of whichrate described in section1) Enter into a short sale of the same or sub- depends on the value of that type of for-1.860G–1(a)(3) of the regulations, andstantially identical property, eign currency),c) The position is not convertible, either2) Enter into an offsetting notional principal 2) Is traded in the interbank market, anddirectly or indirectly, into stock of thecontract relating to the same or substan- issuer (or any related person). 3) Is entered into at arm’s length at a pricetially identical property,
determined by reference to the price in the3) Any hedge with respect to a position de-3) Enter into a futures or forward contract to interbank market.scribed in (2).deliver the same or substantially identical
Bank forward contracts with maturity datesproperty (including a forward contract that
that are longer than the maturities ordinarilyCertain trust instruments treated as stock.provides for cash settlement), or
available for regulated futures contracts are con-For the constructive sale rules, an interest in an4) Acquire the same or substantially identical sidered to meet the definition of a foreign cur-actively traded trust is treated as stock unlessproperty (if the appreciated financial posi- rency contract if the above three conditions aresubstantially all of the value of the property heldtion is a short sale, an offsetting notional satisfied.by the trust is debt that qualifies for the excep-principal contract, or a futures or forward Special rules apply to certain foreign cur-tion to the definition of an appreciated financialcontract). rency transactions. These transactions may re-position (explained in (2) above).
sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. ForYou are also treated as having made a con-Sale of appreciated financial position.A details, see Internal Revenue Code section 988structive sale of an appreciated financial posi-transaction treated as a constructive sale of anand regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) andtion if a person related to you enters into aappreciated financial position is not treated as a1.988-3.transaction described above with a view towardconstructive sale of any other appreciated finan-avoiding the constructive sale treatment. Forcial position, as long as you continue to hold theNonequity option. This is any listed optionthis purpose, a related person is any relatedoriginal position. However, if you hold another (defined later) that is not an equity option. None-party described under Related Party Transac-appreciated financial position and dispose of the quity options include debt options, commoditytions, later in this chapter. original position before closing the transactionfutures options, currency options, and
Exception for nonmarketable securities.that resulted in the constructive sale, you arebroad-based stock index options. A
A contract for sale of any stock, debt instrument, treated as if, at the same time, you construc- broad-based stock index is based upon the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 37

Page 38 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
value of a group of diversified stocks or securi- account in figuring your gain or loss when you contracts loss absorbed in the carryback years
ties (such as the Standard and Poor’s 500 in- later dispose of the contract, as shown in the and an additional long-term capital gain of 60%
dex). example under 60/40 rule, below. of the absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treat
Warrants based on a stock index that are any capital loss carryover from losses on sectionHedging exception. The marked to marketeconomically, substantially identical in all mate- 1256 contracts as if it were a loss from sectionrules do not apply to hedging transactions. Seerial respects to options based on a stock index 1256 contracts for that year.Hedging Transactions, later.are treated as options based on a stock index. Net section 1256 contracts loss.This loss
60/40 rule.Under the marked to market sys-Cash-settled options. Cash-settled op- is the lesser of:
tem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will betions based on a stock index and either traded
1) The net capital loss for your tax year deter-treated as a long-term capital gain or loss, andon or subject to the rules of a qualified board of
mined by taking into account only the40% will be treated as a short-term capital gainexchange are nonequity options if the Securities
gains and losses from section 1256 con-or loss. This is true regardless of how long youand Exchange Commission (SEC) determines
tracts, oractually held the property.that the stock index is broad based.
This rule does not apply to options estab- 2) The capital loss carryover to the next taxExample. On June 23, 2001, you bought alished before the SEC determines that the stock year determined without this election.regulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-index is broad based.
cember 31, 2001 (the last business day of yourNet section 1256 contracts gain.This gainListed option.This is any option that istax year), the fair market value of the contractis the lesser of:traded on, or subject to the rules of, a qualifiedwas $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain on
board or exchange (as discussed earlier underyour 2001 tax return, treated as 60% long-term1) The capital gain net income for the car-Regulated futures contract). A listed option,and 40% short-term capital gain. ryback year determined by taking into ac-however, does not include an option that is aOn February 2, 2002, you sold the contractcount only gains and losses from sectionright to acquire stock from the issuer. for $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,0001256 contracts, or
gain on your 2001 return, you recognize aDealer equity option.This is any listed option 2) The capital gain net income for that year.$1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2002that, for an options dealer: tax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40%Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain for
short-term capital loss.1) Is an equity option, any carryback year without regard to the net
section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year orLimited partners or entrepreneurs.The2) Is bought or granted by that dealer in the any later tax year.60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op-normal course of the dealer’s business ac-
tions or dealer securities futures contracts thattivity of dealing in options, and Traders in section 1256 contracts.Gain orresult in capital gain or loss allocable to limitedloss from the trading of section 1256 contracts is3) Is listed on the qualified board of exchangepartners or limited entrepreneurs (defined latercapital gain or loss subject to the marked towhere that dealer is registered. under Hedging Transactions). Instead, thesemarket rules. However, this does not apply togains or losses are treated as short term.An options dealer is any person registered contracts held for purposes of hedging propertywith an appropriate national securities ex- if any loss from the property would be an ordi-Terminations and transfers.The marked tochange as a market maker or specialist in listed nary loss.market rules also apply if your obligation oroptions. rights under section 1256 contracts are termi-Treatment of underlying property.TheEquity option.This is any option: nated or transferred during the tax year. In thisdetermination of whether an individual’s gain orcase, use the fair market value of each sectionloss from any property is ordinary or capital gain1) To buy or sell stock, or 1256 contract at the time of termination or trans-or loss is made without regard to the fact that thefer to determine the gain or loss. Terminations or2) That is valued directly or indirectly by ref- individual is actively engaged in dealing in ortransfers may result from any offsetting, deliv-erence to any stock or narrow-based se- trading section 1256 contracts related to thatery, exercise, assignment, or lapse of your obli-curity index. property.gation or rights under section 1256 contracts.
Equity options include options on a group of
Loss carryback election.An individual orstocks only if the group is a narrow-based stock How To Reportpartnership having a net section 1256 contractsindex.
loss (defined later) for 2002 can elect to carryIf you disposed of regulated futures or foreignDealer securities futures contract.For this loss back 3 years, instead of carrying it overcurrency contracts in 2002 (or had unrealizedany dealer in securities futures contracts or op-to the next year. See How To Report, later, forprofit or loss on these contracts that were opentions on those contracts, this is a securities fu-information about reporting this election on yourat the end of 2001 or 2002), you should receivetures contract (or option on such a contract) that:return. Form 1099–B, or an equivalent statement, fromThe loss carried back to any year under this1) Is entered into by the dealer (or, in the your broker.election cannot be more than the net sectioncase of an option, is purchased or granted
1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, theForm 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781, Gainsby the dealer) in the normal course of the
amount of loss carried back to an earlier tax yearand Losses From Section 1256 Contracts anddealer’s activity of dealing in this type of
cannot increase or produce a net operating lossStraddles, to report your gains and losses fromcontract (or option), and
for that year. all section 1256 contracts that are open at the2) Is traded on a qualified board or exchangeThe loss is carried to the earliest carrybackend of the year or that were closed out during(as defined under Regulated futures con- year first, and any unabsorbed loss amount canthe year. This includes the amount shown in boxtract, earlier.) then be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. In9 of Form 1099–B. Then enter the net amount
each carryback year, treat 60% of the carrybackof these gains and losses on Schedule D (FormA securities futures contract that is not a dealer
amount as a long-term capital loss and 40% as a1040). Include a copy of Form 6781 with yoursecurities futures contract is treated as de-
short-term capital loss from section 1256 con-income tax return.scribed later under Securities Futures Con-
tracts. If the Form 1099–B you receive includes atracts.
If only a portion of the net section 1256 con-straddle or hedging transaction, defined later, it
tracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss back,may be necessary to show certain adjustments
the unabsorbed portion can be carried forward,on Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc-Marked to Market Rules
under the capital loss carryover rules, to the yeartions for completing Part I.
A section 1256 contract that you hold at the end following the loss. (See Capital Losses under
of the tax year will generally be treated as sold atReporting Capital Gains and Losses, later.) Fig-Loss carryback election.To carry back your
its fair market value on the last business day of ure your capital loss carryover as if, for the loss loss under the election procedures described
the tax year, and you must recognize any gain or year, you had an additional short-term capital earlier, file Form 1040X or Form 1045, Applica-
loss that results. That gain or loss is taken into gain of 40% of the amount of net section 1256tion for Tentative Refund, for the year to which
Page 38 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 39 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you are carrying the loss with an amended Form transaction occurred. The term “unrecognizedFair market value.This is the price at which
6781 attached. Follow the instructions for com-gain” has the same meaning as defined under the property would change hands between a
pleting Form 6781 for the loss year to make thisStraddles, later. buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy or
election. sell and both having reasonable knowledge of
all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property,Sale of property used in a hedge.Once you
around the same date, may be helpful in figuringidentify personal property as being part of a
Hedging Transactions fair market value.hedging transaction, you must treat gain from its
sale or exchange as ordinary income, not capitalThe marked to market rules, described earlier,gain.do not apply to hedging transactions. A transac- Property Received for Services
tion is a hedging transaction if both of the follow-
ing conditions are met. If you receive investment property for services,Self-Employment Income you must include the property’s fair market value1) You entered into the transaction in the nor- in income. The amount you include in incomeGains and losses derived in the ordinary coursemal course of your trade or business pri- then becomes your basis in the property. If theof a commodity or option dealer’s trading inmarily to manage the risk of: services were performed for a price that wassection 1256 contracts and property related to
agreed to beforehand, this price will be acceptedthese contracts are included in net earningsa) Price changes or currency fluctuations as the fair market value of the property if there isfrom self-employment. In addition, the rules re-on ordinary property you hold (or will no evidence to the contrary.lating to contributions to self-employment retire-hold), or
ment plans apply. For information on retirement
b) Interest rate or price changes, or cur-plan contributions, see chapter 3 of PublicationRestricted property.If you receive, as pay-
rency fluctuations, on your current or535, Business Expenses, Publication 560, Re- ment for services, property that is subject to
future borrowings or ordinary obliga-tirement Plans for Small Business, and Publica- certain restrictions, your basis in the property
tions. tion 590, Individual Retirement Arrangementsgenerally is its fair market value when it be-
(IRAs). comes substantially vested. Property becomes2) You clearly identified the transaction as substantially vested when it is transferable or isbeing a hedging transaction before the no longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture,close of the day on which you entered into whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop-it. erty in Publication 525 for more information.Basis of
This hedging transaction exception does not
Bargain purchases. If you buy investmentapply to transactions entered into by or for anyInvestment Property
property at less than fair market value, as pay-syndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor-
poration, or other entity (other than a regular ment for services, you must include the differ-Terms you may need to know
corporation) that allocates more than 35% of its ence in income. Your basis in the property is the(see Glossary):
losses to limited partners or limited entrepre- price you pay plus the amount you include in
neurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person who income.Basishas an interest in an enterprise (but not as a
limited partner) and who does not actively par-Fair market value
Property Receivedticipate in its management. However, an inter-Original issue discount (OID)est is not considered held by a limited partner in Taxable Trades
or entrepreneur if the interest holder actively
If you received investment property in trade forparticipates (or did so for at least 5 full years)Basis is a way of measuring your investment inother property, the basis of the new property isin the management of the entity, or is theproperty for tax purposes. You must know theits fair market value at the time of the tradespouse, child (including a legally adoptedbasis of your property to determine whether youunless you received the property in a nontaxablechild), grandchild, or parent of an individualhave a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi-trade.who actively participates in the management oftion.the entity. Investment property you buy normally has anExample. You trade A Company stock for B
original basis equal to its cost. If you get propertyCompany stock having a fair market value ofHedging loss limit.If you are a limited partner
in some way other than buying it, such as by gift$1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A Companyor entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a
or inheritance, its fair market value may be im-stock is less than $1,200, you have a taxablehedging loss you can claim is limited. A “hedging
portant in figuring the basis. gain on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the Aloss” is the amount by which the allowable de-
company stock is more than $1,200, you have aductions in a tax year that resulted from a hedg-
deductible loss on the trade. The basis of your BCost Basising transaction (determined without regard to
Company stock is $1,200. If you later sell the Bthe limit) are more than the income received or
The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.Company stock for $1,300, you will have a gainaccrued during the tax year from this transac-
The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtof $100.tion.
obligations, or other property or services.Any hedging loss that is allocated to you for
the tax year is limited to your taxable income for
Unstated interest.If you buy property on aProperty Receivedthat year from the trade or business in which the
time-payment plan that charges little or no inter-hedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg- in Nontaxable Trades
est, the basis of your property is your stateding transaction items in determining this taxable
If you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec-purchase price, minus the amount considered toincome. If you have a hedging loss that is disal-
ognize gain or loss until you dispose of thebe unstated interest. You generally have un-lowed because of this limit, you can carry it over
property you received in the trade. See Nontax-stated interest if your interest rate is less thanto the next tax year as a deduction resulting from
able Trades, later.the applicable federal rate. For more informa-a hedging transaction.
tion, see Unstated Interest and Original IssueThe basis of property you received in a non-If the hedging transaction relates to property
Discount in Publication 537. taxable or partly nontaxable trade is generallyother than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-
the same as the adjusted basis of the propertying losses applies if the limited partner or entre-
you gave up. Increase this amount by any cashpreneur is an individual. Basis Other Than Cost
you paid, additional costs you had, and any gainThe limit on hedging losses does not apply to
There are times when you must use a basisrecognized. Reduce this amount by any cash orany hedging loss to the extent that it is more
other than cost. In these cases, you may need tounlike property you received, any loss recog-than all your unrecognized gains from hedging
know the property’s fair market value or thenized, and any liability of yours that was as-transactions at the end of the tax year that are
adjusted basis of the previous owner. sumed or treated as assumed.from the trade or business in which the hedging
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 39

Page 40 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loss is $20,500, the donor’s adjusted basis plus If no federal estate tax return was filed, use theProperty Received
appraised value on the date of death for statethe amount of gift tax paid.From Your Spouse
inheritance or transmission taxes.
If property is transferred to you from your spouseExample 2. The facts are the same as inAppreciated property you gave the dece-(or former spouse, if the transfer is incident toExample 1 except that the gift tax paid wasdent. Your basis in certain appreciated prop-your divorce), your basis is the same as your$1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor’s ad-erty that you inherited is the decedent’s adjustedspouse’s or former spouse’s adjusted basis justjusted basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited tobasis in the property immediately before deathbefore the transfer. See Transfers Between the fair market value of the stock at the time ofrather than its fair market value. This applies toSpouses, later. the gift. appreciated property that you or your spouse
Recordkeeping. The transferor must gave the decedent as a gift during the one-yearGift received after 1976.If you received
give you the records necessary to de- period ending on the date of death. Appreciatedproperty as a gift after 1976, your basis is the
termine the adjusted basis and holding property is any property whose fair market valuedonor’s adjusted basis increased by the part of
RECORDS
period of the property as of the date of the on the day you gave it to the decedent was morethe gift tax paid that was for the net increase in
transfer. than its adjusted basis.value of the gift. You figure this part by multiply-
ing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. TheMore information.See Publication 551, Ba-numerator (top part) is the net increase in valuesis of Assets, for more information on the basisof the gift and the denominator (bottom part) isProperty Received as a Gift of inherited property, including community prop-the amount of the gift. erty, a joint tenancy or tenancy by the entirety, aTo figure your basis in property that you re-The net increase in value of the gift is the fairqualified joint interest, and a farm or business.ceived as a gift, you must know its adjustedmarket value of the gift minus the donor’s ad-
basis to the donor just before it was given to you,justed basis. The amount of the gift is its valueAdjusted Basisits fair market value at the time it was given tofor gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-
you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and thenual exclusion and marital or charitable deduc-Before you can figure any gain or loss on a sale,date it was given to you. tion that applies to the gift. exchange, or other disposition of property or
figure allowable depreciation, depletion, orFair market value less than donor’s adjustedExample. In 2002, you received a gift ofamortization, you usually must make certain ad-basis. If the fair market value of the property atproperty from your mother. At the time of the gift,justments (increases and decreases) to the ba-the time of the gift was less than the donor’sthe property had a fair market value of $101,000sis of the property. The result of theseadjusted basis just before the gift, your basis forand an adjusted basis to her of $40,000. Theadjustments to the basis is the adjusted basis.gain on its sale or other disposition is the sameamount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasAdjustments to the basis of stocks andas the donor’s adjusted basis plus or minus any$90,000 ($101,000 minus the $11,000 annualbonds are explained in the following discussion.required adjustments to basis during the periodexclusion), and your mother paid a gift tax ofFor information about other adjustments to ba-you hold the property. Your basis for loss is its$21,000. You figure your basis in the followingsis, see Publication 551.fair market value at the time of the gift plus orway:minus any required adjustments to basis during
Stocks and Bondsthe period you hold the property. Fair market value............. $101,000
Minus: Adjusted basis.......... 40,000No gain or loss. If you use the basis for The basis of stocks or bonds you own generallyNet increase in value of gift...... $61,000figuring a gain and the result is a loss, and then is the purchase price plus the costs of purchase,
use the basis for figuring a loss and the result is such as commissions and recording or transferGift tax paid................ $21,000a gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss. fees. If you acquired stock or bonds other thanMultiplied by .678 ($61,000 ÷ by purchase, your basis is usually determined$90,000) .................. .678Example. You receive a gift of investment by fair market value or the previous owner’sGift tax due to net increase in value $14,238property having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at adjusted basis as discussed earlier under BasisPlus: Adjusted basis of property tothe time of the gift. The fair market value at the Other Than Cost.your mother................ 40,000time of the gift is $9,000. You later sell the The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer-Your basis in the property $54,238property for $9,500. You have neither gain nor tain events that occur after purchase. For exam-
loss. Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, and ple, if you receive more stock from nontaxable
$10,000 minus $9,500 results in a $500 loss.Part sale, part gift.If you get property in astock dividends or stock splits, you must reduce
Your basis for figuring loss is $9,000, and transfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, yourthe basis of your original stock. You must also
$9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain. basis is the larger of the amount you paid for thereduce your basis when you receive nontaxable
property or the transferor’s adjusted basis in thedistributions, because these are a return of capi-Fair market value equal to or more than property at the time of the transfer. Add to thattal.donor’s adjusted basis.If the fair marketamount the amount of any gift tax paid on the
value of the property at the time of the gift was Identifying stock or bonds sold.If you cangift, as described in the preceding discussion.
equal to or more than the donor’s adjusted basis adequately identify the shares of stock or theFor figuring loss, your basis is limited to the
just before the gift, your basis for gain or loss bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or otherproperty’s fair market value at the time of the
on its sale or other disposition is the donor’s basis of the particular shares of stock or bonds.transfer.
adjusted basis plus or minus any required ad- Identification not possible.If you buy andjustments to basis during the period you hold theGift tax information.For information on giftsell securities at various times in varying quanti-property. Also, you may be allowed to add to thetax, see Publication 950, Introduction to Estateties and you cannot adequately identify thedonor’s adjusted basis all or part of any gift taxand Gift Taxes. shares you sell, the basis of the securities youpaid, depending on the date of the gift. sell is the basis of the securities you acquired
Gift received before 1977.If you received first. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis-
Property Received as Inheritanceproperty as a gift before 1977, your basis in the cussed later, you cannot use the average price
property is the donor’s adjusted basis increased per share to figure gain or loss on the sale of theIf you inherited property, your basis in that prop-by the total gift tax paid on the gift. However, shares.erty generally is its fair market value (its ap-your basis cannot be more than the fair marketpraised value on the federal estate tax return)Example. You bought 100 shares of stockvalue of the gift at the time it was given to you.on: of XYZ Corporation in 1989 for $10 a share. In
Example 1. You were given XYZ Company January 1990 you bought another 200 shares1) The date of the decedent’s death, orstock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stock for $11 a share. In July 1990 you gave your son
2) The later alternate valuation date if the es-had a fair market value of $21,000. The donor’s 50 shares. In December 1992 you bought 100
tate qualifies for, and elects to use, alter-adjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid a shares for $9 a share. In April 2002 you sold 130
nate valuation.gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain or shares. You cannot identify the shares you dis-
Page 40 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 41 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
posed of, so you must use the stock you ac-Undistributed capital gains.If you had to new stock by dividing your $100 basis between
quired first to figure the basis. The shares of include in your income any undistributed capital them. The basis of your common stock is $75
stock you gave your son had a basis of $500 (50 gains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase your ($150/$200 × $100), and the basis of the new
× $10). You figure the basis of the 130 shares of basis in the stock by the difference between the preferred stock is $25 ($50/$200 × $100).
stock you sold in 2002 as follows: amount you included and the amount of tax paid Stock bought at various times.Figure thefor you by the fund or REIT. See Undistributed basis of stock dividends received on stock you50 shares (50 × $10) balance of capital gains of mutual funds and REITs under bought at various times and at different prices bystock bought in 1989.......... $500 Capital Gain Distributions in chapter 1. allocating to each lot of stock the share of the80 shares (80 × $11) stock bought in
stock dividends due to it.Automatic investment service.If you partici-January 1990............... 8 8 0
pate in an automatic investment service, yourTotal basis of stock sold in 2002$1,380 Taxable stock dividends.If your stock divi-basis for each share of stock, including frac-dend is taxable when you receive it, the basis oftional shares, bought by the bank or other agentAdequate identification.You will make an your new stock is its fair market value on theis the purchase price plus a share of the broker’sadequate identification if you show that certifi- date of distribution. The basis of your old stockcommission.cates representing shares of stock from a lot that does not change.
you bought on a certain date or for a certainDividend reinvestment plans.If you partici-price were delivered to your broker or other Stock splits.Figure the basis of stock splits inpate in a dividend reinvestment plan and receiveagent. the same way as stock dividends if identicalstock from the corporation at a discount, your
stock is distributed on the stock held.basis is the full fair market value of the stock onBroker holds stock. If you have left the
the dividend payment date. You must includestock certificates with your broker or other Stock rights.A stock right is a right to acquirethe amount of the discount in your income.agent, you will make an adequate identification if a corporation’s stock. It may be exercised, it mayyou: Public utilities.If, before 1986, you ex-be sold if it has a market value, or it may expire.
cluded from income the value of stock you hadStock rights are rarely taxable when you receive1) Tell your broker or other agent the particu-
received under a qualified public utility reinvest-them. See Distributions of Stock and Stocklar stock to be sold or transferred at the
ment plan, your basis in that stock is zero.Rights under Nontaxable Distributions in chap-time of the sale or transfer, and
ter 1.Stock dividends. Stock dividends are distri-2) Receive a written confirmation of this from
butions made by a corporation of its own stock.Taxable stock rights.If you receive stockyour broker or other agent within a reason-
Generally, stock dividends are not taxable torights that are taxable, the basis of the rights isable time.
you. However, see Distributions of Stock andtheir fair market value at the time of distribution.
Stock Rights under Nontaxable Distributions in The basis of the old stock does not change.Single stock certificate.If you bought
chapter 1 for some exceptions. If the stock divi-stock in different lots at different times and you Nontaxable stock rights.If you receivedends are not taxable, you must divide yourhold a single stock certificate for this stock, you nontaxable stock rights and allow them to ex-basis for the old stock between the old and newwill make an adequate identification if you: pire, they have no basis.stock. If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stock1) Tell your broker or other agent the particu-New and old stock identical.If the new rights and if, at the time of distribution, the stocklar stock to be sold or transferred whenstock you received as a nontaxable dividend isrights had a fair market value of 15% or more ofyou deliver the certificate to your broker oridentical to the old stock on which the dividendthe fair market value of the old stock, you mustother agent, and was declared, divide the adjusted basis of thedivide the adjusted basis of the old stock be-
2) Receive a written confirmation of this fromold stock by the number of shares of old andtween the old stock and the stock rights. Use a
your broker or other agent within a reason-new stock. The result is your basis for eachratio of the fair market value of each to the total
able time. share of stock. fair market value of both at the time of distribu-
tion.Stock identified this way is the stock sold orExample 1. You owned one share of com- If the fair market value of the stock rights wastransferred even if stock certificates from a dif-mon stock that you bought for $45. The corpora-less than 15%, their basis is zero. However, youferent lot are delivered to the broker or othertion distributed two new shares of commoncan choose to divide the basis of the old stockagent. stock for each share held. You then had threebetween the old stock and the stock rights. ToIf you sell part of the stock represented by ashares of common stock. Your basis in eachmake the choice, attach a statement to yoursingle certificate directly to the buyer instead ofshare is $15 ($45 ÷ 3). return for the year in which you received thethrough a broker, you will make an adequate
rights, stating that you choose to divide the basisidentification if you keep a written record of theExample 2. You owned two shares of com-of the stock.particular stock that you intend to sell.mon stock. You had bought one for $30 and the
Basis of new stock. If you exercise theother for $45. The corporation distributed twoBonds. These methods of identification
stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its costnew shares of common stock for each sharealso apply to bonds sold or transferred.
plus the basis of the stock rights exercised.held. You had six shares after the distribution—Shares in a mutual fund or REIT.The basis three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷ 3) andof shares in a regulated investment company Example. You own 100 shares of ABCthree with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷ 3).(mutual fund) or a real estate investment trust Company stock, which cost you $22 per share.
New and old stock not identical.If the(REIT) is generally figured in the same way as The ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxable
new stock you received as a nontaxable divi-the basis of other stock. stock rights that would allow you to buy 10 more
dend is not identical to the old stock on which itshares at $26 per share. At the time the stockMutual fund load charges.Your cost basiswas declared, the basis of the new stock isrights were distributed, the stock had a marketin a mutual fund often includes a sales fee, alsocalculated differently. Divide the adjusted basisvalue of $30, not including the stock rights. Eachknown as a load charge. But, in certain cases,of the old stock between the old and the newstock right had a market value of $3. The marketyou cannot include the entire amount of a loadstock in the ratio of the fair market value of eachvalue of the stock rights was less than 15% ofcharge in your basis if the charge gives you alot of stock to the total fair market value of boththe market value of the stock, but you chose toreinvestment right. For more information, seelots on the date of distribution of the new stock.divide the basis of your stock between the stockPublication 564.
and the rights. You figure the basis of the rights
Choosing average basis for mutual fund Example. You bought a share of common and the basis of the old stock as follows:
shares. You can choose to use the average stock for $100. Later, the corporation distributed
basis of mutual fund shares if you acquired the a share of preferred stock for each share of100 shares × $22 = $2,200, basis of old
shares at various times and prices and left them common stock held. At the date of distribution,stock
on deposit in an account kept by a custodian or your common stock had a fair market value of
agent. The methods you can use to figure aver- $150 and the preferred stock had a fair market100 shares × $30 = $3,000, market value of
old stockage basis are explained in Publication 564. value of $50. You figure the basis of the old and
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 41

Page 42 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
placement stock by the amount of any post- this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID on
10 rights × $3 = $30, market value of rightsponed gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on these obligations in the manner described in
Qualified Small Business Stock, later. chapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons.
($3,000 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $2,178.22, Increase your basis in the stripped tax-ex-Short sales. If you cannot deduct paymentsnew basis of old stock empt bond or coupon by the taxable and nontax-you make to a lender in lieu of dividends onable accrued OID. Also increase your basis bystock used in a short sale, the amount you pay to($30 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $21.78, basis of the interest that accrued (but was not paid, andrights the lender is a capital expense, and you mustwas not previously reflected in your basis)add it to the basis of the stock used to close thebefore the date you sold the bond or coupon. InIf you sell the rights, the basis for figuringshort sale. addition, for bonds acquired after June 10, 1987,gain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷ 10) per right. If See Payments in lieu of dividends, later, foradd to your basis any accrued market discountyou exercise the rights, the basis of the stockinformation about deducting payments in lieu ofnot previously reflected in basis.you acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus thedividends.basis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18
per share. The remaining basis of the old stockPremiums on bonds. If you buy a bond at a
is $21.78 per share. premium, the premium is treated as part of your
How To Figurebasis in the bond. If you choose to amortize theInvestment property received in liquidation.premium paid on a taxable bond, you must re-In general, if you receive investment property as Gain or Lossduce the basis of the bond by the amortized parta distribution in partial or complete liquidation ofof the premium each year over the life of thea corporation and if you recognize gain or loss You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade ofbond.when you acquire the property, your basis in the property by comparing the amount you realizeAlthough you cannot deduct the premium onproperty is its fair market value at the time of the with the adjusted basis of the property.a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de-distribution. termine your adjusted basis in the bond. YouGain. If the amount you realize from a sale orS corporation stock. You must increase must reduce the basis of the bond by the pre-trade is more than the adjusted basis of theyour basis in stock of an S corporation by yourmium you amortized for the period you held theproperty you transfer, the difference is a gain.pro rata share of the following items. bond.
See Bond Premium Amortization in chapter Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property you• All income items of the S corporation, in-3 for more information. transfer is more than the amount you realize, thecluding tax-exempt income, that are sepa-
difference is a loss.rately stated and passed through to you asMarket discount on bonds. If you include
a shareholder. market discount on a bond in income currently,Amount realized. The amount you realize
increase the basis of your bond by the amount of• The nonseparately stated income of the S from a sale or trade of property is everything you
market discount you include in your income. Seecorporation. receive for the property. This includes the
Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 for moremoney you receive plus the fair market value of• The amount of the deduction for depletioninformation. any property or services you receive.(other than oil and gas depletion) that is If you finance the buyer’s purchase of yourAcquisition discount on short-termmore than the basis of the property being property and the debt instrument does not pro-obligations.If you include acquisition dis-depleted. vide for adequate stated interest, the unstatedcount on a short-term obligation in your income
interest will reduce the amount realized. Forcurrently, increase the basis of the obligation byYou must decrease your basis in stock of an more information, see Publication 537.the amount of acquisition discount you include inS corporation by your pro rata share of the
your income. See Discount on Short-Term Obli-following items. Fair market value.Fair market value is the
gations in chapter 1 for more information.price at which property would change hands• Distributions by the S corporation that between a buyer and a seller, neither beingOriginal issue discount (OID) on debtwere not included in your income. forced to buy or sell and both having reasonableinstruments. Increase the basis of a debt in-• All loss and deduction items of the S cor- knowledge of all the relevant facts.strument by the amount of OID that you includeporation that are separately stated and The fair market value of notes or other debtin your income. See Original Issue Discountpassed through to you. instruments you receive as a part of the sale(OID) in chapter 1. price is usually the best amount you can get• Any nonseparately stated loss of the S Discounted tax-exempt obligations.OID from selling them to, or discounting them with, acorporation. on tax-exempt obligations is generally not taxa-bank or other buyer of debt instruments.
ble. However, when you dispose of a tax-ex-• Any expense of the S corporation that is
empt obligation issued after September 3, 1982,not deductible in figuring its taxable in- Example. You trade A Company stock with
that you acquired after March 1, 1984, you mustcome and not properly chargeable to a an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company
accrue OID on the obligation to determine itscapital account. stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which
adjusted basis. The accrued OID is added to theis your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000• The amount of your deduction for deple-basis of the obligation to determine your gain or($10,000 minus $7,000). If you also receive ation of oil and gas wells to the extent theloss. note for $6,000 that has a discount value ofdeduction is not more than your share ofFor information on determining OID on a$4,000, your gain is $7,000 ($10,000 plusthe adjusted basis of the wells. long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is-$4,000 minus $7,000).
sued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985 orHowever, your basis in the stock cannot be Debt paid off.A debt against the property,Debt Instruments Issued After 1984, whicheverreduced below zero. or against you, that is paid off as a part of theapplies, in Publication 1212 under Figuring OID transaction or that is assumed by the buyer mustSpecialized small business investment com-on Long-Term Debt Instruments. be included in the amount realized. This is truepany stock or partnership interest.If you If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity ofeven if neither you nor the buyer is personallybought this stock or interest as replacement1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules forliable for the debt. For example, if you sell orproperty for publicly traded securities you sold atacquisition discount on short-term obligations. trade property that is subject to a nonrecoursea gain, you must reduce the basis of the stock orSee Discount on Short-Term Obligations in loan, the amount you realize generally includesinterest by the amount of any postponed gain onchapter 1. the full amount of the note assumed by the buyerthat sale. See Rollover of Gain From PubliclyStripped tax-exempt obligation.If you ac-even if the amount of the note is more than theTraded Securities, later. quired a stripped tax-exempt bond or couponfair market value of the property.
Qualified small business stock. If you after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on
bought this stock as replacement property for it to determine its adjusted basis when you dis-Example. You sell stock that you had
other qualified small business stock you sold at pose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds or pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.
a gain, you must reduce the basis of this re- coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part of Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer
Page 42 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 43 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in States and personal property used Example. On April 18, 2002, KP1 Corpora-
cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000 predominantly outside the United Statestion was acquired by KP2 Corporation. You held
plus $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 are not like property. 100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis of $3,500.
minus $6,000). As a result of the acquisition, you received 705) The property to be received must be iden-shares of KP2 stock in exchange for your KP1Payment of cash. If you trade property and tified within 45 days after the date youstock. You do not recognize gain or loss on thecash for other property, the amount you realize transfer the property given up in the trade.transaction. Your basis in the 70 shares of theis the fair market value of the property you re-6) The property to be received must be re-new stock is still $3,500.ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- ceived by the earlier of:tracting the cash you pay and the adjusted basis Stock for stock of the same corporation.of the property you traded in from the amounta) The 180th day after the date on whichYou can exchange common stock for commonyou realize. If the result is a positive number, it isyou transfer the property given up instock or preferred stock for preferred stock in thea gain. If the result is a negative number, it is athe trade, or same corporation without having a recognizedloss. gain or loss. This is true for a trade between twob) The due date, including extensions, for
stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-your tax return for the year in which theNo gain or loss.You may have to use a basis holder and the corporation.transfer of the property given up oc-for figuring gain that is different from the basis
curs.used for figuring loss. In this case, you may have Money or other property received.If in an
neither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or loss in otherwise nontaxable trade you receive money
If you trade property with a related party in athe discussion on the basis of property you re- or other property in addition to stock, then your
like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.ceived as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost, gain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but only up to
See Related Party Transactions, later in thisearlier. the amount of the money or other property. Any
chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544loss is not recognized.
for more information on exchanges of business
Nonqualified preferred stock.Nonquali-property and special rules for exchanges using
fied preferred stock is generally treated as prop-qualified intermediaries or involving multipleNontaxable Trades erty other than stock. Generally, this applies toproperties.
preferred stock with one or more of the followingThis section discusses trades that generally doPartly nontaxable exchange.If you receivefeatures.not result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss.cash or unlike property in addition to the like
For more information on nontaxable trades, see • The holder has the right to require theproperty, and the preceding six conditions are
chapter 1 of Publication 544. issuer or a related person to redeem ormet, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You are
purchase the stock.taxed on any gain you realize, but only up to the
amount of the cash and the fair market value ofLike-Kind Exchanges • The issuer or a related person is required
the unlike property you receive. You cannot de-to redeem or purchase the stock.If you trade business or investment property forduct a loss.
• The issuer or a related person has theother business or investment property of a likeLike property and unlike property trans- right to redeem the stock, and on the issuekind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deductferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-date, it is more likely than not that the rightany loss until you sell or dispose of the propertytion to the like property, you must recognize gainyou receive. To be nontaxable, a trade must will be exercised.or loss on the unlike property you give up. Themeet all six of the following conditions. • The dividend rate on the stock varies withgain or loss is the difference between the ad-
reference to interest rates, commodityjusted basis of the unlike property and its fair1) The property must be business or invest- prices, or similar indices.market value.ment property. You must hold both the
property you trade and the property you For a detailed definition of nonqualified pre-Like property and money transferred. Ifreceive for productive use in your trade or ferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Inter-conditions (1) — (6) are met, you have a non-business or for investment. Neither prop- nal Revenue Code.taxable trade even if you pay money in additionerty may be property used for personalto the like property.purposes, such as your home or family Convertible stocks and bonds.You gener-
car. Basis of property received.You figure yourally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you
basis in property received in a nontaxable orconvert bonds into stock or preferred stock into2) The property must not be held primarily forpartly nontaxable trade as explained earliercommon stock of the same corporation accord-sale. The property you trade and the prop-under Basis Other Than Cost, earlier. ing to a conversion privilege in the terms of theerty you receive must not be property you bond or the preferred stock certificate.sell to customers, such as merchandise.How to report. You must report the trade of
like property on Form 8824. If you figure a rec-3) The property must not be stocks, bonds, Example. In November, you bought for $1 aognized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it onnotes, choses in action, certificates of trust right issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, onSchedule D of Form 1040 or on Form 4797,or beneficial interest, or other securities or payment of $99, to subscribe to a bond issuedSales of Business Property, whichever applies.evidences of indebtedness or interest, in- by that corporation.For information on using Form 4797, seecluding partnership interests. However, On December 2, you subscribed to the bond,chapter 4 of Publication 544.you can have a nontaxable trade of corpo- which was issued on December 9. The bond
rate stocks under a different rule, as dis- contained a clause stating that you would re-
cussed later. Corporate Stocks ceive one share of XYZ Corporation common
stock on surrender of one bond and the payment4) There must be a trade of like property. TheThe following trades of corporate stocks gener-of $50.trade of real estate for real estate, or per-ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deductibleLater, you presented the bond and $50 andsonal property for similar personal prop-loss. received one share of XYZ Corporation commonerty, is a trade of like property. The trade
stock. You did not have a recognized gain orof an apartment house for a store building,Corporate reorganizations. In some in-
loss. This is true whether the fair market value ofor a panel truck for a pickup truck, is a stances, a company will give you common stock
the stock was more or less than $150 on thetrade of like property. The trade of a piece for preferred stock, preferred stock for common
date of the conversion.of machinery for a store building is not a stock, or stock in one corporation for stock in
The basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 +trade of like property. Real property lo- another corporation. If this is a result of a
$99 + $50). Your holding period is split. Yourcated in the United States and real prop- merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlled
holding period for the part based on your owner-erty located outside the United States are corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-
ship of the bond ($100 basis) begins on Decem-not like property. Also, personal property porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-
ber 2. Your holding period for the part based onused predominantly within the United zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 43

Page 44 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your cash investment ($50 basis) begins on the The basis of any other property you receive
day after you acquired the share of stock. is its fair market value on the date of the trade.Transfers Between
Bonds for stock of another corporation.
Insurance Policies SpousesGenerally, if you convert the bonds of one corpo-
and Annuitiesration into common stock of another corporation,
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on aaccording to the terms of the bond issue, you
transfer of property from an individual to (or inYou will not have a recognized gain or loss if youmust recognize gain or loss up to the difference
trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident totrade:between the fair market value of the stock re-
a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognitionceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds ex-1) A life insurance contract for another liferule does not apply if the recipient spouse orchanged. In some instances, however, such asinsurance contract or for an endowment orformer spouse is a nonresident alien. The ruletrades that are part of mergers or other corpo-annuity contract, also does not apply to a transfer in trust to therate reorganizations, you will have no recog-
extent the adjusted basis of the property is lessnized gain or loss if certain requirements are2) An endowment contract for an annuity
than the amount of the liabilities assumed plusmet. For more information about the tax conse-contract or for another endowment con-
any liabilities on the property.quences of converting securities of one corpora-tract that provides for regular payments
Any transfer of property to a spouse or for-tion into common stock of another corporation,beginning at a date not later than the be-
mer spouse on which gain or loss is not recog-under circumstances such as those just de- ginning date under the old contract, or
nized is treated by the recipient as a gift and isscribed, consult the respective corporations and3) An annuity contract for another annuitynot considered a sale or exchange. Thethe terms of the bond issue. This information iscontract. recipient’s basis in the property will be the samealso available on the prospectus of the bond
as the adjusted basis of the giver immediatelyissue. The insured or annuitant must be the same
before the transfer. This carryover basis ruleunder both contracts. Exchanges of contractsProperty for stock of a controlled corpora- applies whether the adjusted basis of the trans-not included in this list, such as an annuity con-tion. If you transfer property to a corporation ferred property is less than, equal to, or greatertract for an endowment contract, or an annuity orsolely in exchange for stock in that corporation, than either its fair market value at the time ofendowment contract for a life insurance con-and immediately after the trade you are in con- transfer or any consideration paid by the recipi-tract, are taxable.trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not ent. This rule applies for purposes of determin-recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both ing loss as well as gain. Any gain recognized onto individuals and to groups who transfer prop-Demutualization of Life a transfer in trust increases the basis.erty to a corporation. It does not apply if theInsurance Companies A transfer of property is incident to a divorcecorporation is an investment company. if the transfer occurs within 1 year after the dateIf you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro-A life insurance company may change from aon which the marriage ends, or if the transfer isceeding and you transfer property to a controlledmutual company to a stock company. This isrelated to the ending of the marriage. For morecorporation under a plan, other than a reorgani-commonly called demutualization. If you were ainformation, see Property Settlements in Publi-zation, you must recognize gain to the extent thepolicyholder or annuitant of the mutual com-cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals.stock you receive in the exchange is used to paypany, you may have received either stock in the
off your debts. stock company or cash in exchange for your
For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-equity interest in the mutual company.
ration, you or your group of transferors mustIf the demutualization transaction qualifies
Related Partyown, immediately after the exchange, at leastas a tax-free reorganization under section
80% of the total combined voting power of all368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gainTransactionsclasses of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%or loss is recognized on the exchange. Your
of the outstanding shares of each class of non-holding period for the new stock includes theSpecial rules apply to the sale or trade of prop-voting stock of the corporation. period you held an equity interest in the mutualerty between related parties.If this provision applies to you, you mustcompany as a policyholder or annuitant.
attach to your return a complete statement of allIf the demutualization transaction does not
facts pertinent to the exchange. Gain on Sale or Tradequalify as a tax-free reorganization under sec-
tion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, youof Depreciable PropertyMoney or other property received.If, in an
must recognize a capital gain or loss. Your hold-otherwise nontaxable trade of property for cor- Your gain from the sale or trade of property to aing period for the stock does not include theporate stock, you also receive money or prop- related party may be ordinary income, ratherperiod you held an equity interest in the mutualerty other than stock, you may have a taxable than capital gain, if the property can be depreci-company.gain. However, you are taxed only up to the
ated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 inIf you received cash in exchange for youramount of money plus the fair market value of
Publication 544 for more information.equity interest, you must recognize a capitalthe other property you receive. The rules for
gain. If you held an equity interest for more thanfiguring taxable gain in this situation generally
1 year, your gain is long-term.follow those for a partially nontaxable exchange Like-Kind Exchangesdiscussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. If
U.S. Treasurythe property you give up includes depreciable Generally, if you trade business or investmentproperty, the taxable gain may have to be re-Notes or Bonds property for other business or investment prop-ported as ordinary income because of deprecia- erty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized.tion. (See chapter 3 of Publication 544.) No lossYou can trade certain issues of U.S. TreasurySee Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier, under Non-is recognized. obligations for other issues, designated by thetaxable Trades.Nonqualified preferred stock (described ear-Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or lossThis rule also applies to trades of propertylier under Stock for stock of the same corpora-recognized on the trade. between related parties, defined next undertion) received is generally treated as propertySee the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S. Losses on Sales or Trades of Property. How-other than stock. Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for informationever, if either you or the related party disposes ofabout income from these investments.Basis of stock or other property received. the like property within 2 years after the trade,
The basis of the stock you receive is generally you both must report any gain or loss not recog-
the adjusted basis of the property you transfer. nized on the original trade on your return for the
Increase this amount by any amount that was year in which the later disposition occurs.
treated as a dividend, plus any gain recognized This rule generally does not apply to:
on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cash
you received and the fair market value of any • Dispositions due to the death of either re-
other property you received. lated party,
Page 44 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 45 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 of 6) Two corporations, one of which is an S If you sell or trade at a loss property that you
corporation, if the same persons own morePublication 544), or acquired from a related party, you cannot recog-
than 50% in value of the outstanding stocknize the loss that was not allowed to the related• Trades and later dispositions whose main of each corporation. party.purpose is not the avoidance of federal
7) An executor and a beneficiary of an estateincome tax. Example 1. Your brother sells you stock for(except in the case of a sale or trade to$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brothersatisfy a pecuniary bequest).If a property holder’s risk of loss on the prop- cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sellerty is substantially diminished during any pe-8) Two corporations that are members of thethe same stock to an unrelated party forriod, that period is not counted in determiningsame controlled group (under certain con-$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-whether the property was disposed of within 2ditions, however, these losses are not dis-able gain is $500 — the $2,900 gain minus theyears. The property holder’s risk of loss is sub-allowed but must be deferred). $2,400 loss not allowed to your brother.stantially diminished by:
9) Two partnerships if the same persons
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the• The holding of a put on the property, own, directly or indirectly, more than 50%
stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-of the capital interests or the profit inter-• The holding by another person of a right to nized loss is only $700 — your $7,600 basisests in both partnerships.acquire the property, or minus $6,900. You cannot deduct the loss that
• A short sale or any other transaction. was not allowed to your brother.Multiple property sales or trades.If you sell
or trade to a related party a number of blocks of
stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, youLosses on Sales or
must figure the gain or loss separately for eachTrades of Property
block of stock or piece of property. The gain onCapital Gains
You cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade ofeach item may be taxable. However, you cannot
property, other than a distribution in completededuct the loss on any item. Also, you cannotand Losses
liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is reduce gains from the sales of any of these
items by losses on the sales of any of the otherdirectly or indirectly between you and the follow- Terms you may need to know
items.ing related parties. (see Glossary):
Indirect transactions.You cannot deduct1) Members of your family. This includes only
your loss on the sale of stock through yourCallyour brothers and sisters, half-brothers
broker if, under a prearranged plan, a relatedand half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par- Commodity futureparty buys the same stock you had owned. Thisents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-
does not apply to a trade between related par-Conversion transactionscendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).  
ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-Forward contract2) A partnership in which you directly or indi-dental and is not prearranged.
rectly own more than 50% of the capital Limited partner
Constructive ownership of stock.In deter-interest or the profits interest.
Listed optionmining whether a person directly or indirectly3) A corporation in which you directly or indi-owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-Nonequity optionrectly own more than 50% in value of thetion, the following rules apply.outstanding stock (see Constructive own- Options dealer
Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned byership of stock, later).
Putor for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust4) A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-is considered owned proportionately by or for itsRegulated futures contractganization that is directly or indirectly con-shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.trolled, in any manner or by any method, Section 1256 contract
Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownby you or by a member of your family, Straddlethe stock that is directly or indirectly owned by orwhether or not this control is legally en-
for his or her family. Family includes only broth-forceable. Wash sale
ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,
In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of propertyspouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.
is not deductible if the transaction is directly or This section discusses the tax treatment ofRule 3. An individual owning, other than byindirectly between the following related parties. gains and losses from different types of invest-applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is
ment transactions.1) A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciaryconsidered to own the stock that is directly or
and beneficiary, of any trust. indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.
Character of gain or loss.You need to clas-2) Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or theRule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock
sify your gains and losses as either ordinary orconstructively owned by a person under rule 1 isfiduciary and beneficiary of two different
capital gains or losses. You then need to classifytreated as actually owned by that person. Buttrusts, if the same person is the grantor of
your capital gains and losses as either shortstock constructively owned by an individualboth trusts.
term or long term. If you have long-term gainsunder rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by3) A trust fiduciary and a corporation of which and losses, you must identify your 28% ratethat individual for again applying either rule 2 ormore than 50% in value of the outstanding gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain,rule 3 to make another person the constructivestock is directly or indirectly owned by orowner of the stock. you must also identify your qualified 5-year gainfor the trust, or by or for the grantor of the and any unrecaptured section 1250 gain.trust. Property received from a related party.If The correct classification and identificationyou sell or trade at a gain property that you4) A corporation and a partnership if the helps you figure the limit on capital losses andacquired from a related party, you recognize thesame persons own more than 50% in the correct tax on capital gains. For informationgain only to the extent that it is more than thevalue of the outstanding stock of the cor- about determining whether your capital gain orloss previously disallowed to the related party.poration and more than 50% of the capital loss is short term or long term, see HoldingThis rule applies only if you are the originalinterest, or the profits interest, in the part- Period, later. For information about 28% ratetransferee and you acquired the property bynership. gain or loss, qualified 5-year gain, and unrecap-purchase or exchange. This rule does not apply
tured section 1250 gain, see Reporting Capital5) Two S corporations if the same personsif the related party’s loss was disallowed be-
Gains and Losses and Capital Gain Tax Rates,own more than 50% in value of the out-cause of the wash sale rules, described later
later.standing stock of each corporation. under Wash Sales.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 45

Page 46 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the publications free or for less than theShort-Term Obligations, in chapter 1, for moreCapital or Ordinary
normal sales price. information.Gain or Loss
7) Certain commodities derivative finan-Tax-exempt state and local governmentIf you have a taxable gain or a deductible losscial instruments held by commodities de-bonds. If these bonds were originally issuedfrom a transaction, it may be either a capital gainrivatives dealers. For more information,at a discount before September 4, 1982, or youor loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending onsee section 1221 of the Internal Revenueacquired them before March 2, 1984, treat yourthe circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade ofCode. part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figurea capital asset (defined next) results in a capital your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these8) Hedging transactions, but only if thegain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset bonds, reduce the amount realized by your parttransaction is clearly identified as a hedg-generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De- of the OID.ing transaction before the close of the daypending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on If the bonds were issued after September 3,on which it was acquired, originated, ora sale or trade of property used in a trade or 1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-entered into. For more information, see thebusiness may be treated as either capital or crease the adjusted basis by your part of thedefinition of “hedging transaction” earlier,ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In OID to figure gain or loss. For more informationand the discussion of hedging transactionssome situations, part of your gain or loss may be on the basis of these bonds, see Discountedunder Commodity Futures, later.a capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi- tax-exempt obligations under Stocks andnary gain or loss. 9) Supplies of a type you regularly use orBonds, earlier in this chapter.consume in the ordinary course of your Any gain from market discount is usuallytrade or business. taxable on disposition or redemption of tax-ex-Capital Assets and empt bonds. If you bought the bonds before MayNoncapital Assets Investment property.Investment property is1, 1993, the gain from market discount is capitala capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale orgain. If you bought the bonds after April 30,For the most part, everything you own and usetrade generally is a capital gain or loss.1993, the gain from market discount is ordinaryfor personal purposes, pleasure, or investment
income.Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.is a capital asset. Some examples are:
You figure market discount by subtractingThese are capital assets except when they are
• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac- the price you paid for the bond from the sum ofheld for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss from
count, the original issue price of the bond and thetheir sale or trade generally is a capital gain or
amount of accumulated OID from the date ofloss.• A house owned and used by you and your
issue that represented interest to any earlierfamily, Stocks, stock rights, and bonds.All of holders. For more information, see Market Dis-these, including stock received as a dividend,• Household furnishings, count Bonds in chapter 1.are capital assets except when they are held forA loss on the sale or other disposition of a• A car used for pleasure or commuting,sale by a securities dealer. However, seetax-exempt state or local government bond isLosses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock• Coin or stamp collections, deductible as a capital loss.and Losses on Small Business Investment
• Gems and jewelry, and Redeemed before maturity. If a state orCompany Stock, later.
local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980,• Gold, silver, or any other metal. Personal use property.Property held for per-is redeemed before it matures, the OID is notsonal use only, rather than for investment, is ataxable to you.Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-capital asset, and you must report a gain from itsIf a state or local bond issued after June 8,cept the following noncapital assets. sale as a capital gain. However, you cannot1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part ofdeduct a loss from selling personal use property.the OID that is earned while you hold the bond is1) Property held mainly for sale to cus-
not taxable to you. However, you must report thetomers or property that will physically be-
unearned part of the OID as a capital gain.come a part of the merchandise that is for
Discounted Debt Instrumentssale to customers.
Example. On July 1, 1991, the date of is-2) Depreciable property used in your trade Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bondor business, even if fully depreciated.or retirement of a bond or other debt instrumentfor $800. The face amount of the bond was
originally issued at a discount or bought at a$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time3) Real property used in your trade or busi-
discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-the bond was issued, the issuer had no intentionness.
plained in the following discussions. of redeeming it before it matured. The bond was4) A copyright, a literary, musical, or artis- callable at its face amount beginning 10 yearsShort-term government obligations.Treattic composition, a letter or memoran- after the issue date.gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-dum, or similar property — The issuer redeemed the bond at the end ofernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-
11 years (July 1, 2002) for its face amount ofa) Created by your personal efforts, gations) as ordinary income up to your ratable
$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. Theshare of the acquisition discount. This treatmentb) Prepared or produced for you (in the OID earned during the time you held the bond,applies to obligations that have a fixed maturitycase of a letter, memorandum, or simi- $73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annualdate not more than 1 year from the date of issue.lar property), or interest also is not taxable. However, you mustAcquisition discount is the stated redemption
report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as ac) Acquired under circumstances (for ex-price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-
capital gain.ample, by gift) entitling you to the basistion.
of the person who created the propertyHowever, do not treat these gains as incomeLong-term debt instruments issued afteror for whom it was prepared or pro-to the extent you previously included the dis-1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before Julyduced. count in income. See Discount on Short-Term 2, 1982, if a government instrument).If youObligations in chapter 1 for more information.sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of these5) Accounts or notes receivable acquired Short-term nongovernment obligations. debt instruments, the part of your gain that is notin the ordinary course of a trade or busi-Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli- more than your ratable share of the OID at theness for services rendered or from the salegations as ordinary income up to your ratable time of sale or redemption is ordinary income.of property described in (1). share of OID. This treatment applies to obliga- The rest of the gain is capital gain. If, however,
6) U.S. Government publications that you tions that have a fixed maturity date of not more there was an intention to call the debt instrument
received from the government free or for than 1 year from the date of issue. before maturity, all of your gain that is not more
less than the normal sales price, or that However, to the extent you previously in- than the entire OID is treated as ordinary income
you acquired under circumstances entitling cluded the discount in income, you do not have at the time of the sale. This treatment of taxable
you to the basis of someone who received to include it in income again. See Discount on gain also applies to corporate instruments is-
Page 46 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 47 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sued after May 27, 1969, under a written com- Because the amount in (3) is more than your held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on the
mitment that was binding on May 27, 1969, and gain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in- sale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi-
at all times thereafter. come. nary income. However, if the issuer was subject
to a tax when the obligation was issued, then
Market discount bonds. If the debt instru-Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov- you can deduct any loss, and any gain may
ment has market discount and you chose toernment bond for $700 at original issue on April qualify for capital gain treatment.
include the discount in income as it accrued,1, 1983, and sold it for $900 on April 20, 2002 for Obligations required to be in registeredincrease your basis in the debt instrument by thea $200 gain. The redemption price is $1,000. At form. Any obligation must be in registeredaccrued discount to figure capital gain or loss onthe time of original issue, there was no intention form unless:its disposition. If you did not choose to includeto call the bond before maturity. You have held
the discount in income as it accrued, you mustthe bond for 228 full months. Do not count the 1) It is issued by a natural person,report gain as ordinary interest income up to theadditional days that are less than a full month.
2) It is not of a type offered to the public,instrument’s accrued market discount. See Mar-The number of complete months from date of
ket Discount Bonds in chapter 1. The rest of theissue to date of maturity is 360 (30 years). The 3) It has a maturity at the date of issue of notgain is capital gain.fraction 228/360 multiplied by the discount of more than 1 year, orHowever, a different rule applies if you dis-$300 ($1,000 − $700) is equal to $190. This is
4) It was issued before 1983.pose of a market discount bond that was:your ratable share of OID for the period you
owned the bond. You must treat any part of the1) Issued before July 19, 1984, andgain up to $190 as ordinary income. As a result,
$190 is treated as ordinary income and $10 is2) Purchased by you before May 1, 1993. Deposit in Insolvent or
capital gain. Bankrupt Financial InstitutionIn that case, any gain is treated as interest
income up to the amount of your deferred inter-Long-term debt instruments issued after If you lose money you have on deposit in aest deduction for the year you dispose of theMay 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov- qualified financial institution that becomes insol-bond. The rest of the gain is capital gain. (De-ernment instrument).If you hold one of these vent or bankrupt, you may be able to deductferred interest deduction for market discountdebt instruments, you must include a part of the your loss in one of three ways.bonds is discussed in chapter 3 under When ToOID in your gross income each year that you
Deduct Investment Interest.)own the instrument. Your basis in that debt in- 1) Ordinary loss,
Report the sale or trade of a market discountstrument is increased by the amount of OID that
2) Casualty loss, orbond on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or lineyou have included in your gross income. See
8. If the sale or trade results in a gain and you didOriginal Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1. 3) Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital
not choose to include market discount in incomeIf you sell or trade the debt instrument before loss).
currently, enter “Accrued Market Discount” onmaturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if
the next line in column (a) and the amount of theat the time the instrument was originally issued Ordinary loss or casualty loss.If you can
accrued market discount as a loss in column (f).there was an intention to call it before its matur- reasonably estimate your loss, you can choose
Also report the amount of accrued market dis-ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to the to treat the estimated loss as either an ordinary
count in column (f) as interest income on Sched-extent of the entire OID reduced by any amounts loss or a casualty loss in the current year. Either
ule B (Form 1040), line 1, and identify it asof OID previously includible in your income. In way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc-
“Accrued Market Discount.”this case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain. tion.
An intention to call a debt instrument before If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as aRetirement of debt instrument.Any amountmaturity means there is a written or oral agree- miscellaneous itemized deduction on line 22 ofthat you receive on the retirement of a debtment or understanding not provided for in the Schedule A (Form 1040). The maximum amountinstrument is treated in the same way as if youdebt instrument between the issuer and original you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you arehad sold or traded that instrument.holder that the issuer will redeem the debt instru- married filing separately) reduced by any ex-
ment before maturity. In the case of debt instru- pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss isNotes of individuals.If you hold an obligationments that are part of an issue, the agreement or subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeof an individual that was issued with OID afterunderstanding must be between the issuer and limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinaryMarch 1, 1984, you generally must include thethe original holders of a substantial amount of loss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.OID in your income currently, and your gain orthe debt instruments in the issue. If you claim a casualty loss, attach Formloss on its sale or retirement is generally capital
4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return.gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap-Example 1. On February 4, 2000, you Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your totalplies if the obligation is a loan between individu-bought at original issue for $7,600, Jones casualty losses for the year are reduced by 10%als and all of the following requirements are met.Corporation’s 10-year, 5% bond which has a of your adjusted gross income.stated redemption price at maturity of $10,000. You cannot choose either of these methods1) The lender is not in the business of lendingOn February 3, 2002, you sold the bond for if:money.$9,040. Assume you have included $334 of the
2) The amount of the loan, plus the amountOID in your gross income (including the amount 1) You own at least 1% of the financial insti-
of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000accrued for 2002) and increased your basis in tution,
or less.the bond by that amount. Your basis is now 2) You are an officer of the institution, or$7,934. If at the time of the original issue there3) Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-was no intention to call the bond before maturity, 3) You are related to such an owner or of-cipal purposes of the loan.your gain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized ficer. You are related if you and the owner
If the exception applies, or the obligation wasminus $7,934 adjusted basis) is capital gain. or officer are “related parties,” as defined
issued before March 2, 1984, you do not includeearlier under Related Party Transactions,
the OID in your income currently. When you sellExample 2. If, in Example 1, at the time of or if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, or
or redeem the obligation, the part of your gainoriginal issue there was an intention to call the niece of the owner or officer.
that is not more than your accrued share of thebond before maturity, your entire gain is ordinary If the actual loss that is finally determined isOID at that time is ordinary income. The rest ofincome. You figure this as follows: more than the amount you deducted as an esti-the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the
mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as a1) Entire OID ($10,000 stated sale or redemption is capital loss.
bad debt. If the actual loss is less than theredemption price at maturity minus
amount deducted as an estimated loss, you$7,600 issue price).......... $2,400
must include in income (in the final determina-2) Minus: Amount previously included Bearer Obligations
tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov-in income................ 3 3 4
You cannot deduct any loss on an obligationeries in Publication 525, Taxable and3) Maximum amount of ordinary
income .................. $2,066 required to be in registered form that is insteadNontaxable Income.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 47

Page 48 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choose 2) Subtract from (1) the amount treated asCommodity Futures
to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty loss ordinary income from any earlier disposi-
A commodity futures contract is a standardized,or an ordinary loss, you wait until the year the tion or other termination of a position held
exchange-traded contract for the sale oramount of the actual loss is determined and as part of the same conversion transac-
purchase of a fixed amount of a commodity at adeduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year. tion.
future date for a fixed price.Report it as a short-term capital loss on Sched-
If the contract is a regulated futures contract,Applicable rate.If the term of the conver-ule D (Form 1040), as explained under Nonbusi-
the rules described earlier under Section 1256sion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rateness Bad Debts, later.
Contracts Marked To Market apply to it.is the federal short-term rate in effect under
The termination of a commodity futures con-section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Code
tract generally results in capital gain or lossSale of Annuity during the period of the conversion transaction,
unless the contract is a hedging transaction.compounded daily.
The part of any gain on the sale of an annuityIn all other cases, the applicable rate is the
Hedging transaction. A futures contract thatcontract before its maturity date that is based on“applicable federal rate” determined as if the
is a hedging transaction generally produces or-interest accumulated on the contract is ordinaryconversion transaction were a debt instrument
dinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg-income. and compounded semi-annually.
ing transaction if you enter into the contract inThe rates discussed above are published by
the ordinary course of your business primarily tothe IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Or, youConversion Transactions manage the risk of interest rate or price changescan contact the IRS to get these rates. See
or currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinarychapter 5 for information on contacting the IRS.Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversion property, or ordinary obligations. (Generally, or-
transaction is treated as ordinary income. ThisNet investment. To determine your net in-dinary property or obligations are those that can-
applies to gain on the disposition or other termi-vestment in a conversion transaction, includenot produce capital gain or loss under any
nation of any position you held as part of athe fair market value of any position at the time itcircumstances.) For example, the offset or exer-
conversion transaction that you entered into af-becomes part of the transaction. This meanscise of a futures contract that protects against
ter April 30, 1993. that your net investment generally will be theprice changes in your business inventory results
A conversion transaction is any transactiontotal amount you invested, less any amount youin an ordinary gain or loss.
that meets both of these tests. received for entering into the position (for exam-For more information about hedging transac-
ple, a premium you received for writing a call).tions, see section 1.1221–2 of the regulations.
1) Substantially all of your expected return Also, see Hedging Transactions under SectionPosition with built-in loss.A special rule ap-from the transaction is due to the time 1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.plies when a position with a built-in loss be-value of your net investment. In other
If you have numerous transactions incomes part of a conversion transaction. Awords, the return on your investment is, in
the commodity futures market duringbuilt-in loss is any loss that you would havesubstance, like interest on a loan.
the year, the burden of proof is on yourealized if you had disposed of or otherwiseRECORDS
2) The transaction is one of the following. to show which transactions are hedging transac-terminated the position at its fair market value at
tions. Clearly identify any hedging transactionsthe time it became part of the conversion trans-a) A straddle as defined under Straddles, on your books and records before the end of theaction.later, but including any set of offsetting day you entered into the transaction. It may beWhen applying the conversion transactionpositions on stock. helpful to have separate brokerage accounts forrules to a position with a built-in loss, use the
your hedging and nonhedging transactions. Forb) Any transaction in which you acquireposition’s fair market value at the time it became
specific requirements concerning identificationproperty (whether or not actively part of the transaction. But, when you dispose of
of hedging transactions and the underlying item,traded) at substantially the same timeor otherwise terminate the position in a transac-
items, or aggregate risk that is being hedged,that you contract to sell the same prop-tion in which you recognize gain or loss, you
see section 1.1221–2(f) of the regulations.erty, or substantially identical property,must recognize the built-in loss. The conversion
at a price set in the contract. transaction rules do not affect whether the
built-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capitalc) Any other transaction that is marketedloss. Gains From Certain Constructiveor sold as producing capital gains from
Ownership Transactionsa transaction described in (1). Netting rule for certain conversion transac-
tions. Before determining the amount of gainIf you have a gain from a constructive ownershiptreated as ordinary income, you can net certaintransaction entered into after July 11, 1999, in-Amount treated as ordinary income. The gains and losses from positions of the samevolving a financial asset (discussed later) andamount of gain treated as ordinary income is theconversion transaction. To do this, you have tothe gain normally would be treated as long-termsmaller of: dispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe-capital gain, all or part of the gain may be treatedriod that is within a single tax year. You cannotinstead as ordinary income. In addition, if any1) The gain recognized on the disposition ornet the built-in loss against the gain. gain is treated as ordinary income, your tax isother termination of the position, or
You can net gains and losses only ifincreased by an interest charge.2) The “applicable imputed income amount.” you identify the conversion transaction
Constructive ownership transactions.Theas an identified netting transaction onRECORDS
following are constructive ownership transac-your books and records. Each position of theApplicable imputed income amount.Figure
tions.conversion transaction must be identified beforethis amount as follows.
the end of the day on which the position be-
1) A notional principal contract in which you1) Figure the amount of interest that wouldcomes part of the conversion transaction. For
have the right to receive substantially all ofhave accrued on your net investment inconversion transactions entered into before
the investment yield on a financial assetthe conversion transaction for the periodFebruary 20, 1996, this requirement is met if the
and you are obligated to reimburse sub-ending on the earlier of: identification was made by that date.
stantially all of any decline in value of the
a) The date when you dispose of the posi- financial asset.Options dealers and commodities traders.tion, or These rules do not apply to options dealers and2) A forward or futures contract to acquire a
commodities traders.b) The date when the transaction stops financial asset.
being a conversion transaction. How to report. Use Form 6781, Gains and 3) The holding of a call option and writing of a
To figure this amount, use an interest rateLosses From Section 1256 Contracts and Strad-put option on a financial asset at substan-
equal to 120% of the “applicable rate,” de-dles, to report conversion transactions. See the tially the same strike price and maturity
fined later. instructions for lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781. date.
Page 48 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 49 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This provision does not apply if all the posi- ductions) were more than its gross income dur-
1) The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of thetions are marked to market. Marked to market ing this period, this 50% test does not apply.
property, immediately before the trade,rules for section 1256 contracts are discussed in The corporation must have been largely an
was more than its fair market value, anddetail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked tooperating company for ordinary loss treatment
Market, earlier. to apply. 2) The basis of the stock is determined by the
If the stock was issued before July 19, 1984,basis of the property.Financial asset.A financial asset, for thisthe stock must be common stock. If issued afterpurpose, is any equity interest in a pass-through Reduce the basis of the stock by the differenceJuly 18, 1984, the stock may be either commonentity. Pass-through entities include partner- between the adjusted basis of the property andor preferred. For more information about theships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest- its fair market value at the time of the trade. Yourequirements of a small business corporation orment companies, and real estate investment reduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss.the qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec-trusts. Do not reduce the basis of the stock for anytion 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and its
other purpose.regulations.Amount of ordinary income.Long-term cap-
ital gain is treated as ordinary income to the Example. You transfer property with an ad-The stock must be issued to the person tak-extent it is more than the net underlying justed basis of $1,000 and a fair market value ofing the loss.You must be the original ownerlong-term capital gain. The net underlying $250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock.of the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treat-long-term capital gain is the amount of net capi- The basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figurement. To claim a deductible loss on stock issuedtal gain you would have realized if you acquired the ordinary loss under these rules, the basis ofto your partnership, you must have been a part-the asset for its fair market value on the date the your stock is $250 ($1,000 minus $750). If youner when the stock was issued and have re-constructive ownership transaction was opened, later sell the section 1244 stock for $200, yourmained so until the time of the loss. You addand sold the asset for its fair market value on the $800 loss is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capitalyour distributive share of the partnership loss todate the transaction was closed. If you do not loss of $750.any individual section 1244 stock loss you mayestablish the amount of net underlying long-termhave before applying the ordinary loss limit.capital gain by clear and convincing evidence, it Contributions to capital.If the basis of your
Stock distributed by partnership.If youris treated as zero. section 1244 stock has increased, through con-
partnership distributes the stock to you, you can-tributions to capital or otherwise, you must treat
not treat any later loss on that stock as anMore information.For more information, see this increase as applying to stock that is not
ordinary loss.section 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code. section 1244 stock when you figure an ordinary
loss on its sale.Stock sold through underwriter. Stock
sold through an underwriter is not section 1244Losses on Section 1244 Example. You buy 100 shares of sectionstock unless the underwriter only acted as a(Small Business) Stock 1244 stock for $10,000. You are the originalselling agent for the corporation.
owner. You later make a $2,000 contribution toYou can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than capital that increases the total basis of the 100Stock dividends and reorganizations.Stockas a capital loss, a loss on the sale, trade, or shares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 sharesyou receive as a stock dividend qualifies asworthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report the for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You cansection 1244 stock if:loss on Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 × $10,000/$12,000)line 10. 1) You receive it from a small business cor-as an ordinary loss under these rules. The re-Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capitalporation in which you own stock, and maining $500 is a capital loss.gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.2) The stock you own meets the require- Recordkeeping. You must keep rec-Do not offset gains against losses that are withinments when the stock dividend is distrib- ords sufficient to show your stock quali-the ordinary loss limit, explained later in thisuted. fies as section 1244 stock. Yourdiscussion, even if the transactions are in stock
RECORDS
records must also distinguish your section 1244of the same company. Report the gain on If you trade your section 1244 stock for new
stock from any other stock you own in the corpo-Schedule D of Form 1040. stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza-
ration.If you must figure a net operating loss, anytion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that is
ordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 stockonly a change in identity, form, or place of organ-
is a business loss. ization, the new stock is section 1244 stock if the
stock you trade meets the requirements whenLosses on Small Business
Ordinary loss limit.The amount that you canthe trade occurs. Investment Company Stockdeduct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000If you hold section 1244 stock and other
each year. On a joint return the limit is $100,000, A small business investment company (SBIC) isstock in the same corporation, not all of the stock
even if only one spouse has this type of loss. If one that is licensed and operated under theyou receive as a stock dividend or in a reorgani-
your loss is $110,000 and your spouse has no Small Business Investment Act of 1958.zation will qualify as section 1244 stock. Only
loss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinary If you are an investor in SBIC stock, you canthat part based on the section 1244 stock you
loss on a joint return. The remaining $10,000 is a deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capitalhold will qualify.
capital loss. loss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless-
Example. Your basis for 100 shares of Xness of that stock. A gain from the sale or trade
Section 1244 (small business) stock.This is common stock is $1,000. These shares qualifyof that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset your
stock that was issued for money or propertyas section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stockgains and losses, even if they are on stock of the
(other than stock and securities) in a domesticdividend, you receive 50 more shares of com-same company.
small business corporation. During its 5 mostmon stock, the basis of which is determined from
recent tax years before the loss, this corporation How to report.You report this type of ordinarythe 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are also
must have derived more than 50% of its gross loss on line 10, Part II, of Form 4797. In additionsection 1244 stock.
receipts from other than royalties, rents, divi- to the information required by the form, you mustIf you also own stock in the corporation that
dends, interest, annuities, and gains from sales include the name and address of the companyis not section 1244 stock when you receive the
and trades of stocks or securities. If the corpora- that issued the stock. Report a capital gain fromstock dividend, you must divide the shares you
tion was in existence for at least 1 year, but less the sale of SBIC stock on Schedule D of Formreceive as a dividend between the section 1244
than 5 years, the 50% test applies to the tax 1040.stock and the other stock. Only the shares from
years ending before the loss. If the corporationthe former can be section 1244 stock.
was in existence less than 1 year, the 50% test Short sale.If you close a short sale of SBIC
applies to the entire period the corporation wasContributed property.To determine ordinary stock with other SBIC stock that you bought only
in existence before the day of the loss. However, loss on section 1244 stock you receive in a trade for that purpose, any loss you have on the sale is
if the corporation’s deductions (other than the for property, you have to reduce the basis of the a capital loss. See Short Sales, later in this
net operating loss and dividends received de- stock if: chapter, for more information.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 49

Page 50 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and your basis for the new property is deter- wash sale includes the period you held the oldHolding Period
mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the stock or securities.
old property, your holding period for the newIf you sold or traded investment property, you Qualified small business stock.Your hold-property begins on the day following the datemust determine your holding period for the prop- ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-freeyou acquired the old property.erty. Your holding period determines whether rollover of gain from a sale of qualified smallany capital gain or loss was a short-term or a business stock, described later, includes the pe-Property received as a gift.If you receive along-term capital gain or loss. riod you held the old stock.gift of property and your basis is determined by
the donor’s adjusted basis, your holding periodLong-term or short-term.If you hold invest- Commodity futures. Futures transactions inis considered to have started on the same dayment property more than 1 year, any capital any commodity subject to the rules of a board ofthe donor’s holding period started.gain or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If trade or commodity exchange are long term ifIf your basis is determined by the fair marketyou hold the property 1 year or less, any capital the contract was held for more than 6 months.value of the property, your holding period startsgain or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss. Your holding period for a commodity re-on the day after the date of the gift.To determine how long you held the invest- ceived in satisfaction of a commodity futuresment property, begin counting on the date after contract, other than a regulated futures contractInherited property.If you inherit investmentthe day you acquired the property. The day you subject to Internal Revenue Code section 1256,property, your capital gain or loss on any laterdisposed of the property is part of your holding includes your holding period for the futures con-disposition of that property is treated as aperiod. tract if you held the contract as a capital asset.long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-
gardless of how long you actually held the prop-Securities futures contract.Your holding pe-Example. If you bought investment property
erty. riod for a security received in satisfaction of aon February 5, 2001, and sold it on February 5,
securities futures contract, other than one that is2002, your holding period is not more than 1Real property bought. To figure how long a section 1256 contract, includes your holdingyear and you have a short-term capital gain oryou have held real property bought under anperiod for the futures contract if you held theloss. If you sold it on February 6, 2002, yourunconditional contract, begin counting on thecontract as a capital asset.holding period is more than 1 year and you haveday after you received title to it or on the dayYour holding period for a security received ina long-term capital gain or loss. after you took possession of it and assumed thesatisfaction of a securities futures contract toburdens and privileges of ownership, whicheverSecurities traded on an established market. sell, other than one that is a section 1256 con-happened first. However, taking delivery or pos-For securities traded on an established securi- tract, is determined by the rules that apply tosession of real property under an option agree-ties market, your holding period begins the day short sales, discussed later under Short Sales.ment is not enough to start the holding period.after the trade date you bought the securities,
The holding period cannot start until there is anLoss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6and ends on the trade date you sold them.
actual contract of sale. The holding period of themonths or less. If you hold stock in a regu-Do not confuse the trade date with theseller cannot end before that time. lated investment company (commonly calledsettlement date, which is the date by a mutual fund) or real estate investment trustReal property repossessed.If you sell realwhich the stock must be delivered andCAUTION
!
(REIT) for 6 months or less and then sell it at aproperty but keep a security interest in it, andpayment must be made. loss (other than under a periodic liquidationthen later repossess the property under theplan), special rules may apply.terms of the sales contract, your holding periodExample. You are a cash method, calendar Capital gain distributions received.Thefor a later sale includes the period you held theyear taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De- loss (after reduction for any exempt-interest divi-property before the original sale and the periodcember 27, 2002. According to the rules of the dends you received, as explained next) isafter the repossession. Your holding periodstock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery treated as a long-term capital loss up to the totaldoes not include the time between the originalof the stock 3 trading days after the sale, on of any capital gain distributions you receivedsale and the repossession. That is, it does notJanuary 2, 2003. You received payment of the and your share of any undistributed capitalinclude the period during which the first buyersale price on that same day. Report your gain on gains. Any remaining loss is short-term capitalheld the property.your 2002 return, even though you received the loss.payment in 2003. The gain is long term or shortStock dividends.The holding period for stockExempt-interest dividends on mutual fundterm depending on whether you held the stockyou received as a taxable stock dividend beginsstock. If you received exempt-interest divi-more than 1 year. Your holding period ended onon the date of distribution. dends on the stock, at least part of your loss isDecember 27. If you had sold the stock at a loss,The holding period for new stock you re-disallowed. You can deduct only the amount ofyou would also report it on your 2002 return.ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins onloss that is more than the exempt-interest divi-the same day as the holding period of the oldU.S. Treasury notes and bonds.The holding dends.stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired inperiod of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold ata spin-off, which is a distribution of stock orauction on the basis of yield starts the day after Nonbusiness Bad Debtssecurities in a controlled corporation.the Secretary of the Treasury, through news
releases, gives notification of acceptance toNontaxable stock rights.Your holding periodIf someone owes you money that you cannot
successful bidders. The holding period of U.S.for nontaxable stock rights begins on the samecollect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to
Treasury notes and bonds sold through an offer-day as the holding period of the underlyingdeduct the amount owed to you when you figure
ing on a subscription basis at a specified yieldstock. The holding period for stock acquiredyour tax for the year the debt becomes worth-
starts the day after the subscription is submitted.through the exercise of stock rights begins onless.
the date the right was exercised. There are two kinds of bad debts — busi-Automatic investment service.In determin-
ness and nonbusiness. A business bad debt,ing your holding period for shares bought by theSection 1256 contracts.Gains or losses ongenerally, is one that comes from operating yourbank or other agent, full shares are consideredsection 1256 contracts open at the end of thetrade or business and is deductible as a busi-bought first and any fractional shares are con-year, or terminated during the year, are treatedness loss. All other bad debts are nonbusinesssidered bought last. Your holding period startsas 60% long term and 40% short term, regard-bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-on the day after the bank’s purchase date. If aless of how long the contracts were held. Seetal losses.share was bought over more than one purchaseSection 1256 Contracts Marked to Market, ear-
date, your holding period for that share is a splitlier. Example. An architect made personal loansholding period. A part of the share is considered to several friends who were not clients. SheOption exercised. Your holding period forto have been bought on each date that stock could not collect on some of these loans. Theyproperty you acquire when you exercise an op-was bought by the bank with the proceeds of are deductible only as nonbusiness bad debtstion begins the day after you exercise the option.available funds. because the architect was not in the business of
Nontaxable trades.If you acquire investmentWash sales. Your holding period for substan- lending money and the loans do not have any
property in a trade for other investment property tially identical stock or securities you acquire in a relationship to her business.
Page 50 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 51 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Business bad debts.For information on busi-Loan guarantees. If you guarantee a debt for less than the amount outstanding on the
ness bad debts of an employee, see Publication that becomes worthless, you cannot take a bad mortgage, you may have to make up the differ-
529. For information on other business bad debt deduction for your payments on the debt ence. You can take a bad debt deduction for the
debts, see chapter 11 of Publication 535. unless you can show either that your reason for amount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if you
making the guarantee was to protect your in- cannot collect it from the buyer.
Deductible nonbusiness bad debts.To be vestment or that you entered the guaranteeWorthless securities.If you own securitiesdeductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to-transaction with a profit motive. If you make thethat become totally worthless, you can take atally worthless. You cannot deduct a partlyguarantee as a favor to friends and do not re-deduction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. Seeworthless nonbusiness debt. ceive any consideration in return, your pay-Worthless Securities under What Is a Sale orments are considered a gift and you cannot takeGenuine debt required. A debt must be Trade, earlier in this chapter.a deduction.genuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is Recovery of a bad debt.If you deducted agenuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor rela-Example 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and prin-bad debt and in a later tax year you recovertionship based on a valid and enforceable obli-cipal shareholder of the Spruce Corporation,(collect) all or part of it, you may have to includegation to repay a fixed or determinable sum ofguaranteed payment of a bank loan the corpora-the amount you recover in your gross income.money. tion received. The corporation defaulted on theHowever, you can exclude from gross income
Loan or gift.For a bad debt, you must showloan and Henry made full payment. Because hethe amount recovered up to the amount of the
that there was an intention at the time of theguaranteed the loan to protect his investment indeduction that did not reduce your tax in the year
transaction to make a loan and not a gift. If youthe corporation, Henry can take a nonbusinessdeducted. See Recoveries in Publication 525.
lend money to a relative or friend with the under-bad debt deduction. How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi-standing that it may not be repaid, it is consid-
ness bad debts as short-term capital losses onered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a badExample 2. Milt and John are co-workers.
Schedule D (Form 1040).debt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a badMilt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note at
In Part I, line 1 of Schedule D, enter thedebt unless there is a true creditor-debtor rela-their local credit union. John does not pay the
name of the debtor and “statement attached” intionship between you and the person or organi-note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off the
column (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt inzation that owes you the money. note. However, since he did not enter into the
parentheses in column (f). Use a separate lineguarantee agreement to protect an investmentWhen minor children borrow from their par- for each bad debt.or to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debtents to pay for their basic needs, there is no For each bad debt, attach a statement todeduction.genuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deducted your return that contains:for such a loan. Deductible in year paid.Unless you have
1) A description of the debt, including therights against the borrower, discussed next, aBasis in bad debt required.To deduct a
amount, and the date it became due,payment you make on a loan you guaranteed isbad debt, you must have a basis in it — that is,
deductible in the year you make the payment.you must have already included the amount in 2) The name of the debtor, and any businessyour income or loaned out your cash. For exam- or family relationship between you and theRights against the borrower.When youple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for debtor,make payment on a loan that you guaranteed,court-ordered child support not paid to you byyou may have the right to take the place of the3) The efforts you made to collect the debt,your former spouse. If you are a cash methodlender (the right of subrogation). The debt isandtaxpayer (most individuals are), you generallythen owed to you. If you have this right, or somecannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid 4) Why you decided the debt was worthless.other right to demand payment from the bor-salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends, For example, you could show that the bor-rower, you cannot take a bad debt deductionand similar items. rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-until these rights become totally worthless.
gal action to collect would probably notWhen deductible. You can take a bad debt Debts owed by political parties.You cannot result in payment of any part of the debt.deduction only in the year the debt becomestake a nonbusiness bad debt deduction for any
worthless. You do not have to wait until a debt isworthless debt owed to you by: S corporation shareholder.If you are adue to determine whether it is worthless. A debt shareholder in an S corporation, your share of1) A political party,becomes worthless when there is no longer any any nonbusiness bad debt will be shown on achance that the amount owed will be paid. 2) A national, state, or local committee of aschedule attached to your Schedule K–1 (FormIt is not necessary to go to court if you canpolitical party, or 1120S) that you receive from the corporation.show that a judgment from the court would be3) A committee, association, or organizationuncollectible. You must only show that you have Short Salesthat either accepts contributions or spendstaken reasonable steps to collect the debt. money to influence elections.Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi- A short sale occurs when you agree to selldence of the worthlessness of at least a part of property you do not own (or own but do not wishMechanics’ and suppliers’ liens.Workersan unsecured and unpreferred debt. to sell). You make this type of sale in two steps.and material suppliers may file liens againstIf your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in aproperty because of debts owed by a builder orfinancial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent or 1) You sell short. You borrow property andcontractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid foreclo-Bankrupt Financial Institution, earlier. deliver it to a buyer.sure and loss of your property, you are entitled
Filing a claim for refund.If you do not to repayment from the builder or contractor. If2) You close the sale. At a later date, you
deduct a bad debt on your original return for thethe debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad debteither buy substantially identical property
year it becomes worthless, you can file a claimdeduction. and deliver it to the lender or make deliv-
for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do ery out of property that you held at theInsolvency of contractor.You can take athis, use Form 1040X to amend your return for time of the sale.bad debt deduction for the amount you depositthe year the debt became worthless. You mustwith a contractor if the contractor becomes insol-You do not realize gain or loss until delivery offile it within 7 years from the date your originalvent and you are unable to recover your deposit.property to close the short sale. You will have areturn for that year had to be filed, or 2 yearsIf the deposit is for work unrelated to your tradecapital gain or loss if the property used to closefrom the date you paid the tax, whichever isor business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc-the short sale is a capital asset.later. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthlesstion.securities generally must be filed within 3 years Exception if property becomes worthless.
from the date a return is filed, or 2 years from theSecondary liability on home mortgage.If A different rule applies if the property sold short
date the tax is paid.) For more information about the buyer of your home assumes your mort- becomes substantially worthless. In that case,
filing a claim, see Publication 556, Examination gage, you may remain secondarily liable for re- you must recognize gain as if the short sale were
of Returns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Re-payment of the mortgage loan. If the buyer closed when the property became substantially
fund. defaults on the loan and the house is then sold worthless.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 51

Page 52 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception for constructive sales.Entering securities are also subject to wash sale treat- lieu of dividends will be disallowed only to the
ment. For information, see Wash Sales, later. extent the payments are more than the amountinto a short sale may cause you to be treated as
that you receive as ordinary income from thehaving made a constructive sale of property. InMixed straddles. Under certain elections,lender of the stock for the use of collateral withthat case, you will have to recognize gain on theyou can avoid the treatment of loss from a shortthe short sale. This exception does not apply todate of the constructive sale. For details, seesale as long term under the special rule. Thesepayments in place of extraordinary dividends.Constructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po-elections are for positions that are part of asitions, earlier. mixed straddle. See Other elections under Extraordinary dividends.If the amount ofMixed Straddles, later, for more informationany dividend you receive on a share of preferredExample. On May 1, 2002, you bought 100about these elections. stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case ofshares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000.
other stock) of the amount realized on the shortOn September 3, 2002, you sold short 100
sale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi-shares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. YouReporting Substitute Payments nary dividend.made no other transactions involving Baker
stock for the rest of 2002 and the first 30 days ofIf any broker transferred your securities for use
Wash Sales2003. Your short sale is treated as a construc- in a short sale, or similar transaction, and re-
ceived certain substitute dividend payments ontive sale of an appreciated financial position
You cannot deduct losses from sales or tradesyour behalf while the short sale was open, thatbecause a sale of your Baker stock on the date
of stock or securities in a wash sale.broker must give you a Form 1099–MISC or aof the short sale would have resulted in a gain.
A wash sale occurs when you sell or tradesimilar statement, reporting the amount of theseYou recognize a $600 short-term capital gain
stock or securities at a loss and within 30 dayspayments. Form 1099–MISC must be used forfrom the constructive sale and your new holding
before or after the sale you:those substitute payments totaling $10 or moreperiod in the Baker stock begins on September
that are known on the payment’s record date to3. 1) Buy substantially identical stock or securi-be in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi-ties,tal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution,
or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, or2) Acquire substantially identical stock or se-Short-Term or Long-Term
that are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do notcurities in a fully taxable trade, orCapital Gain or Loss
treat these substitute payments as dividends or3) Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-As a general rule, you determine whether youinterest. Instead, report the substitute paymentsstantially identical stock or securities.have short-term or long-term capital gain or lossshown on Form 1099–MISC as “Other income”
on a short sale by the amount of time you actu-on line 21 of Form 1040. If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora-
ally hold the property eventually delivered to the tion you control buys substantially identical
Substitute payment. A substitute paymentlender to close the short sale. stock, you also have a wash sale.
means a payment in lieu of: If your loss was disallowed because of the
Example. Even though you do not own any wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to the1) Tax-exempt interest (including OID) thatstock of the Ace Corporation, you contract to sell cost of the new stock or securities. The result ishas accrued while the short sale was100 shares of it, which you borrow from your your basis in the new stock or securities. Thisopen, andbroker. After 13 months, when the price of the adjustment postpones the loss deduction until
the disposition of the new stock or securities.stock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Ace2) A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is after
Your holding period for the new stock or securi-the transfer of stock for use in a short saleCorporation stock and immediately deliver them
ties begins on the same day as the holdingand before the closing of the short sale.to your broker to close out the short sale. Your
period of the stock or securities sold.loss is a short-term capital loss because your
holding period for the delivered property is lessPayments in lieu of dividendsIf you borrow Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X stockthan one day. stock to make a short sale, you may have tofor $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 andremit to the lender payments in lieu of the divi-within 30 days from the sale you buy 100 sharesSpecial rules.Special rules may apply to dends distributed while you maintain your shortof the same stock for $800. Because you boughtgains and losses from short sales of stocks,position. You can deduct these payments only ifsubstantially identical stock, you cannot deductsecurities, and commodity and securities futuresyou hold the short sale open at least 46 daysyour loss of $250 on the sale. However, you add(other than certain straddles) if you held or ac-(more than 1 year in the case of an extraordinarythe disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of thequired property substantially identical propertydividend as defined below) and you itemize yournew stock, $800, to obtain your basis in the newto that sold short. But if the amount of propertydeductions. stock, which is $1,050.you sold short is more than the amount of thatYou deduct these payments as investment
substantially identical property, the special rulesinterest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter- Example 2. You are an employee of a cor-do not apply to the gain or loss on the excess.est Expenses in chapter 3 for more information.poration that has an incentive pay plan. UnderIf you close the short sale by the 45th dayGains and holding period.If you held the this plan, you are given 10 shares of theafter the date of the short sale (1 year or less insubstantially identical property for 1 year or less corporation’s stock as a bonus award. You in-the case of an extraordinary dividend), you can-on the date of the short sale, or if you acquired clude the fair market value of the stock in yournot deduct the payment in lieu of the dividendthe substantially identical property after the gross income as additional pay. You later sellthat you make to the lender. Instead, you mustshort sale and by the date of closing the short these shares at a loss. If you receive anotherincrease the basis of the stock used to close thesale, then: bonus award of substantially identical stockshort sale by that amount. within 30 days of the sale, you cannot deductTo determine how long a short sale is keptRule 1. Your gain, if any, when you close the your loss on the sale.open, do not include any period during whichshort sale is a short-term capital gain, andyou hold, have an option to buy, or are under aOptions and futures contracts.The washRule 2. The holding period of the substantiallycontractual obligation to buy substantially identi-sale rules apply to losses from sales or trades ofidentical property begins on the date of thecal stock or securities. contracts and options to acquire or sell stock orclosing of the short sale or on the date of theIf your payment is made for a liquidatingsecurities. They do not apply to losses fromsale of this property, whichever comes first.distribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or ifsales or trades of commodity futures contractsyou buy more shares equal to a stock distribu-and foreign currencies. See Coordination oftion issued on the borrowed stock during yourLosses. If, on the date of the short sale, you Loss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules undershort position, you have a capital expense. Youheld substantially identical property for more Straddles, later, for information about the taxmust add the payment to the cost of the stockthan 1 year, any loss you realize on the short treatment of losses on the disposition of posi-sold short.sale is a long-term capital loss, even if you held tions in a straddle.
the property used to close the sale for 1 year or Losses from the sale, exchange, or termina-Exception. If you close the short sale within
less. Certain losses on short sales of stock or tion of a securities future contract to sell gener-45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay in
Page 52 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 53 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ally are treated in the same manner as losses disallowed loss. The new basis of those sharesResidual Interests in a REMIC.The wash
from the closing of a short sale, discussed later is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25sale rules generally will apply to the sale of your
in this section. shares bought on December 28, 2001, is in- residual interest in a real estate mortgage in-
creased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125vestment conduit (REMIC) if, during the periodWarrants. The wash sale rules apply if you+ $250). beginning 6 months before the sale of the inter-sell common stock at a loss and, at the same est and ending 6 months after that sale, youtime, buy warrants for common stock of the Example 2. You bought 100 shares of M acquire any residual interest in any REMIC orsame corporation. But if you sell warrants at astock on September 24, 2001. On February 1,any interest in a taxable mortgage pool that isloss and, at the same time, buy common stock in2002, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss.comparable to a residual interest. REMICs arethe same corporation, the wash sale rules applyOn each of the 4 days from February 12–15,discussed in chapter 1.only if the warrants and stock are considered2002, you bought 50 shares of substantiallysubstantially identical, as discussed next.identical stock. You cannot deduct your $1,000How to report.Report a wash sale or trade on
loss. You must add half the disallowed lossline 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040),Substantially identical. In determining
($500) to the basis of the 50 shares bought onwhichever is appropriate. Show the full amountwhether stock or securities are substantially
February 12. Add the other half ($500) to theof the loss in parentheses in column (f). On theidentical, you must consider all the facts and
basis of the shares bought on February 13.next line, enter “Wash Sale” in column (a) andcircumstances in your particular case. Ordinar-
the amount of the loss not allowed as a positiveily, stocks or securities of one corporation areLoss and gain on same day. Loss from a amount in column (f).not considered substantially identical to stockswash sale of one block of stock or securities
or securities of another corporation. However,cannot be used to reduce any gains on identical
they may be substantially identical in someblocks sold the same day. Securities Futures Contractscases. For example, in a reorganization, the
stocks and securities of the predecessor andExample. During 1997, you bought 100 A securities futures contract is a contract of salesuccessor corporations may be substantiallyshares of X stock on each of three occasions.for future delivery of a single security or of aidentical. You paid $158 a share for the first block of 100narrow-based security index.Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor-shares, $100 a share for the second block, andGain or loss from the contract generally willporation are not ordinarily considered substan-$95 a share for the third block. On December 23,be treated in a manner similar to gain or losstially identical to the common stock of the same2002, you sold 300 shares of X stock for $125 afrom transactions in the underlying security. Thiscorporation. However, where the bonds or pre-share. On January 6, 2003, you bought 250means gain or loss from the sale, exchange, orferred stock are convertible into common stockshares of identical X stock. You cannot deducttermination of the contract will generally haveof the same corporation, the relative values,the loss of $33 a share on the first block becausethe same character as gain or loss from transac-price changes, and other circumstances maywithin 30 days after the date of sale you boughttions in the property to which the contract re-make these bonds or preferred stock and the250 identical shares of X stock. In addition, youlates. Any capital gain or loss on a sale,common stock substantially identical. For exam-cannot reduce the gain realized on the sale ofexchange, or termination of a contract to sellple, preferred stock is substantially identical tothe second and third blocks of stock by this loss.property will be considered short-term, regard-the common stock if the preferred stock:
Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to aless of how long you hold the contract. These
dealer in stock or securities if the loss is from a1) Is convertible into common stock, contracts are not section 1256 contracts (unless
transaction made in the ordinary course of busi-they are dealer securities futures contracts).2) Has the same voting rights as the commonness.stock,
OptionsShort sales.The wash sale rules apply to a3) Is subject to the same dividend restric-loss realized on a short sale if you sell, or entertions, Options are generally subject to the rules de-into another short sale of, substantially identical
scribed in this section. If the option is part of astock or securities within a period beginning 304) Trades at prices that do not vary signifi-
straddle, the loss deferral rules covered laterdays before the date the short sale is completecantly from the conversion ratio, and
under Straddles may also apply. For specialand ending 30 days after that date.5) Is unrestricted as to convertibility. rules that apply to nonequity options and dealerFor purposes of the wash sale rules, a short
equity options, see Section 1256 Contractssale is considered complete on the date the
More or less stock bought than sold.If the Marked to Market, earlier.short sale is entered into, if: 
number of shares of substantially identical stock Gain or loss from the sale or trade of an
or securities you buy within 30 days before or1) On that date, you own stock or securitiesoption to buy or sell property that is a capital
after the sale is either more or less than theidentical to those sold short (or by thatasset in your hands, or would be if you acquired
number of shares you sold, you must determinedate you enter into a contract or option toit, is capital gain or loss. If the property is not, or
the particular shares to which the wash saleacquire that stock or those securities), andwould not be, a capital asset, the gain or loss is
rules apply. You do this by matching the shares ordinary gain or loss.2) You later deliver the stock or securities tobought with an equal number of the shares sold.close the short sale.Match the shares bought in the same order that Example 1. You purchased an option to buy
you bought them, beginning with the first shares Otherwise, a short sale is not considered100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The stock
bought. The shares or securities so matched are complete until the property is delivered to closeincreases in value and you sell the option for
subject to the wash sale rules. the sale. more than you paid for it. Your gain is capital
This treatment also applies to losses fromgain because the stock underlying the option
Example 1. You bought 100 shares of M the sale, exchange, or termination of a securitieswould have been a capital asset in your hands.
stock on September 24, 2001, for $5,000. Onfutures contract to sell.
December 21, 2001, you bought 50 shares of Example 2. The facts are the same as in
substantially identical stock for $2,750. On De-Example. On June 2, you buy 100 shares ofExample 1, except that the stock decreases in
cember 28, 2001, you bought 25 shares of sub- stock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares ofvalue and you sell the option for less than you
stantially identical stock for $1,125. On January the stock for $750 on October 6. On October 7,paid for it. Your loss is a capital loss.
4, 2002, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares you you buy 100 shares of the same stock for $750.
bought in September. You have a $1,000 loss You close the short sale on November 17 byOption not exercised.If you have a loss be-
on the sale. However, because you bought 75 delivering the shares bought on June 2. Youcause you did not exercise an option to buy or
shares of substantially identical stock within 30 cannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750) sell, you are considered to have sold or traded
days of the sale, you cannot deduct the loss because the date of entering into the short salethe option on the date that it expired.
($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the loss (October 6) is considered the date the sale is
Writer of option.If you write (grant) an option,($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of thecomplete for wash sale purposes and you
how you report your gain or loss depends on50 shares bought on December 21, 2001, is bought substantially identical stock within 30
whether it was exercised.increased by two-thirds (50 ÷ 75) of the $750 days from that date.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 53

Page 54 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are not in the business of writing op- If you sell the call or the put before you If a put you write is exercised and you buy
tions and an option you write on stocks, securi-exercise it, the difference between its cost andthe underlying stock, decrease your basis in the
ties, commodities, or commodity futures is notthe amount you receive for it is either astock by the amount you received for the put.
exercised, the amount you receive is a long-term or short-term capital gain or loss, de-Your holding period for the stock begins on the
short-term capital gain. pending on how long you held it. date you buy it, not on the date you wrote the
If an option requiring you to buy or sell prop-If the option expires, its cost is either aput.
erty is exercised, see Writers of calls and puts,long-term or short-term capital loss, dependingIf you enter into a closing transaction bylater. on your holding period, which ends on the expi-paying an amount equal to the value of the callration date.Section 1256 contract options.Gain or loss or put at the time of the payment, the difference
If you exercise a call, add its cost to the basisis recognized on the exercise of an option on a between the amount you pay and the amount
of the stock you bought. If you exercise a put,section 1256 contract. Section 1256 contracts you receive for the call or put is a short-term
reduce your amount realized on the sale of theare defined under Section 1256 Contracts capital gain or loss.
underlying stock by the cost of the put whenMarked to Market, earlier.
figuring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on theCash settlement option.A cash settlement Examples of non-dealer transactions.sale of the underlying stock is long term or shortoption is treated as an option to buy or sellterm depending on your holding period for theproperty. A cash settlement option is any option 1) Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is-underlying stock.that on exercise is settled in, or could be settled sued on April 8, 2002, for $4,000. Thesein, cash or property other than the underlyingPut option as short sale.Buying a put op- equity options expired in December 2002,property. tion is generally treated as a short sale, and thewithout being exercised. If you were aexercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a clos-How to report.Gain or loss from the closing or holder (buyer) of the options, you woulding of the short sale. See Short Sales, earlier. Ifexpiration of an option that is not a section 1256 recognize a short-term capital loss ofyou have held the underlying stock for 1 year orcontract, but that is a capital asset in your hands, $4,000. If you were a writer of the options,less at the time you buy the put, any gain on theis reported on Schedule D (Form 1040). you would recognize a short-term capitalexercise, sale, or expiration of the put is aIf an option you purchased expired, enter the gain of $4,000.short-term capital gain. The same is true if youexpiration date in column (c) and write buy the underlying stock after you buy the put2) Closing transaction. The facts are the“EXPIRED” in column (d). but before its exercise, sale, or expiration. Yoursame as in (1), except that on May 10,If an option that you wrote expired, enter theholding period for the underlying stock begins on2002, the options were sold for $6,000. Ifexpiration date in column (b) and write the earliest of: you were the holder of the options who“EXPIRED” in column (e).
sold them, you would recognize a1) The date you dispose of the stock, short-term capital gain of $2,000. If you
were the writer of the options and youCalls and Puts 2) The date you exercise the put,
bought them back, you would recognize a3) The date you sell the put, orCalls and puts are options on securities and are short-term capital loss of $2,000.
covered by the rules just discussed for options.4) The date the put expires. 3) Exercise. The facts are the same as inThe following are specific applications of these
(1), except that the options were exercisedrules to holders and writers of options that are
Writers of calls and puts.If you write (grant) on May 27, 2002. The buyer adds the costbought, sold, or “closed out” in transactions on a
a call or a put, do not include the amount youof the options to the basis of the stocknational securities exchange, such as the Chi-
receive for writing it in your income at the time ofbought through the exercise of the options.cago Board Options Exchange. (But see Section
receipt. Carry it in a deferred account until:1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier, for The writer adds the amount received from
special rules that may apply to nonequity op- writing the options to the amount realized
1) Your obligation expires,tions and dealer equity options.) These rules are from selling the stock.
also presented in Table 4–1. 2) You sell, in the case of a call, or buy, in the4) Section 1256 contracts. The facts are theCalls and puts are issued by writers (grant-case of a put, the underlying stock when same as in (1), except the options wereors) to holders for cash premiums. They are the option is exercised, or nonequity options, subject to the rules forended by exercise, closing transaction, or lapse. section 1256 contracts. If you were a3) You engage in a closing transaction.A call option is the right to buy from the
buyer of the options, you would recognizewriter of the option, at any time before a speci-If your obligation expires, the amount youa short-term capital loss of $1,600, and afied future date, a stated number of shares ofreceived for writing the call or put is short-termlong-term capital loss of $2,400. If youstock at a specified price. Conversely, a put capital gain. were a writer of the options, you wouldoption is the right to sell to the writer, at any timeIf a call you write is exercised and you sellrecognize a short-term capital gain ofbefore a specified future date, a stated numberthe underlying stock, increase your amount real-$1,600, and a long-term capital gain ofof shares at a specified price. ized on the sale of the stock by the amount you$2,400. See Section 1256 Contractsreceived for the call when figuring your gain orHolders of calls and puts.If you buy a call or Marked to Market, earlier, for more infor-loss. The gain or loss is long term or short terma put, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capital mation.depending on your holding period of the stock.expenditure.
Page 54 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 55 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) The stock is in a corporation formed or 2) The positions are in the same personalStraddles
property, even if this property is in a sub-availed of to take positions in personal
stantially changed form, and the positions’property that offset positions taken by anyThis section discusses the loss deferral rules
values vary inversely as described in thethat apply to the sale or other disposition ofshareholder.
first condition,positions in a straddle. These rules do not apply
to the straddles described under Exceptions, 3) The positions are in debt instruments withPosition. A position is an interest in personallater. a similar maturity, and the positions’ val-property. A position can be a forward or futuresA straddle is any set of offsetting positions on ues vary inversely as described in the firstcontract, or an option.personal property. For example, a straddle may condition,An interest in a loan that is denominated in aconsist of a purchased option to buy and a
foreign currency is treated as a position in that4) The positions are sold or marketed as off-purchased option to sell on the same number of
currency. For the straddle rules, foreign cur-setting positions, whether or not the posi-shares of the security, with the same exercise
tions are called a straddle, spread,rency for which there is an active interbank mar-price and period.
butterfly, or any similar name, orket is considered to be actively-traded personal
Personal property.This is any property of aproperty. See also Foreign currency contract5) The aggregate margin requirement for thetype that is actively traded. It includes stockunder Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Mar- positions is lower than the sum of the mar-options and contracts to buy stock, but generallyket, earlier. gin requirements for each position if helddoes not include stock. separately.
Offsetting position.This is a position thatStraddle rules for stock.Although stock is
substantially reduces any risk of loss you mayRelated persons. To determine if two orgenerally excluded from the definition of per-
have from holding another position. However, ifmore positions are offsetting, you will be treatedsonal property when applying the straddle rules,
a position is part of a straddle that is not anas holding any position that your spouse holdsit is included in the following two situations. 
identified straddle (described later), do not treatduring the same period. If you take into account
1) The stock is part of a straddle in which atit as offsetting to a position that is part of anpart or all of the gain or loss for a position held by
least one of the offsetting positions is:identified straddle. a flowthrough entity, such as a partnership or
trust, you are also considered to hold that posi-Presumed offsetting positions.Two ora) An option to buy or sell the stock or tion.more positions will be presumed to be offsettingsubstantially identical stock or securi-
if:ties,
Loss Deferral Rulesb) A securities futures contract on the1) The positions are established in the samestock or substantially identical stock orpersonal property (or in a contract for thisGenerally, you can deduct a loss on the disposi-securities, or property), and the value of one or moretion of one or more positions only to the extent
positions varies inversely with the value ofc) A position on substantially similar or re- that the loss is more than any unrecognized gain
one or more of the other positions,lated property (other than stock). you have on offsetting positions. Unused losses
are treated as sustained in the next tax year.
Table 4–1. Puts and Calls
Unrecognized gain. This is:
Puts
1) The amount of gain you would have had
When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer: on an open position if you had sold it on
the last business day of the tax year at its
Is exercised Reduce your amount realized from Reduce your basis in the stock you fair market value, and
sale of the underlying stock by the buy by the amount you received for
2) The amount of gain realized on a positioncost of the put. the put.
if, as of the end of the tax year, gain has
been realized, but not recognized.
Expires Report the cost of the put as a capital Report the amount you received for
loss on the date it expires.* the put as a short-term capital gain.
Example. On July 1, 2002, you entered intoIs sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if youa straddle. On December 16, 2002, you closedcost of the put and the amount you buy back the put, report the one position of the straddle at a loss of $15,000.receive for it as a capital gain or difference between the amount you
On December 31, 2002, the end of your taxloss.* pay and the amount you received for
year, you have an unrecognized gain of $12,750the put as a short-term capital gain
in the offsetting open position. On your 2002or loss.)
return, your deductible loss on the position you
closed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750).Calls You must carry forward to 2003 the unused loss
of $12,750.When a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
Exceptions. The loss deferral rules do not ap-Is exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis Increase your amount realized on ply to:in the stock purchased. sale of the stock by the amount you
received for the call. 1) A straddle that is an identified straddle at
the end of the tax year,Expires Report the cost of the call as a capital Report the amount you received for
loss on the date it expires.* the call as a short-term capital gain.2) Certain straddles consisting of qualified
covered call options and the stock to be
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if youpurchased under the options,
cost of the call and the amount you buy back the call, report the
3) Hedging transactions, described earlierreceive for it as a capital gain or difference between the amount you
loss.* pay and the amount you received for under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
the call as a short-term capital gainMarket, and
or loss.)
4) Straddles consisting entirely of section
1256 contracts, as described earlier*See Holders of calls and puts and Writers of calls and puts in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or
loss is short term or long term. under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
Market (but see Identified straddle, next).
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 55

Page 56 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Identified straddle.Losses from positions 2) The opening price of the stock on the day part of the straddle. If a position in the straddle
in an identified straddle are deferred until you does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2.on which the option was granted, but only
dispose of all the positions in the straddle.if that price is greater than 110% of theRule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-Any straddle (other than a straddle described price determined in (1). sition of shares of stock or securities that makein (2) or (3) above) is an identified straddle if allIf the applicable stock price is $25 or less, theup the positions of a straddle if, within a periodof the following conditions exist. LQB will be treated as not less than 85% of thebeginning 30 days before the date of that dispo-
applicable stock price. If the applicable stocksition and ending 30 days after that date, you1) You clearly identified the straddle on your
price is $150 or less, the LQB will be treated asacquired substantially identical stock or securi-records before the close of the day on
not less than an amount that is $10 below theties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to thewhich you acquired it.
applicable stock price. following tax year, subject to any further applica-
2) All of the original positions that you identify tion of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will alsoExample. On May 13, 2002, you held XYZwere acquired on the same day. apply if you entered into a contract or option tostock and you wrote an XYZ/September callacquire the stock or securities within the time3) All of the positions included in item (2)option with a strike price of $120. The closingperiod described above. See Loss carryover,were disposed of on the same day duringprice of one share of XYZ stock on May 12,later, for more information about how to treat thethe tax year, or none of the positions were2002, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/loss in the following tax year.disposed of by the end of the tax year.September call options offered on May 13,
Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se-2002, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125,4) The straddle is not part of a larger strad-
curities, this loss treatment will not apply to any$130, and $135. Because the option has a termdle.
losses you sustained in the ordinary course ofof more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, the
your business.second highest strike price that is less thanQualified covered call options and op-
$130.25, the applicable stock price. The calltioned stock.A straddle is not subject to the
Example. You are not a dealer in stock oroption is a deep-in-the-money option becauseloss deferral rules for straddles if both of the
securities. On December 2, 2002, you boughtits strike price is lower than the LQB. Therefore,following are true.
stock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off-the option is not a qualified covered call option,
1) All of the offsetting positions consist of one setting put option. On December 13, 2002, thereand the loss deferral rules apply if you closed out
or more qualified covered call options and was $20 of unrealized gain in the put option andthe option or the stock at a loss during the year.
the stock to be purchased from you under you sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By Decem-Capital loss on qualified covered call op-the options. ber 16, the value of the put option had declined,tions. If you hold stock and you write a quali-eliminating all unrealized gain in the position. On2) The straddle is not part of a larger strad-fied covered call option on that stock with aDecember 16, you bought a second XX stockdle. strike price less than the applicable stock price,position that is substantially identical to the XXtreat any loss from the option as long-term capi-But see Special year-end rule, later, for an ex- stock you sold on December 13. At the end oftal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gainception. the year there is no unrecognized gain in the puton the sale or exchange of the stock would beA qualified covered call option is any option option or in the XX stock. Under these circum-treated as long-term capital gain. The holdingyou grant to purchase stock you hold (or stock stances, the $20 loss will be disallowed for 2002period of the stock does not include any periodyou acquire in connection with granting the op- under Rule 1 because, within a period beginningduring which you are the writer of the option.tion), but only if all of the following are true. 30 days before December 13, and ending 30
days after that date, you bought stock substan-Special year-end rule.The loss deferral1) The option is traded on a national securi- tially identical to the XX stock you sold.rules for straddles apply if all of the following areties exchange or other market approved bytrue. Rule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-the Secretary of the Treasury.
sition of less than all of the positions of a strad-1) The qualified covered call options are2) The option is granted more than 30 days dle (your loss position) to the extent that anyclosed or the stock is disposed of at a lossbefore its expiration date. unrecognized gain at the close of the tax year induring any tax year. one or more of the following positions is more3) The option is not a deep-in-the-money op-
2) Gain on disposition of the stock or gain onthan the amount of any loss disallowed undertion.
the options is includible in gross income inRule 1:4) You are not an options dealer who granteda later tax year.
the option in connection with your activity 1) Successor positions,3) The stock or options were held less thanof dealing in options. 2) Offsetting positions to the loss position, or30 days after the closing of the options or
5) Gain or loss on the option is capital gain orthe disposition of the stock. 3) Offsetting positions to any successor posi-loss. tion.
A deep-in-the-money option is an option
with a strike price lower than the lowest qualified Successor position.A successor positionHow To Report Gains
benchmark (LQB). The strike price is the price at is a position that is or was at any time offsettingand Losses (Form 6781)
which the option is to be exercised. The LQB is to a second position, if both of the following
the highest available strike price that is less thanReport each position (whether or not it is part ofconditions are met.
the applicable stock price. However, the LQB fora straddle) on which you have unrecognized
1) The second position was offsetting to thean option with a term of more than 90 days and again at the end of the tax year and the amount of
loss position that was sold.strike price of more than $50 is the secondthis unrecognized gain in Part III of Form 6781.
highest available strike price that is less than theUse Part II of Form 6781 to figure your gains and2) The successor position is entered into dur-applicable stock price. Strike prices are listed inlosses on straddles before entering these ing a period beginning 30 days before, andthe financial section of many newspapers.amounts on Schedule D (Form 1040). Include aending 30 days after, the sale of the lossThe availability of strike prices for equity op-copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.position.tions with flexible terms does not affect the de-
termination of the LQB for an option that is not
Example 1. On November 1, 2002, you en-Coordination of Loss Deferralan equity option with flexible terms.
tered into offsetting long and short positions inThe applicable stock price for any stock forRules and Wash Sale Rules
non-section 1256 contracts. On November 12,which an option has been granted is:
Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to any 2002, you disposed of the long position at a $10
1) The closing price of the stock on the most disposition of a position or positions of a strad- loss. On November 14, you entered into a new
recent day on which that stock was traded dle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, then long position (successor position) that is offset-
before the date on which the option was apply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only if ting to the retained short position, but that is not
granted, or stocks or securities make up a position that is substantially identical to the long position dis-
Page 56 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 57 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
posed of on November 12. You held both posi- actions are described under Section 1256 2) The sale of no position in the straddle,
tions through year end, at which time there wasContracts Marked to Market, earlier.) other than a section 1256 contract, would
$10 of unrecognized gain in the successor long result in a long-term capital gain or loss.2) Loss on the sale of a loss position in aposition and no unrecognized gain in the offset-mixed straddle account. (See the discus- 3) You have not made a straddle-by-straddleting short position. Under these circumstances,sion later on the mixed straddle account identification election (Election B) or mixedthe entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2002election.) straddle account election (Election C),because there is $10 of unrecognized gain in the both discussed later.3) Loss on the sale of a position that is part ofsuccessor long position.
a straddle consisting only of section 1256
Example. On March 1, 2002, you enteredExample 2. The facts are the same as in contracts.
into a long gold forward contract. On July 15,Example 1, except that at year end you have $4
2002, you entered into an offsetting short goldof unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-
regulated futures contract. You did not make antion and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offsettingHolding Period and election to offset gains and losses from positionsshort position. Under these circumstances, theLoss Treatment Rules in a mixed straddle. On August 9, 2002, youentire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2002 be-
disposed of the long forward contract at a loss.cause there is a total of $10 of unrecognizedThe holding period of a position in a straddle
Because the gold forward contract was part of again in the successor long position and offset-generally begins no earlier than the date on
mixed straddle and the disposition of thisting short position. which the straddle ends (the date you no longer
non-section 1256 position would not result inhold an offsetting position). This rule does notExample 3. The facts are the same as in long-term capital loss, the loss recognized onapply to any position you held more than 1 yearExample 1, except that at year end you have $8 the termination of the gold forward contract willbefore you established the straddle. But seeof unrecognized gain in the successor long posi- be treated as a 60% long-term and 40%Exceptions, later.tion and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offsetting short-term capital loss.
short position. Under these circumstances, $8 ofExample. On March 6, 2001, you acquiredExceptions. The special holding period andthe total $10 realized loss will be disallowed forgold. On January 4, 2002, you entered into anloss treatment for straddle positions does not2002 because there is $8 of unrecognized gainoffsetting short gold forward contract (nonregu-apply to positions that:in the successor long position. lated futures contract). On April 1, 2002, you
disposed of the short gold forward contract at no1) Constitute part of a hedging transaction,Loss carryover.If you have a disallowed lossgain or loss. On April 8, 2002, you sold the goldthat resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2, 2) Are included in a straddle consisting onlyat a gain. Because the gold had been held for 1you must carry it over to the next tax year and of section 1256 contracts, oryear or less before the offsetting short positionapply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss.was entered into, the holding period for the gold3) Are included in a mixed straddle accountFor example, a loss disallowed in 2001 underbegins on April 1, 2002, the date the straddle(Election C), discussed later.Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2002, unless theended. Gain recognized on the sale of the goldsubstantially identical stock or securities (whichwill be treated as short-term capital gain.caused the loss to be disallowed in 2001) were
disposed of during 2002. In addition, the carry- Mixed StraddlesLoss treatment.Treat the loss on the sale of
over loss will not be allowed in 2002 if Rule 1 orone or more positions (the loss position) of aIf you disposed of a position in a mixed straddleRule 2 disallows it. straddle as a long-term capital loss if both of theand make one of the elections described in thefollowing are true. following discussions, report your gain or loss asExample. The facts are the same as in the
indicated in those discussions. If you do notexample under Rule 1 above. On December 31,1) You held (directly or indirectly) one ormake any of the elections, report your gain or2003, you sell the second XX stock at a $20 lossmore offsetting positions to the loss posi-loss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed ofand there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the puttion on the date you entered into the lossthe section 1256 component of the straddle,option. Under these circumstances, you cannotposition. enter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) ordeduct in 2003 either the $20 loss disallowed in
2) You would have treated all gain or loss onyour gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of Form2002 or the $20 loss you incurred for the De-
one or more of the straddle positions as6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11 or 13cember 31, 2003, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 does
long-term capital gain or loss if you had(Part II).not apply because the substantially identical XX
sold these positions on the day you en-stock was sold during the year and no substan- Mixed straddle election (Election A).Youtered into the loss position.tially identical stock or securities were bought can elect out of the marked to market rules,within the 61–day period. However, Rule 2 does discussed under Section 1256 ContractsMixed straddles.Special rules apply to aapply because there is $40 of unrecognized gain Marked to Market, earlier, for all section 1256loss position that is part of a mixed straddle andin the put option, an offsetting position to the loss contracts that are part of a mixed straddle. In-that is a non-section 1256 position. A mixedpositions. stead, the gain and loss rules for straddles willstraddle is a straddle:
Capital loss carryover.If the sale of a loss apply to these contracts. However, if you make
position would have resulted in a capital loss, this election for an option on a section 12561) That is not part of a larger straddle,
you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss on contract, the gain or loss treatment discussed2) In which all positions are held as capitalthe date it is allowed, even if you would treat the earlier under Options will apply, subject to theassets,gain or loss on any successor positions as ordi- gain and loss rules for straddles.
nary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of a3) In which at least one (but not all) of the You can make this election if:
loss position (in the case of section 1256 con-positions is a section 1256 contract, and
1) At least one (but not all) of the positions istracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-term4) For which the mixed straddle election a section 1256 contract, andcapital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss,(Election A, discussed later) has not beenyou treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 rule, 2) Each position forming part of the straddlemade.even if you would treat any gain or loss on any is clearly identified as being part of that
successor positions as 100% long-term or Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss andstraddle on the day the first section 1256
short-term capital gain or loss. 40% short-term capital loss, if all of the followingcontract forming part of the straddle is ac-
conditions apply. quired.Exceptions. The rules for coordinating strad-
1) Gain or loss from the sale of one or more If you make this election, it will apply for alldle losses and wash sales do not apply to the
of the straddle positions that are section later years as well. It cannot be revoked withoutfollowing loss situations.
1256 contracts would be considered gain the consent of the IRS. If you made this election,
1) Loss on the sale of one or more positions or loss from the sale or exchange of a check box A of Form 6781. Do not report the
in a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans- capital asset. section 1256 component in Part I.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 57

Page 58 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other elections. You can avoid the 60% of the close of each business day of the tax year.Sales of Stock to ESOPs
long-term capital loss treatment required for aYou offset the net section 1256 contractsor Certain Cooperativesnon-section 1256 loss position that is part of aagainst the net non-section 1256 positions to
mixed straddle, described earlier, if you choosedetermine the “daily account net gain or loss.”If you sold qualified securities held for at least 3either of the two following elections to offsetIf the daily account amount is due to years to an employee stock ownership plangains and losses for these positions. non-section 1256 positions, the amount is(ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative,
treated as short-term capital gain or loss. If theyou may be able to elect to postpone all or part1) Election B. Make a separate identification of the gain on the sale if you bought qualifieddaily account amount is due to section 1256of the positions of each mixed straddle for replacement property (certain securities) withincontracts, the amount is treated as 60%which you are electing this treatment (the the period that began 3 months before the salelong-term and 40% short-term capital gain orstraddle-by-straddle identification method). and ended 12 months after the sale. If you makeloss.
the election, you must recognize gain on the2) Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac-On the last business day of the tax year, you
sale only to the extent the proceeds from thecount for a class of activities for whichdetermine the “annual account net gain or loss”
sale exceed the cost of the qualified replace-gains and losses will be recognized andfor each account by netting the daily accountment property.offset on a periodic basis. amounts for that account for the tax year. TheYou must reduce the basis of the replace-“total annual account net gain or loss” is deter-These two elections are alternatives to the ment property by any postponed gain. If youmined by netting the annual account amountsmixed straddle election. You can choose only dispose of any replacement property, you mayfor all mixed straddle accounts that you hadone of the three elections. Use Form 6781 to have to recognize all of the postponed gain.established.indicate your election choice by checking box A, Generally, to qualify for the election theB, or C, whichever applies. The net amounts keep their long-term orESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% ofshort-term classification. However, no moreStraddle-by-straddle identification elec- the outstanding stock of the corporation that
than 50% of the total annual account net gain fortion (Election B).Under this election, you issued the qualified securities. Also, the quali-
the tax year can be treated as long-term capitalmust clearly identify each position that is part of fied replacement property must have been is-
gain. Any remaining gain is treated asthe identified mixed straddle by the earlier of: sued by a domestic operating corporation.
short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40%
How to make the election.You must make1) The close of the day the identified mixedof the total annual account net loss can be
the election no later than the due date (includingstraddle is established, or treated as short-term capital loss. Any remaining
extensions) for filing your tax return for the yearloss is treated as long-term capital loss.2) The time the position is disposed of. in which you sold the stock. If your original returnThe election to establish one or more mixed
was filed on time, you may make the election onIf you dispose of a position in the mixed straddlestraddle accounts for each tax year must be
an amended return filed no later than 6 monthsbefore the end of the day on which the straddlemade by the due date (without extensions) ofafter the due date of your return (excluding ex-is established, this identification must be madeyour income tax return for the immediately pre-tensions). Write “Filed pursuant to sectionby the time you dispose of the position. You areceding tax year. If you begin trading in a new301.9100–2” at the top of the amended return,presumed to have properly identified a mixedclass of activities during a tax year, you mustand file it at the same address you used for yourstraddle if independent verification is used.make the election for the new class of activitiesoriginal return.The basic tax treatment of gain or loss underby the later of either:this election depends on which side of the strad- How to report and postpone gain.Reportdle produced the total net gain or loss. If the net1) The due date of your return for the imme-the entire gain realized on line 8 of Schedule D.gain or loss from the straddle is due to thediately preceding tax year (without exten-To make the choice to postpone gain, entersection 1256 contracts, gain or loss is treated assions), or “Section 1042 election” in column (a) of the line60% long-term capital gain or loss and 40% directly below the line on which you reported the2) 60 days after you entered into the firstshort-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain gain. Enter in column (f) the amount of the gainmixed straddle in the new class of activi-or loss in Part I of Form 6781 and identify the you are postponing or expecting to postpone.ties.election by checking box B. Enter it as a loss (in parentheses). If the actual
If the net gain or loss is due to the non-sec- postponed gain is different from the amount youYou make the election on Form 6781 by
tion 1256 positions, gain or loss is short-term report, file an amended return.checking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in-
capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain or loss on Also attach the following statements.come tax return for the immediately preceding
Part I of Schedule D and identify the election.tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies.1) A “statement of election” that indicates youFor the specific application of the rules of thisReport the annual account net gain or loss fromare making an election under sectionelection, see regulations section 1.1092(b)–3T.a mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781.1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code andIn addition, you must attach a statement to Formthat includes the following information.Example. On April 1, you entered into a6781 specifically designating the class of activi-non-section 1256 position and an offsetting sec-ties for which a mixed straddle account is estab-a) A description of the securities sold, thetion 1256 contract. You also made a valid elec-lished. date of the sale, the amount realized ontion to treat this straddle as an identified mixedFor the specific application of the rules of thisthe sale, and the adjusted basis of thestraddle. On April 8, you disposed of the securities.election, see regulations section 1.1092(b)–4T.non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and the
section 1256 contract at an $800 gain. UnderInterest expense and carrying charges re- b) The name of the ESOP or cooperative
these circumstances, the $600 loss on thelating to mixed straddle account positions. to which the qualified securities were
non-section 1256 position will be offset againstYou cannot deduct interest and carrying sold.
the $800 gain on the section 1256 contract. Thecharges that are allocable to any positions heldc) For a sale that was part of a single,net gain of $200 from the straddle will be treatedin a mixed straddle account. Treat these interrelated transaction under a prear-as 60% long-term capital gain and 40% charges as an adjustment to the annual account ranged agreement between taxpayersshort-term capital gain because it is due to thenet gain or loss and allocate them proportion- involving other sales of qualified securi-section 1256 contract. ately between the net short-term and the net ties, the names and identifying num-long-term capital gains or losses.Mixed straddle account (Election C).You bers of the other taxpayers under the
To find the amount of interest and carryingmay elect to establish one or more accounts for agreement and the number of shares
charges that is not deductible and that must bedetermining gains and losses from all positions sold by the other taxpayers.
added to the annual account net gain or loss,in a mixed straddle. You must establish a sepa-
apply the rules described in chapter 3 underrate mixed straddle account for each separate 2) A notarized “statement of purchase”
designated class of activities. Interest expense and carrying charges on strad-describing the qualified replacement prop-
dles to the positions held in the mixed straddleGenerally, you must determine gain or loss erty, date of purchase, and the cost of the
account.for each position in a mixed straddle account as property and declaring the property to be
Page 58 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 59 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
qualified replacement property for the is equal to or more than the amount of your gain, 4) You must have acquired the stock at its
qualified stock you sold. The statement you must recognize the full amount of your gain.original issue, directly or through an under-
must have been notarized no later than 30 writer, in exchange for money or otherLimit on gain postponed.The amount ofdays after the purchase. If you have not property (not including stock), or as pay forgain you can postpone each year is limited to theyet purchased the qualified replacement services provided to the corporation (othersmaller of:property, you must attach the notarized than services performed as an underwriter
“statement of purchase” to your income tax of the stock). In certain cases, your stock1) $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and
return for the year following the election may also meet this test if you acquired itfile a separate return), or
year (or the election will not be valid). from another person who met this test, or2) $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married andthrough a conversion or trade of qualified3) A verified written statement of the domes-file a separate return), minus the amountsmall business stock that you held.tic corporation whose employees are cov- of gain you postponed for all earlier years.
ered by the ESOP acquiring the securities, 5) The corporation must have met the active
or of any authorized officer of the coopera- business test, defined next, and mustBasis of replacement property.You musttive, consenting to the taxes under sec- have been a C corporation during substan-subtract the amount of postponed gain from thetions 4978 and 4979A of the Internal tially all the time you held the stock.basis of your replacement property.Revenue Code on certain dispositions,
6) Within the period beginning 2 years beforeand prohibited allocations of the stock pur-
and ending 2 years after the stock waschased by the ESOP or cooperative. How to report and postpone gain. Report
issued, the corporation cannot havethe entire gain realized from the sale on line 1 or
bought more than a de minimis amount ofline 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever isMore information. For details, see section its stock from you or a related party.appropriate. To make the choice to postpone1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Tempo-gain, enter “SSBIC Rollover” in column (a) of the7) Within the period beginning 1 year beforerary Regulations section 1.1042–1T. line directly below the line on which you reportedand ending 1 year after the stock was is-the gain. Enter the amount of gain postponed insued, the corporation cannot have boughtRollover of Gain column (f). Enter it as a loss (in parentheses).more than a de minimis amount of its stockAlso, attach a schedule showing how youFrom Publicly from anyone, unless the total value of thefigured the postponed gain, the name of theTraded Securities stock it bought is 5% or less of the totalSSBIC in which you purchased common stock value of all its stock.or a partnership interest, the date of thatYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain
purchase, and your new basis in that SSBICFor more information about tests 6 and 7, seegains from the sale of publicly traded securities.
stock or partnership interest. the regulations under section 1202 of the Inter-This means that if you buy certain replacement
You must make the choice to postpone gainnal Revenue Code.property and make the choice described in this
no later than the due date (including extensions)section, you postpone part or all of your gain.
for filing your tax return for the year in which youYou postpone the gain by adjusting the basis Active business test.A corporation meets
sold the securities. If your original return wasof the replacement property as described in Ba- this test for any period of time if, during that
filed on time, you may make the choice on ansis of replacement property, later. This period, both the following are true.
amended return filed no later than 6 monthspostpones your gain until the year you dispose
after the due date of your return (excluding ex-1) It was an eligible corporation, definedof the replacement property.
tensions). Write “Filed pursuant to section below.You qualify to make this choice if you meet
301.9100–2” at the top of the amended return,all the following tests. 2) It used at least 80% (by value) of its assetsand file it at the same address you used for yourin the active conduct of at least one quali-1) You sell publicly traded securities at aoriginal return. fied trade or business, defined below.gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-Your choice is revocable with the consent of
ties traded on an established securitiesthe IRS. Exception for SSBIC. Any specializedmarket.
small business investment company (SSBIC) isGains on Qualified2) Your gain from the sale is a capital gain. treated as meeting the active business test. An
Small Business Stock SSBIC is an eligible corporation that is licensed3) During the 60-day period beginning on the
to operate under section 301(d) of the Smalldate of the sale, you buy replacementThis section discusses two provisions of the lawBusiness Investment Act of 1958 as in effect onproperty. This replacement property mustthat may apply to gain from the sale or trade ofMay 13, 1993.be either common stock or a partnershipqualified small business stock. You may qualifyinterest in a specialized small business Eligible corporation.This is any U.S. cor-for a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain.investment company (SSBIC). This is poration other than:You may be able to exclude part of the gainany partnership or corporation licensed byfrom your income.the Small Business Administration under 1) A Domestic International Sales Corpora-
section 301(d) of the Small Business In- tion (DISC) or a former DISC,Qualified small business stock. This isvestment Act of 1958, as in effect on May
stock that meets all the following tests. 2) A corporation that has made, or whose13, 1993.
subsidiary has made, an election under1) It must be stock in a C corporation. section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code,
Amount of gain recognized.  If you make the concerning the Puerto Rico and posses-2) It must have been originally issued after
choice described in this section, you must rec- sion tax credit,August 10, 1993.
ognize gain only up to the following amount:
3) A regulated investment company,3) The corporation must have total gross as-
sets of $50 million or less at all times after1) The amount realized on the sale, minus 4) A real estate investment trust (REIT),August 9, 1993, and before it issued the2) The cost of any common stock or partner- 5) A real estate mortgage investment conduitstock. Its total gross assets immediately af-ship interest in an SSBIC that you bought (REMIC),ter it issued the stock must also be $50during the 60-day period beginning on themillion or less. 6) A financial asset securitization investmentdate of sale (and did not previously take When figuring the corporation’s total trust (FASIT), orinto account on an earlier sale of publiclygross assets, you must also count the as-traded securities). 7) A cooperative.sets of any predecessor of the corporation.
If this amount is less than the amount of your In addition, you must treat all corporations
Qualified trade or business.This is anygain, you can postpone the rest of your gain, that are members of the same parent-sub-
trade or business other than:subject to the limit described next. If this amount sidiary controlled group as one corporation. 
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 59

Page 60 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Pass-through entity.A pass-through entity (a enter “Section 1202 exclusion” in column (a) and
1) One involving services performed in thepartnership, S corporation, or mutual fund or enter the amount of the exclusion in column (f).
fields of health, law, engineering, architec-other regulated investment company) also may Enter it as a loss (in parentheses).
ture, accounting, actuarial science, per-make the choice to postpone gain. The benefit ofMore information.For information about ad-forming arts, consulting, athletics, financialthe postponed gain applies to your share of theditional requirements that may apply, see sec-services, or brokerage services, entity’s postponed gain if you held an interest intion 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code.the entity for the entire period the entity held the2) One whose principal asset is the reputa-
stock.tion or skill of one or more employees, Rollover of GainIf a pass-through entity sold qualified small
3) Any banking, insurance, financing, leasing,business stock held for more than 6 months andFrom Sale ofinvesting, or similar business, you held an interest in the entity for the entireEmpowerment Zone Assetsperiod the entity held the stock, you also may4) Any farming business (including the busi-
choose to postpone gain if you, rather than theYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certainness of raising or harvesting trees),
pass-through entity, buy the replacement stockgains from the sale of qualified empowerment5) Any business involving the production orwithin the 60-day period. zone assets. This means that if you buy certainextraction of products for which percent- replacement property and make the choice de-How to report gain. Report the entire gainage depletion can be claimed, or scribed in this section, you postpone part or all ofrealized from the sale on line 1 or line 8 ofthe recognition of your gain.6) Any business of operating a hotel, motel,Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is appropri-You qualify to make this choice if you meetrestaurant, or similar business. ate. To make the choice to postpone the gain,all the following tests.enter “Section 1045 Rollover” in column (a) of
the line directly below the line on which you1) You hold a qualified empowerment zone
Rollover of Gain reported the gain. Enter the amount of gain asset for more than 1 year and sell it at a
postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (ingain.You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capitalparentheses).
2) Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.gain from the sale of qualified small businessYou must make the choice to postpone gain
stock held more than 6 months. This means that,no later than the due date (including extensions)3) During the 60-day period beginning on theif you buy certain replacement stock and makefor filing your tax return for the year in which youdate of the sale, you buy a replacementthe choice described in this section, you post-sold the stock. If your original return was filed onqualified empowerment zone asset in thepone part or all of your gain. time, you may make the choice on an amended same zone as the asset sold.You postpone the gain by adjusting the basisreturn filed no later than 6 months after the due
of the replacement stock as described in Basis date of your return (excluding extensions). WriteAny part of the gain that is ordinaryof replacement stock, below. This postpones “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100–2” at the income cannot be postponed and mustyour gain until the year you dispose of the re-top of the amended return, and file it at the samebe recognized.CAUTION
!
placement stock. address you used for your original return.
You can make this choice if you meet all the
Qualified empowerment zone asset. Thisfollowing tests.
means certain stock or partnership interests inSection 1202 Exclusion1) You buy replacement stock during the an enterprise zone business. It also includes
60-day period beginning on the date of the certain tangible property used in an enterpriseYou generally can exclude from your income
sale. zone business. You must have acquired theone-half of your gain from the sale or trade of
asset after December 21, 2000.qualified small business stock held by you for2) The replacement stock is qualified small
more than 5 years. The taxable part of your gainbusiness stock. Amount of gain recognized.If you make theequal to your section 1202 exclusion is a 28%choice described in this section, you must rec-3) The replacement stock continues to meetrate gain. See Capital Gain Tax Rates, later. ognize gain only up to the following amount:the active business requirement for small
SSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized smallbusiness stock for at least the first 6 1) The amount realized on the sale, minusbusiness investment company (SSBIC) stockmonths after you buy it.
2) The cost of any qualified empowermentthat you bought as replacement property for
zone asset that you bought during thepublicly traded securities you sold at a gain, youAmount of gain recognized.If you make the
60-day period beginning on the date ofmust reduce the basis of the stock by thechoice described in this section, you must rec-
sale (and did not previously take into ac-amount of any postponed gain on that earlierognize the capital gain only up to the following
count in rolling over gain on an earlier salesale, as explained earlier under Rollover of Gainamount:
of qualified empowerment zone assets).From Publicly Traded Securities. But do not re-
1) The amount realized on the sale, minusduce your basis by that amount when figuringIf this amount is equal to or more than theyour section 1202 exclusion.2) The cost of any qualified small business amount of your gain, you must recognize the full
stock you bought during the 60-day period amount of your gain. If this amount is less thanLimit on eligible gain.The amount of your
beginning on the date of sale (and did not the amount of your gain, you can postpone thegain from the stock of any one issuer that is
previously take into account on an earlier rest of your gain by adjusting the basis of youreligible for the exclusion in 2002 is limited to the
sale of qualified small business stock). replacement property as described next.greater of:
If this amount is less than the amount of your Basis of replacement property.You must1) Ten times your basis in all qualified stockcapital gain, you can postpone the rest of that subtract the amount of postponed gain from theof the issuer that you sold or exchangedgain. If this amount equals or is more than the basis of the qualified empowerment zone assetsduring the year, oramount of your capital gain, you must recognize you bought as replacement property.
2) $10 million ($5 million for married individu-the full amount of your gain. How to report and postpone capital gain.als filing separately) minus the amount ofBasis of replacement stock.You must sub- Report the entire gain realized from the sale ongain from the stock of the same issuer thattract the amount of postponed gain from the line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040). To make theyou used to figure your exclusion in earlierbasis of your replacement stock. choice to postpone gain, enter “Section 1397Byears. Rollover” in column (a) of the line directly belowHolding period of replacement stock.Your the line on which you reported the gain. Enterholding period for the replacement stock in-How to report gain. Report the entire gainthe amount of gain postponed in column (f).cludes your holding period for the stock sold, realized from the sale in column (f) of line 8 ofEnter it as a loss (in parentheses).except for the purpose of applying the 6-month Schedule D (Form 1040). Report an amount
holding period requirement for choosing to roll equal to the excluded gain in column (g). DirectlyMore information. For more information
over the gain on its sale. below the line on which you report the gain, about empowerment zones, see Publication
Page 60 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 61 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
954, Tax Incentives for Empowerment Zonesvises you, in box 2 of Form 1099–B, that gross column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule
and Other Distressed Communities. For more proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions D, whichever applies, unless you reported the
information about this rollover of gain, see sec- and option premiums were reported to the IRS, net sales price amount in column (d).
tion 1397B of the Internal Revenue Code. enter that net sales price in column (d) of either
Short-term gains and losses.Capital gain orline 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies.
loss on the sale or trade of investment propertyIf the net amount is entered in column (d), do
held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain ornot include the commissions and option premi-
loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If theums in column (e).Reporting Capital
amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show itSection 1256 contracts and straddles. in parentheses.Gains and Losses Use Form 6781 to report gains and losses fromYou combine your share of short-term capitalsection 1256 contracts and straddles before en-This section discusses how to report your capital gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,tering these amounts on Schedule D. Include agains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital losscopy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.Enter your sales and trades of stocks, bonds, carryover, with your other short-term capital
Market discount bonds.Report the sale oretc., and real estate (if not required to be re- gains and losses to figure your net short-term
trade of a market discount bond on Schedule Dported on another form) on line 1 of Part I or line capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.
(Form 1040), line 1 or line 8. If the sale or trade8 of Part II, as appropriate. Include all these
results in a gain and you did not choose toLong-term gains and losses.A capital gaintransactions even if you did not receive a Form
include market discount in income currently,or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-1099–B or 1099–S (or substitute statement).
enter “Accrued Market Discount” on the next lineerty held more than 1 year is a long-term capitalYou can use Schedule D–1 as a continuation
in column (a) and the amount of the accruedgain or loss. You report it in Part II of Scheduleschedule to report more transactions.
market discount as a loss in column (f). AlsoD. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,Be sure to add all sales price entries in col-
report the amount of accrued market discount asshow it in parentheses.umn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total on
interest income on Schedule B (Form 1040), lineline 3. Also add all sales price entries in column You also report the following in Part II of
1, and identify it as “Accrued Market Discount.”(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10. Schedule D:
Then add the following amounts reported to you
Form 1099–S transactions. If you sold or 1) Undistributed long-term capital gains fromfor 2002 on Forms 1099–B and Forms 1099–S
traded reportable real estate, you generallya regulated investment company (mutual(or on substitute statements):
should receive from the real estate reportingfund) or real estate investment trust
person a Form 1099–S, Proceeds From Real1) Proceeds from transactions involving (REIT),
Estate Transactions, showing the gross pro-stocks, bonds, and other securities, and
2) Your share of long-term capital gains orceeds.2) Gross proceeds from real estate transac- losses from partnerships, S corporations,“Reportable real estate” is defined as anytions (other than the sale of your main and fiduciaries,present or future ownership interest in any of thehome if you had no taxable gain) not re-following: 3) All capital gain distributions from mutualported on another form or schedule.
funds and REITs not reported directly on1) Improved or unimproved land, including airIf this total is more than the total of lines 3 and line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Formspace,10, attach a statement to your return explaining 1040, and
the difference. 2) Inherently permanent structures, including4) Long-term capital loss carryovers.any residential, commercial, or industrialInstallment sales.You cannot use the install- The result after combining these items withbuilding,ment method to report a gain from the sale of your other long-term capital gains and losses isstock or securities traded on an established se-3) A condominium unit and its accessory fix-your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 16 ofcurities market. You must report the entire gaintures and common elements, including Schedule D).in the year of sale (the year in which the tradeland, and
date occurs). 28% rate gain or loss.Enter in column (g)4) Stock in a cooperative housing corporationthe amount, if any, from column (f) that is a 28%At-risk rules.Special at-risk rules apply to (as defined in section 216 of the Internalrate gain or loss. Enter any loss in parentheses.most income-producing activities. These rulesRevenue Code). A 28% rate gain or loss is:limit the amount of loss you can deduct to theA “real estate reporting person” could includeamount you risk losing in the activity. The at-risk • Any collectibles gain or loss, orthe buyer’s attorney, your attorney, the title orrules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade ofescrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro-• The part of your gain on qualified smallan asset used in an activity to which the at-riskker, the buyer’s broker, or the person acquiringbusiness stock that is equal to the sectionrules apply. For more information, see Publica-the biggest interest in the property. 1202 exclusion.tion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules. Your Form 1099–S will show the gross pro-Use Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, to figure For more information, see Capital Gain Taxceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol-the amount of loss you can deduct. Rates, later.low the instructions for Schedule D to report
these transactions, and include them on line 1 orPassive activity gains and losses.If you Capital gain distributions only.You do
8 as appropriate.have gains or losses from a passive activity, you not have to file Schedule D if all of the following
It is unlawful for any real estate reportingmay also have to report them on Form 8582. In are true.
person to separately charge you for complyingsome cases, the loss may be limited under the
with the requirement to file Form 1099–S.passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its 1) The only amounts you would have to re-
separate instructions for more information about port on Schedule D are capital gain distri-
Sale of property bought at various times.Ifreporting capital gains and losses from a pas- butions from box 2a of Form 1099–DIV (or
you sell a block of stock or other property thatsive activity. substitute statement).
you bought at various times, report the
Form 1099–B transactions.If you sold prop- 2) You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c,short-term gain or loss from the sale on one line
erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi- 2d, or 2e of any Form 1099–DIV (or sub-in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain or
ties, through a broker, you should receive Form stitute statement).loss on one line in Part II. Write “Various” in
1099–B or an equivalent statement from thecolumn (b) for the “Date acquired.” See the3) You do not file Form 4952 or, if you do, thebroker. Use the Form 1099–B or equivalentComprehensive Example later in this chapter. amount on line 4e of that form is not morestatement to complete Schedule D. than zero.Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 ofSale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba-
If all the above statements are true, report yourForm 1099–B as the gross sales price in col- sis any expense of sale such as broker’s fees,
capital gain distributions directly on line 13 ofumn (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, commissions, state and local transfer taxes, and
Form 1040 and check the box on that line. Also,whichever applies. However, if the broker ad- option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 61

Page 62 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-Table 4–2. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
tal loss carryovers. However, if you and your
spouse once filed a joint return and are nowTHEN your maximum
filing separate returns, any capital loss carryoverIF your net capital gain is from ... capital gain rate is ...
from the joint return can be deducted only on the
collectibles gain 28% return of the spouse who actually had the loss.
gain on qualified small business stock equal to the section
Capital Gain Tax Rates1202 exclusion 28%
unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25% The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are
generally lower than the tax rates that apply toother gain,1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is other income. These lower rates are called the27% or higher 20% maximum capital gain rates.
other gain,1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is The term “net capital gain” means the
lower than 27% 8%  or 10% 2 amount by which your net long-term capital gain
for the year is more than your net short-term1“Other gain ” means any gain that is not collectible gain, gain on small business stock, orcapital loss.unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
The maximum capital gain rate can be 8%,2The rate is 8% only for qualified 5 – year gain. 10%, 20%, 25%, or 28%. See Table 4–2 for
details.
The maximum capital gain rate does not ap-use the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form When you carry over a loss, it remains longply if it is higher than your regular tax rate.1040 instructions to figure your tax. term or short term. A long-term capital loss you
You can report your capital gain distributions carry over to the next tax year will reduce thatExample. You have a net capital gain fromon line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Form year’s long-term capital gains before it reducesselling collectibles, so the capital gain rate would1040, if both of the following are true. that year’s short-term capital gains. be 28%. Because you are single and your taxa-
ble income is $25,000, none of your taxableFiguring your carryover.The amount of1) None of the Forms 1099–DIV (or substi- income will be taxed above the 15% rate. Theyour capital loss carryover is the amount of yourtute statements) you received have an 28% rate does not apply.total net loss that is more than the lesser of:amount in box 2b, 2c, 2d, or 2e.
2) You do not have to file Form 1040 for any 8% rate. The 10% maximum capital gain rate1) Your allowable capital loss deduction for
other reason. (For example, you must not is lowered to 8% for “qualified 5-year gain.”the year, or
have any other capital gains or any capital Qualified 5-year gain.This is long-term2) Your taxable income increased by your al-losses.) capital gain from the sale of property that youlowable capital loss deduction for the year
held for more than 5 years.and your deduction for personal exemp-Total net gain or loss.To figure your total nettions.gain or loss, combine your net short-term capital 18% rate beginning in 2006.Beginning ingain or loss (line 7) with your net long-termIf your deductions are more than your gross2006, the 20% maximum capital gain rate will becapital gain or loss (line 16). Enter the result onincome for the tax year, use your negative taxa-lowered to 18% for qualified 5-year gain fromline 17, Part III of Schedule D. If your losses areble income in computing the amount in item (2).property with a holding period that begins aftermore than your gains, see Capital Losses, next. Complete the Capital Loss Carryover Work-2000.If both lines 16 and 17 are gains and line 39 ofsheet in the Schedule D (Form 1040) instruc-
Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gain tions to determine the part of your capital loss forInvestment interest deducted.If you claim aTax Rates, later. 2002 that you can carry over to 2003. deduction for investment interest, you may have
to reduce the amount of your net capital gain
Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities inCapital Losses that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.
2002. The sales resulted in a capital loss ofReduce it by the amount of the net capital gainIf your capital losses are more than your capital$7,000. They had no other capital transactions.you choose to include in investment incomegains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.Their taxable income was $26,000. On their jointwhen figuring the limit on your investment inter-Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,2002 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-est deduction. This is done on lines 21–23 ofenclosed in parentheses. used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000), Schedule D. For more information about the limit
can be carried over to 2003. on investment interest, see Interest Expenses inLimit on deduction. Your allowable capital
If their capital loss had been $2,000, theirchapter 3.loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the
capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.lesser of: 
They would have no carryover.
1) $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file Using the Capital Gain RatesUse short-term losses first.When you fig-a separate return), or ure your capital loss carryover, use yourThe part of a net capital gain that is subject toshort-term capital losses first, even if you in-2) Your total net loss as shown on line 17 of each rate is determined under the followingcurred them after a long-term capital loss. If youSchedule D. rules.have not reached the limit on the capital lossYou can use your total net loss to reduce yourdeduction after using the short-term capital loss,1) In each of the following groups, long-termincome dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.use the long-term capital losses until you reachcapital gains are netted with long-term
Capital loss carryover.If you have a total netthe limit. capital losses.
loss on line 17 of Schedule D that is more thanDecedent’s capital loss.A capital lossthe yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you a) A 28% group, consisting of collectiblessustained by a decedent during his or her lastcan carry over the unused part to the next year gains and losses, gain on qualifiedtax year (or carried over to that year from anand treat it as if you had incurred it in that next small business stock equal to the sec-earlier year) can be deducted only on the finalyear. If part of the loss is still unused, you can tion 1202 exclusion, and long-term cap-return filed for the decedent. The capital losscarry it over to later years until it is completely ital loss carryovers.limits discussed earlier still apply in this situa-used up. tion. The decedent’s estate cannot deduct any b) A 25% group, consisting of unrecap-When you figure the amount of any capitalof the loss or carry it over to following years. tured section 1250 gain.loss carryover to the next year, you must take
the current year’s allowable deduction into ac-Joint and separate returns.If you and your c) A 20% group, consisting of gains and
count, whether or not you claimed it. spouse once filed separate returns and are now losses that are not in the 28% or 25%
Page 62 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 63 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
group. (This includes gains that may be See the Comprehensive Example, later, for enters that amount in column (g) as a 28% rate
taxed at a rate of 10% or 8%.) an example of how to figure your tax on Sched-gain and claims the exclusion on the line below
ule D using the capital gain rates. by entering $1,500 as a loss in column (f).
2) A net short-term capital loss reduces any She received a Form 1099–B (not shown)Using Capital Gain Tax Worksheet.If younet gain from the 28% group, then any from her broker for each of these transactions.have capital gain distributions but do not have togain from the 25% group, and finally any The entries shown in box 2 of these forms totalfile Schedule D (Form 1040), figure your taxnet gain from the 20% group. $14,100.using the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the
3) A net loss from the 28% group reducesinstructions for Form 1040A or Form 1040, Reconciliation of Forms 1099–B. Emily
any gain from the 25% group, and thenwhichever you file. For more information, seemakes sure that the total of the amounts re-
any net gain from the 20% group. Capital gain distributions only, earlier. ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched-
ule D is not less than the total of the amounts4) A net loss from the 20% group reducesAlternative minimum tax.These capital gainshown on the Forms 1099–B she received fromany net gain from the 28% group, and thenrates are also used in figuring alternative mini-her broker. For 2002, the total of lines 3 and 10any gain from the 25% group. mum tax. of Schedule D is $14,100, which is the same
amount reported by the broker on FormsCollectibles gain or loss.This is gain or lossComprehensive Example 1099–B.from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,
antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati- Form 6781. During 2002, Emily had a real-Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wagesnum bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev- ized loss from a regulated futures contract offrom her job, she has income from stocks anderage held more than 1 year. $11,000. She also had an unrealized marked toother securities. For the 2002 tax year, she hadCollectibles gain includes gain from the sale market gain on open contracts of $27,000 at thethe following capital gains and losses, which sheof an interest in a partnership, S corporation, or end of 2002. She had reported an unrealizedreports on Schedule D. Her filled-in Schedule Dtrust attributable to unrealized appreciation of marked to market gain of $1,000 on her 2001 taxis shown at the end of this example.collectibles. return. (This $1,000 must be subtracted from her
Capital gains and losses—Schedule D. 2002 profit.) These amounts are shown in boxesGain on qualified small business stock.If Emily sold stock in two different companies that6, 7, and 8 of the Form 1099–B she receivedyou realized a gain from qualified small businessshe held for less than a year. In June, she soldfrom her broker. Box 9 shows her combinedstock that you held more than 5 years, you100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she hadprofit of $15,000 ($27,000 − $1,000 − $11,000).generally can exclude one-half of your gain frombought in February. She had an adjusted basisShe reports this gain in Part I of Form 6781 (notyour income. The taxable part of your gain equalof $1,150 in the stock and sold it for $400, for ashown). She shows 40% as short-term gain onto your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rateloss of $750. In July, she sold 25 shares ofline 4 of Schedule D and 60% as long-term gaingain. See Gains on Qualified Small BusinessComputer Co. stock that she bought in June.on line 11 of Schedule D.Stock, earlier in this chapter. She had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,000The Form 1099–B that Emily received fromUnrecaptured section 1250 gain.Generally, and sold it for $2,500, for a gain of $500. Sheher broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown later.this is any part of your capital gain from sellingreports these short-term transactions on line 1 in
Capital loss carryover from 2001.Emilysection 1250 property (real property) that is duePart I of Schedule D.
has a capital loss carryover to 2002 of $800, ofto depreciation (but not more than your net sec-Emily had three other stock sales that she
which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500tion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in thereports as long-term transactions on line 8 in
is long-term capital loss. She enters these28% group. Use the worksheet in the SchedulePart II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60
amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D.D instructions to figure your unrecaptured sec-shares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited
tion 1250 gain. For more information about sec- She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-the Car stock from her father. Its fair market
tion 1250 property and section 1231 gain, see over Worksheet in her 2001 Schedule D instruc-value at the time of his death was $2,500, which
chapter 3 of Publication 544. tions (not shown), so she could properly reportbecame her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.
her loss carryover for the 2002 tax year withoutBecause she had inherited the stock, her loss isUsing Schedule D. You apply these rules by refiguring it.a long-term loss, regardless of how long she andusing Part IV of Schedule D (Form 1040) to
her father actually held the stock. She enters thefigure your tax. Tax computation. Because Emily has gainsloss in column (f) of line 8.Use Part IV if both of the following are true. on both lines 16 and 17 of Schedule D and hasIn June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.
taxable income, she goes to Part IV of Schedulestock for $5,000. She had bought 100 of those1) You have a net capital gain. You have a
D to figure her tax. But because line 15 ofshares in 1991, for $1,000. She had bought 100net capital gain if both lines 16 and 17 of
Schedule D is more than zero (due to her sec-more shares in 1993 for $2,200, and an addi-Schedule D are gains. (Line 16 is your net
tion 1202 gain from selling qualified small busi-tional 300 shares in 1996 for $1,500. Her totallong-term capital gain or loss. Line 17 is
ness stock), she must also use the Schedule Dbasis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $300your net long-term capital gain or loss
Tax Worksheet to figure her tax. She must also($5,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which shecombined with any net short-term capital
complete the Qualified 5-Year Gain Worksheetenters in column (f) of line 8. Because she heldgain or loss.)
(not shown) in her Schedule D instructions.all 500 shares for more than 5 years, the entire2) Your taxable income on Form 1040, line After entering the gain from line 17 on line 13gain is qualified 5-year gain.41, is more than zero. of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofIn December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.
Form 1040 through line 41. She enters theIf you have any collectible gain, gain on qual- stock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi-
amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of theified small business stock, or unrecaptured sec- ness stock that she had bought in September
Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out thetion 1250 gain, you may also have to use the 1997. Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000
rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax isSchedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D gain, which she enters in column (f) of line 8.
$3,958. This is less than the tax she would haveinstructions to figure your tax. See the directions Because she held the stock more than 5 years,
figured without the capital gain tax rates, $4,453.below line 19 of Schedule D. she has a $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 63

Page 64 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily Jones 111 00 1111
100 sh
Trucking Co.
25 sh
Computer Co.
2-12-02
6-29-02
6-12-02
7-30-02
400
2,500
1,150
2,000 500
2,900
6,000
300
60 sh
Car Co.
500 sh
Furniture Co.
20 sh
Toy Co.
INHERITED
VARIOUS
9-20-97
2-3-02
6-29-02
12-15-02
2,100
5,000
4,100
11,200
2,500
4,700
1,100
300
500
1,500
(750)
5,450
(400)
3,000
9,000
500
9,900
1,000
Section 1202
exclusion (1,500)
*28% rate gain or loss includes all “collectibles gains and losses” (as defined on page D-6 of the instructions) and up to 50% of
the eligible gain on qualified small business stock (see page D-4 of the instructions).
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on Form 1040
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-5 of the
instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-5 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts.
Add lines 1 and 2 in column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684,
6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your
2001 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f).
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts.
Add lines 8 and 9 in column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and
long-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-1 of the instructions
15 15
14
16
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter in both columns (f) and (g) the amount, if
any, from line 13 of your 2001 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet ()
Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (g)
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f)
Next: Go to Part III on the back.
16
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2002Cat. No. 11338H
()
4
4
Part I
Part II
7
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(g) 28% rate gain or
(loss)
(see instr. below)
()
*
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-5 of the
instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-5 of
the instructions)
2002
Page 64 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 65 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
15,350
300
3,958
-0-
-0-
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2002
Taxable Gain or Deductible Loss
Combine lines 7 and 16 and enter the result. If a loss, go to line 18. If a gain, enter the gain on
Form 1040, line 13, and complete Form 1040 through line 41
17
17
()18
Part III
Page 2
18
Next:
If line 17 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, the smaller of (a) that loss or
(b) ($3,000) (or, if married filing separately, ($1,500)). Then complete Form 1040 through line 39
Tax Computation Using Maximum Capital Gains RatesPart IV
20
Enter your unrecaptured section 1250 gain, if any, from line 17 of the worksheet on page D-7 of the
instructions 
22
23
24
25
Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0-
26
27
28
30
31
34
35
36 Subtract line 35 from line 34
23
24
25
26
27
28
31
30
21
Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 41 20
● If both lines 16 and 17 are gains and Form 1040, line 41, is more than zero, complete
Part IV below.
Subtract line 23 from line 20. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the smaller of:
Enter the amount from line 24
Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- and go to line 34
Enter the smaller of line 28 or line 29
Multiply line 30 by 8% (.08)
Enter the smaller of line 20 or line 23
Enter the amount from line 28 (if line 28 is blank, enter -0-)
19
33
34
35
36
37
● The amount on line 20 or
● $46,700 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er);
$27,950 if single;
$37,450 if head of household; or
$23,350 if married filing separately
37 Multiply line 36 by 20% (.20)
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2002
● Otherwise, skip the rest of Schedule D and complete Form 1040.
Next: ● If the loss on line 17 is more than the loss on line 18 or if Form 1040, line 39, is less
than zero, skip Part IV below and complete the Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
on page D-6 of the instructions before completing the rest of Form 1040.
● Otherwise, skip Part IV below and complete the rest of Form 1040.
19
If line 15 or line 19 is more than zero, complete the worksheet on page D-9 of the instructions
to figure the amount to enter on lines 22, 29, and 40 below, and skip all other lines below.
Otherwise, go to line 20. 22
Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17 of
Schedule D
If you are deducting investment interest
expense on Form 4952, enter the amount
from Form 4952, line 4e. Otherwise, enter -0-
21
Figure the tax on the amount on line 24. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
/H20854
If line 26 is greater than line 24, go to line 27. Otherwise, skip lines
27 through 33 and go to line 34.
29
29
Enter your qualified 5-year gain, if any, from
line 8 of the worksheet on page D-8
32 Subtract line 30 from line 28 32
33 Multiply line 32 by 10% (.10)
38
39
40
Add lines 25, 31, 33, and 37
Figure the tax on the amount on line 20. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains). Enter the smaller of line 38 or line 39 here
and on Form 1040, line 42
38
39
40
If the amounts on lines 23 and 28 are the same, skip lines 34 through 37 and go to line 38.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 65

Page 66 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
30,000
9,900
-0-
9,900
6,450
1,000
-0-
1,000
8,900
21,100
27,950
21,100
20,100
21,100
2,869
6,850
300
300
24
6,550
655
8,900
6,850
2,050
410
30,000
-0-
-0-
3,958
4,453
3,958
Schedule D Tax Worksheet—Line 40 Keep for Y our Records
Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-4.
1.
11.
4.
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 41
● The amount on line 1 or
● $46,700 if married filing jointly or
qualifying widow(er);
$27,950 if single;
$37,450 if head of household; or
$23,350 if married filing separately
/H20854
Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17 of Schedule D2. 2.
3. If you are filing Form 4952, enter the amount from Form 4952, line
4e. Otherwise, enter -0-. Also enter this amount on Schedule D,
line 22 3.
Combine lines 7 and 15 of Schedule D. If zero or less, enter -0-5. 5.
6. Enter the smaller of line 5 above or Schedule D, line 15, but not
less than zero 6.
Add lines 6 and 78. 8.
7. Enter the amount from Schedule D, line 19 7.
9.9. Subtract line 8 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0-
10.10. Subtract line 9 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the smaller of:
12. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 12.
11.
13. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-13.
Enter the larger of line 12 or line 13 /H1707514. 14.
19.19. Multiply line 18 by 8% (.08)
If lines 11 and 12 are the same, skip lines 16 through 21 and go to line 22. Otherwise, go to line 16.
Subtract line 12 from line 11 /H1707516. 16.
17. Enter your qualified 5-year gain, if any , from line 8 of the worksheet
on page D-8. Also enter this amount on Schedule D,
line 29 17.
Enter the smaller of line 16 above or line 17 above18. 18.
21.21. Multiply line 20 by 10% (.10)
Subtract line 18 from line 1620. 20.
Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 922. 22.
23. Enter the amount from line 16 (if line 16 is blank, enter -0-)23.
Subtract line 23 from line 22 /H1707524. 24.
25.25. Multiply line 24 by 20% (.20)
If line 7 is zero or blank, skip lines 26 through 31 and go to line 32. Otherwise, go to line 26.
26. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 7 26.
27. Add lines 4 and 14 27.
28. Enter the amount from line 1 above 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 27. If zero or less, enter -0-29.
Subtract line 29 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- /H1707530. 30.
31.31. Multiply line 30 by 25% (.25)
If line 6 is zero, skip lines 32 through 34 and go to line 35. Otherwise, go to line 32.
Add lines 14, 16, 24, and 3032. 32.
Subtract line 32 from line 133. 33.
34.34. Multiply line 33 by 28% (.28)
35.35. Add lines 15, 19, 21, 25, 31, and 34
36.36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the T ax T able or T ax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
37.
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains). Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 36. Also enter
this amount on Schedule D, line 40, and Form 1040, line 42
15. Figure the tax on the amount on line 14. Use the T ax T able or T ax Rate Schedules, whichever applies/H1707515.
Complete this worksheet only if line 15 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete Part IV of Schedule
D to figure your tax. Exception: Do not use Schedule D, Part IV , or this worksheet to figure your tax if line 16 or line 17 of
Schedule D or Form 1040, line 41, is zero or less; instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 42.
If lines 1 and 11 are the same, skip lines 22 through 34 and go to line 35. Otherwise, go to line 22.
Page 66 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 67 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, P A 18605
10-1111111 111-00-1111
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36309
RFC
(11,000)
27,000
1,000
15,000
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale1a Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
Transactions
CUSIP no.1b
Stocks, bonds, etc.2 Reported
to IRS
Gross proceeds
$ Gross proceeds less commissions and option premiums
PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number Bartering3 Federal income tax withheld4
$$
RECIPIENT’S name Description5
Regulated Futures Contracts
Street address (including apt. no.) Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2001
7Profit or (loss) realized in
2002
6
City, state, and ZIP code $$
Aggregate profit or (loss)9Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2002
8
Account number (optional)
$$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-B (keep for your records)
/H20854
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
CORRECTED (if checked)
OMB No. 1545-0715
Form 1099-B
2002
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 67

Page 68 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must keep detailed records to distinguishHow To Make the
the securities. The securities held for investmentMark-to-Market ElectionSpecial Rules for
must be identified as such in your records on the
To make the mark-to-market election for 2003,day you got them (for example, by holding themTraders in Securities
you must file a statement by April 15, 2003. Thisin a separate brokerage account).
statement should be attached to either yourSpecial rules apply if you are a trader in securi-
2002 individual income tax return or a requestties in the business of buying and selling securi-How To Report
for an extension of time to file that return. Theties for your own account. To be engaged in
Transactions from trading activities result in cap-statement must include the following informa-business as a trader in securities, you must
ital gains and losses and must be reported onmeet all the following conditions. tion.
Schedule D (Form 1040). Losses from these• You must seek to profit from daily markettransactions are subject to the limit on capital1) That you are making an election undermovements in the prices of securities andlosses explained earlier in this chapter. section 475(f) of the Internal Revenuenot from dividends, interest, or capital ap- Code.Mark-to-market election made.If you madepreciation.
the mark-to-market election, you should report2) The first tax year for which the election is• Your activity must be substantial. all gains and losses from trading as ordinaryeffective.
gains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, instead• You must carry on the activity with con-
3) The trade or business for which you areof as capital gains and losses on Schedule D. Intinuity and regularity.
making the election.that case, securities held at the end of the year
in your business as a trader are marked toThe following facts and circumstances should If you are not required to file a 2002 income
market by treating them as if they were soldbe considered in determining if your activity is a tax return, you make the election by placing the(and reacquired) for fair market value on the lastsecurities trading business. above statement in your books and records nobusiness day of the year. But do not mark tolater than March 17, 2003. Attach a copy of the• Typical holding periods for securitiesmarket any securities you held for investment.statement to your 2003 return.bought and sold. Report sales from those securities on Schedule
After making the election to change to theD, not Form 4797.• The frequency and dollar amount of your
mark-to-market method of accounting, you musttrades during the year. Expenses. Interest expense and other invest-change your method of accounting for securitiesment expenses that an investor would deduct on• The extent to which you pursue the activity under Revenue Procedure 99–49. RevenueSchedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by ato produce income for a livelihood. Procedure 99–49 requires you to file Formtrader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or 3115, Application for Change in Accounting• The amount of time you devote to the ac-Loss From Business, if the expenses are fromtivity. Method. Follow its instructions. Label the Formthe trading business. Commissions and other3115 as filed under “Section 10A of thecosts of acquiring or disposing of securities areIf your trading activities are not a business, APPENDIX of Rev. Proc. 99–49.”not deductible but must be used to figure gain oryou are considered an investor, and not a trader. Once you make the election, it will apply toloss. The limit on investment interest expense,It does not matter whether you call yourself awhich applies to investors, does not apply to 2003 and all later tax years, unless you gettrader or a “day trader.” interest paid or incurred in a trading business.permission from IRS to revoke it. The effect of
making the election is described underNote. You may be a trader in some securi-Self-employment tax.Gains and losses fromMark-to-market election made, earlier.ties and have other securities you hold for in- selling securities as part of a trading business
For more information on this election, seevestment. The special rules discussed here do are not subject to self-employment tax. This is
Revenue Procedure 99–17, 1999–1 CB 503.not apply to the securities held for investment. true whether the election is made or not.
Page 68 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 69 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Learn about the benefits of filing electroni-• Services. You can walk in to your local
cally (IRS e-file). IRS office to ask tax questions or get help
with a tax problem. Now you can set up an• Get information on starting and operating5. appointment by calling your local IRS of-a small business.
fice number and, at the prompt, leaving a
message requesting Everyday Tax Solu-You can also reach us with your computer
tions help. A representative will call youHow To using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
back within 2 business days to schedule
TaxFax Service. Using the phone at- an in-person appointment at your conve-Get Tax Help tached to your fax machine, you can nience.
receive forms and instructions by call-
You can get help with unresolved tax issues,ing 703–368–9694. Follow the directions from
Mail. You can send your order fororder free publications and forms, ask tax ques-the prompts. When you order forms, enter the forms, instructions, and publications totions, and get more information from the IRS incatalog number for the form you need. The items the Distribution Center nearest to youseveral ways. By selecting the method that isyou request will be faxed to you. and receive a response within 10 workdays afterbest for you, you will have quick and easy ac-For help with transmission problems, call theyour request is received. Find the address thatcess to tax help. FedWorld Help Desk at 703–487–4608. applies to your part of the country.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you • Western part of U.S.:Phone. Many services are available byhave attempted to deal with an IRS problem
Western Area Distribution Centerphone.unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001payer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your in-• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-• Central part of U.S.:
terests and concerns within the IRS by protect-tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order cur- Central Area Distribution Center
ing your rights and resolving problems that haverent and prior year forms, instructions, andP.O. Box 8903not been fixed through normal channels. Whilepublications. Bloomington, IL 61702–8903Taxpayer Advocates cannot change the tax law
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with • Eastern part of U.S. and foreignor make a technical tax decision, they can clear
your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.up problems that resulted from previous con- addresses:
tacts and ensure that your case is given a com- Eastern Area Distribution Center• Solving problems. Take advantage of Eve-plete and impartial review. P.O. Box 85074ryday Tax Solutions service by calling your
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate: Richmond, VA 23261–5074local IRS office to set up an in-person ap-
pointment at your convenience. Check• Call the Taxpayer Advocate at
your local directory assistance or1–877–777–4778. CD-ROM for tax products. You can
www.irs.gov for the numbers. order IRS Publication 1796, Federal• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain:• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessoffice in your area.
to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829– • Current tax forms, instructions, and publi-• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a 4059 to ask tax questions or to order cations.TTY/TDD user. forms and publications. • Prior-year tax forms and instructions.
For more information, see Publication 1546,• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to • Popular tax forms that may be filled inThe Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS. listen to pre-recorded messages covering
electronically, printed out for submission,various tax topics.
Free tax services.To find out what services and saved for recordkeeping.
are available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free • Internal Revenue Bulletins.Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi-
ices. To ensure that IRS representatives givecations and an index of tax topics. It also de- The CD-ROM can be purchased from Na-accurate, courteous, and professional answers,scribes other free tax information services, tional Technical Information Service (NTIS) byincluding tax education and assistance pro-we use several methods to evaluate the quality
calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet atgrams and a list of TeleTax topics. of our telephone services. One method is for a
http://www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first releasesecond IRS representative to sometimes listenPersonal computer. With your per- is available in early January and the final releasein on or record telephone calls. Another is to asksonal computer and modem, you can is available in late February.some callers to complete a short survey at theaccess the IRS on the Internet at
end of the call.www.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, you CD-ROM for small businesses. IRScan: Publication 3207, Small Business Re-
Walk-in. Many products and services• See answers to frequently asked tax ques- source Guide, is a must for every small
are available on a walk-in basis.tions or request help by e-mail. business owner or any taxpayer about to start a
business. This handy, interactive CD contains• Download forms and publications or
all the business tax forms, instructions and pub-• Products. You can walk in to many postsearch for forms and publications by topic
lications needed to successfully manage a busi-offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick upor keyword.
ness. In addition, the CD provides ancertain forms, instructions, and publica-• Order IRS products on-line. tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, groceryabundance of other helpful information, such as
• View forms that may be filled in electroni-stores, copy centers, city and county gov-how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-
cally, print the completed form, and thenernments, credit unions, and office supplying for your business, and much more. The de-
save the form for recordkeeping. stores have an extensive collection ofsign of the CD makes finding information easy
products available to print from a CD-ROMand quick and incorporates file formats and• View Internal Revenue Bulletins published
or photocopy from reproducible proofs.browsers that can be run on virtually anyin the last few years.
Also, some IRS offices and libraries havedesktop or laptop computer.• Search regulations and the Internal Reve-the Internal Revenue Code, regulations,  It is available in March. You can get a freenue Code. Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-copy by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting thetive Bulletins available for research pur-• Receive our electronic newsletters on hot website at www.irs.gov/smallbiz.tax issues and news. poses.
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 69

Page 70 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
The definitions in this glossary 2) The transaction is one of theInvestment interest:The inter- Passive activity:An activity in-
volving the conduct of a trade orare the meanings of the terms as following. est you paid or accrued on money
business in which you do not mate-used in this publication. The same you borrowed that is allocable to
a) A straddle, including any rially participate and any rental ac-term used in another publication property held for investment.
set of offsetting positions tivity. However, the rental of realmay have a slightly different mean-
on stock. Limited partner: A partner estate is not a passive activity ifing.
whose participation in partnershipboth of the following are true.b) Any transaction in whichAccrual method: An accounting activities is restricted, and whoseyou acquire property 1) More than one-half of the per-method under which you report personal liability for partnership(whether or not actively sonal services you performyour income when you earn it, debts is limited to the amount oftraded) at substantially the during the year in all trades orwhether or not you have received it. money or other property that he orsame time that you con- businesses are performed inYou generally deduct your ex- she contributed or may have totract to sell the same prop- real property trades or busi-penses when you incur a liablity for contribute.erty or substantially nesses in which you materi-them, rather than when you pay identical property at a price ally participate.Listed option:Any option that isthem. set in the contract. traded on, or subject to the rules of,2) You perform more than 750At-risk rules:Rules that limit the a qualified board or exchange.c) Any other transaction that hours of services during theamount of loss you may deduct to is marketed or sold as pro- year in real property trades orMarked to market rule: Thethe amount you risk losing in the ducing capital gains from a businesses in which you ma-treatment of each section 1256activity. transaction described in terially participate.contract ( defined later) held by a(1).Basis: Basis is the amount of taxpayer at the close of the year as
your investment in property for tax Portfolio income:Gross incomeif it were sold for its fair marketpurposes. The basis of property from interest, dividends, annuities,value on the last business day ofDemand loan: A loan payable inyou buy is usually the cost. Basis is or royalties that is not derived in thefull at any time upon demand by thethe year.used to figure gain or loss on the ordinary course of a trade or busi-lender.sale or disposition of investment ness. It includes gains from theMarket discount: The stated re-
property. sale or trade of property (other thanDividend: A distribution of demption price of a bond at matur-
an interest in a passive activity)money or other property made by aity minus your basis in the bondBelow-market loan: A demand producing portfolio income or heldcorporation to its shareholders outimmediately after you acquire it.loan (defined later) on which inter- for investment.of its earnings and profits. Market discount arises when theest is payable at a rate below the value of a debt obligation de-applicable federal rate, or a term Premium: The amount by whichEquity option:Any option: creases after its issue date. your cost or other basis in a bondloan where the amount loaned is
1) To buy or sell stock, or right after you get it is more thanmore than the present value of all Market discount bond: Any
the total of all amounts payable onpayments due under the loan. bond having market discount ex-2) That is valued directly or indi- the bond after you get it (other thancept:rectly by reference to anyCall: An option that entitles the payments of qualified stated inter-stock or narrow-based secur-purchaser to buy, at any time est).1) Short-term obligations withity index.before a specified future date, fixed maturity dates of up to 1Private activity bond:A bondproperty such as a stated number year from the date of issue,that is part of a state or local gov-Fair market value:The price atof shares of stock at a specified
ernment bond issue of which:which property would change 2) Tax-exempt obligations thatprice.
hands between a willing buyer and you bought before May 1,
1) More than 10% of the pro-Cash method: An accounting a willing seller, both having reason-1993, ceeds are to be used for amethod under which you report able knowledge of the relevant 3) U.S. savings bonds, and private business use, andyour income in the year in whichfacts.
you actually or constructively re- 4) Certain installment obliga- 2) More than 10% of the pay-Forgone interest: The amountceive it. You generally deduct your tions. ment of the principal or inter-of interest that would be payable forexpenses in the year you pay them. est is:any period if interest accrued at theNominee: A person who re-Commodities trader: A person applicable federal rate and was a) Secured by an interest inceives, in his or her name, incomewho is actively engaged in tradingpayable annually on December 31, property to be used for athat actually belongs to someonesection 1256 contracts and is regis-minus any interest payable on the private business use (orelse.tered with a domestic board of loan for that period. payments for the property),trade designated as a contract orNonequity option: Any listedmarket by the Commodities Fu- Forward contract:A contract tooption that is not an equity option,b) Derived from payments fortures Trading Commission. deliver a substantially fixed amountsuch as debt options, commodity property (or borrowedof property (including cash) for afutures options, currency options,Commodity future: A contract money) used for a privatesubstantially fixed price. and broad-based stock index op-made on a commodity exchange, business use.
tions.calling for the sale or purchase of aFutures contract: An
fixed amount of a commodity at aexchange-traded contract to buy orOptions dealer:Any person reg- Put: An option that entitles thefuture date for a fixed price. sell a specified commodity or finan-istered with an appropriate nationalpurchaser to sell, at any timecial instrument at a specified pricesecurities exchange as a marketConversion transaction: Any before a specified future date,at a specified future date. See alsotransaction that you entered into maker or specialist in listed op- property such as a stated numberCommodity future.after April 30, 1993 that meets both tions. of shares of stock at a specified
of these tests. Gift loan:Any below-market loan price.Original issue discount (OID):where the forgone interest is in the
The amount by which the stated1) Substantially all of your ex- Real estate mortgage invest-nature of a gift.
redemption price at maturity of apected return from the trans- ment conduit (REMIC): An en-
debt instrument is more than its is-Interest:Compensation for theaction is due to the time value tity that is formed for the purpose of
sue price.of your net investment. use or forbearance of money. holding a fixed pool of mortgages
Page 70

Page 71 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
secured by interests in real prop-Restricted stock:Stock you get borrow the property to deliver to a b) Does not participate in cor-
for services you perform that is buyer and, at a later date, you buy porate growth to any sig-erty, with multiple classes of inter-
nontransferable and is subject to a substantially identical property and nificant extent, andests held by investors. These
substantial risk of forfeiture. deliver it to the lender.interests may be either regular or c) Has a fixed redemptionresidual. price.Section 1256 contract:Any: Straddle: Generally, a set of off-
setting positions on personal prop-Regulated futures contract:A 1) Regulated futures contract,erty. A straddle may consist of asection 1256 contract that: Term loan: Any loan that is not apurchased option to buy and a pur-2) Foreign currency contract as demand loan.1) Provides that amounts that chased option to sell on the samedefined in chapter 4 under
number of shares of the security,must be deposited to, or may Wash sale: A sale of stock or se-Section 1256 Contracts
with the same exercise price andbe withdrawn from, your mar- curities at a loss within 30 daysMarked to Market,
period.gin account depend on daily before or after you buy or acquire in3) Nonequity option,market conditions (a system a fully taxable trade, or acquire aStripped preferred stock:Stockof marking to market), and contract or option to buy, substan-4) Dealer equity option, or that meets the following tests.tially identical stock or securities.2) Is traded on, or subject to the5) Dealer securities futures con-
1) There has been a separationrules of, a qualified board of tract.
in ownership between theexchange, such as a domes-
stock and any dividend on thetic board of trade designatedSecurities futures contract:A stock that has not becomeas a contract market by thecontract of sale for future deliverypayable.Commodity Futures Trading of a single security or of a
Commission or any board of narrow-based security index. 2) The stock:
trade or exchange approved
by the Secretary of the Trea-Short sale:The sale of property a) Is limited and preferred as
sury. that you generally do not own. You to dividends, ■
Page 71

Page 72 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
State or local government . . . Original issue 1116 ............... 1 7A
................. 1 1 discount (OID)..... 11, 12 1120 ............... 2 5Accounting fees.......... 3 2
Sales or redemptions.... 4 6 1120-A .............. 2 5Stripped........... 11, 14Accrual method...... 7 ,  16, 34
Short-term obligations.... 1 5 2439 ............... 1 9Traded flat............. 6Accuracy-related penalty . . . 4, 28 Stripped bonds and 3115 ................ 7U.S. savings.........7 ,  1 7Acquisition discount . . 15, 42, 46 coupons ............ 1 4 4684 ............... 4 7U.S. Treasury.... 11, 44, 50Acquisition premium....... 1 3 4797 ............... 4 3DividendBrokerage fees.......... 3 3Adjusted basis.......... 4 0 4952 ............. 31, 34reinvestment
Alaska Permanent 6198 ............... 6 1plan ........... 19, 32, 41
Fund dividends . . . 21, 30, 31C 6781 ............. 38, 56Dividends:
Amortization of bond 8271 ............... 2 7Calls and puts........... 5 4 Exempt-interest........ 2 1
premium ............. 3 1 8275 ............... 2 8Capital assets........... 4 6 Extraordinary.......... 5 2
Annuities: 8 2 7 5 – R ............. 2 8Form 1099–DIV ........ 1 9Capital gain
Borrowing on.......... 3 3 8582 .......... 24, 25, 61How to report.......... 2 1distributions...... 19, 22, 31
Bought with life 8615 ................ 3Incorrect Form 1099..... 1 9Capital gain taxinsurance proceeds.... 1 1 8814 ..............3 ,  3 1Insurance policies....... 2 1computation........... 6 2Interest on...........6 ,  4 8 8815 ..............9 ,  1 8Nominees ............ 2 2Capital gains and losses:Nontaxable trades...... 4 4 8818 ............... 1 0On restricted stock...... 2 1Constructive ownershipSale of.............. 4 8 8824 ............... 4 3On stock sold.......... 1 9transactions......... 4 8Single-premium........ 3 3 8832 ............... 2 5Ordinary............. 1 9Investment property..... 4 6Trade for............. 3 6 S S – 4............... 2 4Patronage............ 2 1Long term.......... 50, 61 W–8BEN ............. 4Appreciated financial Payments in lieu of...... 5 2Losses, limit on........ 6 2 W – 9 ................ 3position.............. 3 7 Received in January..... 1 9Reporting............ 6 1 Fractional shares....... 20, 41Assistance (See Tax help) ReinvestmentShort term.......... 50, 61 plans......... 19, 32, 41 Free tax services......... 6 9At-risk rules.......... 29, 61 Capital loss carryover...... 6 2 Scrip ............... 2 1 Frozen deposits.........6 ,  1 8Attorney fees........... 3 2 Cash method ....... 7 ,  16, 34 Stock ............. 41, 50 Futures contract, regulated . . 37Automatic Certificate of deposit...... 1 3 Vs. sale or trade........ 3 6investment Children: Divorce ............... 4 4service......... 32, 41, 50 Gifts to............... 4 G
Investment income of..... 3 Gains and losses:EOwner of U.S. savingsB Deposits............. 4 7Education Savings Bondbond ............... 8Backup withholding........ 3 Gains on sales orProgram .............. 9Related parties......... 4 5 trades............. 42, 44Bad debts.............. 5 0 Employee stock ownershipClerical help............ 3 3 Gifts............ 40, 50, 51Bargain purchases........ 3 9 plan, Stock sold to...... 5 8Collateralized debt Glossary .............. 7 0Basis: Empowerment zone ....... 6 0obligations (CDOs).... 23, 24Adjusted............. 4 0 Endowment contract.... 13, 33Comments .............. 2Cost ................ 3 9
HEstate income received byCommissions, trustee’s..... 3 3Discounted debt
beneficiary............ 3 Hedging transactions.... 39, 48Commodity futures...... 48, 50instruments......... 4 2
Expenses of producing Help (See Tax help)Investment property..... 3 9 Community property........ 8
income .............. 3 2Other than cost........ 3 9 Holding period:Constructive ownership
Real estate investment Investment property..... 5 0transactions........... 4 8
trust (REIT)......... 1 9 Straddles............ 5 7Constructive receipt....... 1 6 FREMIC, residual interest . . 23 How to report:Constructive sales........ 3 7 Face-amount certificates.... 1 3Stocks and bonds . . 19, 20, 40 Bond premiumConversion transactions.... 4 8 Fair market value....... 39, 42Bearer obligations...... 13, 47 amortization......... 3 2Convertible stocks and Federal guarantee on Capital gains and losses . . 61Bonds: bonds ............... 4 3 bonds ............... 1 1 Dividend income........ 2 1Accrued interest on...... 1 8 Corporate distributions: Fees to buy or sell........ 3 3 Interest income........ 1 6Amortization of premium . . 31 Capital gain........... 1 9 Financial asset Investment expenses.... 3 4Arbitrage............. 1 2 Dividends............ 1 9 securitization investment Nonbusiness bad debts . . . 51Basis ............... 4 0 Liquidating......... 20, 42 trust (FASIT).......... 2 4 Positions............. 5 6Capital asset.......... 4 6 Nontaxable ........... 1 9 Foreign currency Rollover of gain...... 59, 60Convertible........... 4 3 Return of capital........ 1 9 transactions......... 37, 55 S corporation income,Coupon .............. 1 6 Stock rights......... 20, 41 Foreign income........... 2 etc................ 2 4Coupons, stripped...... 1 4 Undistributed capital Sales of SBIC stock..... 4 9Federally guaranteed.... 1 1 Form:gains.............. 1 9 Section 1256 contractsMarket discount . . . 12, 14, 42, 1041 ............... 2 5Cost basis............. 3 9 and straddles........ 3 847, 61 1065 ............... 2 5
Wash sales ........... 5 3Mortgage revenue...... 1 2 1066 (Schedule Q).... 23, 33
New York Liberty....... 1 2 1096 ............. 18, 22DPremiums on .......... 4 2 1 0 9 9 – B ...........36, 61Day traders............ 6 8 IPrivate activity......... 1 2 1 0 9 9 – D I V..........19, 21
Decedents ......... 8 ,  36, 62 Income from sourcesRedemption or 1099–INT ......5 ,  9 ,  16, 23,
Demutualization......... 4 4 outside the U.S.......... 2retirement of......... 3 6 24
Deposits, loss on......... 4 7 Indian tribal government.... 1 1Registered ......... 11, 47 1099–MISC ........ 19, 52
Discount on debt instruments:Sold between interest 1099–OID ....... 13, 17, 23, Inherited property:
Market discount . . . 12, 14, 42,dates.............. 1 1 24 Basis of ............. 4 0
47, 61State and local......... 4 6 1 0 9 9 – S ............. 6 1 Holding period......... 5 0
Page 72

Page 73 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Installment sales........5 ,  6 1Long-term capital gains Original issue Installment sale ........ 6 1
and losses.......... 61, 62 discount (OID) .... 11, 12, 18, Lost, stolen, etc., cost ofInsurance:
42 replacing........... 3 3Loss on deposits......... 4 7Borrowing on.......... 3 3
Rollover of gain from sale . . .Dividends on.......... 2 1 Losses on sales or trades:
................. 5 9Dividends, interest on..... 5 How to figure.......... 4 2 P Worthless....... 36, 49, 51Interest option on....... 1 1 Passive activities . . 26, 29, 31Passive activity..... 24, 25, 26,Securities futures contracts . . 53Life, interest on loan to Related parties ......... 4 5 29, 31, 61b u y............... 3 3 Small business Self-employment....... 25, 39Penalty:investment companyLife, paid to beneficiary . . . 11 Seller-financed mortgage . . . 18Accuracy-related......4 ,  2 8stock.............. 4 9Prepaid premiums....... 5 Short sales:Backup withholding....... 4Small business stock..... 4 9Single-premium life...... 3 3 Adjusted basis......... 4 2Failure to pay tax....... 2 8Wash sales ........... 5 2Trades .............. 4 4 Defined.............. 5 1Failure to supply SSN..... 3Interest expenses: Expenses of .......... 3 3On early withdrawals....5 ,  1 9
Allocation............ 2 9 Extraordinary dividends . . . 52SubstantialMCarry forward.......... 3 0 Puts ................ 5 4understatement....... 2 8Mark-to-market election.... 6 8Investment ........... 2 9 SBIC stock ........... 4 9Valuation misstatement . . . 28Marked to market...... 37, 38Limit on investment Substitute payments..... 5 2Portfolio income......... 2 9Market discountinterest............ 3 0 Wash sales ........... 5 3Position:bonds .......... 12, 14, 42,Margin accounts........ 3 0 Short-term capitalAppreciated financial..... 3 747, 61Mixed straddle account gains and losses..... 61, 62Defined.............. 5 5Maximum tax rate, netpositions........... 5 8 Short-term obligations..... 1 5Holding period......... 5 7capital gain........... 6 2Paid in advance........ 3 0 Sixty/forty rule........... 3 8Offsetting............ 5 5Passive activity losses.... 3 1 Meetings, expenses of Successor............ 5 6 Small businessattending............. 3 3Straddles............ 3 4 investment companyPreferred stock:Unstated............. 3 9 Money market certificates.... 5 stock ............. 49, 59Nonqualified.......... 4 3Interest income: Money market funds....... 1 9 Redemption premium .... 2 0 Small businessFrozen deposits.......6 ,  1 8More information (See Tax help) Stripped............. 2 2 stock .......... 49, 50, 59How to report.......... 1 6 Mortgage: Premiums on bonds..... 31, 42 Social security:In general............. 4 Revenue bonds ........ 1 2 Investment club earnings . . 25Public utility stockOn condemnation award . . . 5 Secondary liability on Number .............. 3reinvestment.......... 4 1On insurance dividends.... 5 home .............. 5 1 Specialized small businessPublications (See Tax help)On seller-financed Seller-financed......... 1 8 investment company..... 5 9Puts and calls........... 5 4mortgage ........... 1 8 Municipal bonds......... 1 1 Spouses:On tax refund........... 5 Mutual funds....... 19, 33, 41, Related parties......... 4 5Tax-exempt ........... 1 1 Q50 Transfers between.... 40, 44Taxable .............. 5 Qualified 5–year gain...... 6 2 State or local governmentUsurious.............. 6 Qualified small business obligations............ 1 1When to report......... 1 6 N stock ............... 5 9 Stock:Investment clubs......... 2 4 Nominee distributions: Basis ............. 20, 40Investment expenses: Dividends .......... 19, 22 Capital asset.......... 4 6RInterest.............5 ,  1 8Deductible............ 3 2 Constructive ownership . . . 45Real estateOriginal issue discount . . . 13From pass-through Convertible........... 4 3investment trustentities............ 3 3 Nonbusiness bad debts.... 5 0 Dividends.......... 20, 41(REIT) ......... 19, 41, 50How to report.......... 3 4 Noncapital assets........ 4 6 Fractional shares..... 20, 41Real estate mortgage investmentInterest.............. 2 9 Nondeductible investment Identification.......... 4 1conduits (REMICs):Limits on deductions..... 2 9 expenses ............ 3 3 Installment sale........ 6 1Regular interest........ 2 3Nondeductible......... 3 3 Nonqualified preferred Nonqualified preferred.... 4 3Residual interest..... 23, 53Investment income......... 3 stock ............... 4 3 Public utility,Recordkeeping ......3 ,  10, 40,Investment income, children . . 3Nontaxable corporate reinvestment......... 4 149Investment property: distributions......... 19, 22 Qualified small business . . 59Registration of bonds.... 11, 47Basis ............... 3 9 Nontaxable trades...... 43, 50 Redemption of ......... 3 6Regulated futures contract . . 37Defined.............. 2 9 Rights.......... 20, 41, 46,Notes: Related parties..... 34, 44, 55Gain or loss treatment.... 4 6 50Of individuals, bought at Repossession of realSales and trades....... 3 6 Rollover of gain from sale . . .discount............ 4 7 property............. 5 0IRAs .................. 5 ................. 5 9Redemption or
Rollover of gain from sale S corporation.......... 4 2retirement of......... 3 6
of securities........... 5 9 Section 1202.......... 6 0U.S. Treasury.... 11, 44, 50
J Small business (section
Joint accounts............ 4 1244) ............. 4 9SO Small BusinessS corporations........... 2 4Office expenses......... 3 3 InvestmentSafe deposit box......... 3 3L Company ......... 49, 59Options: Sales and trades ofLife insurance companies, Sold or traded......... 4 0Calls and puts......... 5 4 investment property..... 3 6demutualization........ 4 4 Splits............... 4 1Cash settlement........ 5 4 Savings bonds .........7 ,  1 7Like-kind exchanges.... 43, 44 Straddle rules......... 5 5Dealer equity.......... 3 8
Scrip dividends.......... 2 1Liquidating Stripped preferred....... 2 2Deep-in-the-money...... 5 6
Section 1202 gain........ 6 3distributions...... 20, 22, 42 Surrender of.......... 3 6Gain or loss........... 5 3
Section 1244 stock....... 4 9 Trades .............. 4 3Holding period......... 5 0Loans:
Nonequity............ 3 7 Section 1256Below-market........... 6 Straddles:
Qualified covered call.... 5 6 contracts........ 37, 50, 54,Gift and demand......... 6 Deferral of loss from..... 5 5
Section 1256 contracts . . . 54 61Guarantees ........... 5 1 Identified............. 5 6
Wash sales ........... 5 2Nonbusiness bad debt.... 5 1 Securities: Interest expense and
Term ................ 6 Ordinary gains and losses . . . 45 Holding period......... 5 0 carrying charges...... 3 4
Page 73

Page 74 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mixed ............. 52, 57 State or local Stock ............... 4 3 Usurious interest.......... 6
Reporting............ 6 1 government Taxable ............. 3 9
obligations.......... 1 1 U.S. Treasury notes orStripped bonds and WStripped bonds and bonds ............. 4 4coupons ........... 11, 14 Wash sales:coupons .......... 11, 14 Treasury bills, notes, andStripped preferred stock.... 2 2 Holding period......... 5 0Taxes: bonds ............... 1 0Suggestions............. 2 Loss deferral rules,State and local transfer . . . 33Trust income received by straddles........... 5 6State income.......... 3 4 beneficiary............ 3 Loss disallowed........ 5 2T Taxpayer Advocate....... 6 9 Trustee’s commission, When to report interestTax help............... 6 9 Traders in securities....... 6 8 revocable trust......... 3 3 income .............. 1 6Tax refund, interest on...... 5 Trades: TTY/TDD information ...... 6 9 Worthless securities . . 36, 49, 51Tax shelters............ 2 6 Insurance............ 4 4
Tax-exempt income, ■Investment property for Uexpenses of........... 3 3 annuity ............ 3 6 U.S. savings bonds......7 ,  1 7Tax-exempt interest: Like-kind........... 43, 44 U.S. Treasury bills,Reporting........ 5 ,  16, 21 Nontaxable ...... 39, 43, 50 notes, and bonds . . 10, 44, 50
Page 74

Page 75 of 75 of Publication 550 9:25 -  6-NOV-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2003
Highlights of 2002 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Tax Benefits for Work-Related
Education
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Scholarships and Fellowships
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Day-Care Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000
The Taxpayer Advocate Service
of the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
508
514
516
517
519
520
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
534
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet fo r Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit (For Individuals Sent
Here From the Form 1040 or
1040A Instructions)
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs)969
Installment Agreement Request9465 14842
Page 75