Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 10  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 118  12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550
Investment 
Income and 
Expenses
(Including Capital Gains 
and Losses)
For use in preparing
2024 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Contents
Future Developments ....................... 1
Reminders ............................... 2
Introduction .............................. 2
Chapter 1. Investment Income ............... 2
General Information ...................... 3
Interest Income .......................... 6
Discount on Debt Instruments .............. 18
When T o Report Interest Income............ 23
How T o Report Interest Income............. 24
Dividends and Other Distributions ........... 27
How T o Report Dividend Income............ 33
Stripped Preferred Stock .................. 35
REMICs, FASIT s, and Other CDOs........... 35
S Corporations ......................... 37
Investment Clubs ....................... 37
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters and Other Reportable 
Transactions .......................... 39
Abusive T ax Shelters..................... 39
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses ............ 44
Limits on Deductions .................... 45
Interest Expenses ....................... 45
Bond Premium Amortization ............... 49
Nondeductible Interest Expenses ............ 50
How T o Report Investment Interest Expenses... 51
When T o Report Investment Expenses........ 52
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of 
Investment Property .................... 52
What Is a Sale or T rade?.................. 53
Basis of Investment Property ............... 59
How T o Figure Gain or Loss................ 66
Nontaxable T rades...................... 70
T ransfers Between Spouses ............... 73
Related Party T ransactions................ 73
Capital Gains and Losses ................. 75
Reporting Capital Gains and Losses ........ 100
Special Rules for T raders in Securities or 
Commodities ....................... 105
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help ............ 106
Index ................................. 114
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments related to 
Pub. 550, such as legislation enacted after it was 
published, go to IRS.gov/Pub550.
Publication 550 (2024)  Catalog Number 15093R
Feb 14, 2025 Department of the T reasury  Internal Revenue Service  www.irs.gov

Page 2 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reminders
Foreign source income. If you are a U.S. citizen with in-
vestment income from sources outside the United States 
(foreign income), you must report that income on your tax 
return unless it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether 
you reside inside or outside the United States and 
whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the foreign 
payer.
Employee stock options.  If you received an option to 
buy or sell stock or other property as payment for your 
services, see Pub. 525, T axable and Nontaxable Income, 
for the special tax rules that apply.
Disaster relief.  Relief is available for those affected by 
some disasters. See IRS.gov/DisasterT axRelief.
Photographs of missing children.  The Internal Reve-
nue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for 
Missing & Exploited Children® (NCMEC) . Photographs of 
missing children selected by the Center may appear in 
this publication on pages that would otherwise be blank. 
Y ou can help bring these children home by looking at the 
photographs and calling 800 -THE-LOST (800 -843-5678) 
if you recognize a child.
Introduction
This publication provides information on the tax treatment 
of investment income and expenses. It includes informa-
tion on the tax treatment of investment income and expen-
ses for individual shareholders of mutual funds or other 
regulated investment companies, such as money market 
funds. It explains what investment income is taxable and 
what investment expenses are deductible. It explains 
when and how to show these items on your tax return. It 
also explains how to determine and report gains and los-
ses on the disposition of investment property and provides 
information on property trades and tax shelters.
The glossary at the end of this publication defines 
many of the terms used.
Investment income.  This generally includes interest, 
dividends, capital gains, and other types of distributions 
including mutual fund distributions.
Investment expenses. These include interest paid or in-
curred to acquire investment property and expenses to 
manage or collect income from investment property.
Qualified retirement plans and IRAs.  The rules in this 
publication do not apply to investments held in individual 
retirement arrangements (IRAs), section 401(k) plans, and 
other qualified retirement plans. The tax rules that apply to 
retirement plan distributions are explained in the following 
publications.
• Pub. 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business.
• Pub. 571, T ax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b) Plans).
TIP
• Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity Income.
• Pub. 590-A, Contributions to Individual Retirement Ar-
rangements (IRAs).
• Pub. 590-B, Distributions from Individual Retirement 
Arrangements (IRAs).
• Pub. 721, T ax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Retirement 
Benefits.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and suggestions for future 
editions.
Y ou can send us comments through IRS.gov/
FormComments. Or, you can write to the Internal Revenue 
Service, T ax Forms and Publications, 1111 Constitution 
Ave. NW, IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will 
consider your comments and suggestions as we revise 
our tax forms, instructions, and publications. Don’t send 
tax questions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
Getting answers to your tax questions.  If you have 
a tax question not answered by this publication or the How 
T o Get T ax Help section at the end of this publication, go 
to the IRS Interactive T ax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the search 
feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/Forms to download current and prior -year 
forms, instructions, and publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to order current forms, instruc-
tions, and publications; call 800 -829-3676 to order 
prior-year forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon as possible. 
Don’t resubmit requests you’ve already sent us. Y ou can 
get forms and publications faster online.
1.
Investment Income
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• Interest Income,
• Discount on Debt Instruments,
• When T o Report Interest Income,
• How T o Report Interest Income,
• Dividends and Other Distributions,
2 Publication 550 (2024)

Page 3 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• How T o Report Dividend Income,
• Stripped Preferred Stock,
• Real estate mortgage investment conduits (REMICs), 
financial asset securitization investment trusts 
(FASIT s), and other collateralized debt obligations 
(CDOs),
• S Corporations, and
• Investment Clubs.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
519 U.S. T ax Guide for Aliens
525 T axable and Nontaxable Income
537 Installment Sales
541 Partnerships
542 Corporations
555 Community Property
559 Survivors, Executors, and Administrators
590-B Distributions from Individual Retirement 
Arrangements (IRAs)
925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
938 Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduits 
(REMICs) Reporting Information (And Other 
Collateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs))
939 General Rule for Pensions and Annuities
970 T ax Benefits for Education
1212 Guide to Original Issue Discount (OID) 
Instruments
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and Ordinary 
Dividends
Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains and Losses
Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) Beneficiary's Share of 
Income, Deductions, Credits, etc.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) Partner's Share of 
Income, Deductions, Credits, etc.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120-S) Shareholder's Share 
of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc.
Schedule Q (Form 1066) Quarterly Notice to 
Residual Interest Holder of REMIC T axable 
Income or Net Loss Allocation
SS-4 Application for Employer Identification Number
W-2 Wage and T ax Statement
W-8BEN Certificate of Foreign Status of Beneficial 
Owner for United States T ax Withholding and 
Reporting (Individuals)
  519
  525
  537
  541
  542
  555
  559
  590-B
  925
  938
  939
  970
  1212
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
  Schedule B (Form 1040)
  Schedule D (Form 1040)
  Schedule K-1 (Form 1041)
  Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)
  Schedule K-1 (Form 1120-S)
  Schedule Q (Form 1066)
  SS-4 
  W-2 
  W-8BEN 
W-9 Request for T axpayer Identification Number and 
Certification
1040 U.S. Individual Income T ax Return
1040-SR U.S. Income T ax Return for Seniors
1041 U.S. Income T ax Return for Estates and T rusts
1065 U.S. Return of Partnership Income
1096 Annual Summary and T ransmittal of U.S. 
Information Returns
1099-DIV Dividends and Distributions
1099-INT Interest Income
1099-MISC Miscellaneous Information
1099-OID Original Issue Discount
1099-PATR T axable Distributions Received From 
Cooperatives
1099-R Distributions From Pensions, Annuities, 
Retirement or Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, 
Insurance Contracts, etc.
1099 General Instructions General Instructions for 
Certain Information Returns
1120 U.S. Corporation Income T ax Return
2439 Notice to Shareholder of Undistributed 
Long-T erm Capital Gains
3115 Application for Change in Accounting Method
6251 Alternative Minimum T ax — Individuals
8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
8615 T ax for Certain Children Who Have Unearned 
Income
8814 Parents' Election T o Report Child's Interest and 
Dividends
8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series EE and I U.S. 
Savings Bonds Issued After 1989
8818 Optional Form T o Record Redemption of 
Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued 
After 1989
8824 Like-Kind Exchanges
8832 Entity Classification Election
8912 Credit to Holders of T ax Credit Bonds
8949 Sales and Other Dispositions of Capital Assets
8960 Net Investment Income T ax—Individuals, 
Estates, and T rusts
8997 Initial and Annual Statement of Qualified 
Opportunity Fund (QOF) Investments
See chapter 5, How T o Get T ax Help, for information about 
getting these publications and forms.
General Information
A few items of general interest are covered here.
  W-9 
  1040 
  1040-SR 
  1041 
  1065 
  1096
  1099-DIV 
  1099-INT 
  1099-MISC 
  1099-OID 
  1099-PATR 
  1099-R 
  1099 General Instructions 
  1120 
  2439 
  3115 
  6251 
  8582 
  8615 
  8814 
  8815 
  8818 
  8824 
  8832 
  8912 
  8949 
  8960 
  8997 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 3

Page 4 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Recordkeeping. Y ou should keep a list of the 
sources and investment income amounts you re-
ceive during the year. Also, keep the forms you re-
ceive showing your investment income (Form 1099 -DIV , 
Form 1099 -INT , Form 1099–OID, etc.) as an important 
part of your records.
Net investment income tax (NIIT).  Y ou may be subject 
to the NIIT . The NIIT is a 3.8% tax on the lesser of your net 
investment income or the amount of your modified adjus-
ted gross income (MAGI) that is over a threshold amount 
based on your filing status.
Filing Status Threshold Amount
Married filing jointly $250,000
Married filing separately $125,000
Single $200,000
Head of household (with qualifying 
person)
$200,000
Qualifying surviving spouse with 
dependent child
$250,000
For more information, see Form 8960 and the Instruc-
tions for Form 8960.
Tax on unearned income of certain children.  Gener-
ally, a child must file Form 8615 if the child:
1. has more than $2,600 of unearned income;
2. is required to file a tax return;
3. meets certain age/earned-income/self-support 
thresholds;
4. has at least one parent alive at the end of the year; 
and
5. doesn’t file a joint return for the year.
See Form 8615 and its instructions for details.
However, the parent can choose to include the child's 
interest and dividends on the parent's return if certain re-
quirements are met. Use Form 8814 for this purpose.
Beneficiary of an estate or trust.  Interest, dividends, 
and other investment income you receive as a beneficiary 
of an estate or trust generally is taxable income. Y ou 
should receive a Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), from the fidu-
ciary. Y our copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) and its in-
structions will tell you where to report the income on your 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN).  Y ou must give 
your name and TIN (either a social security number 
(SSN), an employer identification number ( EIN), or an in-
dividual tax identification number (ITIN)) to any person re-
quired by federal tax law to make a return, statement, or 
other document that relates to you. This includes payers 
of interest and dividends. If you do not give your TIN to the 
payer, you may have to pay a penalty. In addition, if you do 
not provide a certified TIN on Form W -9, the payer must 
backup withhold on your interest payments at a rate of 
RECORDS
24%. Use Form W-9 to provide the necessary information. 
See Form W-9 and its instructions.
TIN for joint account. Generally, if the funds in a joint 
account belong to one person, list that person's name first 
on the account and give that person's TIN to the payer. 
(For information on who owns the funds in a joint account, 
see Joint accounts , later.) If the joint account contains 
combined funds, give the TIN of the person whose name 
is listed first on the account.
These rules apply both to joint ownership by a married 
couple and to joint ownership by other individuals. For ex-
ample, if you open a joint savings account with your child 
using funds belonging to the child, list the child's name 
first on the account and give the child's TIN.
Form W-9 and its instructions provide the following: If 
this Form W-9 is for a joint account (other than an account 
maintained by a foreign financial institution (FFI)), list first, 
and then circle, the name of the person or entity whose 
number you entered in Form W -9, Part I. If you are provid-
ing Form W-9 to an FFI to document a joint account, each 
holder of the account that is a U.S. person must provide a 
Form W-9. See Form W-9 and its instructions.
Custodian account for your child. If your child is the 
actual owner of an account that is recorded in your name 
as custodian for the child, give the child's TIN to the payer. 
For example, you must give your child's SSN to the payer 
of dividends on stock owned by your child, even though 
the dividends are paid to you as custodian.
Penalty for failure to supply TIN.  Y ou may be sub-
ject to a penalty if, when required, you fail to:
• Include your TIN on any return, statement, or other 
document;
• Give your TIN to another person who must include it 
on any return, statement, or other document; or
• Include the TIN of another person on any return, state-
ment, or other document.
The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maximum pen-
alty of $100,000 for any calendar year.
This penalty may be abated if you can show that your 
failure to provide the TIN was due to reasonable cause 
and not to willful neglect.
If you fail to supply a TIN in the manner required, you 
also may be subject to backup withholding.
Backup withholding. Y our investment income generally 
is not subject to regular withholding. However, it may be 
subject to backup withholding to ensure that income tax is 
collected on the income. The bank, broker, or other payer 
of interest, original issue discount (OID), dividends, cash 
patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold income 
tax on these reportable payments at a rate of 24% under 
backup withholding.
Backup withholding applies if:
1. Y ou do not give the payer your TIN in the required 
manner;
2. The IRS notifies the payer that you gave an incorrect 
TIN;
4 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 5 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. The IRS notifies the payer that you are subject to 
backup withholding on interest or dividends because 
you underreported interest or dividends on your in-
come tax return; or
4. Y ou are required, but fail, to certify that you are not 
subject to backup withholding for the reason descri-
bed in (3).
Certification. For new accounts paying interest or div-
idends, you must certify under penalties of perjury that 
your TIN is correct and that you are not subject to backup 
withholding. Y our payer will give you a Form W-9, or simi-
lar form, to make this certification. If you fail to make this 
certification, backup withholding may begin immediately 
on your new account or investment.
Underreported interest and dividends.  Y ou will be 
considered to have underreported your interest and divi-
dends if the IRS has determined for a tax year that:
• Y ou failed to include any part of a reportable interest or 
dividend payment required to be shown on your re-
turn, or
• Y ou were required to file a return and to include a re-
portable interest or dividend payment on that return, 
but you failed to file the return.
How to stop backup withholding due to underre-
porting. If you have been notified that you underreported 
interest or dividends, you can request a determination 
from the IRS to prevent backup withholding from starting 
or to stop backup withholding once it has begun. Y ou must 
show that at least one of the following situations applies.
• No underreporting occurred.
• Y ou have a bona fide dispute with the IRS about 
whether underreporting occurred.
• Backup withholding will cause or is causing an undue 
hardship, and it is unlikely that you will underreport in-
terest and dividends in the future.
• Y ou have corrected the underreporting by filing a re-
turn if you did not previously file one and by paying all 
taxes, penalties, and interest due for any underrepor-
ted interest or dividend payments.
If the IRS determines that backup withholding should 
stop, it will provide you with a certification and will notify 
the payers who were sent notices earlier.
How to stop backup withholding due to an incor-
rect TIN. If the IRS notifies a payer that your TIN is incor-
rect, the payer must contact you and ask you to provide 
your correct TIN. Follow the instructions provided by the 
payer to prevent or stop backup withholding.
Reporting backup withholding.  If backup withhold-
ing is deducted from your interest or dividend income or 
other reportable payment, the bank or other business 
must give you an information return for the year (for exam-
ple, a Form 1099-INT) indicating the amount withheld. The 
information return will show any backup withholding as 
“Federal income tax withheld.”
Nonresident aliens.  Generally, payments made to 
nonresident aliens are not subject to backup withholding. 
Y ou can use Form W-8BEN to certify exempt status. How-
ever, this does not exempt you from the 30% (or lower 
treaty) withholding rate that may apply to your investment 
income. For information on the 30% rate, see Pub. 519.
Penalties. There are civil and criminal penalties for 
giving false information to avoid backup withholding. The 
civil penalty is $500. The criminal penalty, upon convic-
tion, is a fine of up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 
year, or both.
Where to report investment income.  T able 1-1 gives 
an overview of the forms and schedules to use to report 
some common types of investment income. But see the 
rest of this publication for detailed information about re-
porting investment income.
Joint accounts.  If two or more persons hold property 
(such as a savings account, bond, or stock) as joint ten-
ants, tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common, each 
person's share of any interest or dividends from the prop-
erty is determined by local law.
Community property states.  If you are married and re-
ceive a distribution that is community income, half of the 
distribution generally is considered to be received by each 
spouse. If you file separate returns, you must each report 
one-half of any taxable distribution. See Pub. 555 for more 
information on community income.
If the distribution is not considered community property 
and you and your spouse file separate returns, each of 
you must report your separate taxable distributions.
Example. Y ou and your spouse have a joint money 
market account. Under state law, half the income from the 
account belongs to you, and half belongs to your spouse. 
If you file separate returns, you each report half the in-
come.
Income from property given to a child.  Property you 
give as a parent to your child under the Model Gifts of Se-
curities to Minors Act, the Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or 
any similar law becomes the child's property.
Income from the property is taxable to the child, except 
that any part used to satisfy a legal obligation to support 
the child is taxable to the parent or guardian having that 
legal obligation.
Savings account with parent as trustee.  Interest in-
come from a savings account opened for a minor child, 
but placed in the name and subject to the order of the pa-
rents as trustees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of 
the state in which the child resides, both of the following 
are true.
• The savings account legally belongs to the child.
• The parents are not legally permitted to use any of the 
funds to support the child.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 5

Page 6 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income 
(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this publication, especially How 
T o Report Interest Income and How T o Report Dividend Income in chapter 1.)
T able 1-1. 
Type of Income If you file Form 1040 or 1040-SR, report on ...
T ax-exempt interest Line 2a (See the instructions there.)
T axable interest Line 2b (See the instructions there.)
Savings bond interest you will exclude because of higher 
education expenses
Schedule B; also use Form 8815.
Qualified dividends Line 3a (See the instructions there.)
Ordinary dividends Line 3b (See the instructions there.)
Capital gain distributions Line 7, or, if required, Schedule D, line 13. (See the instructions 
of Form 1040 or 1040-SR.)
Section 1250, 1202, or collectibles gain (Form 1099-DIV , box 2b, 
2c, or 2d)
See the Form 1099-DIV Instructions for Recipient.
Nondividend distributions (Form 1099-DIV , box 3) Generally not reported.
Undistributed capital gains (Form 2439, boxes 1a–1d) See the Form 2439 Instructions for the Shareholder.
Gain or loss from sales of stocks or bonds Line 7; also use Form 8949, Schedule D, and the Qualified 
Dividends and Capital Gain T ax Worksheet or the Schedule D 
T ax Worksheet.
Gain or loss from exchanges of like-kind investment property Line 7; also use Schedule D, Form 8824, and the Qualified 
Dividends and Capital Gain T ax Worksheet or the Schedule D 
T ax Worksheet.
Accuracy-related penalty. An accuracy -related penalty 
of 20% can be charged for underpayments of tax due to 
negligence or disregard of rules or regulations or substan-
tial understatement of tax. For information on the penalty 
and any interest that applies, see Penalties in chapter 2.
Interest Income
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Accrual method
 Below-market loan
 Cash method
 Demand loan
 Forgone interest
 Gift loan
 Interest
 Mutual fund
 Nominee
 Original issue discount
 Private activity bond
 T erm loan
 
This section discusses the tax treatment of different types 
of interest income.
In general, any interest that you receive or that is credi-
ted to your account and can be withdrawn is taxable in-
come. Exceptions to this rule are discussed later.
Form 1099-INT. Interest income generally is reported to 
you on Form 1099 -INT , or a similar statement, by banks, 
savings and loan associations, and other payers of inter-
est. This form shows you the interest you received during 
the year. Keep this form for your records. Y ou do not have 
to attach it to your tax return.
Report on your tax return the total interest income you 
receive for the tax year. See Form 1099 -INT , Instructions 
for Recipient to see whether you need to adjust any of the 
amounts reported to you.
Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT. Even if you 
do not receive a Form 1099-INT , you must still report all of 
your interest income. For example, you may receive dis-
tributive shares of interest from partnerships or S corpora-
tions. This interest is reported to you on Schedule K -1 
(Form 1065) and Schedule K-1 (Form 1120-S).
Nominees. Generally, if someone receives interest as 
a nominee for you, that person must give you a Form 
1099-INT showing the interest received on your behalf.
6 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 7 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you receive a Form 1099 -INT and interest as a nomi-
nee for another person, see the discussion on Nominee 
distributions, later.
Incorrect amount.  If you receive a Form 1099 -INT 
that shows an incorrect amount (or other incorrect infor-
mation), you should ask the issuer for a corrected form. 
The new Form 1099 -INT you receive should be denoted 
“Corrected.”
Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest income also may be 
shown on Form 1099 -OID. For more information about 
amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue Discount 
(OID), later in this chapter.
Exempt-interest dividends.  Form 1099 -DIV , box 12, 
shows exempt -interest dividends from a mutual fund or 
other regulated investment company (RIC) paid to you 
during the calendar year. See the Instructions for Form 
1040 or 1040-SR for where to report.
Form 1099 -DIV , box 13, shows exempt -interest divi-
dends subject to the alternative minimum tax (AMT). This 
amount is included in box 12. See the Instructions for 
Form 6251.
Interest on VA dividends.  Interest on insurance divi-
dends left on deposit with the Department of Veterans Af-
fairs (VA) is not taxable. This includes interest paid on divi-
dends on converted United States Government Life 
Insurance policies and on National Service Life Insurance 
policies.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).  Interest 
on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable. Interest on a tradi-
tional IRA is tax deferred. Y ou generally do not include it in 
your income until you make withdrawals from the IRA. See 
Pub. 590-B for more information.
Taxable Interest—General
T axable interest includes interest you receive from bank 
accounts, loans you make to others, and other sources. 
The following are some sources of taxable interest.
Dividends that are actually interest.  Certain distribu-
tions commonly called dividends are actually interest. Y ou 
must report as interest so -called “dividends” on deposits 
or on share accounts in:
• Cooperative banks,
• Credit unions,
• Domestic building and loan associations,
• Domestic savings and loan associations,
• Federal savings and loan associations, and
• Mutual savings banks.
The “dividends” will be shown as interest income on Form 
1099-INT .
Money market funds.  Money market funds are offered 
by nonbank financial institutions such as mutual funds and 
stock brokerage houses, and pay dividends. Generally, 
amounts you receive from money market funds should be 
reported as dividends, not as interest.
Certificates of deposit and other deferred interest ac-
counts. If you buy a certificate of deposit or open a defer-
red interest account, interest may be paid at fixed intervals 
of 1 year or less during the term of the account. Y ou gen-
erally must include this interest in your income when you 
actually receive it or are entitled to receive it without pay-
ing a substantial penalty. The same is true for accounts 
that mature in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single 
payment at maturity. If interest is deferred for more than 1 
year, see Original Issue Discount (OID), later.
Interest subject to penalty for early withdrawal.  If 
you withdraw funds from a deferred interest account be-
fore maturity, you may have to pay a penalty. Y ou must re-
port the total amount of interest paid or credited to your 
account during the year without subtracting the penalty. 
See Penalty on early withdrawal of savings, later, for more 
information on how to report the interest and deduct the 
penalty.
Money borrowed to invest in certificate of deposit. 
The interest you pay on money borrowed from a bank or 
savings institution to meet the minimum deposit required 
for a certificate of deposit from the institution and the inter-
est you earn on the certificate are two separate items. Y ou 
must report the total interest you earn on the certificate in 
your income. If you itemize deductions, you can deduct 
the interest you pay as investment interest, up to the 
amount of your net investment income. See Interest Ex-
penses in chapter 3.
Example. Y ou purchase a $10,000 certificate of de-
posit by borrowing $5,000 from the bank and adding an 
additional $5,000 of your funds. The certificate earned 
$575 at maturity in 2024, but you received only $265, 
which represented the $575 you earned minus $310 inter-
est charged on your $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a 
Form 1099 -INT for 2024 showing the $575 interest you 
earned. The bank also gives you a statement showing that 
you paid $310 interest for 2024. Y ou must include the 
$575 in your income. If you itemize your deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject to 
the net investment income limit.
Gift for opening account. If you receive noncash gifts or 
services for making deposits or for opening an account in 
a savings institution, the value may be reported to you as 
interest income on Form 1099 -INT and you may have to 
report it on your tax return.
For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or services val-
ued at more than $10 must be reported as interest. For 
deposits of $5,000 or more, gifts or services valued at 
more than $20 must be reported as interest. The value is 
determined by the cost to the financial institution.
Example. Y ou open a savings account at your local 
bank and deposit $800. The account earns $20 interest. 
Y ou also receive a $15 calculator. If no other interest is 
credited to your account during the year, the Form 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 7

Page 8 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1099-INT you receive will show $35 interest for the year. 
Y ou must report $35 interest income on your tax return.
Interest on insurance dividends.  Interest on insurance 
dividends left on deposit with an insurance company that 
can be withdrawn annually is taxable to you in the year it is 
credited to your account. However, if you can withdraw it 
only on the anniversary date of the policy (or other speci-
fied date), the interest is taxable in the year that date oc-
curs.
Prepaid insurance premiums. Any increase in the value 
of prepaid insurance premiums, advance premiums, or 
premium deposit funds is interest if it is applied to the pay-
ment of premiums due on insurance policies or made 
available for you to withdraw.
U.S. obligations.  Interest on U.S. obligations, such as 
U.S. T reasury bills, notes, and bonds, and obligations is-
sued by any agency or instrumentality of the United States 
is taxable for federal income tax purposes.
Interest on tax refunds.  Interest you receive on tax re-
funds is taxable income.
Interest on condemnation award.  If the condemning 
authority pays you interest to compensate you for a delay 
in payment of an award, the interest is taxable.
Installment sale payments.  If a contract for the sale or 
exchange of property provides for deferred payments, it 
also usually provides for interest payable with the deferred 
payments. Generally, that interest is taxable when you re-
ceive it. If little or no interest is provided for in a deferred 
payment contract, part of each payment may be treated as 
interest. See Unstated Interest and Original Issue Dis-
count (OID) in Pub. 537.
Interest on annuity contract.  Accumulated interest on 
an annuity contract you sell before its maturity date is tax-
able.
Usurious interest.  Usurious interest is interest charged 
at an illegal rate. This is taxable as interest unless state 
law automatically changes it to a payment on the principal.
Interest income on frozen deposits. Exclude from your 
gross income interest on frozen deposits. A deposit is fro-
zen if, at the end of the year, you cannot withdraw any part 
of the deposit because:
• The financial institution is, or may become, bankrupt 
or insolvent, or
• The state in which the institution is located has placed 
limits on withdrawals because other financial institu-
tions in the state are, or may become, bankrupt or in-
solvent.
The amount of interest you must exclude is the interest 
that was credited on the frozen deposits minus the sum of:
• The net amount you withdrew from these deposits 
during the year, and
• The amount you could have withdrawn as of the end 
of the year (not reduced by any penalty for premature 
withdrawals of a time deposit).
If you receive a Form 1099 -INT for interest income on de-
posits that were frozen at the end of 2024, see Frozen de-
posits, later, for information about reporting this interest in-
come exclusion on your tax return.
The interest you exclude is treated as credited to your 
account in the following year. Y ou must include it in in-
come in the year you can withdraw it.
Example. $100 of interest was credited on your frozen 
deposit during the year. Y ou withdrew $80 but could not 
withdraw any more as of the end of the year. Y ou must in-
clude $80 in your income and exclude $20 from your in-
come for the year. Y ou must include the $20 in your in-
come for the year you can withdraw it.
Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at a discount when 
interest has been defaulted or when the interest has ac-
crued but has not been paid, the transaction is described 
as trading a bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is 
not income and is not taxable as interest if paid later. 
When you receive a payment of that interest, it is a return 
of capital that reduces the remaining cost basis of your 
bond. Interest that accrues after the date of purchase, 
however, is taxable interest income for the year received 
or accrued. See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later 
in this chapter.
Below-Market Loans
Generally, a “below-market loan” means any loan if (a) in 
the case of a demand loan, interest is payable on the loan 
at a rate less than the applicable federal rate, or (b) in the 
case of a term loan, the amount loaned exceeds the 
present value (using a discount rate equal to the applica-
ble federal rate) of all payments due under the loan. (See 
Code section 7872 for details.) Section 7872 may con-
sider the borrower to pay the lender any forgone interest 
and the lender to pay that foregone interest to the bor-
rower. (See Code section 7872.) Thus, the lender may be 
compelled to recognize that foregone interest as income 
and the borrower may be able to deduct that foregone in-
terest as an expense if the loan proceeds are used for 
business or investment. The nature of the forgone interest 
that section 7872 considers the lender to return to the bor-
rower depends on the relationship between lender and 
borrower. It may be considered a gift, an investment, com-
pensation, etc. (See Code section 7872 for details.)
Loans subject to the rules.  The rules for below -market 
loans apply to:
• Gift loans,
• Compensation-related loans,
• Corporation-shareholder loans,
• T ax avoidance loans, and
• Certain loans made to qualified continuing care facili-
ties under a continuing care contract.
8 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 9 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A compensation-related loan is any below -market loan 
between an employer and an employee or between an in-
dependent contractor and a person for whom the contrac-
tor provides services.
A tax avoidance loan is any below -market loan where 
the avoidance of federal tax is one of the main purposes of 
the interest arrangement.
Forgone interest. For any period, forgone interest is:
• The amount of interest that would be payable for that 
period if interest accrued on the loan at the applicable 
federal rate and was payable annually on December 
31, minus
• Any interest actually payable on the loan for the pe-
riod.
Applicable federal rate.  Applicable federal rates are 
published by the IRS each month in the Internal Revenue 
Bulletin. The Internal Revenue Bulletin is available through 
IRS.gov/IRB. Y ou also can find applicable federal rates in 
the Index of Applicable Federal Rates (AFR) Rulings at 
https://irs.gov/applicable-federal-rates.
See chapter 5, How T o Get T ax Help, for other ways to 
get this information.
Rules for below-market loans. The rules that apply to a 
below-market loan depend on whether the loan is a gift 
loan, demand loan, or term loan.
Gift and demand loans. A gift loan is any below -mar-
ket loan where the forgone interest is in the nature of a gift.
A demand loan is a loan payable in full at any time upon 
demand by the lender. A demand loan is a below -market 
loan if no interest is charged or if interest is charged at a 
rate below the applicable federal rate.
A demand loan or gift loan that is a below -market loan 
generally is treated as an arm's -length transaction in 
which the lender is treated as having made:
• A loan to the borrower in exchange for a note that re-
quires the payment of interest at the applicable federal 
rate, and
• An additional payment to the borrower in an amount 
equal to the forgone interest.
The borrower generally is treated as transferring the addi-
tional payment back to the lender as interest. The lender 
must report that amount as interest income.
The lender's additional payment to the borrower is trea-
ted as a gift, dividend, contribution to capital, pay for serv-
ices, or other payment, depending on the substance of the 
transaction. The borrower may have to report this payment 
as taxable income, depending on its classification.
These transfers are considered to occur annually, gen-
erally on December 31.
Term loans. A term loan is any loan that is not a de-
mand loan. A term loan is a below -market loan if the 
amount of the loan is more than the present value of all 
payments due under the loan.
A lender who makes a below -market term loan other 
than a gift loan is treated as transferring an additional 
lump-sum cash payment to the borrower (as a dividend, 
contribution to capital, etc.) on the date the loan is made. 
The amount of this payment is the amount of the loan mi-
nus the present value, at the applicable federal rate, of all 
payments due under the loan. An equal amount is treated 
as original issue discount (OID). The lender must report 
the annual part of the OID as interest income. The bor-
rower may be able to deduct the OID as interest expense. 
See Original Issue Discount (OID), later.
Exceptions to the below -market loan rules.  Excep-
tions to the below-market loan rules are discussed here.
Exception for loans of $10,000 or less. The rules for 
below-market loans do not apply to any day on which the 
total outstanding amount of loans between the borrower 
and lender is $10,000 or less. This exception applies only 
to:
1. Gift loans between individuals if the gift loan is not di-
rectly used to buy or carry income-producing assets, 
and
2. Compensation-related loans or corporation-share-
holder loans if the avoidance of federal tax is not a 
principal purpose of the interest arrangement.
This exception does not apply to term loans. The gen-
eral below-market loan rules will continue to apply even if 
the outstanding balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.
Exception for loans to continuing care facilities. 
Loans to qualified continuing care facilities under continu-
ing care contracts are not subject to the rules for be-
low-market loans for the calendar year if the lender or the 
lender's spouse is age 65 or older at the end of the year. 
For the definitions of qualified continuing care facility and 
continuing care contract, see Internal Revenue Code 
7872(g)(4) and (h).
Exception for loans without significant tax effect. 
Loans are excluded from the below -market loan rules if 
their interest arrangements do not have a significant effect 
on the federal tax liability of the borrower or the lender. 
These loans include:
1. Loans made available by the lender to the general 
public on the same terms and conditions that are con-
sistent with the lender's customary business practice;
2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or municipal 
government that are made available under a program 
of general application to the public;
3. Certain employee-relocation loans;
4. Certain loans to or from a foreign person;
5. Gift loans to a charitable organization, contributions to 
which are deductible, if the total outstanding amount 
of loans between the organization and lender is 
$250,000 or less at all times during the tax year; and
6. Other loans on which the interest arrangement can be 
shown to have no significant effect on the federal tax 
liability of the lender or the borrower.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 9

Page 10 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For a loan described in (6) above, all the facts and cir-
cumstances are used to determine if the interest arrange-
ment has a significant effect on the federal tax liability of 
the lender or borrower. Some factors to be considered 
are:
• Whether items of income and deduction generated by 
the loan offset each other;
• The amount of these items;
• The cost to you of complying with the below-market 
loan rules, if they were to apply; and
• Any reasons other than taxes for structuring the trans-
action as a below-market loan.
If you structure a transaction to meet this exception and 
one of the principal purposes of that structure is the avoid-
ance of federal tax, the loan will be considered a 
tax-avoidance loan, and this exception will not apply.
Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of $100,000 
or less.  For gift loans between individuals, if the out-
standing loans between the lender and borrower total 
$100,000 or less, the forgone interest to be included in in-
come by the lender and deducted by the borrower is limi-
ted to the amount of the borrower's net investment income 
for the year. If the borrower's net investment income is 
$1,000 or less, it is treated as zero. This limit does not ap-
ply to a loan if the avoidance of federal tax is one of the 
main purposes of the interest arrangement.
U.S. Savings Bonds
This section provides tax information on U.S. savings 
bonds. It explains how to report the interest income on 
these bonds and how to treat transfers of these bonds.
U.S. savings bonds currently offered to individuals in-
clude Series EE bonds and Series I bonds.
For information about U.S. savings bonds, go to 
www.treasurydirect.gov/savings-bonds/. Also, go 
to www.treasurydirect.gov/contact-us/ and click 
on a topic to find answers to your questions by email.
If you prefer, write to:
T reasury Retail Securities Services
P .O. Box 9150
Minneapolis, MN 55480-9150
Accrual method taxpayers.  If you use an accrual 
method of accounting, you must report interest on U.S. 
savings bonds each year as it accrues. Y ou cannot post-
pone reporting interest until you receive it or until the 
bonds mature.
Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cash method of 
accounting, as most individual taxpayers do, you generally 
report the interest on U.S. savings bonds when you re-
ceive it. But see Reporting options for cash method tax-
payers, later.
Series H and HH bonds.  The United States T reasury 
sold HH savings bonds from 1980 through August 2004. 
HH savings bonds earn interest for up to 20 years. So the 
last HH bonds will stop earning interest in 2024. (See 
T reasuryDirect.gov/savings-bonds/hh-bonds/.)
Certain HH bonds weren’t available for cash only. T o 
buy those HH bonds, you had to trade in another security 
you had bought earlier. In making the exchange, you may 
have used interest the original security had earned to help 
pay for the HH bond. If you used an old bond to buy more 
than one HH bond, the interest you used to buy the bonds 
was divided proportionately among the HH bonds. Y ou 
had a choice then for the tax on that interest: pay it then, 
or wait and pay it later (defer it). Interest that you decided 
to pay later is “deferred interest.” If your HH bond has de-
ferred interest, you see the amount identified on the front 
of the bond. Y ou don't have to report deferred interest on 
your federal income tax return until you are filing your re-
turn for the year in which the first of these events occurs: 
you cash the HH bond; the HH bond stops earning inter-
est; the HH bond is reissued to show a change in owner-
ship that is a taxable event. (See T reasuryDirect.gov/
savings-bonds/hh-bonds/hh-bonds-tax-information.)
Series H bonds were issued before 1980. All Series H 
bonds have matured and are no longer earning interest.
In addition to the twice -a-year interest payments, most 
H/HH bonds also have a deferred interest component. 
The reporting of this as income is addressed later in this 
chapter.
Series EE and Series I bonds.  Interest on these bonds 
is payable when you redeem the bonds. The difference 
between the purchase price and the redemption value is 
taxable interest.
Series E and EE bonds.  Series E bonds were issued 
before 1980. All Series E bonds have matured and are no 
longer earning interest. Series EE bonds were first offered 
in January 1980 and have a maturity period of 30 years; 
they were offered in paper (definitive) form until 2012. Pa-
per Series EE and Series E bonds were issued at a dis-
count and increase in value as they earn interest. Elec-
tronic (book -entry) Series EE bonds were first offered in 
2003; they are issued at face value and increase in value 
as they earn interest. For all Series E and Series EE 
bonds, the purchase price plus all accrued interest is pay-
able to you at redemption.
Series I bonds.  Series I bonds were first offered in 
1998. These are inflation -indexed bonds issued at face 
value with a maturity period of 30 years. Series I bonds in-
crease in value as they earn interest. The face value plus 
all accrued interest is payable to you at redemption.
Reporting options for cash method taxpayers.  If 
you use the cash method of reporting income, you can re-
port the interest on Series EE, Series E, and Series I 
bonds in either of the following ways.
1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest until the 
earlier of the year you cash or dispose of the bonds or 
the year in which they mature. (However, see Savings 
bonds traded, later.)
10 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 11 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Method 2. Choose to report the increase in redemp-
tion value as interest each year.
Y ou must use the same method for all Series EE and Ser-
ies I bonds you own. If you do not choose method 2 by re-
porting the increase in redemption value as interest each 
year, you must use method 1.
If you plan to cash your bonds in the same year 
you will pay for higher education expenses, you 
may want to use method 1 because you may be 
able to exclude the interest from your income. T o learn 
how, see Education Savings Bond Program, later.
Change from method 1.  If you want to change your 
method of reporting the interest from method 1 to method 
2, you can do so without permission from the IRS. In the 
year of change, you must report all interest accrued to 
date and not previously reported for all your bonds.
Once you choose to report the interest each year, you 
must continue to do so for all Series EE and Series I 
bonds you own and for any you get later, unless you re-
quest permission to change, as explained next.
Change from method 2. T o change from method 2 to 
method 1, you must request permission from the IRS. Per-
mission for the change is automatically granted if you 
send the IRS a statement that meets all the following re-
quirements.
1. Y ou have typed or printed the following number at the 
top: “131.”
2. It includes your name and social security number un-
der “131.”
3. It includes the year of change (both the beginning and 
ending dates).
4. It identifies the savings bonds for which you are re-
questing this change.
5. It includes your agreement to:
a. Report all interest on any bonds acquired during 
or after the year of change when the interest is re-
alized upon disposition, redemption, or final ma-
turity, whichever is earliest; and
b. Report all interest on the bonds acquired before 
the year of change when the interest is realized 
upon disposition, redemption, or final maturity, 
whichever is earliest, with the exception of the in-
terest reported in prior tax years.
Y ou must attach this statement to your tax return for the 
year of change, which you must file by the due date (in-
cluding extensions).
Y ou can have an automatic extension of 6 months from 
the due date of your return for the year of change (exclud-
ing extensions) to file the statement with an amended re-
turn. On the statement, type or print “Filed pursuant to 
section 301.9100-2.” T o get this extension, you must have 
filed your original return for the year of the change by the 
due date (including extensions). See also Revenue Proce-
dure 2015-13, Section 6.03(4).
TIP
Instead of filing this statement, you can request permis-
sion to change from method 2 to method 1 by filing Form 
3115. In that case, follow the form instructions for an auto-
matic change. No user fee is required.
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in the names 
of co-owners, such as you and your child or you and your 
spouse, interest on the bond generally is taxable to the 
co-owner who bought the bond.
One co-owner's funds used.  If you used your funds 
to buy the bond, you must pay the tax on the interest. This 
is true even if you let the other co -owner redeem the bond 
and keep all the proceeds. Under these circumstances, 
the co-owner who redeemed the bond will receive a Form 
1099-INT at the time of redemption and must provide you 
with another Form 1099 -INT showing the amount of inter-
est from the bond taxable to you. The co -owner who re-
deemed the bond is a “nominee.” See Nominee distribu-
tions, later, for more information about how a person who 
is a nominee reports interest income belonging to another 
person.
Both co -owners' funds used.  If you and the other 
co-owner each contribute part of the bond's purchase 
price, the interest generally is taxable to each of you in 
proportion to the amount each of you paid.
Community property. If you and your spouse live in a 
community property state and hold bonds as community 
property, one-half of the interest is considered received by 
each of you. If you file separate returns, each of you gen-
erally must report one -half of the bond interest. For more 
information about community property, see Pub. 555.
Table 1-2. These rules are also shown in T able 1-2.
Child as only owner.  Interest on U.S. savings bonds 
bought for and registered only in the name of your child is 
income to your child, even if you paid for the bonds and 
are named as beneficiary. If the bonds are Series EE or 
Series I bonds, the interest on the bonds is income to your 
child in the earlier of the year the bonds are cashed or dis-
posed of or the year the bonds mature, unless your child 
chooses to report the interest income each year.
Choice to report interest each year.  The choice to 
report the accrued interest each year can be made either 
by your child or by you for your child. This choice is made 
by filing an income tax return that shows all the interest 
earned to date, and by stating on the return that your child 
chooses to report the interest each year. Either you or 
your child should keep a copy of this return.
Unless your child is otherwise required to file a tax re-
turn for any year after making this choice, your child does 
not have to file a return only to report the annual accrual of 
U.S. savings bond interest under this choice. However, 
see T ax on unearned income of certain children , earlier, 
under General Information. Neither you nor your child can 
change the way you report the interest unless you request 
permission from the IRS, as discussed earlier under 
Change from method 2.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 11

Page 12 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Ownership transferred.  If you bought Series EE or Ser-
ies I bonds entirely with your own funds and had them re-
issued in your co -owner's name or beneficiary's name 
alone, you must include in your gross income for the year 
of reissue all interest that you earned on these bonds and 
have not previously reported. But, if the bonds were reis-
sued in your name alone, you do not have to report the in-
terest accrued at that time.
This same rule applies when bonds (other than bonds 
held as community property) are transferred between 
spouses or incident to divorce.
Example.  Y ou bought Series EE bonds entirely with 
your own funds. Y ou did not choose to report the accrued 
interest each year. Later, you transfer the bonds to your 
former spouse under a divorce agreement. Y ou must in-
clude the deferred accrued interest, from the date of the 
original issue of the bonds to the date of transfer, in your 
income in the year of transfer. Y our former spouse in-
cludes in income the interest on the bonds from the date 
of transfer to the date of redemption.
Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings 
Bond Interest
T able 1-2. 
IF ... THEN the interest must be 
reported by ...
you buy a bond in your name and 
the name of another person as 
co-owners, using only your own 
funds
you.
you buy a bond in the name of 
another person, who is the sole 
owner of the bond
the person for whom you bought 
the bond.
you and another person buy a 
bond as co-owners, each 
contributing part of the purchase 
price
both you and the other co-owner, 
in proportion to the amount each 
paid for the bond.
you and your spouse, who live in 
a community property state, buy a 
bond that is community property
you and your spouse. If you file 
separate returns, both you and 
your spouse generally report half 
of the interest.
Purchased jointly.  If you and a co -owner each con-
tributed funds to buy Series E, Series EE, or Series I 
bonds jointly and later have the bonds reissued in the 
co-owner's name alone, you must include in your gross in-
come for the year of reissue your share of all the interest 
earned on the bonds that you have not previously repor-
ted. The former co -owner does not have to include in 
gross income at the time of reissue his or her share of the 
interest earned that was not reported before the transfer. 
This interest, however, as well as all interest earned after 
the reissue, is income to the former co-owner.
This income-reporting rule also applies when the bonds 
are reissued in the name of your former co -owner and a 
new co-owner. But the new co-owner will report only his or 
her share of the interest earned after the transfer.
If bonds that you and a co-owner bought jointly are reis-
sued to each of you separately in the same proportion as 
your contribution to the purchase price, neither you nor 
your co -owner has to report at that time the interest 
earned before the bonds were reissued.
Example 1. Y ou and your spouse each spent an equal 
amount to buy a $1,000 Series EE savings bond. The 
bond was issued to you and your spouse as co -owners. 
Y ou both postpone reporting interest on the bond. Y ou 
later have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one in 
your name and one in your spouse's name. At that time 
neither you nor your spouse has to report the interest 
earned to the date of reissue.
Example 2.  Y ou bought a $1,000 Series EE savings 
bond entirely with your own funds. The bond was issued 
to you and your spouse as co -owners. Y ou both post-
poned reporting interest on the bond. Y ou later have the 
bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and 
one in your spouse's name. Y ou must report half the inter-
est earned to the date of reissue.
Transfer to a trust.  If you own Series E, Series EE, or 
Series I bonds and transfer them to a trust, giving up all 
rights of ownership, you must include in your income for 
that year the interest earned to the date of transfer if you 
have not already reported it. However, if you are consid-
ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in value 
both before and after the transfer continues to be taxable 
to you, you can continue to defer reporting the interest 
earned each year. Y ou must include the total interest in 
your income in the year you cash or dispose of the bonds 
or the year the bonds finally mature, whichever is earlier.
The same rules apply to previously unreported interest 
on Series EE or Series E bonds if the transfer to a trust 
consisted of Series HH or Series H bonds you acquired in 
a trade for the Series EE or Series E bonds. See Savings 
bonds traded, later.
Decedents. The manner of reporting interest income on 
Series E, Series EE, or Series I bonds, after the death of 
the owner (decedent), depends on the accounting and in-
come-reporting methods previously used by the dece-
dent.
Decedent who reported interest each year.  If the 
bonds transferred because of death were owned by a per-
son who used an accrual method, or who used the cash 
method and had chosen to report the interest each year, 
the interest earned in the year of death up to the date of 
death must be reported on that person's final return. The 
person who acquires the bonds includes in income only 
interest earned after the date of death.
Decedent who postponed reporting interest.  If the 
transferred bonds were owned by a decedent who had 
used the cash method and had not chosen to report the 
interest each year, and who had bought the bonds entirely 
with his or her own funds, all interest earned before death 
must be reported in one of the following ways.
1. The surviving spouse or personal representative (ex-
ecutor, administrator, etc.) who files the final income 
tax return of the decedent can choose to include on 
that return all interest earned on the bonds before the 
12 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 13 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
decedent's death. The person who acquires the 
bonds then includes in income only interest earned 
after the date of death.
2. If the choice in (1) is not made, the interest earned up 
to the date of death is income in respect of the dece-
dent and should not be included in the decedent's fi-
nal return. All interest earned both before and after the 
decedent's death (except any part reported by the es-
tate on its income tax return) is income to the person 
who acquires the bonds. If that person uses the cash 
method and does not choose to report the interest 
each year, he or she can postpone reporting it until 
the year the bonds are cashed or disposed of or the 
year they mature, whichever is earlier. In the year that 
person reports the interest, he or she can claim a de-
duction for any federal estate tax paid on the part of 
the interest included in the decedent's estate.
For more information on income in respect of a decedent, 
see Pub. 559.
Example 1. Y our uncle, a cash method taxpayer, died 
and left you a $1,000 Series EE bond. He had bought the 
bond for $500 and had not chosen to report the interest 
each year. At the date of death, interest of $200 had ac-
crued on the bond, and its value of $700 was included in 
your uncle's estate. Y our uncle's executor chose not to in-
clude the $200 accrued interest in your uncle's final in-
come tax return. The $200 is income in respect of the de-
cedent.
Y ou are a cash method taxpayer and do not choose to 
report the interest each year as it is earned. If you cash 
the bond when it reaches a value of $1,000, you report 
$500 interest income—the difference between the value of 
$1,000 and the original cost of $500.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, the executor had chosen 
to include the $200 accrued interest in your uncle's final 
return, you would report only $300 as interest when you 
cashed the bond. $300 is the interest earned after your 
uncle's death.
Example 3. If, in Example 1, you make or have made 
the choice to report the increase in redemption value as 
interest each year, you include in gross income for the 
year you acquire the bond all of the unreported increase in 
value of all Series E, Series EE, and Series I bonds you 
hold, including the $200 on the bond you inherited from 
your uncle.
Example 4.  When your aunt died, she owned Series 
HH bonds that she had acquired in a trade for Series EE 
bonds. Y ou were the beneficiary of these bonds. Y our aunt 
used the cash method and did not choose to report the in-
terest on the Series EE bonds each year as it accrued. 
Y our aunt's executor chose not to include any interest 
earned before your aunt's death on her final return.
The income in respect of the decedent is the sum of the 
unreported interest on the Series EE bonds and the inter-
est, if any, payable on the Series HH bonds but not re-
ceived as of the date of your aunt's death. Y ou must report 
any interest received during the year as income on your 
return. The part of the interest payable but not received 
before your aunt's death is income in respect of the dece-
dent and may qualify for the estate tax deduction. For in-
formation on when to report the interest on the Series EE 
bonds traded, see Savings bonds traded, later.
Savings bonds distributed from a retirement or 
profit-sharing plan.  If you acquire a U.S. savings bond 
in a taxable distribution from a retirement or profit -sharing 
plan, your income for the year of distribution includes the 
bond's redemption value (its cost plus the interest accrued 
before the distribution). When you redeem the bond 
(whether in the year of distribution or later), your interest 
income includes only the interest accrued after the bond 
was distributed. T o figure the interest reported as a taxa-
ble distribution and your interest income when you re-
deem the bond, see Worksheet for savings bonds distrib-
uted from a retirement or profit-sharing plan, later.
Savings bonds traded.  Prior to September 2004, you 
could trade (exchange) Series E or EE bonds for Series H 
or HH bonds. At the time of the trade, you had the choice 
to postpone (defer) reporting the interest which had been 
earned on your Series E or EE bonds until the Series H or 
HH bonds received in the trade were redeemed or ma-
tured. Any cash you received in the transaction was in-
come up to the amount of the interest that had accrued on 
the Series E or EE bonds. The amount of income that you 
chose to postpone reporting was recorded on the face of 
the Series H or HH bonds as "Deferred Interest"; this 
amount is also equal to the difference between the re-
demption value of the Series H or HH bonds and your 
cost. Y our cost is the sum of the amount you paid for the 
exchanged Series E or EE bonds plus any amount you 
had to pay at the time of the transaction.
Example. Y ou traded Series EE bonds that cost you 
$2,200 (on which you postponed reporting the interest) for 
$2,500 in Series HH bonds and $223 in cash. At the time 
of the trade, the Series EE bonds had accrued interest of 
$523 and a redemption value of $2,723.
Y ou reported the $223 as taxable income on your tax 
return.
Y ou hold the Series HH bonds until maturity, when you 
receive $2,500. Y ou must report $300 as interest income 
in the year of maturity. This is the difference between their 
redemption value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (the 
amount you paid for the Series EE bonds).
Note. The $300 amount that is reportable upon re-
demption or maturity may be found on the face of the Ser-
ies HH bond as “Deferred Interest.” If more than one Ser-
ies HH bond is received in the exchange, the total amount 
of interest postponed/deferred in the transaction is divided 
proportionately among the Series HH bonds.
Choice to report interest in year of trade. Y ou could 
have chosen to treat all of the previously unreported ac-
crued interest on Series EE bonds traded for Series HH 
bonds as income in the year of the trade. If you made this 
choice, it is treated as a change from method 1. See 
Change from method 1, earlier.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 13

Page 14 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note. If you chose to report all of the previously unre-
ported interest in the year of the trade, then there would 
be the no "Deferred Interest" recorded on the face of the 
new bond.
Note. The subsequent annual interest earnings on the 
Series HH bonds received in the exchange would be paid 
and reported annually by T reasury regardless of whether 
the previously accrued interest was further deferred or re-
ported in the year of the exchange.
Form 1099 -INT for U.S. savings bond interest.  Y ou 
may receive a Form 1099 -INT when you redeem a bond. 
Form 1099-INT , box 3 should show the interest as the dif-
ference between the amount you received and the amount 
paid for the bond. However, your Form 1099 -INT may 
show more interest than you have to include on your in-
come tax return. For example, this may happen if any of 
the following are true.
• Y ou chose to report the increase in the redemption 
value of the bond each year. The interest shown on 
your Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by amounts 
previously included in income.
• Y ou received the bond from a decedent. The interest 
shown on your Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by 
any interest reported by the decedent before death, or 
on the decedent's final return, or by the estate on the 
estate's income tax return.
• Ownership of the bond was transferred. The interest 
shown on your Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by 
interest that accrued before the transfer.
Note. This is true for paper bonds. T reasury report-
ing process for electronic bonds is more refined. If 
T reasury is aware that the transfer of an electronic 
savings bond is a reportable event, then the transferor 
will receive a 1099 -INT for the year of the transfer for 
the interest accrued up to the time of the transfer; 
when the transferee later disposes of the bond (re-
demption, maturity, or further transfer), the transferee 
will receive a 1099 -INT showing interest accrued re-
duced by the amount reported to the transferor at the 
time of the original transfer.
• Y ou were named as a co-owner, and the other 
co-owner contributed funds to buy the bond. The inter-
est shown on your Form 1099-INT will not be reduced 
by the amount you received as nominee for the other 
co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier, for more informa-
tion about the reporting requirements.)
• Y ou received the bond in a taxable distribution from a 
retirement or profit-sharing plan. The interest shown 
on your Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by the in-
terest portion of the amount taxable as a distribution 
from the plan and not taxable as interest. (This 
amount generally is shown on Form 1099-R, for the 
year of distribution.)
For more information on including the correct amount of 
interest on your return, see U.S. savings bond interest pre-
viously reported or Nominee distributions, later.
Interest on U.S. savings bonds is exempt from 
state and local taxes.
Education Savings Bond Program
Y ou may be able to exclude from income all or part of the 
interest you receive on the redemption of qualified U.S. 
savings bonds during the year if you pay qualified higher 
education expenses during the same year. This exclusion 
is known as the Education Savings Bond Program. For 
taxable years beginning in 2024, the exclusion under § 
135, regarding income from United States savings bonds 
for taxpayers who pay qualified higher education expen-
ses, begins to phase out for modified adjusted gross in-
come above $145,200 for joint returns and $96,800 for all 
other returns. The exclusion is completely phased out for 
modified adjusted gross income of $175,200 or more for 
joint returns and $111,800 or more for all other returns.
Y ou do not qualify for this exclusion if your filing status 
is married filing separately.
Form 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure your exclusion. At-
tach the form to your Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Qualified U.S. savings bonds.  A qualified U.S. savings 
bond is a Series EE bond issued after 1989 or a Series I 
bond. The bond must be issued either in your name (sole 
owner) or in your and your spouse's names (co -owners). 
Y ou must be at least 24 years old before the bond's issue 
date. For example, a bond bought by a parent and issued 
in the name of his or her child under age 24 does not qual-
ify for the exclusion by the parent or child.
The issue date of a bond may be earlier than the 
date the bond is purchased because the issue 
date assigned to a bond is the first day of the 
month in which it is purchased.
Beneficiary. Y ou can designate any individual (includ-
ing a child) as a beneficiary of the bond.
Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclusion, the IRS 
will check it by using bond redemption information from 
the Department of T reasury.
Qualified expenses.  Qualified higher educational ex-
penses are tuition and fees required for you, your spouse, 
or your dependent to attend an eligible educational institu-
tion.
Qualified expenses include any contribution you make 
to a qualified tuition program or to a Coverdell education 
savings account. For information about these programs, 
see Pub. 970.
Qualified expenses do not include expenses for room 
and board or for courses involving sports, games, or hob-
bies that are not part of a degree or certificate granting 
program.
Eligible educational institutions.  These institutions 
include most public, private, and nonprofit universities, 
colleges, and vocational schools that are accredited and 
TIP
CAUTION
!
14 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 15 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
eligible to participate in student aid programs run by the 
Department of Education.
Reduction for certain benefits.  Y ou must reduce 
your qualified higher educational expenses by all of the 
following tax-free benefits.
1. T ax-free part of scholarships and fellowships.
2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free portion of distri-
butions from a Coverdell ESA.
3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free portion of distri-
butions from a qualified tuition program.
4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or inheritan-
ces) received as educational assistance, such as:
a. Veterans' educational assistance benefits,
b. Qualified tuition reductions, or
c. Employer-provided educational assistance.
5. Any expense used in figuring the American Opportu-
nity and lifetime learning credits.
For information about these benefits, see Pub. 970.
Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (interest and 
principal) from the qualified U.S. savings bonds you re-
deem during the year are not more than your adjusted 
qualified higher educational expenses for the year, you 
may be able to exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds 
are more than the expenses, you may be able to exclude 
only part of the interest.
T o determine the excludable amount, multiply the inter-
est part of the proceeds by a fraction. The numerator (top 
part) of the fraction is the qualified higher educational ex-
penses you paid during the year. The denominator (bot-
tom part) of the fraction is the total proceeds you received 
during the year.
Example. J and L, a married couple, paid $5,000. 00 
for a $10,000 denominated Series EE U.S. Savings Bond 
in January 2008. J and L redeemed (cashed in) the bond 
in January 2024 for $8,052.00 ($5,000.00 investment + 
$3,052.00 interest). J and L paid $4,000.00 of their child's 
college tuition in 2024. J and L are not claiming any credit 
for that amount and their child does not receive any 
tax-free educational assistance.
T o determine the excludable amount, J and L multiply 
the interest part of the proceeds ($3,052.00) by a fraction. 
The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the qualified 
higher educational expenses paid during the year 
($4,000.00). The denominator (bottom part) of the fraction 
is the total proceeds received during the year ($8,052.00).
Thus, J and L can exclude $3,052.00 x 
($4,000.00/$8,052.00) = $1,516.15.
U.S. Treasury Bills,
Notes, and Bonds
T reasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts (obliga-
tions) of the U.S. government.
Taxation of interest. Interest income from T reasury bills, 
notes, and bonds is subject to federal income tax but is 
exempt from all state and local income taxes. Y ou should 
receive Form 1099 -INT showing the interest (in box 3) 
paid to you for the year.
Treasury bills.  These bills generally have a 4 -week, 
8-week, 13 -week, 26 -week, or 52 -week maturity period. 
They generally are issued at a discount in the amount of 
$100 and multiples of $100. The difference between the 
discounted price you pay for the bills and the face value 
you receive at maturity is interest income. Generally, you 
report this interest income when the bill is paid at maturity. 
If you paid a premium for a bill (more than face value), you 
generally report the premium as a section 171 deduction 
when the bill is paid at maturity. See Discount on 
Short-T erm Obligations, later.
If you reinvest your T reasury bill at its maturity in a new 
T reasury bill, note, or bond, you will receive payment for 
the difference between the proceeds of the maturing bill 
(par amount less any tax withheld) and the purchase price 
of the new T reasury security. However, you must report the 
full amount of the interest income on each of your T reas-
ury bills at the time it reaches maturity.
Treasury notes and bonds. T reasury notes have matur-
ity periods of at least 1 year, ranging up to 10 years. Ma-
turity periods for T reasury bonds are generally longer than 
10 years. Both generally are issued in denominations of 
$100 to $1 million and both generally pay interest every 6 
months. Generally, you report this interest for the year 
paid. When the notes or bonds mature, you can redeem 
these securities for face value or use the proceeds from 
the maturing note or bond to reinvest in another note or 
bond of the same type and term.
T reasury notes and bonds are sold by auction. T wo 
types of bids are accepted: competitive bids and noncom-
petitive bids. If you make a competitive bid and a determi-
nation is made that the purchase price is less than the 
face value, you will receive a refund for the difference be-
tween the purchase price and the face value. This amount 
is considered original issue discount. However, the origi-
nal issue discount rules (discussed later) do not apply if 
the discount is less than one -fourth of 1% (0.0025) of the 
face amount, multiplied by the number of full years from 
the date of original issue to maturity. See De minimis OID, 
later. If the purchase price is determined to be more than 
the face amount, the difference is a premium. (See Bond 
Premium Amortization in chapter 3.)
For other information on these notes or bonds, 
write to:
T reasury Retail Securities Services
P .O. Box 9150
Minneapolis, MN 55480-9150
Or, on the Internet, visit www.treasurydirect.gov.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 15

Page 16 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS).  These 
securities pay interest twice a year at a fixed rate, based 
on a principal amount adjusted to take into account infla-
tion and deflation. For the tax treatment of these securi-
ties, see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments, later.
Retirement, sale, or redemption. For information on the 
retirement, sale, or redemption of U.S. government obliga-
tions, see Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss  in chapter 4. 
Also, see Nontaxable T rades in chapter 4 for information 
about trading U.S. T reasury obligations for certain other 
designated issues.
Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates
If you sell a bond between interest payment dates, part of 
the sales price represents interest accrued to the date of 
sale. Y ou must report that part of the sales price as inter-
est income for the year of sale.
If you buy a bond between interest payment dates, part 
of the purchase price represents interest accrued before 
the date of purchase. When that interest is paid to you, 
treat it as a return of your capital investment, rather than 
interest income, by reducing your basis in the bond. See 
Accrued interest on bonds , later in this chapter, for infor-
mation on reporting the payment.
Insurance
Life insurance proceeds paid to you as the beneficiary of 
the insured person usually are not taxable. But if you re-
ceive the proceeds in installments, you usually must report 
part of each installment payment as interest income.
For more information about insurance proceeds re-
ceived in installments, see Pub. 525.
Interest option on insurance. If you leave life insurance 
proceeds on deposit with an insurance company under an 
agreement to pay interest only, the interest paid to you is 
taxable.
Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insurance pro-
ceeds, the annuity payments you receive are taxed as 
pension and annuity income from a nonqualified plan, not 
as interest income. See Pub. 939.
State or Local
Government Obligations
Interest you receive on an obligation issued by a state or 
local government generally is not taxable. The issuer 
should be able to tell you whether the interest is taxable. 
The issuer also should give you a periodic (or year -end) 
statement showing the tax treatment of the obligation. If 
you invested in the obligation through a trust, a fund, or 
other organization, that organization should give you this 
information.
Even if interest on the obligation is not subject to 
income tax, you may have to report a capital gain 
or loss when you sell it. Estate, gift, or genera-
tion-skipping tax may apply to other dispositions of the ob-
ligation.
Tax-Exempt Interest
Interest on a bond used to finance government operations 
generally is not taxable if the bond is issued by a state, the 
District of Columbia, a U.S. territory, or any of their political 
subdivisions. Political subdivisions include:
• Port authorities,
• T oll road commissions,
• Utility services authorities,
• Community redevelopment agencies, and
• Qualified volunteer fire departments (for certain obli-
gations issued after 1980).
There are other requirements for tax -exempt bonds. Con-
tact the issuing state or local government agency or see 
sections 103 and 141 through 150 of the Internal Revenue 
Code and the related regulations.
Obligations that are not bonds. Interest on a 
state or local government obligation may be tax 
exempt even if the obligation is not a bond. For 
example, interest on a debt evidenced only by an ordinary 
written agreement of purchase and sale may be tax ex-
empt. Also, interest paid by an insurer on default by the 
state or political subdivision may be tax exempt.
Registration requirement. A bond issued after June 30, 
1983, generally must be in registered form for the interest 
to be tax exempt.
Indian tribal government.  Bonds issued after 1982 by 
an Indian tribal government (including tribal economic de-
velopment bonds issued after February 17, 2009) are 
treated as issued by a state. Interest on these bonds gen-
erally is tax exempt if the bonds are part of an issue of 
which substantially all proceeds are to be used in the ex-
ercise of any essential government function. However, the 
proceeds of a tribal economic development bond issued 
after February 17, 2009, are not required to be used in the 
exercise of an essential government function in order for 
the bond to receive tax -exempt treatment. Interest on pri-
vate activity bonds (other than certain bonds for tribal 
manufacturing facilities) is taxable.
Original issue discount.  Original issue discount (OID) 
on tax-exempt state or local government bonds is treated 
as tax-exempt interest.
For information on the treatment of OID when you dis-
pose of a tax -exempt bond, see T ax-exempt state and lo-
cal government bonds in chapter 4.
Stripped bonds or coupons.  For special rules that 
apply to stripped tax -exempt obligations, see Stripped 
Bonds and Coupons, later.
CAUTION
!
TIP
16 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 17 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Information reporting requirement.  If you must file a 
tax return, you are required to show any tax -exempt inter-
est you received on your return. This is an information re-
porting requirement only. It does not change tax -exempt 
interest to taxable interest. See Reporting tax -exempt in-
terest, later in this chapter.
Taxable Interest
Interest on some state or local obligations is taxable.
Federally guaranteed bonds. Interest on federally guar-
anteed state or local obligations issued after 1983 gener-
ally is taxable. This rule does not apply to interest on obli-
gations guaranteed by the following U.S. government 
agencies.
• Bonneville Power Authority (if the guarantee was un-
der the Northwest Power Act as in effect on July 18, 
1984).
• Department of Veterans Affairs.
• Federal home loan banks. (The guarantee must be 
made after July 30, 2008, in connection with the origi-
nal bond issue during the period beginning on July 30, 
2008, and ending on December 31, 2010 (or a re-
newal or extension of a guarantee so made), and the 
bank must meet safety and soundness requirements.)
• Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
• Federal Housing Administration.
• Federal National Mortgage Association.
• Government National Mortgage Corporation.
• Resolution Funding Corporation.
• Student Loan Marketing Association.
Tax credit bonds. Use Form 8912, to claim the credit for 
the following tax credit bonds.
• Clean renewable energy bond (CREB).
• New clean renewable energy bond (NCREB).
• Qualified energy conservation bond (QECB).
• Qualified zone academy bond (QZAB).
• Qualified school construction bond (QSCB).
• Build America bond (BAB).
Generally, in lieu of, or in addition to, receiving periodic 
interest payments from the issuer, the holder of the bond 
is allowed an income tax credit. The credit compensates 
the holder for lending money to the issuer and functions 
as interest paid on the bond.
See the Instructions for Form 8912 for details and in-
structions.
Mortgage revenue bonds.  The proceeds of these 
bonds are used to finance mortgage loans for homebuy-
ers. Generally, interest on state or local government home 
mortgage bonds issued after April 24, 1979, is taxable un-
less the bonds are qualified mortgage bonds or qualified 
veterans' mortgage bonds.
Arbitrage bonds. Interest on arbitrage bonds issued by 
state or local governments after October 9, 1969, is taxa-
ble. An arbitrage bond is a bond of which any portion of 
the proceeds is expected to be used to buy (or to replace 
funds used to buy) higher yielding investments. A bond is 
treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuer intentionally uses 
any part of the proceeds of the issue in this manner.
Private activity bonds.  Interest on a private activity 
bond that is not a qualified bond (defined below) is taxa-
ble. Generally, a private activity bond is part of a state or 
local government bond issue that meets both the following 
requirements.
1. More than 10% of the proceeds of the issue is to be 
used for a private business use.
2. More than 10% of the payment of the principal or in-
terest is:
a. Secured by an interest in property to be used for a 
private business use (or payments for this prop-
erty), or
b. Derived from payments for property (or borrowed 
money) used for a private business use.
Also, a bond generally is considered a private activity 
bond if the proceeds to be used to make or finance loans 
to persons other than government units is more than 5% 
of the proceeds or $5 million (whichever is less).
Qualified bond. Interest on a private activity bond that 
is a qualified bond is tax exempt. A qualified bond is an 
exempt-facility bond (including an enterprise zone facility 
bond, a New Y ork Liberty bond, a Midwestern disaster 
area bond, a Hurricane Ike disaster area bond, a Gulf Op-
portunity Zone bond treated as an exempt-facility bond, or 
any recovery zone facility bond), qualified student loan 
bond, qualified small issue bond (including a tribal manu-
facturing facility bond), qualified redevelopment bond, 
qualified mortgage bond (including a Gulf Opportunity 
Zone bond, a Midwestern disaster area bond, or a Hurri-
cane Ike disaster area bond treated as a qualified mort-
gage bond), qualified veterans' mortgage bond, or quali-
fied 501(c)(3) bond (a bond issued for the benefit of 
certain tax-exempt organizations).
Interest you receive on these tax -exempt bonds, if is-
sued after August 7, 1986, generally is a “tax preference 
item” and may be subject to the AMT . See Form 6251 and 
its instructions for more information.
The interest on the following bonds is not a tax prefer-
ence item and is not subject to the AMT .
• Qualified 501(c)(3) bonds.
• New Y ork Liberty bonds.
• Gulf Opportunity Zone bonds.
• Midwestern disaster area bonds.
• Hurricane Ike disaster area bonds.
• Exempt facility bonds for qualified residential rental 
projects issued after July 30, 2008.
• Qualified mortgage bonds issued after July 30, 2008.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 17

Page 18 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Qualified veterans' mortgage bonds issued after July 
30, 2008.
Qualified bonds issued in 2009 or 2010.  The inter-
est on any qualified bond issued in 2009 or 2010 is not a 
tax preference item and is not subject to the AMT . For this 
purpose, a refunding bond (whether a current or advanced 
refunding) is treated as issued on the date the refunded 
bond was issued (or on the date the original bond was is-
sued in the case of a series of refundings). However, this 
rule does not apply to any refunding bond issued to refund 
any qualified bond issued during 2004 through 2008 or af-
ter 2010.
Qualified bonds issued after December 31, 2010. 
A portion of the interest on specified private activity bonds 
issued after December 31, 2010, may be a tax preference 
item subject to the AMT . The tax preference status will ap-
ply to the portion of the interest that remains after reducing 
it by deductions that would be allowed if the interest were 
taxable.
Enterprise zone facility bonds.  Interest on certain 
private activity bonds issued by a state or local govern-
ment to finance a facility used in an empowerment zone or 
enterprise community is tax exempt.
New York Liberty bonds. New Y ork Liberty bonds are 
bonds issued after March 9, 2002, to finance the construc-
tion and rehabilitation of real property in the designated 
“Liberty Zone” of New Y ork City. Interest on these bonds is 
tax exempt.
Market discount. Market discount on a tax -exempt bond 
is not tax exempt. If you bought the bond after April 30, 
1993, you can choose to accrue the market discount over 
the period you own the bond and include it in your income 
currently as taxable interest. See Market Discount Bonds, 
later. If you do not make that choice, or if you bought the 
bond before May 1, 1993, any gain from market discount 
is taxable when you dispose of the bond.
For more information on the treatment of market dis-
count when you dispose of a tax -exempt bond, see Dis-
counted Debt Instruments, later.
Discount on
Debt Instruments
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Market discount
 Market discount bond
 Original issue discount (OID)
 Premium
 
A debt instrument, such as a bond, note, debenture, or 
other evidence of indebtedness, that bears no interest or 
bears interest at a lower than current market rate usually 
will be issued at less than its face amount. This discount 
is, in effect, additional interest income. The following are 
some types of discounted debt instruments.
• U.S. T reasury bonds.
• Corporate bonds.
• Municipal bonds.
• Certificates of deposit.
• Notes between individuals.
• Stripped bonds and coupons.
• Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).
The discount on these instruments (except municipal 
bonds) is taxable in most instances. The discount on mu-
nicipal bonds generally is not taxable (but see State or Lo-
cal Government Obligations , earlier, for exceptions). See 
also REMICs, FASIT s, and Other CDOs, later, for informa-
tion about applying the rules discussed in this section to 
the regular interest holder of a real estate mortgage in-
vestment conduit, a financial asset securitization invest-
ment trust, or other CDO.
Original Issue
Discount (OID)
OID is a form of interest. Y ou generally include OID in your 
income as it accrues over the term of the debt instrument, 
whether or not you receive any payments from the issuer.
A debt instrument generally has OID when the instru-
ment is issued for a price that is less than its stated re-
demption price at maturity. OID is the difference between 
the stated redemption price at maturity and the issue 
price.
All debt instruments that pay no interest before maturity 
are presumed to be issued at a discount. Zero coupon 
bonds are one example of these instruments.
The OID accrual rules generally do not apply to 
short-term obligations (those with a fixed maturity date of 
1 year or less from date of issue). See Discount on 
Short-T erm Obligations, later.
For information about the sale of a debt instrument with 
OID, see Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru-
ments, later.
De minimis OID. Y ou can treat the discount as zero if it is 
less than one-fourth of 1% (0.0025) of the stated redemp-
tion price at maturity multiplied by the number of full years 
from the date of original issue to maturity. This small dis-
count is known as “de minimis” OID. In the case of a debt 
instrument providing for more than one stated principal 
payment (an installment obligation), the “de minimis” for-
mula described above is modified. See Regulations sec-
tion 1.1273-1(d)(3).
Example 1. Y ou bought a 10-year bond with a stated 
redemption price at maturity of $1,000, issued at $980 
18 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 19 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
with OID of $20. One -fourth of 1% of $1,000 (stated re-
demption price) times 10 (the number of full years from 
the date of original issue to maturity) equals $25. Because 
the $20 discount is less than $25, the OID is treated as 
zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you will recognize 
$20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except that the bond was issued at $950. The OID is $50. 
Because the $50 discount is more than the $25 figured in 
Example 1, you must include the OID in income as it ac-
crues over the term of the bond.
Debt instrument bought after original issue.  If you 
buy a debt instrument with de minimis OID at a premium, 
the discount is not includible in income. If you buy a debt 
instrument with de minimis OID at a discount, the discount 
is reported under the market discount rules. See Market 
Discount Bonds, later in this chapter.
Exceptions to reporting OID as current income. 
The OID rules discussed here do not apply to the fol-
lowing debt instruments.
1. T ax-exempt obligations. (However, see Stripped 
tax-exempt obligations, later.)
2. U.S. savings bonds.
3. Short-term debt instruments (those with a fixed matur-
ity date of not more than 1 year from the date of is-
sue).
4. Loans between individuals, if all the following are true.
a. The loan is not made in the course of a trade or 
business of the lender.
b. The amount of the loan, plus the amount of any 
outstanding prior loans between the same individ-
uals, is $10,000 or less.
c. Avoiding any federal tax isn’t one of the principal 
purposes of the loan.
5. A debt instrument purchased at a premium.
Form 1099-OID
Y ou may receive a Form 1099-OID for a debt instrument 
you own. If you receive a Form 1099 -OID (Rev. 1 -2024), 
box 1 will show any “Original issue discount for the year”; 
box 2 will show any “Other periodic interest”; and box 8 
will show any “Original issue discount on U.S. T reasury 
obligations.”
In most cases, you must report the entire amount in 
Form 1099-OID, boxes 1, 2, and 8 as interest income. But 
see Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID, later in this 
discussion, and also Original issue discount (OID) adjust-
ment, later in this chapter, for more information.
Form 1099 -OID not received.  If you had OID for the 
year but did not receive a Form 1099 -OID, you may have 
to figure the correct amount of OID to report on your re-
turn. See Pub. 1212 for details on how to figure the correct 
OID.
Nominee. If someone else is the record holder (the regis-
tered owner) of an OID instrument belonging to you and 
receives a Form 1099 -OID on your behalf, that person 
must give you a Form 1099-OID.
If you receive a Form 1099 -OID that includes amounts 
belonging to another person, see Nominee distributions , 
later.
Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099 -OID. Y ou may 
need to refigure the OID shown in Form 1099 -OID, box 1 
or box 8 if either of the following apply.
• Y ou bought the debt instrument after its original issue 
and paid a premium or an acquisition premium.
• The debt instrument is a stripped bond or a stripped 
coupon (including certain zero coupon instruments). 
See Figuring OID, later in this chapter.
See Original issue discount (OID) adjustment , later in this 
chapter, for information about reporting the correct 
amount of OID.
Premium. Y ou bought a debt instrument at a premium 
if its adjusted basis immediately after purchase was 
greater than the total of all amounts payable on the instru-
ment after the purchase date, other than qualified stated 
interest.
If you bought an OID debt instrument at a premium, you 
generally do not have to report any OID as ordinary in-
come.
Qualified stated interest. In general, this is stated in-
terest unconditionally payable in cash or property (other 
than debt instruments of the issuer) at least annually at a 
fixed rate.
Acquisition premium. Y ou bought a debt instrument 
at an acquisition premium if both the following are true.
• Y ou did not pay a premium.
• The instrument's adjusted basis immediately after pur-
chase (including purchase at original issue) was 
greater than its adjusted issue price. This is the issue 
price plus the OID previously accrued, minus any pay-
ment previously made on the instrument other than 
qualified stated interest.
Acquisition premium reduces the amount of OID includible 
in your income. See Pub. 1212 for more information.
Refiguring periodic interest shown on Form 
1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument or ac-
quired it from another holder during the year, see Bonds 
Sold Between Interest Dates, earlier, for information about 
the treatment of periodic interest that may be shown in 
Form 1099-OID, box 2 for that instrument.
Applying the OID Rules
The rules for reporting OID depend on the date the 
long-term debt instrument was issued.
Debt instruments issued after May 27, 1969 (after 
July 1, 1982, if a government instrument), and before 
1985. If you hold these debt instruments as capital 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 19

Page 20 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
assets, you must include a part of the discount in your 
gross income each year that you own the instruments.
Effect on basis.  Y our basis in the instrument is in-
creased by the amount of OID you include in your gross 
income.
Debt instruments issued after 1984. For these debt in-
struments, you report the total OID that applies each year 
regardless of whether you hold that debt instrument as a 
capital asset.
Effect on basis.  Y our basis in the instrument is in-
creased by the amount of OID you include in your gross 
income.
Certificates of Deposit (CDs)
A CD is a debt instrument.
If you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1 year, you 
must include in income each year a part of the total inter-
est due and report it in the same manner as other OID.
This also applies to similar deposit arrangements with 
banks, building and loan associations, etc., including:
• Time deposits,
• Bonus plans,
• Savings certificates,
• Deferred income certificates,
• Bonus savings certificates, and
• Growth savings certificates.
Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generally must be in 
registered form. Bearer CDs are CDs not in registered 
form. They are not issued in the depositor's name and are 
transferable from one individual to another.
Banks must provide the IRS and the person redeeming 
a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT .
Time deposit open account arrangement.  This is an 
arrangement with a fixed maturity date in which you make 
deposits on a schedule arranged between you and your 
bank. But there is no actual or constructive receipt of inter-
est until the fixed maturity date is reached. For instance, 
you and your bank enter into an arrangement under which 
you agree to deposit $100 each month for a period of 5 
years. Interest will be compounded twice a year at 7 1/2%, 
but payable only at the end of the 5 -year period. Y ou must 
include a part of the interest in your income as OID each 
year. Each year the bank must give you a Form 1099 -OID 
to show you the amount you must include in your income 
for the year.
Redemption before maturity.  If, before the maturity 
date, you redeem a deferred interest account for less than 
its stated redemption price at maturity, you can deduct 
OID that you previously included in income but did not re-
ceive.
Renewable certificates. If you renew a CD at maturity, it 
is treated as a redemption and a purchase of a new certifi-
cate. This is true regardless of the terms of renewal.
Face-Amount Certificates
These certificates are subject to the OID rules. They are a 
form of endowment contracts issued by insurance or in-
vestment companies for either a lump-sum payment or pe-
riodic payments, with the face amount becoming payable 
on the maturity date of the certificate.
In general, the difference between the face amount and 
the amount you paid for the contract is OID. Y ou must in-
clude a part of the OID in your income over the term of the 
certificate.
The issuer must give you a statement on Form 
1099-OID indicating the amount you must include in your 
income each year.
Inflation-Indexed
Debt Instruments
If you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument (other than 
a Series I U.S. savings bond), you must report as OID any 
increase in the inflation -adjusted principal amount of the 
instrument that occurs while you held the instrument dur-
ing the year. In general, an inflation -indexed debt instru-
ment is a debt instrument on which the payments are ad-
justed for inflation and deflation (such as T reasury 
Inflation-Protected Securities). Y ou should receive Form 
1099-OID from the payer showing the amount you must 
report as OID and any qualified stated interest paid to you 
during the year. For more information, see Pub. 1212.
Stripped Bonds and Coupons
If you strip one or more coupons from a bond and sell the 
bond or the coupons, the bond and coupons are treated 
as separate debt instruments issued with OID.
The holder of a stripped bond has the right to receive 
the principal (redemption price) payment. The holder of a 
stripped coupon has the right to receive interest on the 
bond.
Stripped bonds and stripped coupons include:
• Zero coupon instruments available through the De-
partment of the T reasury's Separate T rading of Regis-
tered Interest and Principal of Securities (STRIPS) 
program and government-sponsored enterprises such 
as the Resolution Funding Corporation and the Fi-
nancing Corporation; and
• Instruments backed by U.S. T reasury securities that 
represent ownership interests in those securities, such 
as obligations backed by U.S. T reasury bonds offered 
primarily by brokerage firms.
Seller. If you strip coupons from a bond and sell the bond 
or coupons, include in income the interest that accrued 
20 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 21 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
while you held the bond before the date of sale, to the ex-
tent you did not previously include this interest in your in-
come. For an obligation acquired after October 22, 1986, 
you also must include the market discount that accrued 
before the date of sale of the stripped bond (or coupon) to 
the extent you did not previously include this discount in 
your income.
Add the interest and market discount that you include in 
income to the basis of the bond and coupons. Allocate 
this adjusted basis between the items you keep and the 
items you sell, based on the fair market value of the items. 
The difference between the sale price of the bond (or cou-
pon) and the allocated basis of the bond (or coupon) is 
your gain or loss from the sale.
T reat any item you keep as an OID bond originally is-
sued and bought by you on the sale date of the other 
items. If you keep the bond, treat the amount of the re-
demption price of the bond that is more than the basis of 
the bond as OID. If you keep the coupons, treat the 
amount payable on the coupons that is more than the ba-
sis of the coupons as OID.
Buyer. If you buy a stripped bond or stripped coupon, 
treat it as if it were originally issued on the date you buy it. 
If you buy a stripped bond, treat as OID any excess of the 
stated redemption price at maturity over your purchase 
price. If you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID any ex-
cess of the amount payable on the due date of the coupon 
over your purchase price.
Figuring OID.  The rules for figuring OID on stripped 
bonds and stripped coupons depend on the date the debt 
instruments were purchased, not the date issued.
Y ou must refigure OID shown on the Form 1099 -OID 
you receive for a stripped bond or coupon. See Pub. 1212 
for information about figuring the correct amount of OID on 
these instruments. Owners of stripped bonds and cou-
pons should not rely on the OID shown in Section II of the 
OID tables (available by going to IRS.gov and searching 
for “OID T ables”) because the amounts listed in Section II 
for stripped bonds or coupons are figured without refer-
ence to the date or price at which you acquired them.
Stripped inflation -indexed debt instruments.  OID 
on stripped inflation -indexed debt instruments is figured 
under the discount bond method. This method is descri-
bed in Regulations section 1.1275-7(e).
Stripped tax -exempt obligations.  Y ou do not have to 
pay tax on OID on any stripped tax -exempt bond or cou-
pon you bought before June 11, 1987. However, if you ac-
quired it after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on 
it to determine its basis when you dispose of it. See Origi-
nal issue discount (OID) on debt instruments, later.
Y ou may have to pay tax on part of the OID on stripped 
tax-exempt bonds or coupons that you bought after June 
10, 1987. See Pub. 1212 for information on figuring the 
taxable part.
Market Discount Bonds
A market discount bond is any bond having market dis-
count except:
• Short-term obligations (those with fixed maturity dates 
of up to 1 year from the date of issue),
• T ax-exempt obligations you bought before May 1, 
1993,
• U.S. savings bonds, and
• Certain installment obligations.
Market discount arises when the value of a debt obliga-
tion decreases after its issue date. Generally, this is due to 
an increase in interest rates. If you buy a bond on the sec-
ondary market, it may have market discount.
When you buy a market discount bond, you can choose 
to accrue the market discount over the period you own the 
bond and include it in your income currently as interest in-
come. If you do not make this choice, the following rules 
generally apply.
• Y ou must treat any gain when you dispose of the bond 
as ordinary interest income, up to the amount of the 
accrued market discount. See Discounted Debt Instru-
ments, later.
• Y ou must treat any partial payment of principal on the 
bond as ordinary interest income, up to the amount of 
the accrued market discount. See Partial principal 
payments, later in this discussion.
• If you borrow money to buy or carry the bond, your de-
duction for interest paid on the debt is limited. See 
Limit on interest deduction for market discount bonds, 
later.
Market discount.  Market discount is the amount of the 
stated redemption price of a bond at maturity that is more 
than your basis in the bond immediately after you acquire 
it. Y ou treat market discount as zero if it is less than 
one-fourth of 1% (0.0025) of the stated redemption price 
of the bond multiplied by the number of full years to matur-
ity (after you acquire the bond).
If a market discount bond also has OID, the market dis-
count is the sum of the bond's issue price and the total 
OID includible in the gross income of all holders (for a 
tax-exempt bond, the total OID that accrued) before you 
acquired the bond, reduced by your basis in the bond im-
mediately after you acquired it.
Bonds acquired at original issue.  Generally, a bond 
you acquired at original issue is not a market discount 
bond. If your adjusted basis in a bond is determined by 
reference to the adjusted basis of another person who ac-
quired the bond at original issue, you also are considered 
to have acquired it at original issue.
Exceptions. A bond you acquired at original issue can 
be a market discount bond if either of the following is true.
• Y our cost basis in the bond is less than the bond's is-
sue price.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 21

Page 22 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The bond is issued in exchange for a market discount 
bond under a plan of reorganization. (This does not 
apply if the bond is issued in exchange for a market 
discount bond issued before July 19, 1984, and the 
terms and interest rates of both bonds are the same.)
Accrued market discount.  The accrued market dis-
count is figured in one of two ways.
Ratable accrual method.  T reat the market discount 
as accruing in equal daily installments during the period 
you hold the bond. Figure the daily installments by divid-
ing the market discount by the number of days after the 
date you acquired the bond, up to and including its matur-
ity date. Multiply the daily installments by the number of 
days you held the bond to figure your accrued market dis-
count.
Constant yield method.  Instead of using the ratable 
accrual method, you can choose to figure the accrued dis-
count using a constant interest rate (the constant yield 
method). Make this choice by attaching to your timely filed 
return a statement identifying the bond and stating that 
you are making a constant interest rate election. The 
choice takes effect on the date you acquired the bond. If 
you choose to use this method for any bond, you cannot 
change your choice for that bond.
See Pub. 1212 for information about using the constant 
yield method. T o use this method to figure market discount 
(instead of OID), treat the bond as having been issued on 
the date you acquired it. T reat the amount of your basis 
(immediately after you acquired the bond) as the issue 
price and apply the formula shown in Pub. 1212.
Choosing to include market discount in income cur-
rently. Y ou can make this choice if you have not revoked 
a prior choice to include market discount in income cur-
rently within the last 5 calendar years. Make the choice by 
attaching to your timely filed return a statement in which 
you:
• State that you have included market discount in your 
gross income for the year under section 1278(b) of the 
Internal Revenue Code, and
• Describe the method you used to figure the accrued 
market discount for the year.
Once you make this choice, it will apply to all market 
discount bonds you acquire during the tax year and in 
later tax years. Y ou cannot revoke your choice without the 
consent of the IRS. See Rev. Proc. 2024 -23, section 31, 
for information on how to revoke your election.
Also, see Election T o Report All Interest as OID, later. If 
you make that election, you must use the constant yield 
method.
Effect on basis. Y ou increase the basis of your bonds 
by the amount of market discount you include in your in-
come.
Partial principal payments. If you receive a partial pay-
ment of principal on a market discount bond you acquired 
after October 22, 1986, and you did not choose to include 
the discount in income currently, you must treat the pay-
ment as ordinary interest income up to the amount of the 
bond's accrued market discount. Reduce the amount of 
accrued market discount reportable as interest at disposi-
tion by that amount.
There are three methods you can use to figure accrued 
market discount for this purpose.
1. On the basis of the constant yield method, described 
earlier.
2. In proportion to the accrual of OID for any accrual pe-
riod, if the debt instrument has OID.
3. In proportion to the amount of stated interest paid in 
the accrual period, if the debt instrument has no OID.
Under method (2) above, figure accrued market dis-
count for a period by multiplying the total remaining mar-
ket discount by a fraction. The numerator (top part) of the 
fraction is the OID for the period, and the denominator 
(bottom part) is the total remaining OID at the beginning of 
the period.
Under method (3) above, figure accrued market dis-
count for a period by multiplying the total remaining mar-
ket discount by a fraction. The numerator is the stated in-
terest paid in the accrual period, and the denominator is 
the total stated interest remaining to be paid at the begin-
ning of the accrual period.
Discount on
Short-Term Obligations
When you buy a short -term obligation (one with a fixed 
maturity date of 1 year or less from the date of issue), 
other than a tax -exempt obligation, you generally can 
choose to include any discount and interest payable on 
the obligation in income currently. If you do not make this 
choice, the following rules generally apply.
• Y ou must treat any gain when you sell, exchange, or 
redeem the obligation as ordinary income, up to the 
amount of the ratable share of the discount. See Dis-
counted Debt Instruments, later.
• If you borrow money to buy or carry the obligation, 
your deduction for interest paid on the debt is limited. 
See Limit on interest deduction for short-term obliga-
tions, later.
Short-term obligations for which no choice is availa-
ble. Y ou must include any discount or interest in current 
income as it accrues for any short -term obligation (other 
than a tax-exempt obligation) that is:
• Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer;
• Held primarily for sale to customers in the ordinary 
course of your trade or business;
• Held by a bank, regulated investment company, or 
common trust fund;
• Held by certain pass-through entities;
• Identified as part of a hedging transaction; or
• A stripped bond or stripped coupon held by the per-
son who stripped the bond or coupon (or by any other 
22 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 23 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
person whose basis in the obligation is determined by 
reference to the basis in the hands of the person who 
stripped the bond or coupon).
Effect on basis. Increase the basis of your obligation by 
the amount of discount you include in income currently.
Figuring the accrued discount. Figure the accrued dis-
count by using either the ratable accrual method or the 
constant yield method discussed in Accrued market dis-
count, earlier.
Government obligations.  For an obligation described 
above that is a short -term government obligation, the 
amount you include in your income for the current year is 
the accrued acquisition discount, if any, plus any other ac-
crued interest payable on the obligation. The acquisition 
discount is the stated redemption price at maturity minus 
your basis. 
If you choose to use the constant yield method to figure 
accrued acquisition discount, treat the cost of acquiring 
the obligation as the issue price. If you choose to use this 
method, you cannot change your choice.
Nongovernment obligations.  For an obligation listed 
above that is not a government obligation, the amount you 
include in your income for the current year is the accrued 
OID, if any, plus any other accrued interest payable. If you 
choose the constant yield method to figure accrued OID, 
apply it by using the obligation's issue price.
Choosing to include accrued acquisition discount 
instead of OID.  Y ou can choose to report accrued ac-
quisition discount (defined earlier under Government obli-
gations) rather than accrued OID on these short -term obli-
gations. Y our choice will apply to the year for which it is 
made and to all later years and cannot be changed with-
out the consent of the IRS.
Y ou must make your choice by the due date of your re-
turn, including extensions, for the first year for which you 
are making the choice. Attach a statement to your return 
or amended return indicating:
• Y our name, address, and social security number;
• The choice you are making and that it is being made 
under section 1283(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue 
Code;
• The period for which the choice is being made and the 
obligation to which it applies; and
• Any other information necessary to show you are enti-
tled to make this choice.
Choosing to include accrued discount and other in-
terest in current income.  If you acquire short -term dis-
count obligations that are not subject to the rules for cur-
rent inclusion in income of the accrued discount or other 
interest, you can choose to have those rules apply. This 
choice applies to all short -term obligations you acquire 
during the year and in all later years. Y ou cannot change 
this choice without the consent of the IRS.
The procedures to use in making this choice are the 
same as those described for choosing to include 
acquisition discount instead of OID on nongovernment ob-
ligations in current income. However, you should indicate 
that you are making the choice under section 1282(b)(2) 
of the Internal Revenue Code.
Also, see the following discussion. If you make the elec-
tion to report all interest currently as OID, you must use 
the constant yield method.
Election To Report
All Interest as OID
Generally, you can elect to treat all interest on a debt in-
strument acquired during the tax year as OID and include 
it in income currently. For purposes of this election, inter-
est includes stated interest, acquisition discount, OID, de 
minimis OID, market discount, de minimis market dis-
count, and unstated interest as adjusted by any amortiza-
ble bond premium or acquisition premium. See Regula-
tions section 1.1272-3.
When To Report
Interest Income
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Accrual method
 Cash method
 
When to report your interest income depends on whether 
you use the cash method or an accrual method to report 
income.
Cash method.  Most individual taxpayers use the cash 
method. If you use this method, you generally report your 
interest income in the year in which you actually or con-
structively receive it. However, there are special rules for 
reporting the discount on certain debt instruments. See 
U.S. Savings Bonds  and Discount on Debt Instruments , 
earlier.
Example. On September 1, 2022, you loaned another 
individual $2,000 at 4% compounded annually. Y ou are 
not in the business of lending money. The note stated that 
principal and interest would be due on August 31, 2024. In 
2024, you received $2,163.20 ($2,000 principal and 
$163.20 interest). If you use the cash method, you must 
include in income on your 2024 return the $163.20 in inter-
est you received in that year.
Constructive receipt.  Y ou constructively receive in-
come when it is credited to your account or made availa-
ble to you. Y ou do not need to have physical possession of 
it. For example, you are considered to receive interest, div-
idends, or other earnings on any deposit or account in a 
bank, savings and loan association, or similar financial in-
stitution, or interest on life insurance policy dividends left 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 23

Page 24 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to accumulate, when they are credited to your account 
and subject to your withdrawal.
Y ou constructively receive income on the deposit or ac-
count even if you must:
• Make withdrawals in multiples of even amounts,
• Give a notice to withdraw before making the with-
drawal,
• Withdraw all or part of the account to withdraw the 
earnings, or
• Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless the interest 
you are to receive on an early withdrawal or redemp-
tion is substantially less than the interest payable at 
maturity.
Accrual method. If you use an accrual method, you re-
port your interest income when you earn it, whether or not 
you have received it. Interest is earned over the term of 
the debt instrument.
Example. If, in the previous example, you use an ac-
crual method, you must include the interest in your income 
as you earn it. Y ou would report the interest as follows: 
2022, $26.67; 2023, $81.06; and 2024, $55.47.
Coupon bonds.  Generally, interest on coupon bonds is 
taxable in the year the coupon becomes due and payable. 
It does not matter when you mail the coupon for payment.
How To Report
Interest Income
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Nominee
 Original issue discount (OID)
 
Generally, you report all your taxable interest income on 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 2b.
Schedule B (Form 1040). Y ou must complete Sched-
ule B (Form 1040), Part I, if any of the following apply.
1. Y our taxable interest income is more than $1,500.
2. Y ou are claiming the interest exclusion under the Edu-
cation Savings Bond Program (discussed earlier).
3. Y ou received interest from a seller-financed mortgage, 
and the buyer used the property as a home.
4. Y ou received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond 
interest that includes amounts you reported in a previ-
ous tax year.
5. Y ou received, as a nominee, interest that actually be-
longs to someone else.
6. Y ou received a Form 1099-INT for interest on frozen 
deposits.
7. Y ou received a Form 1099-INT for interest on a bond 
you bought between interest payment dates.
8. Y ou are reporting OID in an amount less than the 
amount shown on Form 1099-OID.
9. Y ou are reporting interest income of less than the 
amount shown on a Form 1099 due to amortizable 
bond premium.
In Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and the amount re-
ceived from each. If you received a Form 1099 -INT or 
Form 1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the brokerage 
firm as the payer.
Reporting tax -exempt interest.  T otal your tax-exempt 
interest (such as interest or accrued OID on certain state 
and municipal bonds, including zero coupon municipal 
bonds) reported on Form 1099 -INT , box 8; Form 
1099-OID, box 11; and exempt -interest dividends from a 
mutual fund or other RIC reported on Form 1099 -DIV , 
box 12. Add these amounts to any other tax -exempt inter-
est you received. Report the total on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 2a.
Form 1099 -INT , box 9, and Form 1099 -DIV , box 13, 
show the tax-exempt interest subject to the AMT on Form 
6251. These amounts already are included in the amounts 
on Form 1099-INT , box 8, and Form 1099-DIV , box 12. Do 
not add the amounts in Form 1099 -INT , box 9, and Form 
1099-DIV , box 13, to, or subtract them from, the amounts 
on Form 1099-INT , box 8, and Form 1099-DIV , box 12.
Do not report interest from an individual retire-
ment arrangement (IRA) as tax-exempt interest.
Form 1099-INT. Y our taxable interest income, except for 
interest from U.S. savings bonds and T reasury obligations, 
is shown in Form 1099-INT , box 1. Add this amount to any 
other taxable interest income you received. See the Form 
1099-INT Instructions for Recipient if you have interest 
from a security acquired at a premium. Y ou must report all 
your taxable interest income even if you do not receive a 
Form 1099-INT . Contact your financial institution if you do 
not receive a Form 1099 -INT by February 15. Y our identi-
fying number may be truncated on any paper Form 
1099-INT you receive.
If you forfeited interest income because of the early 
withdrawal of a time deposit, the deductible amount will be 
shown on Form 1099 -INT , box 2. See Penalty on early 
withdrawal of savings, later.
Form 1099 -INT , box 3 shows the interest income you 
received from U.S. savings bonds, T reasury bills, T reasury 
notes, and T reasury bonds. Generally, add the amount 
shown in Form 1099-INT , box 3 to any other taxable inter-
est income you received. If part of the amount shown in 
Form 1099-INT , box 3 was previously included in your in-
terest income, see U.S. savings bond interest previously 
reported, later. If you redeemed U.S. savings bonds you 
CAUTION
!
24 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 25 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bought after 1989 and you paid qualified educational ex-
penses, see Interest excluded under the Education Sav-
ings Bond Program, later.
Form 1099 -INT , box 4 will contain an amount if you 
were subject to backup withholding. Include the amount 
from box 4 on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 25b.
Form 1099-INT , box 5 shows your share of investment 
expenses of a single -class REMIC. This amount is inclu-
ded in Form 1099-INT , box 1 and is not deductible.
Form 1099-INT , box 6 shows foreign tax paid. Y ou may 
be able to claim this tax as a deduction or a credit on your 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. See your tax return instructions. 
Form 1099-INT , box 7 shows the country or U.S. territory 
to which the foreign tax was paid.
For a covered security, if you made an election under 
section 1278(b) to include market discount in income as it 
accrues and you notified your payer of the election in writ-
ing in accordance with Regulations section 1. 6045-1(n)
(5), Form 1099 -INT , box 10 shows the market discount 
that accrued on the debt instrument during the year while 
held by you. Report this amount on your income tax return 
as directed in the Instructions for Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
For a covered security, Form 1099 -INT , box 11 shows 
the amount of premium amortization for the year, unless 
you notified the payer in writing in accordance with Regu-
lations section 1.6045-1(n)(5) that you did not want to am-
ortize bond premium under section 171. If an amount is 
reported in this box, see the Instructions for Schedule B 
(Form 1040). If an amount is not reported in this box for a 
covered security acquired at a premium, the payer has re-
ported a net amount of interest in box 1, 3, 8, or 9, which-
ever is applicable. If the amount in this box is greater than 
the amount of interest paid on the covered security, see 
Regulations section 1.171-2(a)(4).
Form 1099-OID. The taxable OID on a discounted obli-
gation for the part of the year you owned it is shown in 
Form 1099 -OID, box 1. Include this amount in your total 
taxable interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown on 
Form 1099 -OID, earlier. Y our identifying number may be 
truncated on any paper Form 1099-OID you receive.
Y ou must report all taxable OID even if you do not re-
ceive a Form 1099-OID.
Form 1099 -OID, box 2 shows any taxable interest on 
the obligation other than OID. Add this amount to the OID 
shown in Form 1099 -OID, box 1 and include the result in 
your total taxable income.
If you bought and/or sold an obligation during the year, 
see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates , earlier, for infor-
mation about the treatment of periodic interest that may be 
shown in Form 1099-OID, box 2.
If you forfeited interest or principal on the obligation be-
cause of an early withdrawal, the deductible amount will 
be shown in Form 1099 -OID, box 3. See Penalty on early 
withdrawal of savings, later.
Form 1099 -OID, box 4 will contain an amount if you 
were subject to backup withholding. Report the amount 
from box 4 on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 25b.
Form 1099-OID, box 5 shows the market discount that 
accrued on the debt instrument during the year while held 
by you for a covered security acquired with OID, if you 
made an election under section 1278(b) to include market 
discount in income as it accrues and you notified your 
payer of the election in writing in accordance with Regula-
tions section 1.6045-1(n)(5).
For a taxable covered security, Form 1099 -OID, box 6 
shows the amount of acquisition premium amortization for 
the year that reduces the amount of OID that is included 
as interest on your income tax return.
Form 1099-OID, box 9 shows your share of investment 
expenses of a single-class REMIC. This amount is not de-
ductible.
U.S. savings bond interest previously reported. If you 
received a Form 1099 -INT for U.S. savings bond interest, 
the form may show interest you do not have to report. See 
Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond interest, earlier.
On Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, report all the 
interest shown on your Form 1099 -INT . Then follow these 
steps.
1. Several rows above Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, 
line 2, enter a subtotal of all interest listed on Sched-
ule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1.
2. Below the subtotal, enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest 
Previously Reported” and enter amounts previously 
reported or interest accrued before you received the 
bond.
3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal and enter 
the result on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 2.
Example 1.  Y our parents bought U.S. savings bonds 
for you when you were a child. The bonds were issued in 
your name, and the interest on the bonds was reported 
each year as it accrued. See Choice to report interest 
each year, earlier.
In March 2024, you redeemed one of the bonds —a 
$1,000 Series EE bond. The bond was originally issued in 
March 2005 for $500.00. When you redeemed the bond, 
you received $732.80 for it.
The Form 1099 -INT you received shows interest in-
come of $232.80. However, since the interest on your sav-
ings bonds was reported yearly, you need only include the 
$6.40 interest that accrued from January 2024 to March 
2024.
On Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, enter your in-
terest income as shown on Form 1099 -INT—$232.80. If 
you had other taxable interest income, you would enter it 
next and then enter a subtotal, as described earlier, before 
going to the next step. Several rows above Schedule B 
(Form 1040), Part I, line 2, enter “U.S. Savings Bond Inter-
est Previously Reported” and enter $226.40 ($232.80 − 
$6.40). Subtract $226.40 from $232.80 and include $6. 40 
on Schedule B (Form 1040), line 2. Add this amount to 
your subtotal (if any) and in the total on Schedule B (Form 
1040), line 4.
Example 2. Y our uncle died and left you a $1,000 Ser-
ies EE bond. Y ou redeem the bond for $1,000.
Y our uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $500 of the 
amount you receive upon redemption is interest income. 
Y our uncle's executor included in your uncle's final return 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 25

Page 26 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$200 of the interest that had accrued at the time of your 
uncle's death. Y ou have to include only $300 in your in-
come.
The bank where you redeem the bond gives you a 
Form 1099-INT showing interest income of $500. Y ou also 
receive a Form 1099-INT showing taxable interest income 
of $300 from your savings account.
Y ou file Form 1040 or 1040-SR and complete Sched-
ule B (Form 1040). On Schedule B (Form 1040), line 1, 
you list the $500 and $300 interest amounts shown on 
your Forms 1099. Several rows above Schedule B (Form 
1040), line 2, you put a subtotal of $800. Below this subto-
tal, enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Repor-
ted” and enter the $200 interest included in your uncle's fi-
nal return. Subtract the $200 from the subtotal and enter 
$600 on Schedule B (Form 1040), line 2. Y ou then com-
plete the rest of the form.
Worksheet for savings bonds distributed from a 
retirement or profit -sharing plan. If you cashed a sav-
ings bond acquired in a taxable distribution from a retire-
ment or profit-sharing plan (as discussed under U.S. Sav-
ings Bonds, earlier), your interest income does not include 
the interest accrued before the distribution and taxed as a 
distribution from the plan.
Use the worksheet below to figure the amount you 
subtract from the interest shown on Form 
1099-INT .
A. Enter the amount of cash received upon redemption 
of the bond ..........................  
B. Enter the value of the bond at the time of distribution 
by the plan ...........................  
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on 
line A. This is the amount of interest accrued on the 
bond since it was distributed by the plan ........  
D. Enter the amount of interest shown on your Form 
1099-INT ............................  
E. Subtract the amount on line C from the amount on 
line D. This is the amount you include in “U.S. Savings 
Bond Interest Previously Reported” ............
Y our employer should tell you the value of each bond 
on the date it was distributed.
Example. Y ou received a distribution of Series EE U.S. 
savings bonds in December 2021 from your company's 
profit-sharing plan.
In March 2024, you redeemed a $100 Series EE bond 
that was part of the distribution you received in 2021. Y ou 
received $88.16 for the bond the company bought in May 
2007. The value of the bond at the time of distribution in 
2021 was $81.72. (This is the amount you included on 
your 2021 return.) The bank gave you a Form 1099 -INT 
that shows $38.16 interest (the total interest from the date 
the bond was purchased to the date of redemption). Since 
a part of the interest was included in your income in 2021, 
you need to include in your 2024 income only the interest 
that accrued after the bond was distributed to you.
On Schedule B (Form 1040), line 1, include all the inter-
est shown on your Form 1099 -INT as well as any other 
taxable interest income you received. Several rows above 
Schedule B (Form 1040), line 2, put a subtotal of all inter-
est listed on Schedule B (Form 1040), line 1. Below this 
subtotal, enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Re-
ported” and enter the amount figured on the worksheet 
below.
A. Enter the amount of cash received upon 
redemption of the bond ................. $88.16
B. Enter the value of the bond at the time of 
distribution by the plan .................. $81.72
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on 
line A. This is the amount of interest accrued on the 
bond since it was distributed by the plan ....... $6.44
D. Enter the amount of interest shown on your Form 
1099-INT .......................... $38.16
E. Subtract the amount on line C from the amount on 
line D. This is the amount you include in “U.S. 
Savings Bond Interest Previously Reported” ..... $31.72 
Subtract $31.72 from the subtotal and enter the result on 
Schedule B (Form 1040), line 2. Y ou then complete the 
rest of the form.
Interest excluded under the Education Savings Bond 
Program. Use Form 8815 to figure your interest exclusion 
when you redeem qualified savings bonds and pay quali-
fied higher education expenses during the same year.
For more information on the exclusion and qualified 
higher education expenses, see the earlier discussion un-
der Education Savings Bond Program.
Interest on seller -financed mortgage.  If an individual 
buys his or her home from you in a sale that you finance, 
you must report the amount of interest received on Sched-
ule B (Form 1040), line 1. Include on line 1 the buyer's 
name, address, and SSN. If you do not, you may have to 
pay a $50 penalty. The buyer may have to pay a $50 pen-
alty if he or she does not give you this information.
Y ou also must give your name, address, and SSN (or 
EIN) to the buyer. If you do not, you may have to pay a $50 
penalty.
Frozen deposits. Even if you receive a Form 1099 -INT 
for interest on deposits that you could not withdraw at the 
end of 2024, you must exclude these amounts from your 
gross income. (See Interest income on frozen deposits , 
earlier.) Do not include as income on your annual income 
tax return. On Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, include the 
full amount of interest shown on your Form 1099 -INT , 
line 1. Several rows above Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, 
line 2, put a subtotal of all interest income. Below this sub-
total, enter “Frozen Deposits” and show the amount of in-
terest that you are excluding. Subtract this amount from 
the subtotal and enter the result on Schedule B (Form 
1040), Part I, line 2.
Accrued interest on bonds.  If you received a Form 
1099-INT that reflects accrued interest paid on a bond you 
bought between interest payment dates, include the full 
amount shown as interest on the Form 1099 -INT on 
Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1. Then, below a 
26 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 27 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
subtotal of all interest income listed, enter “Accrued Inter-
est” and the amount of accrued interest you paid to the 
seller. That amount is taxable to the seller, not you. Sub-
tract that amount from the interest income subtotal. For 
more information, see Bonds Sold Between Interest 
Dates, earlier.
Nominee distributions. If you received a Form 1099-INT 
that includes an amount you received as a nominee for the 
real owner, report the full amount shown as interest on the 
Form 1099-INT on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1. 
Then, below a subtotal of all interest income listed, enter 
“Nominee Distribution” and the amount that actually be-
longs to someone else. Subtract that amount from the in-
terest income subtotal.
File Form 1099 -INT with the IRS.  If you received in-
terest as a nominee in 2024, you must file a Form 
1099-INT for that interest with the IRS. Send Copy A of 
Form 1099-INT with a Form 1096 to your Internal Revenue 
Service Center by February 28, 2025 (March 31, 2025, if 
you file Form 1099 -INT electronically). Give the actual 
owner of the interest Copy B of the Form 1099-INT by Jan-
uary 31, 2025. On Form 1099 -INT , you should be listed as 
the “Payer.” Prepare one Form 1099 -INT for each other 
owner and show that person as the “Recipient.” However, 
you do not have to file Form 1099 -INT to show payments 
for your spouse. For more information about the reporting 
requirements and the penalties for failure to file (or furnish) 
certain information returns, see the General Instructions 
for Certain Information Returns.
Similar rules apply to OID reported to you as a nominee 
on Form 1099 -OID. Y ou must file a Form 1099 -OID with 
Form 1096 to show the proper distributions of the OID.
Example. Y ou and your sibling have a joint savings ac-
count that paid $1,500 interest for 2024. Y our sibling de-
posited 30% of the funds in this account, and you and 
your sibling have agreed to share the yearly interest in-
come in proportion to the amount each of you has inves-
ted. Because your SSN was given to the bank, you re-
ceived a Form 1099-INT for 2024 that includes the interest 
income earned belonging to your sibling. This amount is 
$450, or 30% of the total interest of $1,500.
Y ou must give your sibling a Form 1099-INT by January 
31, 2025, showing $450 of interest income your sibling 
earned for 2024. Y ou also must send a copy of the nomi-
nee Form 1099-INT , along with Form 1096, to the Internal 
Revenue Service Center by February 28, 2025 (March 31, 
2025, if you file Form 1099 -INT electronically). Show your 
own name, address, and SSN as that of the “Payer” on the 
Form 1099-INT . Show your sibling's name, address, and 
SSN in the blocks provided for identification of the “Recipi-
ent.”
When you prepare your own federal income tax return, 
report the total amount of interest income, $1,500, on 
Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, and identify the 
name of the bank that paid this interest. Show the amount 
belonging to your sibling, $450, as a subtraction from a 
subtotal of all interest on Schedule B (Form 1040) and 
identify this subtraction as a “Nominee Distribution.” (Y our 
sibling will report the $450 of interest income on any 
income tax return your sibling files and identify you as the 
payer of that amount.)
Original issue discount (OID) adjustment.  If you are 
reporting OID in an amount less than the amount shown 
on Form 1099-OID or other written statement (such as for 
a REMIC regular interest), include the full amount of OID 
shown on your Form 1099 -OID or other statement on 
Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1. Show OID you do 
not have to report below a subtotal of the interest and OID 
listed. Identify the amount as “OID Adjustment” and sub-
tract it from the subtotal.
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings.  If you with-
draw funds from a certificate of deposit or other deferred 
interest account before maturity, you may be charged a 
penalty. The Form 1099 -INT or similar statement given to 
you by the financial institution will show the total amount of 
interest in box 1 and will show the penalty separately in 
box 2. Y ou must include in income all interest shown in 
Form 1099 -INT , box 1. Y ou can deduct the penalty on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 18.
Dividends and
Other Distributions
Dividends can be distributions of money, stock, or other 
property paid to you by a corporation or by a mutual fund. 
Y ou also may receive dividends through a partnership, an 
estate, a trust, or an association that is taxed as a corpo-
ration. However, some amounts you receive called divi-
dends actually are interest income. See Dividends that are 
actually interest, earlier.
The most common kinds of distributions are:
• Ordinary dividends,
• Capital gain distributions, and
• Nondividend distributions.
Most distributions are paid in cash (check). However, 
distributions can consist of more stock, stock rights, other 
property, or services.
Form 1099 -DIV. Most corporations use Form 1099 -DIV 
to show you the distributions you received from them dur-
ing the year. Keep this form with your records. Y ou do not 
have to attach it to your tax return. Y our identifying number 
may be truncated on any paper Form 1099 -DIV you re-
ceive.
Dividends not reported on Form 1099 -DIV. Even if 
you do not receive a Form 1099 -DIV , you must still report 
all your taxable dividend income. For example, you may 
receive distributive shares of dividends from partnerships 
or S corporations. These dividends are reported to you on 
Schedule K -1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K -1 (Form 
1120-S).
Nominees. If someone receives distributions as a 
nominee for you, that person will give you a Form 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 27

Page 28 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1099-DIV which will show distributions received on your 
behalf.
If you receive a Form 1099 -DIV that includes amounts 
belonging to another person, see Nominees under How 
T o Report Dividend Income, later, for more information.
Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute payments in lieu of 
dividends or tax -exempt interest received by a broker on 
your behalf must be reported to you on Form 1099 -MISC 
or a similar statement. See also Reporting Substitute Pay-
ments, later.
Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099.  If you re-
ceive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect amount (or 
other incorrect information), you should ask the issuer for 
a corrected form. The new Form 1099 you receive should 
be denoted “Corrected.”
Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold, exchanged, or 
otherwise disposed of after a dividend is declared but be-
fore it is paid, the owner of record (usually the payee 
shown on the dividend check) must include the dividend 
in income.
Dividends received in January.  If a mutual fund (or 
other RIC) or real estate investment trust (REIT) declares 
a dividend (including any exempt-interest dividend or capi-
tal gain distribution) in October, November, or December, 
payable to shareholders of record on a date in one of 
those months but actually pays the dividend during Janu-
ary of the next calendar year, the shareholder is consid-
ered to have received the dividend on December 31 and 
must report the dividend in the year it was declared.
Ordinary Dividends
Ordinary dividends are the most common type of distribu-
tion from a corporation or a mutual fund. They are paid out 
of earnings and profits and are ordinary income to you. 
This means they are not capital gains. Y ou can assume 
that any dividend you receive on common or preferred 
stock is an ordinary dividend unless the paying corpora-
tion or mutual fund tells you otherwise. Ordinary dividends 
will be shown on Form 1099-DIV , box 1a.
Qualified Dividends
Qualified dividends are the ordinary dividends subject to 
the same 0%, 15%, or 20% maximum tax rate that applies 
to net capital gain. They should be shown in box 1b of the 
Form 1099-DIV you receive.
See the instructions for Form 1040 to calculate the in-
come tax on net capital gain and qualified dividends.
The maximum rate on qualified dividends applies only if 
all of the following requirements are met.
• The dividends must have been paid by a U.S. corpora-
tion or a qualified foreign corporation. (See Qualified 
foreign corporation, later.)
• The dividends are not of the type listed later under 
Dividends that are not qualified dividends.
• Y ou meet the holding period (discussed next).
Holding period. Y ou must have held the stock for more 
than 60 days during the 121 -day period that begins 60 
days before the ex-dividend date. The ex -dividend date is 
the first date following the declaration of a dividend on 
which the buyer of a stock is not entitled to receive the 
next dividend payment. When counting the number of 
days you held the stock, include the day you disposed of 
the stock, but not the day you acquired it. See the exam-
ples below.
Exception for preferred stock.  In the case of prefer-
red stock, you must have held the stock more than 90 
days during the 181-day period that begins 90 days before 
the ex-dividend date if the dividends are due to periods to-
taling more than 366 days. If the preferred dividends are 
due to periods totaling less than 367 days, the holding pe-
riod in the preceding paragraph applies.
Example 1.  Y ou bought 5,000 shares of XYZ Corp. 
common stock on July 5, 2024. XYZ Corp. paid a cash 
dividend of 10 cents per share. The ex -dividend date was 
July 12, 2024. Y our Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. shows 
$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in box 1b (quali-
fied dividends). However, you sold the 5,000 shares on 
August 8, 2024. Y ou held your shares of XYZ Corp. for 
only 34 days of the 121 -day period (from July 6, 2024, 
through August 8, 2024). The 121 -day period began on 
May 13, 2024 (60 days before the ex -dividend date), and 
ended on September 10, 2024. Y ou have no qualified divi-
dends from XYZ Corp. because you held the XYZ stock 
for less than 61 days.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 
except that you bought the stock on July 11, 2024 (the day 
before the ex -dividend date), and you sold the stock on 
September 13, 2024. Y ou held the stock for 63 days (from 
July 12, 2024, through September 13, 2024). The $500 of 
qualified dividends shown in box 1b of your Form 
1099-DIV are all qualified dividends because you held the 
stock for 61 days of the 121 -day period (from July 12, 
2024, through September 13, 2024).
Example 3. Y ou bought 10,000 shares of ABC Mutual 
Fund common stock on July 5, 2024. ABC Mutual Fund 
paid a cash dividend of 10 cents per share. The ex -divi-
dend date was July 12, 2024. The ABC Mutual Fund advi-
ses you that the portion of the dividend eligible to be trea-
ted as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per share. Y our 
Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual Fund shows total ordi-
nary dividends of $1,000 and qualified dividends of $200. 
However, you sold the 10,000 shares on August 8, 2024. 
Y ou have no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual Fund 
because you held the ABC Mutual Fund stock for less 
than 61 days.
Holding period reduced where risk of loss is di-
minished. When determining whether you met the mini-
mum holding period discussed earlier, you cannot count 
any day during which you meet any of the following condi-
tions.
28 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 29 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Y ou had an option to sell, were under a contractual 
obligation to sell, or had made (and not closed) a 
short sale of substantially identical stock or securities.
2. Y ou were grantor (writer) of an option to buy substan-
tially identical stock or securities.
3. Y our risk of loss is diminished by holding one or more 
other positions in substantially similar or related prop-
erty.
For information about how to apply condition (3), see 
Regulations section 1.246-5.
Qualified foreign corporation.  A foreign corporation is 
a qualified foreign corporation if it meets any of the follow-
ing conditions.
1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S. territory.
2. The corporation is eligible for the benefits of a com-
prehensive income tax treaty with the United States 
that the Department of the T reasury determines is sat-
isfactory for this purpose and that includes an ex-
change of information program. For a list of those 
treaties, see T able 1-3.
3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2) above, but 
the stock for which the dividend is paid is readily trad-
able on an established securities market in the United 
States. See Readily tradable stock, later.
Exception. A corporation is not a qualified foreign cor-
poration if it is a passive foreign investment company dur-
ing its tax year in which the dividends are paid or during its 
previous tax year.
Controlled foreign corporation (CFC).  Dividends 
paid out of a CFC's earnings and profits that were not pre-
viously taxed are qualified dividends if the CFC is other-
wise a qualified foreign corporation and the other require-
ments in this discussion are met. Certain dividends paid 
by a CFC that would be treated as a passive foreign in-
vestment company but for section 1297(d) of the Internal 
Revenue Code may be treated as qualified dividends. For 
more information, see Notice 2004 -70, which can be 
found at IRS.gov/irb/2004-44_IRB#NOT -2004-70.
Readily tradable stock.  Any stock or American de-
positary receipt in respect of that stock is considered to 
satisfy requirement (3) under Qualified foreign corporation 
if it is listed on a national securities exchange that is regis-
tered under section 6 of the Securities Exchange Act of 
1934 or on the Nasdaq Stock Market. For a list of the ex-
changes that meet these requirements, see National 
Securities Exchange | Investor.gov.
T able 1-3. Income Tax Treaties
Income tax treaties that the United States has with the following 
countries satisfy requirement (2) under Qualified foreign corporation.
Australia Indonesia Romania
Austria Ireland Slovak
Bangladesh Israel Republic
Bulgaria Italy Slovenia
Barbados Jamaica South Africa
Belgium Japan Spain
Canada Kazakhstan Sri Lanka
Chile Korea Sweden
China Latvia Switzerland
Cyprus Lithuania Thailand
Czech Luxembourg T rinidad
 Republic Malta and
Denmark Mexico T obago
Egypt Morocco T unisia
Estonia Netherlands T urkey
Finland New Zealand Ukraine
France Norway United
Germany Pakistan Kingdom
Greece Philippines Venezuela
Iceland Poland
India Portugal
Note. For details and effective dates, see Notice 
2024-11 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2024-02, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2024-02_IRB#NOT -2024-11.
For the latest information about developments re-
lated to Pub. 550, such as tax treaties between 
the United States and particular countries, go to 
www.IRS.gov/Pub550.
Dividends that are not qualified dividends.  The fol-
lowing dividends are not qualified dividends. They are not 
qualified dividends even if they are shown on Form 
1099-DIV , box 1b.
• Capital gain distributions.
• Dividends paid on deposits with mutual savings 
banks, cooperative banks, credit unions, U.S. building 
and loan associations, U.S. savings and loan associa-
tions, federal savings and loan associations, and simi-
lar financial institutions. Report these amounts as in-
terest income.
• Dividends from a corporation that is a tax-exempt or-
ganization or farmer's cooperative during the corpora-
tion's tax year in which the dividends were paid or dur-
ing the corporation's previous tax year.
• Dividends paid by a corporation on employer securi-
ties held on the date of record by an employee stock 
ownership plan (ESOP) maintained by that corpora-
tion.
• Dividends on any share of stock to the extent you are 
obligated (whether under a short sale or otherwise) to 
make related payments for positions in substantially 
similar or related property.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 29

Page 30 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if you know or 
have reason to know the payments are not qualified 
dividends.
• Payments shown on Form 1099-DIV , box 1b, from a 
foreign corporation to the extent you know or have rea-
son to know the payments are not qualified dividends.
Dividends Used To
Buy More Stock
The corporation in which you own stock may have a divi-
dend reinvestment plan. This plan lets you choose to use 
your dividends to buy (through an agent) more shares of 
stock in the corporation instead of receiving the dividends 
in cash. Most mutual funds also permit shareholders to 
automatically reinvest distributions in more shares in the 
fund, instead of receiving cash. If you use your dividends 
to buy more stock at a price equal to its fair market value, 
you must still report the dividends as income.
If you are a member of a dividend reinvestment plan 
that lets you buy more stock at a price less than its fair 
market value, you must report as dividend income the fair 
market value of the additional stock on the dividend pay-
ment date.
Y ou also must report as dividend income any service 
charge subtracted from your cash dividends before the 
dividends are used to buy the additional stock. But you 
may be able to deduct the service charge.
In some dividend reinvestment plans, you can invest 
more cash to buy shares of stock at a price less than fair 
market value. If you choose to do this, you must report as 
dividend income the difference between the cash you in-
vest and the fair market value of the stock you buy. When 
figuring this amount, use the fair market value of the stock 
on the dividend payment date.
Money Market Funds
Report amounts you receive from money market funds as 
dividend income. Money market funds are a type of mu-
tual fund and should not be confused with bank money 
market accounts that pay interest.
Capital Gain Distributions
Capital gain distributions (also called capital gain divi-
dends) are paid to you or credited to your account by mu-
tual funds (or other regulated investment companies) and 
real estate investment trusts (REIT s). They will be shown 
in Form 1099 -DIV , box 2a you receive from the mutual 
fund or REIT .
Report capital gain distributions as long -term capital 
gains, regardless of how long you owned your shares in 
the mutual fund or REIT . See Capital gain distributions un-
der How T o Report Dividend Income, later in this chapter.
Qualified Opportunity Fund (QOF).  Effective Decem-
ber 22, 2017, section 1400Z -2 provides a temporary de-
ferral of inclusion in gross income for capital gains inves-
ted in QOFs, and permanent exclusion of capital gains 
from the sale or exchange of an investment in the QOF if 
the investment is held for at least 10 years. See the Form 
8949 instructions on how to report your election to defer 
eligible gains invested in a QOF . For additional informa-
tion, please see Opportunity Zones Frequently Asked 
Questions available at www.IRS.gov/Newsroom/
Opportunity-Zones-Frequently-Asked-Questions.
Qualified Opportunity Investment.  If you held a quali-
fied investment in a qualified opportunity fund (QOF) at 
any time during the year, you must file your return with 
Form 8997, attached. See Form 8997 instructions.
Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds and RE-
ITs. Some mutual funds and REIT s keep their long -term 
capital gains and pay tax on them. Y ou must treat your 
share of these gains as distributions, even though you did 
not actually receive them. However, they are not included 
on Form 1099 -DIV . Instead, they are reported to you in 
Form 2439, box 1a.
Form 2439 also will show how much, if any, of the un-
distributed capital gains is:
• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1b),
• Gain from qualified small business stock (section 
1202 gain, box 1c), or
• Collectibles (28%) gain (box 1d).
For information about these terms, see Capital Gain T ax 
Rates in chapter 4.
The tax paid on these gains by the mutual fund or REIT 
is shown in Form 2439, box 2.
Basis adjustment. Increase your basis in your mutual 
fund, or your interest in a REIT , by the difference between 
the gain you report and the credit you claim for the tax 
paid.
Nondividend Distributions
A nondividend distribution is a distribution that is not paid 
out of the earnings and profits of a corporation or a mutual 
fund. Y ou should receive a Form 1099-DIV or other state-
ment showing you the nondividend distribution. A nondivi-
dend distribution will be shown in Form 1099 -DIV , box 3. If 
you do not receive such a statement, you report the distri-
bution as an ordinary dividend.
Basis adjustment.  A nondividend distribution reduces 
the basis of your stock. It is not taxed until your basis in 
the stock is fully recovered. This nontaxable portion also is 
called a return of capital; it is a return of your investment in 
the stock of the company. If you buy stock in a corporation 
in different lots at different times, and you cannot definitely 
identify the shares subject to the nondividend distribution, 
reduce the basis of your earliest purchases first.
When the basis of your stock has been reduced to zero, 
report any additional nondividend distribution you receive 
as a capital gain. Whether you report it as a long -term or 
short-term capital gain depends on how long you have 
held the stock. See Holding Period in chapter 4.
30 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 31 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1.  Y ou bought stock in 2011 for $100. In 
2014, you received a nondividend distribution of $80. Y ou 
did not include this amount in your income, but you re-
duced the basis of your stock to $20. Y ou received a non-
dividend distribution of $30 in 2024. The first $20 of this 
amount reduced your basis to zero. Y ou report the other 
$10 as a long -term capital gain for 2024. Y ou must report 
as a long -term capital gain any nondividend distribution 
you receive on this stock in later years.
Example 2. Y ou bought shares in XYZ Mutual Fund in 
2020 for $12 per share. In 2021, you received a nondivi-
dend distribution of $5 per share. Y ou reduced your basis 
in each share by $5 to an adjusted basis of $7. In 2022, 
you received a nondividend distribution of $1 per share 
and further reduced your basis in each share to $6. In 
2023, you received a nondividend distribution of $2 per 
share. Y our basis was reduced to $4 per share. In 2024, 
the nondividend distribution from the mutual fund was $5 
per share. Y ou reduce your basis in each share to zero 
and report $1 of gain per share. See the Instructions for 
Form 8949 for details and more information.
For more information on Form 8949 and Sched-
ule D (Form 1040), see Reporting Capital Gains 
and Losses  in chapter 4. Also, see the Instruc-
tions for Form 8949 and the Instructions for Schedule D 
(Form 1040).
Liquidating Distributions
Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liquidating divi-
dends, are distributions you receive during a partial or 
complete liquidation of a corporation. These distributions 
are, at least in part, one form of a return of capital. They 
may be paid in one or more installments. Y ou will receive 
Form 1099 -DIV from the corporation showing you the 
amount of the liquidating distribution in box 9 or 10.
Any liquidating distribution you receive is not taxable to 
you until you have recovered the basis of your stock. After 
the basis of your stock has been reduced to zero, you 
must report the liquidating distribution as a capital gain. 
Whether you report the gain as a long -term or short -term 
capital gain depends on how long you have held the stock. 
See Holding Period in chapter 4.
Stock acquired at different times.  If you acquired 
stock in the same corporation in more than one transac-
tion, you own more than one block of stock in the corpora-
tion. If you receive distributions from the corporation in 
complete liquidation, you must divide the distribution 
among the blocks of stock you own in the following pro-
portion: the number of shares in that block over the total 
number of shares you own. Divide distributions in partial 
liquidation among that part of the stock redeemed in the 
partial liquidation. After the basis of a block of stock is re-
duced to zero, you must report the part of any later distri-
bution for that block as a capital gain.
Distributions less than basis.  If the total liquidating 
distributions you receive are less than the basis of your 
stock, you may have a capital loss. Y ou can report a 
TIP
capital loss only after you have received the final distribu-
tion in liquidation that results in the redemption or cancel-
lation of the stock. Whether you report the loss as a 
long-term or short -term capital loss depends on how long 
you held the stock. See Holding Period in chapter 4.
Distributions of Stock
and Stock Rights
Distributions by a corporation of its own stock are com-
monly known as stock dividends. Stock rights (also known 
as “stock options”) are distributions by a corporation of 
rights to acquire the corporation's stock. Generally, stock 
dividends and stock rights are not taxable to you, and you 
do not report them on your return.
Taxable stock dividends and stock rights.  Distribu-
tions of stock dividends and stock rights are taxable to you 
if any of the following apply.
1. Y ou or any other shareholder have the choice to re-
ceive cash or other property instead of stock or stock 
rights.
2. The distribution gives cash or other property to some 
shareholders and an increase in the percentage inter-
est in the corporation's assets or earnings and profits 
to other shareholders.
3. The distribution is in convertible preferred stock and 
has the same result as in (2).
4. The distribution gives preferred stock to some com-
mon stock shareholders and common stock to other 
common stock shareholders.
5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (The distribu-
tion, however, is not taxable if it is an increase in the 
conversion ratio of convertible preferred stock made 
solely to take into account a stock dividend, stock 
split, or similar event that would otherwise result in re-
ducing the conversion right.)
The term “stock” includes rights to acquire stock, and 
the term “shareholder” includes a holder of rights or con-
vertible securities.
If you receive taxable stock dividends or stock rights, 
include their fair market value at the time of distribution in 
your income.
Constructive distributions.  Y ou must treat certain 
transactions that increase your proportionate interest in 
the earnings and profits or assets of a corporation as if 
they were distributions of stock or stock rights. These con-
structive distributions are taxable if they have the same re-
sult as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4), or (5) of the 
above discussion.
This treatment applies to a change in your stock's con-
version ratio or redemption price, a difference between 
your stock's redemption price and issue price, a redemp-
tion not treated as a sale or exchange of your stock, and 
any other transaction having a similar effect on your inter-
est in the corporation.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 31

Page 32 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Preferred stock redeemable at a premium.  If you 
receive preferred stock having a redemption price higher 
than its issue price, the difference (the redemption pre-
mium) generally is taxable as a constructive distribution of 
additional stock on the preferred stock.
For stock issued before October 10, 1990, you include 
the redemption premium in your income ratably over the 
period during which the stock cannot be redeemed. For 
stock issued after October 9, 1990, you include the re-
demption premium on the basis of its economic accrual 
over the period during which the stock cannot be re-
deemed, as if it were original issue discount on a debt in-
strument. See Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier in this 
chapter.
The redemption premium is not a constructive distribu-
tion, and is not taxable as a result, in the following situa-
tions.
1. The stock was issued before October 10, 1990 (be-
fore December 20, 1995, if redeemable solely at the 
option of the issuer), and the redemption premium is 
“reasonable.” (For stock issued before October 10, 
1990, only the part of the redemption premium that is 
not “reasonable” is a constructive distribution.) The re-
demption premium is reasonable if it is not more than 
10% of the issue price on stock not redeemable for 5 
years from the issue date or is in the nature of a pen-
alty for making a premature redemption.
2. The stock was issued after October 9, 1990 (after De-
cember 19, 1995, if redeemable solely at the option of 
the issuer), and the redemption premium is de mini-
mis. The redemption premium is de minimis if it is less 
than one-fourth of 1% (0.0025) of the redemption 
price multiplied by the number of full years from the 
date of issue to the date redeemable.
3. The stock was issued after October 9, 1990, and must 
be redeemed at a specified time or is redeemable at 
your option, but the redemption is unlikely because it 
is subject to a contingency outside your control (not 
including the possibility of default, insolvency, etc.).
4. The stock was issued after December 19, 1995, and 
is redeemable solely at the option of the issuer, but 
the redemption premium is in the nature of a penalty 
for premature redemption or redemption is not more 
likely than not to occur. The redemption will be treated 
under a “safe harbor” as not more likely than not to oc-
cur if all of the following are true.
a. Y ou and the issuer are not related under the rules 
discussed in chapter 4 under Losses on Sales or 
T rades of Property, substituting “20%” for “50%.”
b. There are no plans, arrangements, or agreements 
that effectively require or are intended to compel 
the issuer to redeem the stock.
c. The redemption would not reduce the stock's 
yield.
Basis. Y our basis in stock or stock rights received in a 
taxable distribution is their fair market value when distrib-
uted. If you receive stock or stock rights that are not taxa-
ble to you, see Stocks and Bonds, later, for information on 
how to figure their basis.
Fractional shares. Y ou may not own enough stock in a 
corporation to receive a full share of stock if the corpora-
tion declares a stock dividend. However, with the approval 
of the shareholders, the corporation may set up a plan in 
which fractional shares are not issued but instead are 
sold, and the cash proceeds are given to the sharehold-
ers. Any cash you receive for fractional shares under such 
a plan is treated as an amount realized on the sale of the 
fractional shares. Report this transaction on Form 8949. 
Enter your gain or loss, the difference between the cash 
you receive and the basis of the fractional shares sold, in 
column (h) of Schedule D (Form 1040) in Part I or Part II, 
whichever is appropriate.
Report these transactions on Form 8949 with the 
correct box checked.
For more information on Form 8949 and Schedule D 
(Form 1040), see Reporting Capital Gains and Losses  in 
chapter 4. Also, see the Instructions for Form 8949 and 
the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Example. Y ou own one share of common stock that 
you bought on January 6, 2015, for $100. The corporation 
declared a common stock dividend of 5% on July 1, 2024. 
The fair market value of the stock at the time the stock div-
idend was declared was $200. Y ou were paid $10 for the 
fractional-share stock dividend under a plan described in 
the discussion above. Y ou figure your gain or loss as fol-
lows.
Fair market value of old stock ............... $200.00 
Fair market value of stock dividend
(cash received) ........................ + 10.00 
Fair market value of old stock and stock dividend ... $210.00 
Basis (cost) of old stock
after the stock dividend
(($200 ÷ $210) × $100) ................... $95.24
Basis (cost) of stock dividend
(($10 ÷ $210) × $100) .................... + 4.76 
T otal ............................... $100.00 
Cash received .........................  $10.00
Basis (cost) of stock dividend ............... − 4.76 
Gain  $5.24 
Because you had held the share of stock for more than 
1 year at the time the stock dividend was declared, your 
gain on the stock dividend is a long-term capital gain.
Scrip dividends. A corporation that declares a stock 
dividend may issue you a scrip certificate that entitles you 
to a fractional share. The certificate generally is nontaxa-
ble when you receive it. If you choose to have the corpora-
tion sell the certificate for you and give you the proceeds, 
your gain or loss is the difference between the proceeds 
and the part of your basis in the corporation's stock alloca-
ted to the certificate.
However, if you receive a scrip certificate that you can 
choose to redeem for cash instead of stock, the certificate 
CAUTION
!
32 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 33 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is taxable when you receive it. Y ou must include its fair 
market value in income on the date you receive it.
Other Distributions
Y ou may receive any of the following distributions during 
the year.
Exempt-interest dividends.  Exempt-interest dividends 
you receive from a mutual fund or other RIC are not inclu-
ded in your taxable income. (However, see Information re-
porting requirement , next.) Exempt -interest dividends 
should be shown in Form 1099-DIV , box 12.
Information reporting requirement.  Although ex-
empt-interest dividends are not taxable, you must show 
them on your tax return if you have to file a return. See Re-
porting tax-exempt interest, earlier.
Alternative minimum tax treatment. Exempt-interest 
dividends paid from specified private activity bonds may 
be subject to the AMT . The exempt-interest dividends sub-
ject to the AMT should be shown in Form 1099 -DIV , 
box 13. See Form 6251 and its instructions for more infor-
mation.
Dividends on insurance policies. Insurance policy divi-
dends the insurer keeps and uses to pay your premiums 
are not taxable. However, you must report as taxable inter-
est income the interest that is paid or credited on divi-
dends left with the insurance company.
If dividends on an insurance contract (other than a 
modified endowment contract) are distributed to you, they 
are a partial return of the premiums you paid. Do not in-
clude them in your gross income until they are more than 
the total of all net premiums you paid for the contract.
Dividends on veterans' insurance.  Dividends you re-
ceive on veterans' insurance policies are not taxable. In 
addition, interest on dividends left with the Department of 
Veterans Affairs is not taxable.
Patronage dividends.  Generally, patronage dividends 
you receive in money from a cooperative organization are 
included in your income. Y ou should receive Form 
1099-PATR.
Do not include in your income patronage dividends you 
receive on:
• Property bought for your personal use, or
• Capital assets or depreciable property bought for use 
in your business. But you must reduce the basis (cost) 
of the items bought. If the dividend is more than the 
adjusted basis of the assets, you must report the ex-
cess as income.
These rules are the same whether the cooperative pay-
ing the dividend is a taxable or tax-exempt cooperative.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.  Do not report 
these amounts as dividends. Instead, include these 
amounts on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8g.
How To Report
Dividend Income
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Nominee
 Restricted stock
 
Report the total of your ordinary dividends on Form 1040 
or 1040 -SR, line 3b. Report qualified dividends on Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 3a.
Form 1099 -DIV. If you owned stock on which you re-
ceived $10 or more in dividends and other distributions, 
you should receive a Form 1099 -DIV . Even if you do not 
receive a Form 1099 -DIV , you must report all your divi-
dend income.
See Form 1099 -DIV and its instructions for more infor-
mation on how to report dividend income.
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. Y ou must complete Schedule B 
(Form 1040), Part II, and attach it to your Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, if:
• Y our ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV , box 1a) are 
more than $1,500, or
• Y ou received, as a nominee, dividends that actually 
belong to someone else.
See Instructions for Schedule B (Form 1040) for more in-
formation.
List on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part II, line 5, each 
payer's name and the ordinary dividends you received. If 
your securities are held by a brokerage firm (in “street 
name”), list the name of the brokerage firm shown on 
Form 1099 -DIV as the payer. If your stock is held by a 
nominee who is the owner of record, and the nominee 
credited or paid you dividends on the stock, show the 
name of the nominee and the dividends you received or 
for which you were credited.
Enter on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part II, line 6 the to-
tal of the amounts listed on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part 
II, line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a nominee, see 
Nominees, later.).
Dividends received on restricted stock.  Restricted 
stock is stock you get from your employer for services you 
perform and that is nontransferable and subject to a sub-
stantial risk of forfeiture. Y ou do not have to include the 
value of the stock in your income when you receive it. 
However, if you get dividends on restricted stock, you 
must include them in your income as wages, not divi-
dends. See Restricted Property in Pub. 525 for information 
on restricted stock dividends.
Y our employer should include these dividends in the 
wages shown on your Form W -2. If you also get a Form 
1099-DIV for these dividends, list them on Schedule B 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 33

Page 34 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Form 1040), Part II, line 5, with the other dividends you 
received. Enter a subtotal of all your dividend income sev-
eral rows above Schedule B (Form 1040), Part II, line 6. 
Below the subtotal, enter “Dividends on restricted stock 
reported as wages on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 1,” and 
include the dividends included in your wages on Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR, line 1. Subtract this amount from the 
subtotal and enter the result on Schedule B (Form 1040), 
Part II, line 6.
Election. Y ou can choose to include the value of re-
stricted stock in gross income as pay for services. If you 
made this choice, report the dividends on the stock like 
any other dividends. If you receive both a Form 1099 -DIV 
and a Form W -2 showing these dividends, do not include 
the dividends in your wages reported on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 1. Attach a statement to your Form 1040 or 
1040-SR explaining why the amount shown on your Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR, line 1 is different from the amount 
shown on your Form W-2.
Independent contractor.  If you received restricted 
stock for services as an independent contractor, the rules 
in the previous discussion apply. Generally, you must treat 
dividends you receive on the stock as income from 
self-employment.
Qualified dividends.  Report qualified dividends (Form 
1099-DIV , box 1b) on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 3a. The 
amount in Form 1099 -DIV , box 1b is already included in 
box 1a. Do not add the amount in box 1b to, or subtract it 
from, the amount in box 1a. Do not include any of the fol-
lowing on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 3a.
• Qualified dividends you received as a nominee. See 
Nominees, later.
• Dividends on stock for which you did not meet the 
holding period. See Holding period, earlier, under 
Qualified Dividends.
• Dividends on any share of stock to the extent you are 
obligated (whether under a short sale or otherwise) to 
make related payments for positions in substantially 
similar or related property.
• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if you know or 
have reason to know the payments are not qualified 
dividends.
• Payments shown on Form 1099-DIV , box 1b, from a 
foreign corporation to the extent you know or have rea-
son to know the payments are not qualified dividends.
If you have qualified dividends, you must figure your tax 
by completing the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain 
T ax Worksheet in the Form 1040 or 1040-SR instructions 
or the Schedule D T ax Worksheet in the Schedule D 
(Form 1040) instructions, whichever applies.
Investment interest deducted. If you claim a deduc-
tion for investment interest, you may have to reduce the 
amount of your qualified dividends that are eligible for the 
0%, 15%, or 20% tax rate. Reduce it by the qualified divi-
dends you choose to include in investment income when 
figuring the limit on your investment interest deduction. 
This is done on the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain 
T ax Worksheet or the Schedule D T ax Worksheet. For 
more information about the limit on investment interest, 
see Interest Expenses in chapter 3.
Capital gain distributions.  If you received capital gain 
distributions, you report them directly on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 7; or on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 13, 
depending on your situation. If you received capital gain 
distributions from a mutual fund or real estate investment 
trust (REIT), the distributions of net realized short -term 
capital gains are not treated as capital gains. Instead, they 
are included on Form 1099-DIV as ordinary dividends. Re-
port them on your tax return as ordinary dividends.
Exceptions to filing Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 
1040). There are certain situations where you may not 
have to file Form 8949 and/or Schedule D (Form 1040). 
See Instructions for Form 1040, Line 7, for those excep-
tions.
Undistributed capital gains.  Follow the Instructions 
for the Shareholder on Form 2439 to report undistributed 
capital gains and the tax paid by the mutual fund on those 
gains.
Nondividend distributions.  Report nondividend distri-
butions (Form 1099-DIV , box 3) only after your basis in the 
stock has been reduced to zero. After the basis of your 
stock has been reduced to zero, you must show this ex-
cess amount on Form 8949, Part I, if you held the stock 1 
year or less. Show it on Form 8949, Part II, if you held the 
stock for more than 1 year. See Form 8949 and instruc-
tions.
Report these transactions on Form 8949 with the 
correct box checked.
For more information on Form 8949 and Schedule D 
(Form 1040), see Reporting Capital Gains and Losses  in 
chapter 4. Also, see the Instructions for Form 8949 and 
the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Nominees. If you received ordinary dividends as a nomi-
nee (that is, the dividends are in your name but actually 
belong to someone else), include them on Schedule B 
(Form 1040), Part II, line 5. Several rows above Sched-
ule B (Form 1040), Part II, line 6, put a subtotal of all divi-
dend income listed on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part II, 
line 5. Below this subtotal, enter “Nominee Distribution” 
and show the amount received as a nominee. Subtract the 
total of your nominee distributions from the subtotal. Enter 
the result on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part II, line 6.
If you received a capital gain distribution or were alloca-
ted an undistributed capital gain as a nominee, report only 
the amount that belongs to you on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, 
line 7; or Schedule D (Form 1040), line 13, whichever is 
appropriate. Attach a statement to your return showing the 
full amount you received or were allocated and the 
amount you received or were allocated as a nominee.
File Form 1099-DIV with the IRS. If you received divi-
dends as a nominee in 2024, you must file a Form 
CAUTION
!
34 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 35 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1099-DIV (or Form 2439) for those dividends with the IRS. 
Send the Form 1099-DIV with a Form 1096 to your Internal 
Revenue Service Center by February 28, 2025 (March 31, 
2025, if you file Form 1099 -DIV electronically). Give the 
actual owner of the dividends Copy B of the Form 
1099-DIV by January 31, 2025. On Form 1099 -DIV , you 
should be listed as the “Payer.” The other owner should be 
listed as the “Recipient.” Y ou do not, however, have to file 
a Form 1099 -DIV to show payments for your spouse. For 
more information about the reporting requirements and 
the penalties for failure to file (or furnish) certain informa-
tion returns, see the General Instructions for Certain Infor-
mation Returns and the Instructions for Form 2439.
Stripped
Preferred Stock
If the dividend rights are stripped from certain preferred 
stock, the holder of the stripped preferred stock may have 
to include amounts in income equal to the amounts that 
would have been included if the stock were a bond with 
OID.
Stripped preferred stock defined.  Stripped preferred 
stock is any stock that meets both of the following tests.
1. There has been a separation in ownership between 
the stock and any dividend on the stock that has not 
become payable.
2. The stock:
a. Is limited and preferred as to dividends,
b. Does not participate in corporate growth to any 
significant extent, and
c. Has a fixed redemption price.
Treatment of buyer. If you buy stripped preferred stock 
after April 30, 1993, you must include certain amounts in 
your gross income while you hold the stock. These 
amounts are ordinary income. They are equal to the 
amounts you would have included in gross income if the 
stock were a bond that:
1. Was issued on the purchase date of the stock, and
2. Has OID equal to:
a. The redemption price for the stock, minus
b. The price at which you bought the stock.
Include these amounts on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8z.
This treatment also applies to you if you acquire the 
stock in such a way (for example, by gift) that your basis in 
the stock is determined by using a buyer's basis.
Treatment of person stripping stock.  If you strip the 
rights to one or more dividends from preferred stock, you 
are treated as having purchased the stock. Y ou are treated 
as making the purchase on the date you disposed of the 
dividend rights. Y our adjusted basis in the preferred stock 
is treated as your purchase price. The rules described in 
T reatment of buyer, earlier, apply to you.
REMICs, FASITs,
and Other CDOs
Holders of interests in real estate mortgage investment 
conduits (REMICs), financial asset securitization invest-
ment trusts (FASIT s), and other collateralized debt obliga-
tions (CDOs) must follow special rules for reporting in-
come and any expenses from these investment products.
REMICs
A REMIC is an entity formed for the purpose of holding a 
fixed pool of mortgages secured by interests in real prop-
erty. A REMIC issues regular and residual interests to in-
vestors. A REMIC generally is not treated as a corpora-
tion, partnership, or trust. For purposes of subtitle F of the 
Internal Revenue Code (Procedure and Administration), a 
REMIC generally is treated as a partnership with the resid-
ual interest holders treated as the partners. The regular in-
terests are treated as debt instruments.
REMIC income or loss is not income or loss from a pas-
sive activity.
For more information about the qualifications and tax 
treatment that apply to a REMIC and the interests of in-
vestors in a REMIC, see sections 860A through 860G of 
the Internal Revenue Code, and the regulations under 
those sections.
Regular Interest
A REMIC can have several classes (also known as 
“tranches”) of regular interests. A regular interest uncondi-
tionally entitles the holder to receive a specified principal 
amount (or other similar amount).
A REMIC regular interest is treated as a debt instru-
ment for income tax purposes. Accordingly, the OID, mar-
ket discount, and income reporting rules that apply to 
bonds and other debt instruments as described earlier in 
this publication under Discount on Debt Instruments apply, 
with certain modifications discussed below.
Generally, you report your income from a regular inter-
est on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 2b. For more informa-
tion on how to report interest and OID, see How T o Report 
Interest Income, earlier.
Holders must use accrual method.  Holders of regular 
interests must use an accrual method of accounting to re-
port OID and interest income. Because income under an 
accrual method is not determined by the receipt of cash, 
you may have to include OID or interest income in your 
taxable income even if you have not received any cash 
payments.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 35

Page 36 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Forms 1099 -INT and 1099 -OID. Y ou should receive a 
copy of Form 1099 -INT or Form 1099 -OID from the RE-
MIC. See the General Instructions for Certain Information 
Returns for information on when you should receive your 
copy of Form 1099 -INT or Form 1099 -OID and a written 
statement providing additional information. The statement 
should contain enough information to enable you to figure 
your accrual of market discount or amortizable bond pre-
mium.
Form 1099-INT shows interest income that accrued to 
you for the period you held the regular interest.
Form 1099-OID shows OID and interest, if any, that ac-
crued to you for the period you held the regular interest. 
Y ou will not need to make any adjustments to the amounts 
reported even if you held the regular interest for only a part 
of the calendar year. However, if you bought the regular in-
terest at a premium or acquisition premium, see Refigur-
ing OID shown on Form 1099-OID, earlier.
You may not get a Form 1099.  Corporations and 
other persons specified in Regulations section 
1.6049-7(c) will not receive Forms 1099. These persons 
and fiscal year taxpayers may obtain tax information by 
contacting the REMIC or the issuer of the CDO, if they 
hold their interest directly from the REMIC or issuer of the 
CDO. Pub 938 explains how to request this information.
Pub. 938 is available at IRS.gov/pub938.
If you hold a regular interest or CDO through a nominee 
(rather than directly), you can request the information from 
the nominee.
Allocated investment expenses. A single-class REMIC 
will report your share of its investment expenses in Form 
1099-INT , box 5 or Form 1099-OID, box 9. This amount is 
not deductible. A single-class REMIC is one that generally 
would be classified as a trust for tax purposes if it had not 
elected REMIC status.
Redemption of regular interests at maturity. Redemp-
tion of debt instruments at their maturity is treated as a 
sale or exchange. Y ou must report redemptions on your 
tax return whether or not you realize gain or loss on the 
transaction. Y our basis is your adjusted issue price, which 
includes any OID you previously reported in income.
Any amount you receive on the retirement of a debt in-
strument is treated as if you had sold or exchanged that 
instrument. A debt instrument is retired when it is reac-
quired or redeemed by the issuer and canceled.
Sale or exchange of a regular interest.  Some of 
your gain on the sale or exchange of a REMIC regular in-
terest may be ordinary income. The ordinary income part, 
if any, is:
• The amount that would have been included in your in-
come if the yield to maturity on the regular interest had 
been 110% of the applicable federal rate at the begin-
ning of your holding period, minus
• The amount you included in your income.
Residual Interest
A residual interest is an interest in a REMIC that is not a 
regular interest. It is designated as a residual interest by 
the REMIC.
If you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC, you must 
take into account on a quarterly basis your daily portion of 
the taxable income or net loss of the REMIC for each day 
during the tax year you hold the residual interest. Y ou must 
report these amounts as ordinary income or loss.
Basis in the residual interest. Y our basis in the residual 
interest is increased by taxable income you take into ac-
count. Y our basis is decreased (but not below zero) by the 
cash or the fair market value of any property distributed to 
you, and by any net loss you have taken into account. If 
you sell or transfer your residual interest, you must adjust 
your basis to reflect your share of the REMIC's taxable in-
come or net loss immediately before the sale or transfer. 
See Wash Sales, in chapter 4, for more information about 
selling a residual interest.
Treatment of distributions.  Y ou must include in your 
gross income the part of any distribution that is more than 
your adjusted basis. T reat the distribution as a gain from 
the sale or exchange of your residual interest.
Schedule Q (Form 1066).  If you hold a REMIC residual 
interest, you should receive Schedule Q (Form 1066) and 
instructions from the REMIC each quarter. Schedule Q 
(Form 1066) will indicate your share of the REMIC's quar-
terly taxable income (or loss).
Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part IV , to report your to-
tal share of the REMIC's taxable income (or loss) for each 
quarter included in your tax year.
For more information about reporting your income (or 
loss) from a residual interest in a REMIC, follow the In-
structions for Schedule Q (Form 1066) and Schedule E 
(Form 1040).
Collateralized Debt Obligations 
(CDOs)
A CDO is a debt instrument, other than a REMIC regular 
interest, that is secured by a pool of mortgages or other 
evidence of debt and that has principal payments subject 
to acceleration. ( Note: While REMIC regular interests are 
collateralized debt obligations, they have unique rules that 
do not apply to CDOs issued before 1987.) CDOs, also 
known as “pay-through bonds,” are commonly divided into 
different classes (also called “tranches”).
CDOs can be secured by a pool of mortgages, automo-
bile loans, equipment leases, or credit card receivables.
For more information about the qualifications and the 
tax treatment that apply to an issuer of a CDO, see section 
1272(a)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code and the regula-
tions under that section.
The OID, market discount, and income -reporting rules 
that apply to bonds and other debt instruments, as 
36 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 37 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
described earlier in this chapter under Discount on Debt 
Instruments, also apply to a CDO.
Y ou must include interest income from your CDO in 
your gross income under your regular method of account-
ing. Also, include any OID accrued on your CDO during 
the tax year.
Generally, you report your income from a CDO on Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR, line 2b. For more information about re-
porting these amounts on your return, see How T o Report 
Interest Income, earlier.
Forms 1099 -INT and 1099 -OID. Y ou should receive a 
copy of Form 1099 -INT or Form 1099 -OID generally by 
January 31, 2025. See the General Instructions for Certain 
Information Returns for information on when you should 
receive your copy of Form 1099 -INT or Form 1099 -OID 
and a written statement providing additional information. 
The statement should contain enough information about 
the CDO to enable you to figure your accrual of market 
discount or amortizable bond premium.
Form 1099-INT shows the interest income paid to you 
for the period you held the CDO.
Form 1099-OID shows the OID accrued to you and the 
interest, if any, paid to you for the period you held the 
CDO. Y ou should not need to make any adjustments to 
the amounts reported even if you held the CDO for only a 
part of the calendar year. However, if you bought the CDO 
at a premium or acquisition premium, see Refiguring OID 
shown on Form 1099-OID, earlier.
If you did not receive a Form 1099, see Y ou may not get 
a Form 1099, earlier.
FASITs
A financial asset securitization investment trust (FASIT) is 
an entity that securitizes debt obligations such as credit 
card receivables, home equity loans, and automobile 
loans.
A regular interest in a FASIT is treated as a debt instru-
ment. The rules described under Collateralized Debt Obli-
gations (CDOs), earlier, apply to a regular interest in a FA-
SIT , except that a holder of a regular interest in a FASIT 
must use an accrual method of accounting to report OID 
and interest income.
See Internal Revenue Code sections 860H, 860I, 860J, 
860K, 860L, before repeal by PL 108–357, October 22, 
2004, for more information on FASIT s.
Beginning January 1, 2005, the special rules for 
FASIT s are repealed. However, the special rules 
still apply to any FASIT in existence on October 
22, 2004, to the extent that regular interests issued by the 
FASIT before that date continue to remain outstanding in 
accordance with the original terms of issuance.
S Corporations
In general, an S corporation does not pay a tax on its in-
come. Instead, its income and expenses are passed 
CAUTION
!
through to the shareholders, who then report these items 
on their own income tax returns.
If you are an S corporation shareholder, your share of 
the corporation's current year income or loss and other tax 
items are taxed to you whether or not you receive any 
amount. Generally, those items increase or decrease the 
basis of your S corporation stock, as appropriate.
Generally, S corporation distributions, except dividend 
distributions, are considered a return of capital and reduce 
your basis in the stock of the corporation. The part of any 
distribution that is more than your basis is treated as a 
gain from the sale or exchange of property. The corpora-
tion's distributions may be in the form of cash or property.
S corporation distributions are not treated as dividends 
except in certain cases in which the corporation has accu-
mulated earnings and profits from years before it became 
an S corporation.
Reporting S corporation income, deductions, and 
credits. The S corporation should send you a copy of 
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120-S) showing your share of the S 
corporation's income, credits, and deductions for the tax 
year. Y ou must report your distributive share of the S cor-
poration's income, gain, loss, deductions, or credits on the 
appropriate lines and schedules of your Form 1040 or 
1040-SR.
For more information about your treatment of S corpo-
ration tax items, see Shareholder's Instructions for Sched-
ule K-1 (Form 1120-S).
Limit on losses and deductions.  The deduction for 
your share of losses and deductions shown on Sched-
ule K-1 (Form 1120 -S) is limited to the adjusted basis of 
your stock and any debt the corporation owes you. Any 
loss or deduction not allowed because of this limit is car-
ried over and treated as a loss or deduction in the next tax 
year.
Passive activity losses. Rules apply that limit losses 
from passive activities. Y our copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 
1120-S) and its instructions will explain the limits and tell 
you where on your return to report your share of S corpo-
ration items from passive activities.
Form 8582. If you have a passive activity loss from an 
S corporation, you must complete Form 8582 to figure the 
allowable loss to enter on your return. See Pub. 925 for 
more information.
Investment Clubs
An investment club is formed when a group of friends, 
neighbors, business associates, or others pool their 
money to invest in stock or other securities. The club may 
or may not have a written agreement, a charter, or bylaws.
Usually, the group operates informally with members 
pledging to pay a monthly regular amount into the club. 
Some clubs have a committee that gathers information on 
securities, selects the most promising securities, and 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 1 Investment Income 37

Page 38 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
recommends that the club invest in them. Other clubs ro-
tate these responsibilities among all their members. Most 
clubs require all members to vote for or against all invest-
ments, sales, trades, and other transactions.
Identifying number. Each club must have an EIN to use 
when filing its return. The club's EIN also may have to be 
given to the payer of dividends or other income from in-
vestments recorded in the club's name. T o obtain an EIN, 
apply online at IRS.gov/Businesses/Small-Businesses-&-
Self-Employed/Apply-for-an-Employer-Identification-
Number-(EIN)-Online or file Form SS -4. See chapter 5, 
How T o Get T ax Help, for more information about how to 
get this form.
Investments in name of member.  When an invest-
ment is recorded in the name of one club member, this 
member must give its SSN to the payer of investment in-
come. (When an investment is held in the names of two or 
more club members, the SSN of only one member must 
be given to the payer.) This member is considered the re-
cord owner for the actual owner, the investment club. This 
member is a “nominee” and must file an information return 
with the IRS. For example, the nominee member must file 
Form 1099-DIV for dividend income, showing the club as 
the owner of the dividend, its SSN, and the EIN of the 
club.
Tax Treatment of the Club
Generally, an investment club is treated as a partnership 
for federal tax purposes unless it chooses otherwise. In 
some situations, however, it is taxed as a corporation or a 
trust.
Clubs formed before 1997.  Before 1997, the rules for 
determining how an investment club is treated were differ-
ent from those explained in the following discussions. An 
investment club that existed before 1997 is treated for 
later years the same way it was treated before 1997, un-
less it chooses to be treated a different way under the new 
rules. T o make that choice, the club must file Form 8832.
Club as a Partnership
If your club is not taxed as a corporation or a trust, it will be 
treated as a partnership.
Filing requirement. If your investment club is treated as 
a partnership, it must file Form 1065. However, as a part-
ner in the club, you must report on your individual return 
your share of the club's income, gains, losses, deductions, 
and credits for the club's tax year. (Its tax year generally 
must be the same tax year as that of the partners owning 
a majority interest.) Y ou must report these items whether 
or not you actually receive any distribution from the part-
nership.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065).  Y ou should receive a copy 
of Schedule K -1 (Form 1065) from the partnership. The 
amounts shown on Schedule K -1 (Form 1065) are your 
share of the partnership's income, deductions, and cred-
its. Report each amount on the appropriate lines and 
schedules of your income tax return.
The club's expenses for producing or collecting in-
come, for managing investment property, or for determin-
ing any tax are listed separately on Schedule K -1 (Form 
1065).
For more information about reporting your income from 
a partnership, see the Schedule K -1 (Form 1065) instruc-
tions. Also, see Pub. 541.
Passive activity losses. Rules apply that limit losses 
from passive activities. Y our copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 
1065) and its instructions will tell you where on your return 
to report your share of partnership items from passive ac-
tivities. If you have a passive activity loss from a partner-
ship, you must complete Form 8582 to figure the amount 
of the allowable loss to enter on your tax return.
No social security coverage for investment club earn-
ings. If an investment club partnership's activities are 
limited to investing in savings certificates, stock, or securi-
ties, and collecting interest or dividends for its members' 
accounts, a member's share of income is not earnings 
from self -employment. Y ou cannot voluntarily pay the 
self-employment tax to increase your social security cov-
erage and ultimate benefits.
Club as a Corporation
An investment club formed after 1996 is taxed as a corpo-
ration if:
• It is formed under a federal or state law that refers to it 
as incorporated or as a corporation, body corporate, 
or body politic;
• It is formed under a state law that refers to it as a 
joint-stock company or joint-stock association; or
• It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.
Choosing to be taxed as a corporation.  T o choose to 
be taxed as a corporation, the club cannot be a trust (see 
Club as a T rust, later) or otherwise subject to special treat-
ment under the tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to 
make the choice.
Filing requirement.  If your club is taxed as a corpora-
tion, it must file Form 1120. In that case, you do not report 
any of its income or expenses on your individual return. All 
ordinary income and expenses and capital gains and los-
ses must be reported on the Form 1120. Any distribution 
the club makes that qualifies as a dividend must be repor-
ted on Form 1099 -DIV if total distributions to the share-
holder are $10 or more for the year.
Y ou must report any distributions you receive from the 
club on your individual return. Y ou should receive a copy 
of Form 1099 -DIV from the club showing the distributions 
you received.
Some corporations can choose not to be taxed and 
have earnings taxed to the shareholders. See S Corpora-
tions, earlier.
For more information about corporations, see Pub. 542.
38 Chapter 1 Investment Income Publication 550 (2024)

Page 39 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Club as a Trust
In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as a trust. In 
general, a trust is an arrangement through which trustees 
take title to property for the purpose of protecting or con-
serving it for the beneficiaries under the ordinary rules ap-
plied in chancery or probate courts. An arrangement is 
treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purpose is to vest 
in trustees responsibility for protecting and conserving 
property for beneficiaries who cannot share in that respon-
sibility and so are not associates in a joint enterprise for 
the conduct of business for profit. If you need more infor-
mation about trusts, see Regulations section 301.7701-4.
Filing requirement.  If your club is taxed as a trust, it 
must file Form 1041. Y ou should receive a copy of Sched-
ule K -1 (Form 1041) from the trust. Report the amounts 
shown on Schedule K -1 (Form 1041) on the appropriate 
lines and schedules of your income tax return.
2.
Tax Shelters and Other 
Reportable
Transactions
Introduction
Investments that yield tax benefits are sometimes called 
“tax shelters.” In some cases, Congress has concluded 
that the loss of revenue is an acceptable side effect of 
special tax provisions designed to encourage taxpayers to 
make certain types of investments. In many cases, how-
ever, losses from tax shelters produce little or no benefit to 
society, or the tax benefits are exaggerated beyond those 
intended. Those cases are called “abusive tax shelters.” 
An investment that is considered a tax shelter is subject to 
restrictions, including the requirement that it be disclosed. 
See Disclosure of reportable transactions, later.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• Abusive T ax Shelters,
• Rules T o Curb Abusive T ax Shelters,
• Investor Reporting,
• Penalties, and
• Whether T o Invest.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
538 Accounting Periods and Methods
561 Determining the Value of Donated Property
925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Form (and Instructions)
8275 Disclosure Statement
8275-R Regulation Disclosure Statement
8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions
8865 Return of U.S. Persons With Respect to 
Certain Foreign Partnerships
8886 Reportable T ransaction Disclosure Statement
8918 Material Advisor Disclosure Statement
8938 Statement of Specified Foreign Financial 
Assets
See chapter 5, How T o Get T ax Help, for information about 
getting these publications and forms.
Abusive Tax Shelters
Abusive tax shelters are marketing schemes involving arti-
ficial transactions with little or no economic reality. They 
often make use of unrealistic allocations, inflated apprais-
als, losses in connection with nonrecourse loans, mis-
matching of income and deductions, financing techniques 
that do not conform to standard commercial business 
practices, or mischaracterization of the substance of the 
transaction. Despite appearances to the contrary, the tax-
payer generally takes little risk.
Abusive tax shelters commonly involve package deals 
designed from the start to generate losses, deductions, or 
credits that will be far more than the present or future in-
vestment. For example, abusive tax shelters may promise 
investors from the start that future inflated appraisals will 
enable them to deduct charitable contribution deductions 
based on those appraisals. (But see the appraisal require-
ments discussed under Rules T o Curb Abusive T ax Shel-
ters, later.) They are commonly marketed in terms of the 
ratio of tax deductions allegedly available to each dollar 
invested. This ratio (or “write -off”) is frequently said to be 
several times greater than one-to-one.
Because there are many types of abusive tax shelters, 
it is not possible to list all the factors you should consider 
in determining whether an offering is an abusive tax shel-
ter. However, you should ask the following questions, 
which might provide a clue to the abusive nature of the 
plan.
• Do the tax benefits far outweigh the economic bene-
fits? Are the tax benefits the primary reason for the 
transaction?
  538
  561
  925
  8275 
  8275-R 
  8283
  8865
  8886 
  8918
  8938
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 2 T ax Shelters and Other Reportable 
T ransactions
39

Page 40 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Is this a transaction you would seriously consider if 
you hoped to make a profit?
• Do shelter assets really exist and, if so, are they in-
sured for less than their purchase price?
• Is there a nontax justification for the way profits and 
losses are allocated to partners?
• Do the facts and supporting documents make eco-
nomic sense? For example, are there sales and re-
sales of the tax shelter property at ever increasing pri-
ces?
• Does the investment plan involve a gimmick, device, 
or sham to hide the economic reality of the transac-
tion?
• Does the promoter offer to backdate documents? Are 
you instructed to backdate checks covering your in-
vestment?
• Is your debt a real debt or are you assured by the pro-
moter that you will never have to pay it?
• Does this transaction involve laundering U.S. source 
income through foreign corporations incorporated in a 
tax haven and owned by U.S. shareholders?
Rules To Curb
Abusive Tax Shelters
Congress has enacted a series of income tax laws de-
signed to halt the growth of abusive tax shelters. These 
provisions include the following.
Disclosure of reportable transactions.  Y ou must 
disclose information for each reportable transaction in 
which you participate. See Reportable T ransaction Disclo-
sure Statement, later.
Material advisors with respect to any reportable trans-
action must disclose information about the transaction on 
Form 8918, Material Advisor Disclosure Statement. T o de-
termine whether you are a material advisor to a transac-
tion, see the Instructions for Form 8918.
Material advisors will receive a reportable transaction 
number for the disclosed reportable transaction. They 
must provide this number to all persons to whom they ac-
ted as a material advisor. They must provide the number 
at the time the transaction is entered into. If they do not 
have the number at that time, they must provide it within 
60 calendar days from the date the number is mailed to 
them. For information on penalties for failure to disclose 
and failure to maintain lists, see sections 6707, 6707A, 
and 6708.
Requirement to maintain list.  Material advisors 
must maintain a list of persons to whom they provide ma-
terial aid, assistance, or advice on any reportable transac-
tion. The list must be available for inspection by the IRS, 
and the information required to be included on the list 
must generally be kept for 7 years. See Regulations sec-
tion 301.6112-1 for more information (including what infor-
mation is required to be included on the list).
Confidentiality privilege. The confidentiality privilege 
between you and a federally authorized tax practitioner 
does not apply to written communications made after Oc-
tober 21, 2004, regarding the promotion of your direct or 
indirect participation in any tax shelter.
Appraisal requirement for donated property.  If you 
claim a deduction of more than $5,000 for an item or 
group of similar items of donated property, you must gen-
erally get a qualified appraisal. See section 170 and Form 
8283 for more information. If you claim a deduction of 
more than $500,000 for the donated property, you must 
generally attach the qualified appraisal to your return. If 
you file electronically, see Form 8453, U.S. Individual In-
come T ax T ransmittal for an IRS e-file Return, and its in-
structions. See Pub. 561 for information about appraisals.
Conservation easements. The IRS issued final Regula-
tions section 1. 6011-9 to identify certain syndicated con-
servation easement transactions and substantially similar 
transactions as listed transactions. These transactions re-
quire additional disclosures by advisors and certain partic-
ipants as a reportable transaction. The definition of the 
term “conservation easement” is modified to include a re-
striction (granted in perpetuity) on the use that may be 
made of the real property, within the meaning of section 
170(h)(2)(C), exclusively for conservation purposes, within 
the meaning of section 170(h)(1)(C) and (h)(4). The pres-
ervation of a certified historic structure is included in the 
definition of real property for purposes of identifying a 
transaction as a listed transaction. See Regulations sec-
tion 1. 6011-9, effective October 8, 2024, for details and 
examples.
Limits on deductions for donations of conserva-
tion contributions by pass -through entities. A deduc-
tion for a donation of a qualified conservation contribution 
by a partnership or S corporation is limited to 2.5 times the 
sum of each partner’s relevant basis. Any contribution in 
excess of that amount is disallowed and not treated as a 
qualified conservation contribution. For more information, 
see section 170(h).
Passive activity loss and credit limits.  The passive 
activity loss and credit rules limit the amount of losses and 
credits that can be claimed from passive activities and 
limit the amount that can offset nonpassive income, such 
as certain portfolio income from investments. See Pub. 
925 for information about income, losses, and credits from 
passive activities.
Interest on penalties.  If you are assessed an accu-
racy-related or civil fraud penalty (as discussed under 
Penalties, later), interest will be imposed on the amount of 
the penalty from the due date of the return (including any 
extensions) to the date you pay the penalty.
Accounting method restriction.  T ax shelters gener-
ally cannot use the cash method of accounting.
Uniform capitalization rules.  The uniform capitaliza-
tion rules generally apply to producing property or acquir-
ing it for resale. Under those rules, the direct cost and part 
of the indirect cost of the property must be capitalized or 
40 Chapter 2 T ax Shelters and Other Reportable 
T ransactions
Publication 550 (2024)

Page 41 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
included in inventory. See Pub. 538 for uniform capitaliza-
tion rules.
Denial of deduction for interest on an underpay-
ment due to a reportable transaction.  Y ou cannot de-
duct any interest you paid or accrued on any part of an un-
derpayment of tax due to an understatement arising from 
a reportable transaction if the relevant facts affecting the 
tax treatment of the item are not adequately disclosed. 
See Reportable transaction, later. This rule applies to re-
portable transactions entered into in tax years beginning 
after October 22, 2004.
Authority for Disallowance of Tax Benefits
The IRS has published guidance concluding that the 
claimed tax benefits of various abusive tax shelters should 
be disallowed. The guidance is the IRS’s conclusion on 
how the law is applied to a particular set of facts. Guid-
ance is published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin for tax-
payers' information and also for use by IRS officials. So, if 
your return is examined and an abusive tax shelter is iden-
tified and challenged, published guidance dealing with 
that type of shelter, which disallows certain claimed tax 
shelter benefits, could serve as the basis for the examin-
ing official's challenge of the tax benefits you claimed. In 
such a case, the examiner will not compromise even if you 
or your representative believe you have authority for the 
positions taken on your tax return. In addition, the exam-
iner can also assess penalties based on the facts and cir-
cumstances.
The courts are generally unsympathetic to taxpay-
ers involved in abusive tax shelter schemes and 
have ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of the 
cases in which these shelters have been challenged.
Investor Reporting
Y ou may be required to file a reportable transaction disclo-
sure statement.
Reportable Transaction Disclosure 
Statement
Use Form 8886 to disclose information for each reportable 
transaction in which you participated. See Reportable 
transaction, later. Generally, you must attach Form 8886 to 
your return for each tax year in which you participated in 
the transaction. Under certain circumstances, a transac-
tion must be disclosed within 90 days of the transaction 
being identified as a listed transaction or a transaction of 
interest. See Listed transaction , later. In addition, for the 
first year Form 8886 is attached to your return, you must 
send a copy of the form to:
Internal Revenue Service
OTSA Mail Stop 4915
1973 Rulon White Blvd.
Ogden, UT 84201
CAUTION
!
If you file your return electronically, the copy sent to The 
Office of T ax Shelter Analysis (OTSA) must show exactly 
the same information, word for word, provided with the 
electronically filed return and it must be provided on the 
official IRS Form 8886 or an exact copy of the form. If you 
use a computer -generated or substitute Form 8886, it 
must be an exact copy of the official IRS form.
If you fail to file Form 8886 as required or fail to include 
any required information on the form, you may have to pay 
a penalty. See Penalty for failure to disclose a reportable 
transaction, later.
The following discussion briefly describes reportable 
transactions. For more details, see the Instructions for 
Form 8886.
Reportable transaction. A reportable transaction is any 
of the following.
• A listed transaction.
• A confidential transaction.
• A transaction with contractual protection.
• A loss transaction.
• A transaction of interest entered into after November 
1, 2006.
Note. T ransactions with a brief asset holding period 
were removed from the definition of reportable transaction 
for transactions entered into after August 2, 2007.
Listed transaction.  A listed transaction is the same 
as, or substantially similar to, one of the types of transac-
tions the IRS has determined to be a tax -avoidance trans-
action. These transactions have been identified in notices, 
regulations, and other published guidance issued by the 
IRS.
For more information, go to Abusive T ax Shelters and 
T ransactions, where you will find a link to a list of listed 
transactions.
Confidential transaction.  A confidential transaction 
is offered to you under conditions of confidentiality and for 
which you have paid an advisor a minimum fee. A transac-
tion is offered under conditions of confidentiality if the ad-
visor who is paid the fee places a limit on your disclosure 
of the tax treatment or tax structure of the transaction and 
the limit protects the confidentiality of the advisor's tax 
strategies. The transaction is treated as confidential even 
if the conditions of confidentiality are not legally binding on 
you.
Transaction with contractual protection.  Generally, 
a transaction with contractual protection is one in which 
you or a related party has the right to a full or partial refund 
of fees if all or part of the intended tax consequences of 
the transaction are not sustained, or a transaction for 
which the fees are contingent on realizing the tax benefits 
from the transaction. For information on exceptions, see 
Revenue Procedure 2007-20, 2007-7 I.R.B. 517, available 
at IRS.gov/irb/2007-07_IRB#RP-2007-20.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 2 T ax Shelters and Other Reportable 
T ransactions
41

Page 42 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Loss transaction.  For individuals, a loss transaction 
is one that results in a deductible loss if the gross amount 
of the loss is at least $2 million in a single tax year or $4 
million in any combination of tax years. A loss from a for-
eign currency transaction under section 988 is a loss 
transaction if the gross amount of the loss is at least 
$50,000 in a single tax year, whether or not the loss flows 
through from an S corporation or partnership.
Certain losses (such as losses from casualties, thefts, 
and condemnations) are excepted from this category and 
do not have to be reported on Form 8886. For information 
on other exceptions, see Revenue Procedure 2013 -11, 
2013-2 I.R.B. 269, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2013-02_IRB#RP-2013-11. See Updates on reportable 
transactions, later, for updates on loss transactions.
Transaction of interest. A transaction of interest is a 
transaction entered into after November 1, 2006, that is 
the same as, or substantially similar to, one of the types of 
transactions that the IRS has identified by notice, regula-
tion, or other published guidance as a transaction of inter-
est. For more information, go to Abusive T ax Shelters and 
T ransactions, where you will find a link to a list of transac-
tions of interest.
Updates on reportable transactions.  For updates 
on all reportable transactions, go to Abusive T ax Shelters 
and T ransactions.
Penalties
Investing in an abusive tax shelter may lead to substantial 
expenses. First, the promoter generally charges a sub-
stantial fee. If your return is examined by the IRS and a tax 
deficiency is determined, you will have to pay more taxes 
and interest on the underpayment, possibly a 20%, 30%, 
or even 40% accuracy-related penalty, or a 75% civil fraud 
penalty. Y ou may also be subject to the penalty for failure 
to pay tax. These penalties are explained in the following 
paragraphs.
Accuracy-related penalties.  An accuracy -related pen-
alty of 20% can be imposed for underpayments of tax due 
to:
• Negligence or disregard of rules or regulations,
• Substantial understatement of tax,
• Substantial valuation misstatements (increased to 
40% for gross valuation misstatements),
• T ransactions lacking economic substance. Economic 
substance means that the transaction makes business 
sense, without the tax benefits. (Penalty increased to 
40% for nondisclosed noneconomic substance trans-
actions),
• Undisclosed foreign financial asset understatements 
(40% for tax years beginning after March 18, 2010), or
• Disallowance of a deduction for a qualified conserva-
tion contribution by a pass-through entity under sec-
tion
170(h)(7).
If you are charged an accuracy -related penalty, interest 
will be imposed on the amount of the penalty from the due 
date of the return (including extensions) to the date you 
pay the penalty.
The 20% penalties do not apply to any underpayment 
attributable to a reportable transaction understatement 
subject to an accuracy-related penalty (discussed later).
Negligence or disregard of rules or regulations. 
The penalty for negligence or disregard of rules or regula-
tions is imposed only on the part of the underpayment due 
to negligence or disregard of rules or regulations. Gener-
ally, the penalty will not be charged if you can show you 
had reasonable cause for understating your tax and that 
you acted in good faith.
Negligence includes any failure to make a reasonable 
attempt to comply with the provisions of the Internal Reve-
nue Code. It also includes any failure to keep adequate 
books and records. A return position that has a reasona-
ble basis is not negligence. See Regulations section 
1.6662-3(b)(1).
Disregard includes any careless, reckless, or inten-
tional disregard of rules or regulations.
The penalty for disregard of rules and regulations can 
be avoided if all the following are true.
• Y ou keep adequate books and records.
• Y ou have a reasonable basis for your position on the 
tax issue.
• Y ou make an adequate disclosure of your position.
Use Form 8275 to make your disclosure and attach it to 
your return. T o disclose a position contrary to a regulation, 
use Form 8275-R. Use Form 8886 to disclose a reportable 
transaction. See Reportable transaction, earlier.
Substantial understatement of tax.  An understate-
ment is considered to be substantial if it is more than the 
greater of:
• 10% of the tax required to be shown on the return, or
• $5,000.
For tax years 2018 through 2025, if you claim any deduc-
tion allowed under section 199A, an understatement is 
considered to be substantial if it is more than the greater 
of:
• 5% of the tax required to be shown on the return, or
• $5,000.
In general, “understatement” means the excess of:
1. The amount of the tax required to be shown on the re-
turn for the tax year; over
2. The amount of the tax imposed which is shown on the 
return, reduced by any rebate (within the meaning of 
section 6211(b)(2)).
For items other than tax shelters, you can file Form 
8275 or Form 8275-R to disclose items that could cause a 
substantial understatement of income tax. In that way, you 
can avoid the substantial understatement penalty if you 
have a reasonable basis for your position on the tax issue. 
42 Chapter 2 T ax Shelters and Other Reportable 
T ransactions
Publication 550 (2024)

Page 43 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a tax return does not 
reduce the amount of the understatement.
Also, the understatement penalty will not be imposed if 
you can show there was reasonable cause for the under-
payment caused by the understatement and that you ac-
ted in good faith. An important factor in establishing rea-
sonable cause and good faith will be the extent of your 
effort to determine your proper tax liability under the law.
Substantial valuation misstatement. In general, you 
are liable for a 20% penalty for a substantial valuation mis-
statement if any the following are true.
• The value or adjusted basis of any property claimed 
on the return is 150% or more of the correct amount.
• Y ou underpaid your tax by more than $5,000 because 
of the misstatement.
• Y ou cannot establish that you had reasonable cause 
for the underpayment and that you acted in good faith.
Y ou may be assessed a penalty of 40% for a gross val-
uation misstatement. If you misstate the value or the ad-
justed basis of property by 200% or more of the amount 
determined to be correct, you will be assessed a penalty 
of 40%, instead of 20%, of the amount you underpaid be-
cause of the gross valuation misstatement. The penalty 
rate is also 40% if the property's correct value or adjusted 
basis is zero.
Transaction lacking economic substance. The eco-
nomic substance doctrine only applies to an individual 
that entered into a transaction in connection with a trade 
or business or an activity engaged in for the production of 
income. A transaction has economic substance for you as 
an individual taxpayer only if:
• The transaction changes your economic position in a 
meaningful way (apart from federal income tax ef-
fects), and
• Y ou have a substantial purpose (apart from federal in-
come tax effects) for entering into the transaction.
For purposes of determining whether economic sub-
stance exists, a transaction's profit potential will only be 
taken into account if the present value of the reasonably 
expected pre-tax profit from the transaction is substantial 
compared to the present value of the expected net tax 
benefits that would be allowed if the transaction were re-
spected.
If any part of your underpayment is due to any disallow-
ance of claimed tax benefits by reason of a transaction 
lacking economic substance or failing to meet the require-
ments of any similar rule of law, that part of your underpay-
ment will be subject to the 20% accuracy -related penalty 
even if you had a reasonable cause and acted in good 
faith concerning that part.
Additionally, the penalty increases to 40% if you do not 
adequately disclose, on your return or in a statement at-
tached to your return, the relevant facts affecting the tax 
treatment of a transaction that lacks economic substance. 
Relevant facts include any facts affecting the tax treatment 
of the transaction.
For the understatement of tax related to reportable 
transactions, no penalty is imposed to any portion of an 
understatement if you can demonstrate the understate-
ment was due to reasonable cause. The reasonable 
cause exception does not apply if the underpayment is 
due to a transaction that lacks economic substance.
For underpayments, no penalty will be assessed if a 
reasonable cause exception applies. A reasonable cause 
exception is generally not available for an underpayment 
attributable to a transaction lacking economic substance, 
or for an underpayment associated with a disallowed de-
duction for a conservation easement.
Y ou may be subject to a 20% penalty based on 
the excessive amount of an erroneous claim for 
an income tax refund or credit. If that excessive 
amount results from a transaction found to be lacking eco-
nomic substance, it will NOT be treated as due to reason-
able cause.
Undisclosed foreign financial asset understate-
ment. For tax years beginning after March 18, 2010, you 
may be liable for a 40% penalty for an understatement of 
your tax liability due to an undisclosed foreign financial as-
set. An undisclosed foreign financial asset is any asset for 
which an information return, required to be provided under 
sections 6038, 6038B, 6038D, 6046A, or 6048 for any tax 
year, is not provided. The penalty applies to any part of an 
underpayment related to the following undisclosed foreign 
financial assets.
• Any foreign business you control, reportable on Form 
5471, Information Return of U.S. Persons With Re-
spect T o Certain Foreign Corporations, or Form 8865, 
Return of U.S. Persons With Respect to Certain For-
eign Partnerships.
• Certain transfers of property to a foreign corporation or 
partnership, reportable on Form 926, Return by a U.S. 
T ransferor of Property to a Foreign Corporation, or cer-
tain distributions to a foreign person, reportable on 
Form 8865.
• Y our ownership interest in an otherwise undisclosed 
foreign financial asset, reportable on Form 8275 or 
8275-R. See the Instructions for Form 8275 or Form 
8275-R.
Instead of, or in addition to, Form 8275 or 8275-R, 
you may have to file Form 8938, Statement of 
Specified Foreign Financial Assets, with your tax 
return. See the Instructions for Form 8938 for details.
• Y our acquisition, disposition, or substantial change in 
ownership interest in a foreign partnership, reportable 
on Form 8865.
• Creation or transfer of money or property to certain 
foreign trusts, reportable on Form 3520, Annual Re-
turn T o Report T ransactions With Foreign T rusts and 
Receipt of Certain Foreign Gifts.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 2 T ax Shelters and Other Reportable 
T ransactions
43

Page 44 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalty for incorrect appraisals.  The person who pre-
pares an appraisal of the value of property may have to 
pay a penalty if:
• He or she knows, or reasonably should have known, 
that the appraisal would be used in connection with a 
return or claim for refund; and
• The claimed value of the property on a return or claim 
for refund based on that appraisal results in a substan-
tial valuation misstatement or a gross valuation mis-
statement. See Substantial valuation misstatement, 
earlier.
For details on the penalty amount and exceptions, see 
Pub. 561.
Penalty for failure to disclose a reportable transac-
tion. If you fail to include any required information regard-
ing a reportable transaction on a return or statement, you 
may have to pay a penalty of 75% of the decrease in tax 
shown on your return as a result of such transaction (or 
that would have resulted if the transaction were respected 
for federal tax purposes). See Reportable transaction, ear-
lier. For an individual, the minimum penalty is $5,000 and 
the maximum is $10,000 (or $100,000 for a listed transac-
tion). This penalty is in addition to any other penalty that 
may be imposed.
The IRS may rescind or abate the penalty for failing to 
disclose a reportable transaction under certain limited cir-
cumstances but cannot rescind the penalty for failing to 
disclose a listed transaction. See Revenue Procedure 
2007-21, as updated by T reasury Decision 9686 and An-
nouncement 2016-1, for information on rescission.
Accuracy-related penalty for a reportable transaction 
understatement. If you have a reportable transaction un-
derstatement, you may have to pay a penalty equal to 
20% of the amount of that understatement. This applies to 
any item due to a listed transaction or other reportable 
transaction with a significant purpose of avoiding or evad-
ing federal income tax. The penalty is 30% rather than 
20% for the part of any reportable transaction understate-
ment if the transaction was not properly disclosed.
This penalty does not apply to the part of an under-
statement on which the fraud penalty, gross valuation mis-
statement penalty, or penalty for nondisclosure of noneco-
nomic substance transactions is imposed.
Civil fraud penalty.  If any underpayment of tax on your 
return is due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of the underpay-
ment will be added to your tax.
Joint return.  The fraud penalty on a joint return ap-
plies to a spouse only if some part of the underpayment is 
due to the fraud of that spouse.
Failure to pay tax. If a deficiency is assessed and is not 
paid within 10 days of the demand for payment, you may 
be penalized with up to a 25% addition to tax if the failure 
to pay continues.
Whether To Invest
T ake into account the risks, benefits, and the source of ev-
ery financial transaction before investing. Y ou may wish to 
consider professional legal and financial advice for help in 
evaluating the transaction.
3.
Investment Expenses
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 At-risk rules
 Passive activity
 Portfolio income
 
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• Limits on Deductions,
• Interest Expenses,
• Bond Premium Amortization,
• Nondeductible Interest Expenses,
• How T o Report Investment Interest Expenses, and
• When T o Report Investment Expenses.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
4952 Investment Interest Expense Deduction
8615 T ax for Certain Children Who Have Unearned 
Income
8814 Parents’ Election T o Report Child's Interest and 
Dividends
See chapter 5, How T o Get T ax Help, for information about 
getting these publications and forms.
  925
  Schedule A (Form 1040) 
  4952
  8615
  8814
44 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Publication 550 (2024)

Page 45 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Limits on Deductions
Y our deductions for investment expenses may be limited 
by:
• The at-risk rules,
• The passive activity loss limits, or
• The limit on investment expenses.
The at -risk rules and passive activity rules are ex-
plained briefly in this section. The limit on investment inter-
est is explained later in this chapter under Interest Expen-
ses.
At-risk rules.  Special at -risk rules apply to most in-
come-producing activities. These rules limit the amount of 
loss you can deduct to the amount you risk losing in the 
activity. Generally, this is the cash and the adjusted basis 
of property you contribute to the activity. It also includes 
money you borrow for use in the activity if you are person-
ally liable for repayment or if you use property not used in 
the activity as security for the loan. For more information, 
see Pub. 925.
Passive activity losses and credits. The amount of los-
ses and tax credits you can claim from passive activities is 
limited. Generally, you are allowed to deduct passive ac-
tivity losses only up to the amount of your passive activity 
income. Also, you can use credits from passive activities 
only against tax on the income from passive activities. 
There are exceptions for certain activities, such as rental 
real estate activities.
Passive activity. A passive activity is generally any 
activity involving the conduct of any trade or business in 
which you do not materially participate and any rental ac-
tivity. However, if you are involved in renting real estate, 
the activity is not a passive activity if both of the following 
are true.
• More than one-half of the personal services you per-
form during the year in all trades or businesses are 
performed in real property trades or businesses in 
which you materially participate.
• Y ou perform more than 750 hours of services during 
the year in real property trades or businesses in which 
you materially participate.
The term “trade or business” generally means any activity 
that involves the conduct of a trade or business, is con-
ducted in anticipation of starting a trade or business, or in-
volves certain research or experimental expenditures. 
However, it does not include rental activities or certain ac-
tivities treated as incidental to holding property for invest-
ment.
Y ou are considered to materially participate in an activ-
ity if you are involved on a regular, continuous, and sub-
stantial basis in the operations of the activity.
Other income (nonpassive income).  Generally, you 
can use losses from passive activities only to offset in-
come from passive activities. Y ou cannot use passive 
activity losses to offset your other income, such as your 
wages or your portfolio income. Portfolio income includes 
gross income from interest, dividends, annuities, or royal-
ties that is not derived in the ordinary course of a trade or 
business. It also includes gains or losses (not derived in 
the ordinary course of a trade or business) from the sale 
or trade of property (other than an interest in a passive ac-
tivity) producing portfolio income or held for investment. 
This includes capital gain distributions from mutual funds 
(and other regulated investment companies (RICs)) and 
real estate investment trusts (REIT s).
Y ou cannot use passive activity losses to offset Alaska 
Permanent Fund dividends.
Expenses. Do not include in the computation of your 
passive activity income or loss:
• Expenses (other than interest) that are clearly and di-
rectly allocable to your portfolio income, or
• Interest expense properly allocable to portfolio in-
come.
However, this interest and other expenses may be subject 
to other limits. These limits are explained in the rest of this 
chapter.
Additional information.  For more information about 
determining and reporting income and losses from pas-
sive activities, see Pub. 925.
Interest Expenses
This section discusses interest expenses you may be able 
to deduct as an investor.
For information on business interest, see chapter 8 of 
Pub. 334, T ax Guide for Small Business.
Y ou generally cannot deduct personal interest. How-
ever, you can deduct qualified home mortgage interest, as 
explained in Pub. 936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduc-
tion. Y ou may be able to deduct interest on certain student 
loans. See Pub. 970, T ax Benefits for Education.
Investment Interest
If you borrow money to buy property you hold for invest-
ment, the interest you pay is investment interest. Y ou can 
deduct investment interest subject to the limit discussed 
later. However, you cannot deduct interest you incurred to 
produce tax -exempt income. See T ax-exempt income , 
later. Y ou also cannot deduct interest expenses on strad-
dles discussed under Interest expense and carrying 
charges on straddles, later.
Investment interest does not include any qualified 
home mortgage interest or any interest taken into account 
in computing income or loss from a passive activity.
Investment property.  Property held for investment in-
cludes property that produces interest, dividends, annui-
ties, or royalties not derived in the ordinary course of a 
trade or business. It also includes property that produces 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 3 Investment Expenses 45

Page 46 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gain or loss (not derived in the ordinary course of a trade 
or business) from the sale or trade of property producing 
these types of income or held for investment (other than 
an interest in a passive activity). Investment property also 
includes an interest in a trade or business activity in which 
you did not materially participate (other than a passive ac-
tivity).
Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.  T o de-
termine your investment interest, combine your share of 
investment interest from a partnership, S corporation, es-
tate, or trust with your other investment interest.
Allocation of Interest Expense
If you borrow money for business, personal purposes, or 
investment, you must allocate the debt among those pur-
poses. Only the interest expense on the part of the debt 
used for investment purposes is treated as investment ex-
pense. The allocation is not affected by the use of prop-
erty that secures the debt.
Example 1.  Y ou borrow $10,000 and use $8,000 to 
buy stock. Y ou use the other $2,000 to buy items for your 
home. Because 80% of the debt is used for, and allocated 
to, investment purposes, 80% of the interest on that debt 
is investment interest. The other 20% is nondeductible 
personal interest.
Debt proceeds received in cash.  If you receive debt 
proceeds in cash, the proceeds are generally not treated 
as investment property.
Debt proceeds deposited in account.  If you deposit 
debt proceeds in an account, that deposit is treated as in-
vestment property, regardless of whether the account 
bears interest. But, if you withdraw the funds and use 
them for another purpose, you must reallocate the debt to 
determine the amount considered to be for investment 
purposes.
Example 2. Assume in Example 1 that you borrowed 
the money on March 1 and immediately bought the stock 
for $8,000. Y ou did not buy the household items until June 
1. Y ou had deposited the $2,000 in the bank. Y ou had no 
other transactions on the bank account until June. Y ou did 
not sell the stock, and you made no principal payments on 
the debt. Y ou paid interest from another account. The 
$8,000 is treated as being used for an investment pur-
pose. The $2,000 is treated as being used for an invest-
ment purpose for the 3 -month period. Y our total interest 
expense for 3 months on this debt is investment interest. 
In June, when you spend the $2,000 for household items, 
you must begin to allocate 80% of the debt and the inter-
est expense to investment purposes and 20% to personal 
purposes.
Amounts paid within 30 days.  If you receive loan 
proceeds in cash or if the loan proceeds are deposited in 
an account, you can treat any payment (up to the amount 
of the proceeds) made from any account you own, or from 
cash, as made from those proceeds. This applies to any 
payment made within 30 days before or after the proceeds 
are received in cash or deposited in your account.
If you received the loan proceeds in cash, you can treat 
the payment as made on the date you received the cash 
instead of the date you actually made the payment.
Payments on debt may require new allocation.  As 
you repay a debt used for more than one purpose, you 
must reallocate the balance. Y ou must first reduce the 
amount allocated to personal purposes by the repayment. 
Y ou then reallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is 
for investment purposes.
Example 3.  If, in Example 2 , you repay $500 on No-
vember 1, the entire repayment is applied against the 
amount allocated to personal purposes. The debt balance 
is now allocated as $8,000 for investment purposes and 
$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next reallocation is 
necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷ $9,500) of the debt and the in-
terest expense is allocated to investment.
Pass-through entities. If you use borrowed funds to buy 
an interest in a partnership or S corporation, then the in-
terest on those funds must be allocated based on the as-
sets of the entity. If you contribute to the capital of the en-
tity, you can make the allocation using any reasonable 
method.
Additional allocation rules. For more information about 
allocating interest expense, see chapter 8 of Pub. 334.
When To Deduct Investment Interest
If you use the cash method of accounting, you must pay 
the interest expense before you can deduct it. 
If you use an accrual method of accounting, you can 
deduct interest over the period it accrues, regardless of 
when you pay it. For an exception, see Unpaid expenses 
owed to related party, later in this chapter.
Example. Y ou borrowed $1,000 on August 19, 2024, 
payable in 90 days at 4% interest. On November 18, 2024, 
you paid this with a new note for $1,010, due on February 
17, 2025. If you use the cash method of accounting, you 
cannot deduct any part of the $10 interest on your return 
for 2024 because you did not actually pay it in that year. If 
you use an accrual method, you may be able to deduct a 
portion of the interest on the loans through December 31, 
2024, on your return for 2024.
Interest paid in advance.  Generally, if you pay interest 
in advance for a period that goes beyond the end of the 
tax year, you must spread the interest over the tax years to 
which it belongs under the OID rules discussed in chap-
ter 1. Y ou can deduct in each year only the interest for that 
year.
Interest on margin accounts.  If you are a cash method 
taxpayer, you can deduct interest on margin accounts to 
buy taxable securities as investment interest in the year 
you paid it. Y ou are considered to have paid interest on 
these accounts only when you actually pay the broker or 
46 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Publication 550 (2024)

Page 47 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
when payment becomes available to the broker through 
your account. Payment may become available to the 
broker through your account when the broker collects divi-
dends or interest for your account, or sells securities held 
for you or received from you.
Limit on interest deduction for market discount 
bonds. The amount you can deduct for interest expense 
you paid or accrued during the year to buy or carry a mar-
ket discount bond may be limited. This limit does not apply 
if you accrue the market discount and include it in your in-
come currently.
Under this limit, the interest is deductible only to the ex-
tent it is more than:
1. The total interest and OID includible in gross income 
for the bond for the year, plus
2. The market discount for the number of days you held 
the bond during the year.
Figure the amount in (2) above using the rules for figuring 
accrued market discount in chapter 1 under Market Dis-
count Bonds.
Interest not deducted due to limit.  In the year you 
dispose of the bond, you can deduct any interest expense 
you were not allowed to deduct in earlier years because of 
the limit.
Choosing to deduct disallowed interest expense 
before the year of disposition.  Y ou can choose to de-
duct disallowed interest expense in any year before the 
year you dispose of the bond, up to your net interest in-
come from the bond during the year. The rest of the disal-
lowed interest expense remains deductible in the year you 
dispose of the bond.
Net interest income.  This is the interest income (in-
cluding OID) from the bond that you include in income for 
the year, minus the interest expense paid or accrued dur-
ing the year to purchase or carry the bond.
Limit on interest deduction for short -term obliga-
tions. If the current income inclusion rules discussed in 
chapter 1 under Discount on Short -T erm Obligations do 
not apply to you, the amount you can deduct for interest 
expense you paid or accrued during the year to buy or 
carry a short-term obligation is limited.
The interest is deductible only to the extent it is more 
than:
• The amount of acquisition discount or OID on the obli-
gation for the tax year, plus
• The amount of any interest payable on the obligation 
for the year that is not included in income because of 
your accounting method (other than interest taken into 
account in determining the amount of acquisition dis-
count or OID).
The method of determining acquisition discount and OID 
for short-term obligations is discussed in chapter 1 under 
Discount on Short-T erm Obligations.
Interest not deducted due to limit.  In the year you 
dispose of the obligation, or, if you choose, in another year 
in which you have net interest income from the obligation, 
you can deduct any interest expense you were not allowed 
to deduct for an earlier year because of the limit. Follow 
the same rules provided in the earlier discussion under 
Limit on interest deduction for market discount bonds.
Limit on Deduction
Generally, your deduction for investment interest expense 
is limited to your net investment income.
Y ou can carry over the amount of investment interest 
you could not deduct because of this limit to the next tax 
year. The interest carried over is treated as investment in-
terest paid or accrued in that next year.
Y ou can carry over disallowed investment interest to the 
next tax year even if it is more than your taxable income in 
the year the interest was paid or accrued.
Net Investment Income
Determine the amount of your net investment income by 
subtracting your investment expenses (other than interest 
expense) from your investment income.
Investment income.  Generally, investment income in-
cludes your gross income from property held for invest-
ment such as interest, dividends, annuities, and royalties. 
Investment income does not include Alaska Permanent 
Fund dividends. It also does not include qualified divi-
dends or net capital gain unless you choose to include 
them.
Choosing to include qualified dividends.  Invest-
ment income generally does not include qualified divi-
dends, discussed in chapter 1. However, you can choose 
to include all or part of your qualified dividends in invest-
ment income.
Y ou make this choice by completing Form 4952, 
line 4g, according to its instructions.
If you choose to include any of your qualified dividends 
in investment income, you must reduce your qualified divi-
dends that are eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates 
by the same amount.
Choosing to include net capital gain. Investment in-
come generally does not include net capital gain from dis-
posing of investment property (including capital gain distri-
butions from mutual funds). However, you can choose to 
include all or part of your net capital gain in investment in-
come.
Y ou make this choice by completing Form 4952, 
line 4g, according to its instructions.
If you choose to include any of your net capital gain in 
investment income, you must reduce your net capital gain 
that is eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by the 
same amount.
For more information about the capital gains rates, see 
Capital Gain T ax Rates in chapter 4.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 3 Investment Expenses 47

Page 48 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Before making either choice, consider the overall 
effect on your tax liability. Compare your tax if you 
make one or both of these choices with your tax if 
you do not.
Investment income of child reported on parent's re-
turn. Investment income includes the part of your child's 
interest and dividend income you choose to report on your 
return. If the child does not have qualified dividends, 
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, or capital gain distribu-
tions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form 8814. Include it 
on line 4a of Form 4952.
Example. Y our 8-year-old child has interest income of 
$2,700, which you choose to report on your own return. 
Y ou enter $2,700 on Form 8814, lines 1a and 4, and $100 
on lines 6 and 12, and complete Part II. Y ou also enter 
$100 on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. Y our investment 
income includes this $100.
Child's qualified dividends. If part of the amount you 
report is your child's qualified dividends, that part (which is 
reported on Form 1040, line 3a) generally does not count 
as investment income. However, you can choose to in-
clude all or part of it in investment income, as explained 
under Choosing to include qualified dividends, earlier.
Y our investment income also includes the amount on 
Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, the reduced amount 
figured next under Child's Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends).
Child's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. If part of 
the amount you report is your child's Alaska Permanent 
Fund dividends, that part does not count as investment in-
come. T o figure the amount of your child's income that you 
can consider your investment income, start with the 
amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that amount by a 
percentage that is equal to the Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends divided by the total amount on Form 8814, 
line 4. Subtract the result from the amount on Form 8814, 
line 12.
Example. Y our 10-year-old child has taxable interest 
income of $4,000 and Alaska Permanent Fund dividends 
of $2,000. Y ou choose to report this on your return. Y ou 
enter $4,000 on Form 8814, line 1a; $2,000 on line 2a; 
and $6,000 on line 4. Y ou then enter $3,400 on Form 
8814, lines 6 and 12; and Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8z. Y ou figure the amount of your child's income that 
you can consider your investment income as follows.
$3,400 − ($3,400 × ($2,000 ÷ $6,000)) = $2,267
Y ou include the result, $2,267, on Form 4952, line 4a.
Child's capital gain distributions.  If part of the 
amount you report is your child's capital gain distributions, 
that part (which is reported on Schedule D (Form 1040), 
line 13; or Form 1040, line 7) generally does not count as 
investment income. However, you can choose to include 
all or part of it in investment income, as explained under 
Choosing to include net capital gain, earlier.
TIP
Y our investment income also includes the amount on 
Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, the reduced amount 
figured under Child's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends , 
earlier).
Investment expenses. Investment expenses are your al-
lowed deductions (other than interest expense) directly 
connected with the production of investment income.
Losses from passive activities.  Income or expenses 
that you used in computing income or loss from a passive 
activity are not included in determining your investment in-
come or investment expenses (including investment inter-
est expense). See Pub. 925 for information about passive 
activities.
Example. T ed is a partner in a partnership that oper-
ates a business. However, he does not materially partici-
pate in the partnership's business. T ed's interest in the 
partnership is considered a passive activity.
T ed's investment income from interest and dividends 
(other than qualified dividends) is $10,000. His investment 
expenses (other than interest) are $3,200. His investment 
interest expense is $8,000. T ed also has income from the 
partnership of $2,000.
T ed figures his net investment income and the limit on 
his investment interest expense deduction in the following 
way.
T otal investment income.................... $10,000
Minus: Investment expenses (other than interest) .... 3,200
Net investment income ..................... $6,800
Deductible investment interest expense for the year ... $6,800
The $2,000 of income from the passive activity is not 
used in determining T ed's net investment income. His in-
vestment interest deduction for the year is limited to 
$6,800, the amount of his net investment income.
Form 4952
Use Form 4952 to figure your deduction for investment in-
terest. See Form 4952 for more information.
Exception to use of Form 4952.  Y ou do not have to 
complete Form 4952 or attach it to your return if you meet 
all of the following tests.
• Y our investment income from interest and ordinary div-
idends minus any qualified dividends is more than 
your investment interest expense.
• Y ou do not have any other deductible investment ex-
penses.
• Y ou have no carryover of investment interest expense 
from 2023.
If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct all of your 
investment interest.
48 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Publication 550 (2024)

Page 49 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bond Premium Amortization
If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the premium is part of 
your basis in the bond. If the bond yields taxable interest, 
you can choose to amortize the premium. This generally 
means that each year, over the life of the bond, you use a 
part of the premium to reduce the amount of interest in-
cludible in your income. If you make this choice, you must 
reduce your basis in the bond by the amortization for the 
year.
If the bond yields tax -exempt interest, you must amor-
tize the premium. This amortized amount is not deductible 
in determining taxable income. However, each year, you 
must reduce your basis in the bond (and tax -exempt inter-
est otherwise reportable on your tax return) by the amorti-
zation for the year.
If you acquire a security, such as a bond, at a premium, 
you may receive a Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID. See 
the instructions on those forms to determine if the 
amounts of interest reported to you have been reduced by 
amortizable bond premium for the period.
Bond premium. Bond premium is the amount by which 
your basis in the bond right after you get it is more than the 
total of all amounts payable on the bond after you get it 
(other than payments of qualified stated interest). For ex-
ample, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000 generally 
would have a $50 premium if you buy it for $1,050.
Special rules to determine amounts payable on a 
bond. For special rules that apply to determine the 
amounts payable on a variable rate bond, an inflation -in-
dexed debt instrument, a bond that provides for certain al-
ternative payment schedules (for example, a bond callable 
prior to the stated maturity date of the bond), or a bond 
that provides for remote or incidental contingencies, see 
Regulations section 1.171-3.
Basis. In general, your basis for figuring bond premium 
amortization is the same as your basis for figuring any loss 
on the sale of the bond. However, you may need to use a 
different basis for:
• Convertible bonds,
• Bonds you got in a trade, and
• Bonds whose basis has to be determined using the 
basis of the person who transferred the bond to you.
See Regulations section 1.171-1(e).
Dealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyone who holds 
them mainly for sale to customers in the ordinary course 
of a trade or business, or who would properly include 
bonds in inventory at the close of the tax year) cannot 
claim a deduction for amortizable bond premium.
See section 75 of the Internal Revenue Code for the 
treatment of bond premium by a dealer in tax -exempt 
bonds.
How To Figure Amortization
For bonds issued after September 27, 1985, you must am-
ortize bond premium using a constant yield method on the 
basis of the bond's yield to maturity, determined by using 
the bond's basis and compounding at the close of each 
accrual period.
Constant yield method. Figure the bond premium amor-
tization for each accrual period as follows.
Step 1: Determine your yield.  Y our yield is the dis-
count rate that, when used in figuring the present value of 
all remaining payments to be made on the bond (including 
payments of qualified stated interest), produces an 
amount equal to your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as 
of the date you got the bond. It must be constant over the 
term of the bond and must be figured to at least two deci-
mal places when expressed as a percentage.
If you do not know the yield, consult your broker or tax 
advisor. Databases available to them are likely to show the 
yield at the date of purchase.
Step 2: Determine the accrual periods.  Y ou can 
choose the accrual periods to use. They may be of any 
length and may vary in length over the term of the bond, 
but each accrual period can be no longer than 1 year, and 
each scheduled payment of principal or interest must oc-
cur either on the first or the final day of an accrual period. 
The computation is simplest if accrual periods are the 
same as the intervals between interest payment dates.
Step 3: Determine the bond premium for the ac-
crual period.  T o do this, multiply your adjusted acquisi-
tion price at the beginning of the accrual period by your 
yield. Then, subtract the result from the qualified stated in-
terest for the period.
Y our adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of the 
first accrual period is the same as your basis. After that, it 
is your basis decreased by the amount of bond premium 
amortized for earlier periods, and the amount of any pay-
ment previously made on the bond other than a payment 
of qualified stated interest.
Example. On February 1, 2023, you bought a taxable 
bond for $110,000. The bond has a stated principal 
amount of $100,000, payable at maturity on February 1, 
2030, making your premium $10,000 ($110,000 − 
$100,000). The bond pays qualified stated interest of 
$10,000 on February 1 of each year. Y our yield is 
8.07439% compounded annually. Y ou choose to use an-
nual accrual periods ending on February 1 of each year. 
T o find your bond premium amortization for the accrual pe-
riod ending on February 1, 2024, you multiply the adjusted 
acquisition price at the beginning of the period ($110,000) 
by your yield. When you subtract the result ($8,881. 83) 
from the qualified stated interest for the period ($10,000), 
you find that your bond premium amortization for the pe-
riod is $1,118.17.
Special rules to figure amortization.  For special 
rules to figure the bond premium amortization on a varia-
ble rate bond, an inflation -indexed debt instrument, a 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 3 Investment Expenses 49

Page 50 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bond that provides for certain alternative payment sched-
ules (for example, a bond callable prior to the stated ma-
turity date of the bond), or a bond that provides for remote 
or incidental contingencies, see Regulations section 
1.171-3.
Choosing To Amortize
Y ou choose to amortize the premium on taxable bonds by 
reporting the amortization for the year on your income tax 
return for the first tax year you want the choice to apply. 
Y ou should attach a statement to your return that you are 
making this choice under section 171. See How T o Report 
Amortization next.
This choice is binding for the year you make it and for 
later tax years. It applies to all taxable bonds you own in 
the year you make the choice and also to those you ac-
quire in later years.
Y ou can change your decision to amortize bond pre-
mium only with the written approval of the IRS. T o request 
approval, use Form 3115. For more information on re-
questing approval, see section 5 of Revenue Procedure 
2024-23 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2024 -23. Y ou can 
find Revenue Procedure 2024 -23 at IRS.gov/irb/
2024-23_IRB#REVPROC-2024-23.
How To Report Amortization
(Taxable Bonds)
Subtract the bond premium amortization from your interest 
income from these bonds.
Report the bond's interest on Schedule B (Form 1040), 
line 1. Under your last entry on line 1, put a subtotal of all 
interest listed on line 1. Below this subtotal, enter the am-
ortizable bond premium allocable to the interest payments 
for the year and label this amount “ABP Adjustment.” Sub-
tract this amount from the subtotal, and enter the result on 
line 2.
Bond premium amortization more than interest. If the 
amount of your bond premium amortization for an accrual 
period is more than the qualified stated interest for the pe-
riod, you can include the difference in Other Itemized De-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16.
But your deduction is limited to the amount by which 
your total interest inclusions on the bond in prior accrual 
periods is more than your total bond premium deductions 
on the bond in prior periods. Any amount you cannot de-
duct because of this limit can be carried forward to the 
next accrual period.
Pre-1998 election to amortize bond premium.  Gener-
ally, if you first elected to amortize bond premium before 
1998, the above treatment of the premium does not apply 
to bonds you acquired before 1988.
Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986.  The amorti-
zation of the premium on these bonds is a miscellaneous 
itemized deduction not subject to the 2% -of-adjus-
ted-gross-income limit.
Bonds acquired after October 22, 1986, but before 
1988. The amortization of the premium on these bonds is 
investment interest expense subject to the investment in-
terest limit, unless you choose to treat it as an offset to in-
terest income on the bond.
Nondeductible Interest 
Expenses
Some interest expenses that you incur as an investor are 
not deductible.
Single-premium life insurance, endowment, and an-
nuity contracts.  Y ou cannot deduct interest on money 
you borrow to buy or carry a single -premium life insur-
ance, endowment, or annuity contract.
Used as collateral. If you use a single-premium annu-
ity contract as collateral to obtain or continue a mortgage 
loan, you cannot deduct any interest on the loan that is 
collateralized by the annuity contract. Figure the amount 
of interest expense disallowed by multiplying the current 
interest rate on the mortgage loan by the lesser of the 
amount of the annuity contract used as collateral or the 
amount of the loan.
Borrowing on insurance.  Generally, you cannot deduct 
interest on money you borrow to buy or carry a life insur-
ance, endowment, or annuity contract if you plan to sys-
tematically borrow part or all of the increases in the cash 
value of the contract. This rule applies to the interest on 
the total amount borrowed to buy or carry the contract, not 
just the interest on the borrowed increases in the cash 
value.
Tax-exempt income. Y ou cannot deduct interest expen-
ses you incur to produce tax -exempt income, such as in-
terest on money you borrow to buy tax -exempt securities 
or shares in a mutual fund or other regulated investment 
company that distributes only exempt-interest dividends.
Short-sale expenses. The rule disallowing a deduc-
tion for interest expenses on debt proceeds used to pur-
chase tax-exempt securities applies to amounts you pay in 
connection with personal property used in a short sale or 
amounts paid by others for the use of any collateral in con-
nection with the short sale. However, it does not apply to 
the expenses you incur if you deposit cash as collateral for 
the property used in the short sale and the cash does not 
earn a material return during the period of the sale. Short 
sales are discussed under Short Sales in chapter 4.
Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxable income. 
Y ou may have expenses that are for both tax-exempt and 
taxable income. If you cannot specifically identify what 
part of the expenses is for each type of income, you can 
divide the expenses, using reasonable proportions based 
on facts and circumstances. Y ou must attach a statement 
to your return showing how you divided the expenses and 
stating that each deduction claimed is not based on 
tax-exempt income.
50 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Publication 550 (2024)

Page 51 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
One accepted method for dividing expenses is to do it 
in the same proportion that each type of income is to the 
total income. If the expenses relate in part to capital gains 
and losses, include the gains, but not the losses, in figur-
ing this proportion. T o find the part of the expenses that is 
for the tax-exempt income, divide your tax-exempt income 
by the total income and multiply your expenses by the re-
sult.
Example. Y ou received $6,000 in interest income; 
$4,800 was tax exempt and $1,200 was taxable. In earn-
ing this income, you had $500 of expenses. Y ou cannot 
specifically identify the amount of each expense item that 
is for each income item, so you must divide your expen-
ses. 80% ($4,800 tax -exempt interest divided by $6,000 
total interest) of your expenses is for the tax -exempt in-
come. Y ou cannot deduct $400 (80% of $500) of the ex-
penses. Y ou can deduct $100 (the rest of the expenses) 
because they are for the taxable interest.
State income taxes.  If you itemize your deductions, 
you can deduct, as taxes, state income taxes on interest 
income that is exempt from federal income tax. But you 
cannot deduct, as either taxes or investment expenses, 
state income taxes on other exempt income.
Interest expense and carrying charges on straddles. 
Y ou cannot deduct interest and carrying charges allocable 
to personal property that is part of a straddle. The nonde-
ductible interest and carrying charges are added to the 
basis of the straddle property. However, this treatment 
does not apply if:
• All the offsetting positions making up the straddle ei-
ther consist of one or more qualified covered call op-
tions and the optioned stock, or consist of section 
1256 contracts (and the straddle is not part of a larger 
straddle); or
• The straddle is a hedging transaction.
For information about straddles, including definitions of 
the terms used in this discussion, see Straddles in chap-
ter 4.
Interest includes any amount you pay or incur in con-
nection with personal property used in a short sale. How-
ever, you must first apply the rules discussed under Pay-
ments in lieu of dividends in chapter 4.
T o determine the interest on market discount bonds 
and short-term obligations that are part of a straddle, you 
must first apply the rules discussed under Limit on interest 
deduction for market discount bonds  and Limit on interest 
deduction for short-term obligations, earlier.
Nondeductible amount. Figure the nondeductible in-
terest and carrying charges on straddle property as fol-
lows.
1. Add:
a. Interest on indebtedness incurred or continued to 
buy or carry the personal property, and
b. All other amounts (including charges to insure, 
store, or transport the personal property) paid or 
incurred to carry the personal property.
2. Subtract from the amount in (1):
a. Interest (including OID) includible in gross income 
for the year on the personal property,
b. Any income from the personal property treated as 
ordinary income on the disposition of short-term 
government obligations or as ordinary income un-
der the market discount and short-term bond pro-
visions—see Discount on Debt Instruments in 
chapter 1,
c. The dividends includible in gross income for the 
year from the personal property, and
d. Any payment on a loan of the personal property for 
use in a short sale that is includible in gross in-
come.
Basis adjustment. Add the nondeductible amount to 
the basis of your straddle property.
How To Report
Investment Interest Expenses
T o deduct your investment interest expenses, you must 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Enter 
your deductible investment interest expense on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), line 9. Include any deductible short 
sale expenses. (See Short Sales in chapter 4 for informa-
tion on these expenses.) Also attach a completed Form 
4952 if you used that form to figure your investment inter-
est expense.
Investment expenses from nonpublicly offered mu-
tual fund or real estate mortgage investment conduit 
(REMIC). If you hold an interest in a nonpublicly offered 
mutual fund, your investment expenses will be shown in 
box 6 of Form 1099-DIV . Publicly offered mutual funds are 
discussed later.
If you hold an interest in a REMIC, any expenses relat-
ing to your residual interest investment will be shown on 
Schedule Q (Form 1066), line 3b. Any expenses relating 
to your regular interest investment will appear in box 5 of 
Form 1099-INT or box 9 of Form 1099-OID.
Including mutual fund or REMIC expenses in in-
come. Y our share of the investment expenses of a RE-
MIC or a nonpublicly offered mutual fund, as described 
above, is considered to be an indirect deduction through 
that pass-through entity. Y ou must include in your gross in-
come an amount equal to the expenses allocated to you, 
whether or not you are able to claim a deduction for those 
expenses. If you are a shareholder in a nonpublicly offered 
mutual fund, you must include on your return the full 
amount of ordinary dividends or other distributions of 
stock, as shown in box 1a of Form 1099 -DIV . If you are a 
residual interest holder in a REMIC, you must report as or-
dinary income on Schedule E (Form 1040) the total 
amounts shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), lines 1b and 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 3 Investment Expenses 51

Page 52 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3b. If you are a REMIC regular interest holder, you must in-
clude the amount of any expense allocation you received 
on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 2b.
Publicly offered mutual funds.  Most mutual funds are 
publicly offered. These mutual funds, generally, are traded 
on an established securities exchange. These funds do 
not pass investment expenses through to you. Instead, the 
dividend income they report to you in box 1a of Form 
1099-DIV is already reduced by your share of investment 
expenses. As a result, you cannot deduct the expenses on 
your return.
Include the amount from box 1a of Form 1099 -DIV in 
your income.
A publicly offered mutual fund is one that:
1. Is continuously offered pursuant to a public offering,
2. Is regularly traded on an established securities mar-
ket, and
3. Is held by or for no fewer than 500 persons at any time 
during the year.
Contact your mutual fund if you are not sure whether it is 
publicly offered.
For information on how to report amortizable bond pre-
mium, see Bond Premium Amortization , earlier in this 
chapter.
When To Report Investment 
Expenses
If you use the cash method to report income and expen-
ses, you generally deduct your expenses, except for cer-
tain prepaid interest, in the year you pay them.
If you use an accrual method, you generally deduct 
your expenses when you incur a liability for them, rather 
than when you pay them.
See also When T o Deduct Investment Interest, earlier in 
this chapter.
Unpaid expenses owed to related party.  If you use an 
accrual method, you cannot deduct interest and other ex-
penses owed to a related cash-basis person until payment 
is made and the amount is includible in the gross income 
of that person. The relationship, for purposes of this rule, 
is determined as of the end of the tax year for which the 
interest or expense would otherwise be deductible. If a de-
duction is denied under this rule, this rule will continue to 
apply even if your relationship with the person ceases to 
exist before the amount is includible in the gross income 
of that person.
This rule generally applies to those relationships listed 
in chapter 4 under Related Party T ransactions. It also ap-
plies to accruals by partnerships to partners, partners to 
partnerships, shareholders to S corporations, and S 
corporations to shareholders.
TIP
The postponement of deductions for unpaid expenses 
and interest under the related party rule does not apply to 
OID, regardless of when payment is made. This rule also 
does not apply to loans with below-market interest rates or 
to certain payments for the use of property and services 
when the lender or recipient has to include payments peri-
odically in income, even if a payment has not been made.
4.
Sales and Trades of 
Investment Property
Introduction
This chapter explains the tax treatment of sales and 
trades of investment property.
Investment property. This is property that produces in-
vestment income. Examples include stocks, bonds, and 
T reasury bills and notes. Property used in a trade or busi-
ness is not investment property.
Digital assets. A digital asset is a digital representation 
of value that is recorded on a cryptographically secured 
distributed ledger or any similar technology. A digital asset 
is treated as property, and general tax principles that ap-
ply to property transactions apply to transactions using 
digital assets, including how to figure your holding period 
for short-term and long -term capital gains and losses ex-
plained earlier under Long-term or Short -term. Digital as-
sets include property that has been referred to as “conver-
tible virtual currency,” “cryptocurrency,” and “non -fungible 
tokens.” If a particular asset has the characteristics of a 
digital asset, it will be treated as a digital asset for federal 
income tax purposes. For more information on the tax 
treatment of digital assets, see Notice 2014 -21, 2014 -16 
I.R.B. 938, available at IRS.gov/irb/2014-16 
IRB#NOT -2014-21, (as modified by Notice 2023 -34, 
2023-19 I.R.B. 837, available at IRS.gov/irb/2023-19 
IRB#NOT -2023-34), Rev. Rul. 2019 -24, 2019 -44 I.R.B. 
1004, available at IRS.gov/irb/2019-44 IRB#REV-
RUL-2019-24, Rev. Rul. 2023 -14, 2023 -33 I.R.B. 484, 
available at IRS.gov/irb/2023-33 IRB#REV-RUL-2023-14, 
Rev. Proc. 2024 -28, 2024 -31 I.R.B. 326, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2024-31 IRB#REV-PROC-2024–28 , and 
IRS.gov/VirtualCurrencyFAQs. For more information on 
the tax treatment of property transactions and on 
short-term and long -term capital gains and losses, see 
Pub. 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets.
Form 1099-B. If you sold property such as stocks, bonds, 
mutual funds, or certain commodities through a broker 
during the year, the broker should send you a Form 
52 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 53 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Exchange 
T ransactions, for each sale. Y ou should receive the Form 
1099-B for 2024 by February 17, 2025. It will show the 
gross proceeds from the sale. The IRS will also get a copy 
of Form 1099-B from the broker.
Use the Form 1099 -B received from your broker to 
complete Form 8949, Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Capital Assets. If you sold a covered security in 2024, your 
broker will send you a Form 1099-B that shows your basis. 
This will help you complete Form 8949. Generally, a cov-
ered security is a security you acquired after 2010, with 
certain exceptions explained in the Instructions for Form 
8949.
For more information on Form 8949 and Sched-
ule D (Form 1040), see Reporting Capital Gains 
and Losses in this chapter. Also see the Instruc-
tions for Form 8949 and the Instructions for Schedule D 
(Form 1040).
Nominees. If someone receives gross proceeds as a 
nominee, that person will give you a Form 1099 -B, which 
will show gross proceeds received on your behalf.
If you receive a Form 1099 -B that includes gross pro-
ceeds belonging to another person, see Nominees, later, 
under Reporting Capital Gains and Losses  for more infor-
mation.
Other property transactions.  Certain transfers of prop-
erty are discussed in other IRS publications. These in-
clude:
• Sale of your main home, discussed in Pub. 523, Sell-
ing Y our Home;
• Installment sales, covered in Pub. 537, Installment 
Sales;
• Various types of transactions involving business prop-
erty, and digital assets, discussed in Pub. 544;
• T ransfers of property at death, covered in Pub. 559, 
Survivors, Executors and Administrators; and
• Disposition of an interest in a passive activity, dis-
cussed in Pub. 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk 
Rules.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• What Is a Sale or T rade,
• Basis of Investment Property,
• Adjusted Basis,
• How T o Figure Gain or Loss,
• Nontaxable T rades,
• T ransfers Between Spouses,
• Related Party T ransactions,
• Capital Gains and Losses,
• Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, and
TIP
• Special Rules for T raders in Securities or 
Commodities.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
551 Basis of Assets
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains and Losses
6781 Gains and Losses From Section 1256 
Contracts and Straddles
8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
8824 Like-Kind Exchanges
8949 Sales and Other Dispositions of Capital Assets
See chapter 5, How T o Get T ax Help, for information about 
getting these publications and forms.
What Is a Sale or Trade?
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Equity option
 Futures contract
 Mark-to-market rule
 Nonequity option
 Options dealer
 Regulated futures contract
 Section 1256 contract
 Short sale
 
This section explains what is a sale or trade. It also ex-
plains certain transactions and events that are treated as 
sales or trades.
A sale is generally a transfer of property for money or a 
mortgage, note, or other promise to pay money.
A trade is a transfer of property for other property or 
services, and may be taxed in the same way as a sale.
Sale or trade of digital assets.  For U.S. tax purposes, 
digital assets are considered property, not currency. A dig-
ital asset is stored electronically and it can be bought, 
sold, owned, transferred or traded. If a particular asset has 
the characteristics of a digital asset, it will be treated as a 
digital asset for federal income tax purposes.
Digital assets are any digital representations of value 
that are recorded on a cryptographically secured 
  544
  551
  Schedule D (Form 1040) 
  6781 
  8582 
  8824 
  8949 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 53

Page 54 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
distributed ledger or any similar technology. For example, 
digital assets include non -fungible tokens (NFT s) and vir-
tual currencies, such as cryptocurrencies and sta-
ble-coins. If a particular asset has the characteristics of a 
digital asset, it will be treated as a digital asset for federal 
income tax purposes. The general tax principles that ap-
ply to property transactions apply to transactions using 
digital assets. T ransactions involving digital assets in-
clude, but are not limited to:
• The receipt of digital assets as payment for goods or 
services provided;
• The receipt or transfer of digital asset for free (without 
providing any consideration) that does not qualify as a 
bona fide gift;
• The receipt of new digital assets as a result of mining 
and staking activities;
• The receipt of digital assets as a result of a hard fork;
• An exchange of digital assets for property, goods, or 
services;
• An exchange or trade of digital assets for other digital 
assets;
• A sale of digital assets; and
• Any other disposition of a financial interest in digital 
assets.
If, in 2024, you engaged in any transaction involving 
digital assets, check "Y es" next to the question on digital 
assets on page 1 of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. On the left 
side of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, you will see the heading 
"Digital Assets." See the Instructions for Form 1040. Also, 
if you disposed of any digital assets in 2024 that were held 
as a capital asset through a sale, exchange, or transfer, 
use Form 8949 to figure your capital gain or loss and re-
port it on Schedule D (Form 1040). See the Instructions 
for Form 8949.
If you received digital assets as compensation for your 
services, you must report the income as wages on Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 1a. If you received digital assets for 
sales to customers in a trade or business, you must gener-
ally report the income on Schedule C (Form 1040) for a 
sole proprietorship. Y ou should report income from digital 
assets the same way as you would report similar income.
For additional information on digital assets, see the In-
structions for Form 1040 or go to IRS.gov/DigitalAsset.
Sale and purchase.  Ordinarily, a transaction is not a 
trade when you voluntarily sell property for cash and im-
mediately buy similar property to replace it. The sale and 
purchase are two separate transactions. But see 
Like-Kind Exchanges under Nontaxable T rades, later.
Redemption of stock.  A redemption of stock is treated 
as a sale or trade and is subject to the capital gain or loss 
provisions unless the redemption is a dividend or other 
distribution on stock.
Dividend versus sale or trade.  Whether a redemp-
tion is treated as a sale, trade, dividend, or other 
distribution depends on the circumstances in each case. 
Both direct and indirect ownership of stock will be consid-
ered. The redemption is treated as a sale or trade of stock 
if:
• The redemption is not essentially equivalent to a divi-
dend—see Dividends and Other Distributions in chap-
ter 1,
• There is a substantially disproportionate redemption 
of stock,
• There is a complete redemption of all the stock of the 
corporation owned by the shareholder, or
• The redemption is a distribution in partial liquidation of 
a corporation.
Redemption or retirement of bonds.  A redemption or 
retirement of bonds or notes at their maturity is generally 
treated as a sale or trade. See Stocks, stock rights, and 
bonds and Discounted Debt Instruments, later.
In addition, a significant modification of a bond is trea-
ted as a trade of the original bond for a new bond. For de-
tails, see Regulations section 1.1001-3.
Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by a dominant 
shareholder who retains ownership of more than half of 
the corporation's voting shares is treated as a contribution 
to capital rather than as an immediate loss deductible 
from taxable income. The surrendering shareholder must 
reallocate his or her basis in the surrendered shares to the 
shares he or she retains.
Trade of investment property for an annuity.  The 
transfer of investment property to a corporation, trust, 
fund, foundation, or other organization, in exchange for a 
fixed annuity contract that will make guaranteed annual 
payments to you for life, is a taxable trade. If the present 
value of the annuity is more than your basis in the property 
traded, you have a taxable gain in the year of the trade. 
Figure the present value of the annuity according to fac-
tors used by commercial insurance companies issuing an-
nuities.
Transfer by inheritance.  The transfer of property of a 
decedent to the executor or administrator of the estate, or 
to the heirs or beneficiaries, is not a sale or other disposi-
tion. No taxable gain or deductible loss results from the 
transfer.
Termination of certain rights and obligations.  The 
cancellation, lapse, expiration, or other termination of a 
right or obligation (other than a securities futures contract) 
with respect to property that is a capital asset (or that 
would be a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated as a 
sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital gain or loss.
This rule does not apply to the retirement of a debt in-
strument. See Redemption or retirement of bonds, earlier.
Worthless Securities
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds (other than those held for 
sale by a securities dealer) that became completely worth-
less during the tax year are treated as though they were 
54 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 55 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sold on the last day of the tax year. This affects whether 
your capital loss is long term or short term. See Holding 
Period, later.
Worthless securities also include securities that you 
abandon after March 12, 2008. T o abandon a security, you 
must permanently surrender and relinquish all rights in the 
security and receive no consideration in exchange for it. 
All the facts and circumstances determine whether the 
transaction is properly characterized as an abandonment 
or other type of transaction, such as an actual sale or ex-
change, contribution to capital, dividend, or gift.
If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make payments on 
a negotiable promissory note that you issued for stock that 
became worthless, you can deduct these payments as 
losses in the years you actually make the payments. Do 
not deduct them in the year the stock became worthless.
How to report loss. Report worthless securities on Form 
8949, Part I or Part II, whichever applies.
Report your worthless securities transactions on 
Form 8949 with the correct box checked for these 
transactions. See Form 8949 and the Instructions 
for Form 8949.
Filing a claim for refund. If you do not claim a loss for a 
worthless security on your original return for the year it be-
comes worthless, you can file a claim for a credit or refund 
due to the loss. Y ou must use Form 1040 -X, Amended 
U.S. Individual Income T ax Return, to amend your return 
for the year the security became worthless. Y ou must file it 
within 7 years from the date your original return for that 
year had to be filed, or 2 years from the date you paid the 
tax, whichever is later. (Claims not due to worthless secur-
ities or bad debts must generally be filed within 3 years 
from the date a return is filed, or 2 years from the date the 
tax is paid, whichever is later.) For more information about 
filing a claim, see Pub. 556, Examination of Returns, Ap-
peals Rights, and Claims for Refund.
Constructive Sales
of Appreciated
Financial Positions
Y ou are treated as having made a constructive sale when 
you enter into certain transactions involving an appreci-
ated financial position (defined later) in stock, a partner-
ship interest, or certain debt instruments. Y ou must recog-
nize a gain as if the position were disposed of at its fair 
market value on the date of the constructive sale. This 
gives you a new holding period for the position that begins 
on the date of the constructive sale. Then, when you close 
the transaction, you reduce your gain (or increase your 
loss) by the gain recognized on the constructive sale.
Constructive sale.  Y ou are treated as having made a 
constructive sale of an appreciated financial position if 
you:
• Enter into a short sale of the same or substantially 
identical property,
CAUTION
!
• Enter into an offsetting notional principal contract re-
lating to the same or substantially identical property,
• Enter into a futures or forward contract to deliver the 
same or substantially identical property (including a 
forward contract that provides for cash settlement), or
• Acquire the same or substantially identical property (if 
the appreciated financial position is a short sale, an 
offsetting notional principal contract, or a futures or 
forward contract).
Y ou are also treated as having made a constructive 
sale of an appreciated financial position if a person related 
to you enters into a transaction described above with a 
view toward avoiding the constructive sale treatment. For 
this purpose, a related person is any related party descri-
bed under Related Party T ransactions, later in this chap-
ter.
Exception for nonmarketable securities.  Y ou are 
not treated as having made a constructive sale solely be-
cause you entered into a contract for sale of any stock, 
debt instrument, or partnership interest that is not a mar-
ketable security if it settles within 1 year of the date you 
enter into it.
Exception for certain closed transactions.  Do not 
treat a transaction as a constructive sale if all of the follow-
ing are true.
1. Y ou closed the transaction on or before the 30th day 
after the end of your tax year;
2. Y ou held the appreciated financial position throughout 
the 60-day period beginning on the date you closed 
the transaction; and
3. Y our risk of loss was not reduced at any time during 
that 60-day period by holding certain other positions.
If a closed transaction is reestablished in a substantially 
similar position during the 60 -day period beginning on the 
date the first transaction was closed, this exception still 
applies if the reestablished position is closed before the 
30th day after the end of your tax year in which the first 
transaction was closed and, after that closing, (2) and (3) 
above are true.
This exception also applies to successive short sales of 
an entire appreciated financial position. For more informa-
tion, see Revenue Ruling 2003 -1 in Internal Revenue Bul-
letin 2003 -3. This bulletin is available at IRS.gov/pub/irs-
irbs/irb03-03.pdf.
Appreciated financial position.  This is any interest in 
stock, a partnership interest, or a debt instrument (includ-
ing a futures or forward contract, a short sale, or an op-
tion) if disposing of the interest would result in a gain.
Exceptions. An appreciated financial position does 
not include the following.
1. Any position from which all of the appreciation is ac-
counted for under the mark-to-market rule, including 
section 1256 contracts (described later under Section 
1256 Contracts Marked to Market).
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 55

Page 56 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Any position in a debt instrument if:
a. The position unconditionally entitles the holder to 
receive a specified principal amount;
b. The interest payments (or other similar amounts) 
with respect to the position are payable at a fixed 
rate or a variable rate described in Regulations 
section 1.860G-1(a)(3); and
c. The position is not convertible, either directly or in-
directly, into stock of the issuer (or any related per-
son).
3. Any hedge with respect to a position described in (2).
Certain trust instruments treated as stock.  For the 
constructive sale rules, an interest in an actively traded 
trust is treated as stock unless substantially all of the value 
of the property held by the trust is debt that qualifies for 
the exception to the definition of an appreciated financial 
position (explained in (2) above).
Sale of appreciated financial position.  A transaction 
treated as a constructive sale of an appreciated financial 
position is not treated as a constructive sale of any other 
appreciated financial position, as long as you continue to 
hold the original position. However, if you hold another ap-
preciated financial position and dispose of the original po-
sition before closing the transaction that resulted in the 
constructive sale, you are treated as if, at the same time, 
you constructively sold the other appreciated financial po-
sition.
Section 1256 Contracts
Marked to Market
If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end of the tax 
year, you must generally treat it as sold at its fair market 
value on the last business day of the tax year.
Section 1256 Contract
A section 1256 contract is any:
• Regulated futures contract,
• Foreign currency contract,
• Nonequity option,
• Dealer equity option, or
• Dealer securities futures contract.
Exceptions.  A section 1256 contract does not in-
clude:
• Interest rate swaps,
• Currency swaps,
• Basis swaps,
• Interest rate caps,
• Interest rate floors,
• Commodity swaps,
• Equity swaps,
• Equity index swaps,
• Credit default swaps, or
• Similar agreements.
For more details, including definitions of these terms, see 
section 1256.
Regulated futures contract. This is a contract that:
• Provides that amounts which must be deposited to, or 
can be withdrawn from, your margin account depend 
on daily market conditions (a system of mark to mar-
ket); and
• Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, a qualified 
board of exchange. A qualified board of exchange is a 
domestic board of trade designated as a contract mar-
ket by the Commodity Futures T rading Commission, 
any board of trade or exchange approved by the Sec-
retary of the T reasury, or a national securities ex-
change registered with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC).
Foreign currency contract. This is a contract that:
• Requires delivery of a foreign currency that has posi-
tions traded through regulated futures contracts (or 
settlement of which depends on the value of that type 
of foreign currency),
• Is traded in the interbank market, and
• Is entered into at arm's length at a price determined by 
reference to the price in the interbank market.
Bank forward contracts with maturity dates longer than 
the maturities ordinarily available for regulated futures 
contracts are considered to meet the definition of a foreign 
currency contract if the above three conditions are satis-
fied.
Special rules apply to certain foreign currency transac-
tions. These transactions may result in ordinary gain or 
loss treatment. For details, see Internal Revenue Code 
section 988 and Regulations sections 1. 988-1(a)(7) and 
1.988-3.
Nonequity option.  This is any listed option (defined 
later) that is not an equity option. Nonequity options in-
clude debt options, commodity futures options, currency 
options, and broad -based stock index options. A 
broad-based stock index is based on the value of a group 
of diversified stocks or securities (such as the Standard 
and Poor's 500 index).
Warrants based on a stock index that are economically 
substantially identical in all material respects to options 
based on a stock index are treated as options based on a 
stock index.
Cash-settled options. Cash-settled options based on 
a stock index and either traded on or subject to the rules 
of a qualified board of exchange are nonequity options if 
the SEC determines that the stock index is broad based.
This rule does not apply to options established before 
the SEC determines that the stock index is broad based.
56 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 57 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Listed option. This is any option traded on, or subject 
to the rules of, a qualified board or exchange (as dis-
cussed earlier under Regulated futures contract ). A listed 
option, however, does not include an option that is a right 
to acquire stock from the issuer.
Dealer equity option.  This is any listed option that, for 
an options dealer:
• Is an equity option,
• Is bought or granted by that dealer in the normal 
course of the dealer's business activity of dealing in 
options, and
• Is listed on the qualified board of exchange where that 
dealer is registered.
An “options dealer” is any person registered with an ap-
propriate national securities exchange as a market maker 
or specialist in listed options.
Equity option. This is any option:
• T o buy or sell stock, or
• That is valued directly or indirectly by reference to any 
stock or narrow-based security index.
Equity options include options on a group of stocks only if 
the group is a narrow-based stock index.
Dealer securities futures contract. For any dealer in 
securities futures contracts or options on those contracts, 
this is a securities futures contract (or option on such a 
contract) that:
• Is entered into by the dealer (or, in the case of an op-
tion, is purchased or granted by the dealer) in the nor-
mal course of the dealer's activity of dealing in this 
type of contract (or option); and
• Is traded on a qualified board or exchange (as defined 
under Regulated futures contract, earlier).
A securities futures contract that is not a dealer securities 
futures contract is treated as described later under Securi-
ties Futures Contracts.
Mark-to-Market Rule
A section 1256 contract that you hold at the end of the tax 
year will generally be treated as sold at its fair market 
value on the last business day of the tax year, and you 
must recognize any gain or loss that results. That gain or 
loss is taken into account in figuring your gain or loss 
when you later dispose of the contract, as shown in the 
Example under 60/40 rule below.
Hedging exception.  The mark -to-market rule does not 
apply to hedging transactions. See Hedging T ransactions, 
later.
60/40 rule.  Under the mark -to-market system, 60% of 
your capital gain or loss will be treated as a long-term cap-
ital gain or loss, and 40% will be treated as a short -term 
capital gain or loss. This is true regardless of how long you 
actually held the property.
Example. On June 1, 2023, you bought a regulated fu-
tures contract for $50,000. On December 29, 2023 (the 
last business day of your tax year), the fair market value of 
the contract was $57,000. Y ou recognized a $7,000 gain 
on your 2023 tax return. Y ou treated 60% of the gain as 
long-term capital gain and 40% as short-term capital gain.
On February 1, 2024, you sold the contract for $56,000. 
Because you recognized a $7,000 gain on your 2023 re-
turn, you recognize a $1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on 
your 2024 tax return, treated as 60% long -term and 40% 
short-term capital loss.
Limited partners or entrepreneurs.  The 60/40 rule 
does not apply to dealer equity options or dealer securi-
ties futures contracts that result in capital gain or loss allo-
cable to limited partners or limited entrepreneurs (defined 
later under Hedging T ransactions). Instead, these gains or 
losses are treated as short term.
Terminations and transfers.  The mark -to-market rule 
also applies if your obligation or rights under section 1256 
contracts is terminated or transferred during the tax year. 
In this case, use the fair market value of each section 
1256 contract at the time of termination or transfer to de-
termine the gain or loss. T erminations or transfers may re-
sult from any offsetting, delivery, exercise, assignment, or 
lapse of your obligation or rights under section 1256 con-
tracts.
Loss carryback election.  An individual having a net 
section 1256 contracts loss (defined later) can generally 
elect to carry this loss back 3 years instead of carrying it 
over to the next year. See How T o Report, later, for infor-
mation about reporting this election on your return.
The loss carried back to any year under this election 
cannot be more than the net section 1256 contracts gain 
in that year. In addition, the amount of loss carried back to 
an earlier tax year cannot increase or produce a net oper-
ating loss for that year.
The loss is carried to the earliest carryback year first, 
and any unabsorbed loss amount can then be carried to 
each of the next 2 tax years. In each carryback year, treat 
60% of the carryback amount as a long -term capital loss 
and 40% as a short -term capital loss from section 1256 
contracts.
If only a portion of the net section 1256 contracts loss is 
absorbed by carrying the loss back, the unabsorbed por-
tion can be carried forward, under the capital loss carry-
over rules, to the year following the loss. For more informa-
tion, see Capital Losses , later. Figure your capital loss 
carryover as if, for the loss year, you had an additional 
short-term capital gain of 40% of the amount of net sec-
tion 1256 contracts loss absorbed in the carryback years 
and an additional long -term capital gain of 60% of the ab-
sorbed loss. In the carryover year, treat any capital loss 
carryover from losses on section 1256 contracts as if it 
were a loss from section 1256 contracts for that year.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 57

Page 58 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Net section 1256 contracts loss.  This loss is the 
lesser of:
• The net capital loss for your tax year determined by 
taking into account only the gains and losses from 
section 1256 contracts, or
• The capital loss carryover to the next tax year deter-
mined without this election.
Net section 1256 contracts gain.  This gain is the 
lesser of:
• The capital gain net income for the carryback year de-
termined by taking into account only gains and losses 
from section 1256 contracts, or
• The capital gain net income for that year.
Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain for any carry-
back year without regard to the net section 1256 contracts 
loss for the loss year or any later tax year.
Traders in section 1256 contracts.  Gain or loss from 
the trading of section 1256 contracts is capital gain or loss 
subject to the mark-to-market rule. However, this does not 
apply to contracts held for purposes of hedging property if 
any loss from the property would be an ordinary loss.
Treatment of underlying property.  The determina-
tion of whether an individual's gain or loss from any prop-
erty is ordinary or capital gain or loss is made without re-
gard to the fact that the individual is actively engaged in 
dealing in or trading section 1256 contracts related to that 
property.
Deferral of net gain from section 1256 contracts due 
to investment in Qualified Opportunity Fund.  For 
special rules relating to the deferral of net gain from sec-
tion 1256 contracts, see section 1400Z -2. See the Form 
8949 instructions for how to report.
How To Report
If you disposed of regulated futures or foreign currency 
contracts in 2024 (or had unrealized profit or loss on these 
contracts that were open at the end of 2023 or 2024), you 
should receive Form 1099-B from your broker.
Form 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781 to report your gains 
and losses from all section 1256 contracts that are open 
at the end of the year or that were closed out during the 
year. This includes the amount shown in box 11 of Form 
1099-B. Then enter the net amount of these gains and los-
ses on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 4 or line 11, as ap-
propriate. Include a copy of Form 6781 with your income 
tax return.
If the Form 1099 -B you receive includes a straddle or 
hedging transaction, defined later, it may be necessary to 
show certain adjustments on Form 6781. Follow the Form 
6781 instructions for completing Part I.
Loss carryback election. T o carry back your loss under 
the election procedures described earlier, file Form 
1040-X or Form 1045, Application for T entative Refund, for 
the year to which you are carrying the loss with an amen-
ded Form 6781 and an amended Schedule D (Form 1040) 
attached. Follow the instructions for completing Form 
6781 for the loss year to make this election.
Hedging Transactions
The mark-to-market rule, described earlier, does not apply 
to hedging transactions. A transaction is a hedging trans-
action if both of the following conditions are met.
1. Y ou entered into the transaction in the normal course 
of your trade or business primarily to manage the risk 
of:
a. Price changes or currency fluctuations on ordinary 
property you hold (or will hold); or
b. Interest rate or price changes, or currency fluctua-
tions, on your current or future borrowings or ordi-
nary obligations.
2. Y ou clearly identified the transaction as being a hedg-
ing transaction before the close of the day on which 
you entered
into it.
This hedging transaction exception does not apply to 
transactions entered into by or for any syndicate. A syndi-
cate is a partnership, S corporation, or other entity (other 
than a regular corporation) that allocates more than 35% 
of its losses to limited partners or limited entrepreneurs. A 
limited entrepreneur is a person who has an interest in an 
enterprise (but not as a limited partner) and who does not 
actively participate in its management. However, an inter-
est is not considered held by a limited partner or entrepre-
neur if the interest holder actively participates (or did so 
for at least 5 full years) in the management of the entity, or 
is the spouse, child (including a legally adopted child), 
grandchild, or parent of an individual who actively partici-
pates in the management of the entity.
Hedging loss limit.  If you are a limited partner or entre-
preneur in a syndicate, the amount of a hedging loss you 
can claim is limited. A “hedging loss” is the amount by 
which the allowable deductions in a tax year that resulted 
from a hedging transaction (determined without regard to 
the limit) are more than the income received or accrued 
during the tax year from this transaction.
Any hedging loss allocated to you for the tax year is 
limited to your taxable income for that year from the trade 
or business in which the hedging transaction occurred. Ig-
nore any hedging transaction items in determining this 
taxable income. If you have a hedging loss that is disal-
lowed because of this limit, you can carry it over to the 
next tax year as a deduction resulting from a hedging 
transaction.
If the hedging transaction relates to property other than 
stock or securities, the limit on hedging losses applies if 
the limited partner or entrepreneur is an individual.
The limit on hedging losses does not apply to any 
hedging loss to the extent that it is more than all your un-
recognized gains from hedging transactions at the end of 
the tax year that are from the trade or business in which 
the hedging transaction occurred. The term “unrecognized 
58 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 59 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gain” has the same meaning as defined under Loss Defer-
ral Rules, later.
Sale of property used in a hedge.  Once you identify 
personal property as being part of a hedging transaction, 
you must treat gain from its sale or exchange as ordinary 
income, not capital gain.
Self-Employment Income
Gains and losses derived in the ordinary course of a com-
modity or option dealer's trading in section 1256 contracts 
and property related to these contracts are included in net 
earnings from self -employment. See the Instructions for 
Schedule SE (Form 1040). In addition, the rules relating to 
contributions to self -employment retirement plans apply. 
For information on retirement plan contributions, see Pub. 
560, Retirement Plans for Small Business (SEP , SIMPLE 
and Qualified Plans) and Pub. 590 -A, Contributions to In-
dividual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs).
Generally, self -employment income includes all 
gross income derived by an individual from any 
trade or business carried on by the individual as 
other than an employee. Consequently, the fair market 
value of virtual currency received for services performed 
as an independent contractor, measured in U.S. dollars as 
of the date of receipt, constitutes self -employment income 
and is subject to the self-employment tax.
Basis of Investment Property
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Basis
 Fair market value
 Original issue discount (OID)
 
Basis is a way of measuring your investment in property 
for tax purposes. Y ou must know the basis of your prop-
erty to determine whether you have a gain or loss on its 
sale or other disposition.
Investment property you buy normally has an original 
basis equal to its cost. If you get property in some way 
other than buying it, such as by gift or inheritance, its fair 
market value may be important in figuring the basis.
Cost Basis
The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. The cost 
is the amount you pay in cash, debt obligations, or other 
property or services.
Cost basis and digital assets.  The basis of property is 
its cost. Generally, the basis of a digital asset is the cost in 
U.S. dollars. How you determine your basis for digital as-
TIP
sets depends on the type of transaction you had. Find 
how to determine the basis for your specific situation in 
FAQs on virtual currency transactions.  T o determine your 
basis, you’ll need this information:
• T ype of digital asset you acquired (for example Bit-
coin);
• Date and time you acquired the digital asset;
• Number of units of the digital asset acquired, and
• Fair market value of the digital asset when acquired 
(as measured in U.S. dollars).
Find additional details on Pub. 551.
Unstated interest.  If you buy property on a time -pay-
ment plan that charges little or no interest, the basis of 
your property is your stated purchase price, minus the 
amount considered to be unstated interest. Y ou generally 
have unstated interest if your interest rate is less than the 
applicable federal rate. For more information, see Unsta-
ted Interest and Original Issue Discount (OID) in Pub. 537.
Basis Other Than Cost
There are times when you must use a basis other than 
cost. In these cases, you may need to know the property's 
fair market value or the adjusted basis of the previous 
owner.
Fair market value. This is the price at which the property 
would change hands between a buyer and a seller, neither 
being forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable 
knowledge of all the relevant facts. Sales of similar prop-
erty, around the same date, may be helpful in figuring fair 
market value.
Property Received for Services
If you receive investment property for services, you must 
include the property's fair market value in income. The 
amount you include in income then becomes your basis in 
the property. If the services were performed for a price that 
was agreed to beforehand, this price will be accepted as 
the fair market value of the property if there is no evidence 
to the contrary.
Digital assets for services.  If your employer gives you 
digital assets (such as Bitcoin) as payment for your serv-
ices, you must include the FMV of the digital assets as of 
the date(s) of receipt in your income. The FMV of digital 
assets paid as wages is subject to federal income tax 
withholding, FICA tax, and FUTA tax and must be reported 
on Form W -2. Notice 2014 -21, 2014 -16 I.R.B. 938, de-
scribes how digital assets are treated for federal tax pur-
poses and is available at IRS.gov/irb/
2014-16_IRB#NOT -2014-21.
If you received digital assets as compensation for your 
services, you must report the income as wages on Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 1a. If you received digital assets for 
sales to customers in a trade or business, you must gener-
ally report the income on Schedule C (Form 1040) for a 
sole proprietorship. Y ou should report income from digital 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 59

Page 60 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
assets the same way as you would report similar income. 
For additional information on digital assets, see the 
Instructions for Form 1040 or go to IRS.gov/DigitalAssets.
Restricted property. If you receive, as payment for serv-
ices, property that is subject to certain restrictions, your 
basis in the property is generally its fair market value when 
it becomes substantially vested. Property becomes sub-
stantially vested when it is transferable or is no longer sub-
ject to substantial risk of forfeiture, whichever happens 
first. See Restricted Property  in Pub. 525, T axable and 
Nontaxable Income, for more information.
Bargain purchases.  If you buy investment property at 
less than fair market value, as payment for services, you 
must include the difference in income. Y our basis in the 
property is the price you pay plus the amount you include 
in income.
Property Received in Taxable Trades
If you received investment property in trade for other prop-
erty, the basis of the new property is its fair market value at 
the time of the trade unless you received the property in a 
nontaxable trade.
Example.  Y ou trade A Company stock for B Company 
stock having a fair market value of $1,200. If the adjusted 
basis of the A Company stock is less than $1,200, you 
have a taxable gain on the trade. If the adjusted basis of 
the A Company stock is more than $1,200, you have a de-
ductible loss on the trade. The basis of your B Company 
stock is $1,200. If you later sell the B Company stock for 
$1,300, you will have a gain of $100.
Property Received in Nontaxable Trades
If you have a nontaxable trade, you do not recognize gain 
or loss until you dispose of the real property you received 
in the trade. See Nontaxable T rades, later.
The basis of property you received in a nontaxable or 
partly nontaxable trade is generally the same as the adjus-
ted basis of the property you gave up. Increase this 
amount by any cash you paid, additional costs you had, 
and any gain recognized. Reduce this amount by any 
cash or unlike property you received, any loss recognized, 
and any liability of yours that was assumed or treated as 
assumed.
Property Received From Your Spouse
If property is transferred to you from your spouse (or for-
mer spouse, if the transfer is incident to your divorce), your 
basis is the same as your spouse's or former spouse's ad-
justed basis just before the transfer. See T ransfers Be-
tween Spouses, later.
Recordkeeping. The transferor must give you the 
records necessary to determine the adjusted ba-
sis and holding period of the property as of the 
date of the transfer.
RECORDS
Property Received as a Gift
If you receive virtual currency as a bona fide gift, 
you will not recognize income until you sell, ex-
change, or otherwise dispose of that virtual cur-
rency. For more information about gifts, see Pub. 559.
T o figure your basis in property that you received as a 
gift, you must know its adjusted basis to the donor just be-
fore it was given to you, its fair market value at the time it 
was given to you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and 
the date it was given to you.
Digital assets received as a gift.  The gift tax applies to 
transfers of digital assets. Digital assets are any digital 
representations of value that are recorded on a crypto-
graphically secured distributed ledger or any similar tech-
nology. For example, digital assets include non -fungible 
tokens (NFT s) and virtual currencies, such as cryptocur-
rencies and stablecoins. If a particular asset has the char-
acteristics of a digital asset, it will be treated as a digital 
asset for federal transfer tax purposes. For more informa-
tion, see Form 709 Instructions.
Basis of digital assets received as a gift. Y our basis in 
virtual currency received as a bona fide gift differs de-
pending on whether you will have a gain or a loss when 
you sell or dispose of it. For purposes of determining 
whether you have a gain, your basis is equal to the donor's 
basis, plus any gift tax the donor paid on the gift. For pur-
poses of determining whether you have a loss, your basis 
is equal to the lesser of the donor's basis or the fair market 
value of the virtual currency at the time you received the 
gift. If you do not have any documentation to substantiate 
the donor's basis, then your basis is zero. For more infor-
mation on basis of property received as a gift, see Pub. 
551.
Fair market value less than donor's adjusted basis. If 
the fair market value of the property at the time of the gift 
was less than the donor's adjusted basis just before the 
gift, your basis for gain on its sale or other disposition is 
the same as the donor's adjusted basis plus or minus any 
required adjustments to basis during the period you hold 
the property. Y our basis for loss is its fair market value at 
the time of the gift plus or minus any required adjustments 
to basis during the period you hold the property.
No gain or loss.  If you use the basis for figuring a 
gain and the result is a loss, and then use the basis for fig-
uring a loss and the result is a gain, you will have neither a 
gain nor a loss.
Example.  Y ou receive a gift of investment property 
having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at the time of the gift. 
The fair market value at the time of the gift is $9,000. Y ou 
later sell the property for $9,500. Y our basis for figuring 
gain is $10,000, and $9,500 minus $10,000 results in a 
$500 loss. Y our basis for figuring loss is $9,000, and 
$9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain. Y ou have nei-
ther gain nor loss.
TIP
60 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 61 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fair market value equal to or more than donor's ad-
justed basis.  If the fair market value of the property at 
the time of the gift was equal to or more than the donor's 
adjusted basis just before the gift, your basis for gain or 
loss on its sale or other disposition is the donor's adjusted 
basis plus or minus any required adjustments to basis dur-
ing the period you hold the property. Also, you may be al-
lowed to add to the donor's adjusted basis all or part of 
any gift tax paid, depending on the date of the gift.
Gift received after 1976.  If you received property as 
a gift after 1976, your basis is the donor's adjusted basis 
increased by the part of the gift tax paid that was for the 
net increase in value of the gift. Y ou figure this part by mul-
tiplying the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The nu-
merator (top part) is the net increase in value of the gift 
and the denominator (bottom part) is the amount of the 
gift.
The net increase in value of the gift is the fair market 
value of the gift minus the donor's adjusted basis. The 
amount of the gift is its value for gift tax purposes after re-
duction by any annual exclusion and marital or charitable 
deduction that applies to the gift.
Example.  In 2024, you received a gift of property from 
your mother. At the time of the gift, the property had a fair 
market value of $101,000 and an adjusted basis to her of 
$40,000. The amount of the gift for gift tax purposes was 
$83,000 ($101,000 minus the $18,000 annual exclusion), 
and your mother paid a gift tax of $19,040. Y ou figure your 
basis in the following way:
Fair market value ....................... $101,000 
Minus: Adjusted basis ....................  40,000 
Net increase in value of gift ................. $ 61,000 
Gift tax paid .......................... $ 19,040 
Multiplied by 0.735 ($61,000 ÷ $83,000) ......... 0.735 
Gift tax due to net increase in value ............ $ 13,994 
Plus: Adjusted basis of property to 
your mother .......................... 40,000 
Your basis in the property................. $ 53,994
Part sale, part gift.  If you get property in a transfer that 
is partly a sale and partly a gift, your basis is the larger of 
the amount you paid for the property or the transferor's ad-
justed basis in the property at the time of the transfer. Add 
to that amount the amount of any gift tax paid on the gift, 
as described in the preceding discussion. For figuring 
loss, your basis is limited to the property's fair market 
value at the time of the transfer.
Gift tax information.  For information on gift tax, see 
Pub. 559. For information on figuring the amount of gift tax 
to add to your basis, see Property Received as a Gift  in 
Pub. 551.
Property Received as Inheritance
If you sell or dispose of inherited property that is a 
capital asset, the gain or loss is considered long 
term, regardless of how long you held the prop-
erty. For more information on inherited property, see Pub. 
559.
Before or after 2010.  If you inherited property from a 
decedent who died before or after 2010, or who died in 
2010 and the executor of the decedent's estate elected 
not to file Form 8939, Allocation of Increase in Basis for 
Property Acquired From a Decedent, your basis in that 
property is generally its fair market value (its appraised 
value on Form 706, United States Estate (and Genera-
tion-Skipping T ransfer) T ax Return) on:
• The date of the decedent's death; or
• The later alternate valuation date if the estate qualifies 
for, and elects to use, alternate valuation.
In certain circumstances, the executor of an estate (or 
other person) required to file Form 706 after July 15, 2015, 
will be required to provide a Schedule A (Form 8971) to 
you as a beneficiary who receives or is to receive property 
from the estate. If you receive Schedule A (Form 8971), 
use the final estate tax value of the property reported on 
the Schedule A to determine your basis in the property.
If no Form 706 was filed, or the executor was not re-
quired to provide you Schedule A (Form 8971), use the 
appraised value on the date of death for state inheritance 
or transmission taxes. For stocks and bonds, if no Form 
706 was filed and there are no state inheritance or trans-
mission taxes, see the Form 706 instructions for figuring 
the fair market value of the stocks and bonds on the date 
of the decedent's death.
Appreciated property you gave the decedent.  Y our 
basis in certain appreciated property that you inherited is 
the decedent's adjusted basis in the property immediately 
before death rather than its fair market value. This applies 
to appreciated property that you or your spouse gave the 
decedent as a gift during the 1 -year period ending on the 
date of death. Appreciated property is any property whose 
fair market value on the day you gave it to the decedent 
was more than its adjusted basis.
More information.  See Pub. 551 for more information 
on the basis of inherited property, including community 
property, property held by a surviving tenant in a joint ten-
ancy or tenancy by the entirety, a qualified joint interest, 
and a farm or closely held business.
Inherited in 2010 and executor elected to file Form 
8939.  If you inherited property from a decedent who died 
in 2010 and the executor made the election to file Form 
8939, see Revenue Procedure 2011 -41 to figure your ba-
sis. Revenue Procedure 2011 -41 is available at 
IRS.gov/rb/2011-35_IRB#RP-2011-41.
For additional information on an executor making the 
election, see also Notice 2011 -66, 2011 -35 I.R.B. 184, 
available at IRS.gov/irb/2011-35_IRB#NOT -2011-66.
TIP
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 61

Page 62 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Adjusted Basis
Before you can figure any gain or loss on a sale, ex-
change, or other disposition of property or figure allowable 
depreciation, depletion, or amortization, you must usually 
make certain adjustments (increases and decreases) to 
the basis of the property. The result of these adjustments 
to the basis is the adjusted basis.
Adjustments to the basis of stocks and bonds are ex-
plained in the following discussion. For information about 
other adjustments to basis, see Pub. 551.
Stocks and Bonds
The basis of stocks or bonds you own is generally the pur-
chase price plus the costs of purchase, such as commis-
sions and recording or transfer fees. If you acquired stock 
or bonds other than by purchase, your basis is usually de-
termined by fair market value or the previous owner's ad-
justed basis as discussed earlier under Basis Other Than 
Cost.
The basis of stock must be adjusted for certain events 
that occur after purchase. For example, if you receive 
more stock from nontaxable stock dividends or stock 
splits, you must reduce the basis of your original stock. 
Y ou must also reduce your basis when you receive nondi-
vidend distributions (discussed in chapter 1). These distri-
butions, up to the amount of your basis, are a nontaxable 
return of capital.
The IRS partners with companies that offer Form 
8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040) software that 
can import trades from many brokerage firms and 
accounting software to help you keep track of your adjus-
ted basis in securities. T o find out more, go to IRS.gov/
Filing .
Identifying stock or bonds sold.  If you can adequately 
identify the shares of stock or the bonds you sold, their ba-
sis is the cost or other basis of the particular shares of 
stock or bonds.
Identifying digital assets.  Y ou may identify a specific 
unit of virtual currency either by documenting the specific 
unit’s unique digital identifier such as a private key, public 
key, and address, or by records showing the transaction 
information for all units of a specific virtual currency, such 
as Bitcoin, held in a single account, wallet, or address. 
This information must show:
1. The date and time each unit was acquired;
2. Y our basis and the fair market value of each unit at the 
time it was acquired;
3. The date and time each unit was sold, exchanged, or 
otherwise disposed of, and
4. The fair market value of each unit when sold, ex-
changed, or disposed of, and the amount of money or 
the value of property received for each unit.
TIP
Adequate identification.  Y ou will make an adequate 
identification if you show that certificates representing 
shares of stock from a lot that you bought on a certain 
date or for a certain price were delivered to your broker or 
other agent.
Broker holds stock.  If you have left the stock certifi-
cates with your broker or other agent, you will make an ad-
equate identification if you:
• T ell your broker or other agent the particular stock to 
be sold or transferred at the time of the sale or trans-
fer, and
• Receive a written confirmation of this from your broker 
or other agent within a reasonable time.
Stock identified this way is the stock sold or transferred 
even if stock certificates from a different lot are delivered 
to the broker or other agent.
Single stock certificate.  If you bought stock in differ-
ent lots at different times and you hold a single stock cer-
tificate for this stock, you will make an adequate identifica-
tion if you:
• T ell your broker or other agent the particular stock to 
be sold or transferred when you deliver the certificate 
to your broker or other agent, and
• Receive a written confirmation of this from your broker 
or other agent within a reasonable time.
If you sell part of the stock represented by a single cer-
tificate directly to the buyer instead of through a broker, 
you will make an adequate identification if you keep a writ-
ten record of the particular stock that you intend to sell.
Bonds.  These methods of identification also apply to 
bonds sold or transferred.
Identification not possible.  If you buy and sell se-
curities at various times in varying quantities and you can-
not adequately identify the shares you sell, the basis of 
the securities you sell is the basis of the securities you ac-
quired first. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis-
cussed later, you cannot use the average price per share 
to figure gain or loss on the sale of the shares.
Example.  Y ou bought 100 shares of stock of XYZ 
Corporation in 2009 for $10 per share. In January 2010, 
you bought another 200 shares for $11 per share. In July 
2010, you gave your son 50 shares. In December 2012, 
you bought 100 shares for $9 per share. In April 2024, you 
sold 130 shares. Y ou cannot identify the shares you dis-
posed of, so you must use the stock you acquired first to 
figure the basis. The shares of stock you gave your son 
had a basis of $500 (50 × $10). Y ou figure the basis of the 
130 shares of stock you sold in April 2024 as follows:
50 shares (50 × $10) balance of stock bought in 
2009 ................................ $  500 
80 shares (80 × $11) stock bought in January 2010 .. 880 
Total basis of stock sold in 2024 ............. $1,380
Shares in a mutual fund or real estate investment 
trust (REIT).  The basis of shares in a mutual fund (or 
62 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 63 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
other regulated investment company) or a REIT is gener-
ally figured in the same way as the basis of other stock 
and usually includes any commissions or load charges 
paid for the purchase.
Example.  Y ou bought 100 shares of Fund A for $10 
per share. Y ou paid a $50 commission to the broker for the 
purchase. Y our cost basis for each share is $10. 50 
($1,050 ÷ 100).
Commissions and load charges.  The fees and 
charges you pay to acquire or redeem shares of a mutual 
fund are not deductible. Y ou can usually add acquisition 
fees and charges to your cost of the shares and thereby 
increase your basis. A fee paid to redeem the shares is 
usually a reduction in the redemption price (sales price).
Y ou cannot add your entire acquisition fee or load 
charge to the cost of the mutual fund shares acquired if all 
of the following conditions apply. 
1. Y ou get a reinvestment right because of the purchase 
of the shares or the payment of the fee or charge.
2. Y ou dispose of the shares within 90 days of the pur-
chase date.
3. Y ou acquire new shares in the same mutual fund or 
another mutual fund, for which the fee or charge is re-
duced or waived because of the reinvestment right 
you got when you acquired the original shares.
The amount of the original fee or charge in excess of 
the reduction in (3) is added to the cost of the original 
shares. The rest of the original fee or charge is added to 
the cost basis of the new shares (unless all three condi-
tions above also apply to the purchase of the new shares).
Choosing average basis for mutual fund shares. 
Y ou can choose to use the average basis of mutual fund 
shares if you acquired the identical shares at various times 
and prices, or you acquired the shares after 2011 in con-
nection with a dividend reinvestment plan (DRIP), and left 
them on deposit in an account kept by a custodian or 
agent. The methods you can use to figure average basis 
are explained later.
Undistributed capital gains.  If you had to include in 
your income any undistributed capital gains of the mutual 
fund or REIT , increase your basis in the stock by the differ-
ence between the amount you included and the amount of 
tax paid for you by the fund or REIT . See Undistributed 
capital gains of mutual funds and REIT s in chapter 1.
Reinvestment right.  This is the right to acquire mu-
tual fund shares in the same or another mutual fund with-
out paying a fee or load charge, or by paying a reduced 
fee or load charge.
The original cost basis of mutual fund shares you ac-
quire by reinvesting your distributions is the amount of the 
distributions used to purchase each full or fractional share. 
This rule applies even if the distribution is an exempt-inter-
est dividend that you do not report as income.
Table 4-1. This is a worksheet you can use to 
keep track of the adjusted basis of your mutual 
fund shares. Enter the cost per share when you 
acquire new shares and any adjustments to their basis 
when the adjustment occurs. This worksheet will help you 
figure the adjusted basis when you sell or redeem shares.
Automatic investment service.  If you participate in an 
automatic investment service, your basis for each share of 
stock, including fractional shares, bought by the bank or 
other agent is the purchase price plus a share of the brok-
er's commission.
Dividend Reinvestment Plans (DRIPs).  If you partici-
pate in a DRIP and receive stock from the corporation at a 
discount, your basis is the full fair market value of the 
stock on the dividend payment date. Y ou must include the 
amount of the discount in your income.
Public utilities. If, before 1986, you excluded from in-
come the value of stock you had received under a quali-
fied public utility reinvestment plan, your basis in that 
stock is zero.
Stock dividends. Stock dividends are distributions made 
by a corporation of its own stock. Generally, stock divi-
dends are not taxable to you. However, see Distributions 
of Stock and Stock Rights  in chapter 1 for some excep-
tions. If the stock dividends are not taxable, you must di-
vide your basis for the old stock between the old and new 
stock.
New and old stock identical. If the new stock you re-
ceived as a nontaxable dividend is identical to the old 
stock on which the dividend was declared, divide the ad-
justed basis of the old stock by the number of shares of 
old and new stock. The result is your basis for each share 
of stock.
Example 1.  Y ou owned one share of common stock 
that you bought for $45. The corporation distributed two 
new shares of common stock for each share held. Y ou 
then had three shares of common stock. Y our basis in 
each share is $15 ($45 ÷ 3).
Example 2. Y ou owned two shares of common stock. 
Y ou bought one for $30 and the other for $45. The corpo-
ration distributed two new shares of common stock for 
each share held. Y ou had six shares after the distribu-
tion—three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷ 3) and three 
with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷ 3).
New and old stock not identical.  If the new stock 
you received as a nontaxable dividend is not identical to 
the old stock on which it was declared, the basis of the 
new stock is figured differently. Divide the adjusted basis 
of the old stock between the old and the new stock in the 
ratio of the fair market value of each lot of stock to the total 
fair market value of both lots on the date of distribution of 
the new stock.
Example. Y ou bought a share of common stock for 
$100. Later, the corporation distributed a share of 
RECORDS
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 63

Page 64 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
preferred stock for each share of common stock held. At 
the date of distribution, your common stock had a fair mar-
ket value of $150 and the preferred stock had a fair market 
value of $50. Y ou figure the basis of the old and new stock 
by dividing your $100 basis between them. The basis of 
your common stock is $75 (($150 ÷ $200) × $100), and 
the basis of the new preferred stock is $25 (($50 ÷ $200) × 
$100).
Stock bought at various times.  Figure the basis of 
stock dividends received on stock you bought at various 
times and at different prices by allocating to each lot of 
stock the share of the stock dividends due to it.
Taxable stock dividends.  If your stock dividend is 
taxable when you receive it, the basis of your new stock is 
its fair market value on the date of distribution. The basis 
of your old stock does not change.
Stock splits. Figure the basis of stock splits in the same 
way as stock dividends if identical stock is distributed on 
the stock held.
Stock rights. A stock right is a right to acquire a corpora-
tion's stock. It may be exercised, it may be sold if it has a 
market value, or it may expire. Stock rights are rarely taxa-
ble when you receive them. See Distributions of Stock and 
Stock Rights in chapter 1.
Taxable stock rights.  If you receive stock rights that 
are taxable, the basis of the rights is their fair market value 
at the time of distribution. The basis of the old stock does 
not change.
Nontaxable stock rights.  If you receive nontaxable 
stock rights and allow them to expire, they have no basis.
If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stock rights and if, 
at the time of distribution, the stock rights had a fair market 
value of 15% or more of the fair market value of the old 
stock, you must divide the adjusted basis of the old stock 
between the old stock and the stock rights. Use a ratio of 
the fair market value of each to the total fair market value 
of both at the time of distribution.
If the fair market value of the stock rights was less than 
15%, their basis is zero. However, you can choose to di-
vide the basis of the old stock between the old stock and 
the stock rights. T o make the choice, attach a statement to 
your return for the year in which you received the rights, 
stating that you choose to divide the basis of the stock.
T able 4-1. Mutual Fund Record
Mutual Fund
Acquired 1
Adjustment to Basis per Share
Adjusted 
2 Basis 
per Share
Sold or Redeemed
Date
Number 
of 
Shares
Cost 
per 
Share
Date
Number
 of 
Shares
1 Include share received from reinvestment of distributions.
2 Cost plus or minus adjustments.
64 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 65 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Basis of new stock.  If you exercise the stock rights, 
the basis of the new stock is its cost plus the basis of the 
stock rights exercised.
Example.  Y ou own 100 shares of ABC Company 
stock, which cost you $22 per share. The ABC Company 
gave you 10 nontaxable stock rights that would allow you 
to buy 10 more shares at $26 per share. At the time the 
stock rights were distributed, the stock had a market value 
of $30, not including the stock rights. Each stock right had 
a market value of $3. The market value of the stock rights 
was less than 15% of the market value of the stock, but 
you chose to divide the basis of your stock between the 
stock and the rights. Y ou figure the basis of the rights and 
the basis of the old stock as follows:
100 shares × $22 = $2,200, basis of old stock 
100 shares × $30 = $3,000, market value of old stock 
10 rights × $3 = $30, market value of rights 
($3,000 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $2,178.22, new basis of old stock 
($30 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $21.78, basis of rights 
If you sell the rights, the basis for figuring gain or loss is 
$2.18 ($21.78 ÷ 10) per right. If you exercise the rights, the 
basis of the stock you acquire is the price you pay ($26) 
plus the basis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28. 18 per 
share. The remaining basis of the old stock is $21.78 per 
share.
Investment property received in liquidation.  In gen-
eral, if you receive investment property as a distribution in 
partial or complete liquidation of a corporation and if you 
recognize gain or loss when you acquire the property, your 
basis in the property is its fair market value at the time of 
the distribution.
S corporation stock.  Y ou must increase your basis in 
stock of an S corporation by your pro rata share of the fol-
lowing items.
• All income items of the S corporation, including tax-ex-
empt income, that are separately stated and passed 
through to you as a shareholder.
• The nonseparately stated income of the S corporation.
• The amount of the deduction for depletion (other than 
oil and gas depletion) that is more than the basis of 
the property being depleted.
Y ou must decrease your basis in stock of an S corpora-
tion by your pro rata share of the following items.
• Distributions by the S corporation that were not inclu-
ded in your income.
• All loss and deduction items of the S corporation that 
are separately stated and passed through to you.
• Any nonseparately stated loss of the S corporation.
• Any expense of the S corporation that is not deducti-
ble in figuring its taxable income and not properly 
chargeable to a capital account.
• The amount of your deduction for depletion of oil and 
gas wells to the extent the deduction is not more than 
your share of the adjusted basis of the wells.
However, your basis in the stock cannot be reduced below 
zero.
Qualified small business stock.  If you bought this 
stock as replacement property for other qualified small 
business stock you sold at a gain, you must reduce the 
basis of this replacement stock by the amount of any post-
poned gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on Qualified 
Small Business Stock, later.
Short sales. If you cannot deduct payments you make to 
a lender in lieu of dividends on stock used in a short sale, 
the amount you pay to the lender is a capital expense, and 
you must add it to the basis of the stock used to close the 
short sale.
See Payments in lieu of dividends, later, for information 
about deducting payments in lieu of dividends.
Premiums on bonds.  If you buy a bond at a premium, 
the premium is treated as part of your basis in the bond. If 
you choose to amortize the premium paid on a taxable 
bond, you must reduce the basis of the bond by the amor-
tized part of the premium each year over the life of the 
bond.
For a taxable bond acquired at a premium that is a cov-
ered security, unless you instruct your broker that you do 
not want to amortize the premium, your broker will report 
income on the bond and your basis in the bond by amor-
tizing the premium. Y our broker may report the amount of 
premium amortization for a tax year separately from the 
amount of gross interest income in boxes 11 and 12 of 
Form 1099-INT or box 10 of Form 1099-OID, or may report 
net interest in boxes 1 and 3 of Form 1099 -INT or box 2 of 
Form 1099-OID.
Although you cannot deduct the premium on a tax -ex-
empt bond, you must amortize it to determine your adjus-
ted basis in the bond. Y ou must reduce the basis of the 
bond by the premium you amortized for the period you 
held the bond. For a tax-exempt covered security acquired 
at a premium, box 13 of Form 1099 -INT or box 10 of Form 
1099-OID shows the amount of bond premium amortiza-
tion allocable to the interest paid during the tax year. If a 
net amount of interest appears in box 8 or 9 of Form 
1099-INT , whichever is applicable, box 13 of Form 
1099-INT should be blank. If a net amount of interest ap-
pears in box 2 of Form 1099 -OID, box 10 of Form 
1099-OID should be blank.
See Bond Premium Amortization  in chapter 3 for more 
information.
Market discount on bonds.  If you include market dis-
count on a bond in income currently, increase the basis of 
your bond by the amount of market discount you include in 
your income. See Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 for 
more information.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 65

Page 66 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bonds purchased at par value.  A bond purchased at 
par value (face amount) has no premium or discount. 
When you sell or otherwise dispose of the bond, you fig-
ure the gain or loss by comparing the bond proceeds to 
the purchase price of the bond.
Example. Y ou purchased a bond several years ago for 
its par value of $10,000. Y ou sold the bond this year for 
$10,100. Y ou have a gain of $100. However, if you had 
sold the bond for $9,900, you would have a loss of $100.
Acquisition discount on short-term obligations. If you 
include acquisition discount on a short -term obligation in 
your income currently, increase the basis of the obligation 
by the amount of acquisition discount you include in your 
income. See Discount on Short-T erm Obligations in chap-
ter 1 for more information.
Original issue discount (OID) on debt instruments. 
Increase the basis of a debt instrument by the OID you in-
clude in your income. See Original Issue Discount (OID) in 
chapter 1.
If your debt instrument is a covered security, your 
broker will report a basis amount that is adjusted for OID 
included in income.
Discounted tax-exempt obligations. OID on tax -ex-
empt obligations is generally not taxable. However, when 
you dispose of a tax -exempt obligation issued after Sep-
tember 3, 1982, that you acquired after March 1, 1984, 
you must accrue OID on the obligation to determine its ad-
justed basis. The accrued OID is added to the basis of the 
obligation to determine your gain or loss. If your tax -ex-
empt obligation is a covered security, your broker will re-
port a basis amount that is adjusted for tax-exempt OID.
For information on determining OID on a long-term obli-
gation, see Debt Instruments Issued After July 1, 1982, 
and Before 1985  or Debt Instruments Issued After 1984 , 
whichever applies, in Pub. 1212, Guide to Original Issue 
Discount (OID) Instruments, under Figuring OID on 
Long-T erm Debt Instruments.
If the tax -exempt obligation has a maturity of 1 year or 
less, accrue OID under the rules for acquisition discount 
on short -term obligations. See Discount on Short -T erm 
Obligations in chapter 1.
Stripped tax -exempt obligation.  If you acquired a 
stripped tax -exempt bond or coupon after October 22, 
1986, you must accrue OID on it to determine its adjusted 
basis when you dispose of it. For stripped tax -exempt 
bonds or coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part of 
this OID may be taxable. Y ou accrue the OID on these ob-
ligations in the manner described in chapter 1 under Strip-
ped Bonds and Coupons.
Increase your basis in the stripped tax -exempt bond or 
coupon by the taxable and nontaxable accrued OID. Also 
increase your basis by the interest that accrued (but was 
not paid and was not previously reflected in your basis) 
before the date you sold the bond or coupon. In addition, 
for bonds acquired after June 10, 1987, add to your basis 
any accrued market discount not previously reflected in 
basis.
How To Figure Gain or Loss
Y ou figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of property by 
subtracting the adjusted basis of the property from the 
amount you realize on the sale or trade.
If you own and use a digital asset for personal or 
investment purposes, the income would be taxed 
as a capital gain or loss when you sell or dispose 
it. T o calculate the capital gain or loss of a digital asset 
that you sold or disposed of in a transaction, you'll need 
this information:
• T ype of digital asset;
• Date and time of transaction;
• Number of units;
• Fair Market value at time of transaction (as measured 
in U.S. dollars), and
• Basis of digital asset sold or disposed of.
Find how to calculate gain or loss, identify the units sold or 
disposed, and determine fair market value for your situa-
tion in FAQs on virtual currency transactions.
Gain.  If the amount you realize from a sale or trade is 
more than the adjusted basis of the property you transfer, 
the difference is a gain.
Loss.  If the adjusted basis of the property you transfer is 
more than the amount you realize, the difference is a loss.
Amount realized.  The amount you realize from a sale or 
trade of property is everything you receive for the property 
minus your expenses related to the sale (such as redemp-
tion fees, sales commissions, sales charges, or exit fees). 
Amount realized includes the money you receive plus the 
fair market value of any property or services you receive.
If you finance the buyer's purchase of your property and 
the debt instrument does not provide for adequate stated 
interest, the unstated interest that you must report as ordi-
nary income will reduce the amount realized from the sale. 
For more information, see Pub. 537.
If a buyer of property issues a debt instrument to the 
seller of the property, the amount realized is determined 
by reference to the issue price of the debt instrument, 
which may or may not be the fair market value of the debt 
instrument. See Regulations section 1. 1001-1(g). How-
ever, if the debt instrument was previously issued by a 
third party (one not part of the sale transaction), the fair 
market value of the debt instrument is used to determine 
the amount realized.
Fair market value.  Fair market value is the price at 
which property would change hands between a buyer and 
a seller, neither being forced to buy or sell and both having 
reasonable knowledge of all the relevant facts.
Example.  Y ou trade A Company stock with an adjus-
ted basis of $7,000 for B Company stock with a fair market 
value of $10,000, which is your amount realized. Y our gain 
TIP
66 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 67 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is $3,000 ($10,000 – $7,000). If you also receive a note for 
$6,000 that has an issue price of $6,000, your gain is 
$9,000 ($10,000 + $6,000 – $7,000).
Debt paid off.  A debt against the property, or against 
you, that is paid off as a part of the transaction or that is 
assumed by the buyer must be included in the amount re-
alized. This is true even if neither you nor the buyer is per-
sonally liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or trade 
property that is subject to a nonrecourse loan, the amount 
you realize generally includes the full amount of the note 
assumed by the buyer even if the amount of the note is 
more than the fair market value of the property.
Example.  Y ou sell stock that you had pledged as se-
curity for a bank loan of $8,000. Y our basis in the stock is 
$6,000. The buyer pays off your bank loan and pays you 
$20,000 in cash. The amount realized is $28,000 
($20,000 + $8,000). Y our gain is $22,000 ($28,000 – 
$6,000).
Payment of cash.  If you trade property and cash for 
other property, the amount you realize is the fair market 
value of the property you receive. Determine your gain or 
loss by subtracting the cash you pay and the adjusted ba-
sis of the property you trade in from the amount you real-
ize. If the result is a positive number, it is a gain. If the re-
sult is a negative number, it is a loss.
No gain or loss.  Y ou may have to use a basis for figur-
ing gain that is different from the basis used for figuring 
loss. In this case, you may have neither a gain nor a loss. 
See No gain or loss in the discussion on the basis of prop-
erty you received as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost , 
earlier.
Special Rules for Mutual Funds
T o figure your gain or loss when you dispose of mutual 
fund shares, you need to determine which shares were 
sold and the basis of those shares. If your shares in a mu-
tual fund were acquired all on the same day and for the 
same price, figuring their basis is not difficult. However, 
shares are generally acquired at various times, in various 
quantities, and at various prices. Therefore, figuring your 
basis can be more difficult. Y ou can choose to use either a 
cost basis or an average basis to figure your gain or loss.
Cost Basis
Y ou can figure your gain or loss using a cost basis only if 
you did not previously use an average basis for a sale, ex-
change, or redemption of other shares in the same mutual 
fund.
T o figure cost basis, you can choose one of the follow-
ing methods.
• Specific share identification.
• First-in first-out (FIFO).
Specific share identification.  If you adequately identify 
the shares you sold, you can use the adjusted basis of 
those particular shares to figure your gain or loss.
Y ou will adequately identify your mutual fund shares, 
even if you bought the shares in different lots at various 
prices and times, if you:
1. Specify to your broker or other agent the particular 
shares to be sold or transferred at the time of the sale 
or transfer, and
2. Receive confirmation in writing from your broker or 
other agent within a reasonable time of your specifica-
tion of the particular shares sold or transferred.
Y ou continue to have the burden of proving your basis 
in the specified shares at the time of sale or transfer.
FIFO. If your shares were acquired at different times or at 
different prices and you cannot identify which shares you 
sold, use the basis of the shares you acquired first as the 
basis of the shares sold. In other words, the oldest shares 
you own are considered sold first. Y ou should keep a sep-
arate record of each purchase and any dispositions of the 
shares until all shares purchased at the same time have 
been disposed of completely.
T able 4-2 illustrates the use of the FIFO method to fig-
ure the cost basis of shares sold, compared with the use 
of the average basis method (discussed next).
Average Basis
Y ou can use the average basis method to determine the 
basis of shares of stock if the shares are identical to each 
other, you acquired them at different times and different 
prices and left them in an account with a custodian or 
agent, and either:
• They are shares in a mutual fund (or other regulated 
investment company);
• They are shares you hold in connection with a DRIP , 
and all the shares you hold in connection with the 
DRIP are treated as covered securities (defined later); 
or
• Y ou acquired them after 2011 in connection with a 
DRIP .
Average basis is determined by averaging the basis of 
all shares of identical stock in an account regardless of 
how long you have held the stock. However, shares of 
stock in a DRIP are not identical to shares of stock with 
the same CUSIP number that are not in a DRIP . The basis 
of each share of identical stock in the account is the ag-
gregate basis of all shares of that stock in the account 
divided by the aggregate number of shares.
Transition rule from double -category method.  Y ou 
may no longer use the double -category method for figur-
ing your average basis. If you were using the double -cate-
gory method for stock you acquired before April 1, 2011, 
and you sell, exchange, or otherwise dispose of that stock 
on or after April 1, 2011, you must figure the average basis 
of this stock by averaging together all identical shares of 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 67

Page 68 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
stock in the account on April 1, 2011, regardless of the 
holding period.
Election of average basis method for covered securi-
ties.  T o make the election to use the average basis 
method for your covered securities, you must send written 
notice to the custodian or agent who keeps the account. 
The written notice can be made electronically. Y ou must 
also notify your broker that you have made the election. 
Generally, a covered security is a security you acquired af-
ter 2010, with certain exceptions explained in the Instruc-
tions for Form 8949.
Y ou can make the election to use the average basis 
method at any time. The election will be effective for sales 
or other dispositions of stocks that occur after you notify 
the custodian or agent of your election. Y our election must 
identify each account with that custodian or agent and 
each stock in that account to which the election applies. 
The election can also indicate that it applies to all ac-
counts with a custodian or agent, including accounts you 
later establish with the custodian or agent.
Election of average basis method for noncovered se-
curities.  For noncovered securities, you elect to use the 
average basis method on your income tax return for the 
first tax year that the election applies. Y ou make the elec-
tion by showing on your return that you used the average 
basis method in reporting gain or loss on the sale or other 
disposition.
Revoking the average basis method election.  Y ou 
can revoke an election to use the average basis method 
for your covered securities by sending written notice to the 
custodian or agent holding the stock for which you want to 
revoke the election. The election must generally be re-
voked by the earlier of 1 year after you make the election 
or the date of the first sale, transfer, or disposition of the 
stock following the election. The revocation applies to all 
the stock you hold in an account that is identical to the 
shares of stock for which you are revoking the election. Af-
ter revoking your election, your basis in the shares of stock 
to which the revocation applies is the basis before averag-
ing.
Y ou may be able to find the average basis of your 
shares from information provided by the fund.
Average basis method illustrated.  T able 4-2 illustrates 
the average basis method of shares sold, compared with 
the use of the FIFO method to figure cost basis (dis-
cussed earlier).
Even though you include all unsold shares of identical 
stock in an account to figure average basis, you may have 
both short -term and long -term gains or losses when you 
sell these shares. T o determine your holding period, the 
shares disposed of are considered to be those acquired 
first.
Example.  Y ou bought 400 identical shares in the LJO 
Mutual Fund: 200 shares on May 11, 2023, and 200 
shares on May 16, 2024. On November 18, 2024, you 
sold 300 shares. The basis of all 300 shares sold is the 
TIP
same, but you held 200 shares for more than 1 year, so 
your gain or loss on those shares is long term. Y ou held 
100 shares for 1 year or less, so your gain or loss on those 
shares is short term.
How to figure the basis of shares sold. T o figure the 
basis of shares you sell, use the steps in the following 
worksheet.
1. Enter the total adjusted basis of all the shares you 
owned in the fund just before the sale. (If you made 
an earlier sale of shares in this fund, add the 
adjusted basis of any shares you still owned after 
the last sale and the adjusted basis of any shares 
you acquired after that sale.) ............... $ 
2. Enter the total number of shares you owned in the 
fund just before the sale ..................  
3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 2. 
This is your average basis per share ......... $
4. Enter the number of shares you sold ..........  
5. Multiply the amount on line 3 by the amount on 
line 4. This is the basis of the shares you sold .. $ 
Example 1.  Y ou bought 300 identical shares in the 
LJP Mutual Fund: 100 shares in 2020 for $1,000 ($10 per 
share); 100 shares in 2021 for $1,200 ($12 per share); 
and 100 shares in 2022 for $2,600 ($26 per share). Thus, 
the total cost of your shares was $4,800 ($1,000 + $1,200 
+ $2,600). On May 6, 2024, you sold 150 shares. The ba-
sis of the shares you sold is $2,400 ($16 per share), fig-
ured as follows.
1. Enter the total adjusted basis of all the shares you 
owned in the fund just before the sale. (If you made 
an earlier sale of shares in this fund, add the 
adjusted basis of any shares you still owned after 
the last sale and the adjusted basis of any shares 
you acquired after that sale.) .............. $4,800 
2. Enter the total number of shares you owned in the 
fund just before the sale ................. 300 
3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 2. 
This is your average basis per share ........ $  16 
4. Enter the number of shares you sold ......... 150 
5. Multiply the amount on line 3 by the amount on 
line 4. This is the basis of the shares you sold .. $2,400
Remaining shares.  The average basis of the shares 
you still hold after a sale of some of your shares is the 
same as the average basis of the shares sold. The next 
time you make a sale, your average basis will still be the 
same, unless you have acquired additional shares (or 
have made a subsequent adjustment to basis).
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except that you sold an additional 50 shares on December 
9, 2024. Y ou do not need to refigure the average basis of 
the 150 shares you owned at that time because you ac-
quired or sold no shares, and had no other adjustments to 
basis, since the last sale. Y our basis is the $16 per share 
figured earlier.
68 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 69 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except that you bought an additional 150 identical shares 
at $14 per share on September 9, 2024, and then sold 50 
shares on December 9, 2024. The total adjusted basis of 
all the shares you owned just before the sale is $4,500, 
figured as follows.
1. Basis of remaining shares ($16 x 150) ........ $2,400 
2. Cost of shares acquired on 9/9/2024 ($14 x 
150) ............................. $2,100 
3. T otal adjusted basis of all shares owned ($2,400 + 
$2,100) ........................... $4,500 
The basis of the shares sold is $750 ($15 per share), fig-
ured as follows.
1. Enter the total adjusted basis of all the shares you 
owned in the fund just before the sale. (If you made 
an earlier sale of shares in this fund, add the 
adjusted basis of any shares you still owned after 
the last sale and the adjusted basis of any shares 
you acquired after that sale.) .............. $4,500 
2. Enter the total number of shares you owned in the 
fund just before the sale ................. 300 
3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 2. 
This is your average basis per share ........ $  15 
4. Enter the number of shares you sold ......... 50 
5. Multiply the amount on line 3 by the amount on 
line 4. This is the basis of the shares you sold .. $ 750
Shares received as gift.  If your account includes 
shares that you received by gift, and the fair market value 
of the shares at the time of the gift was not more than the 
donor's basis, special rules apply. Y ou cannot choose to 
use the average basis for the account unless you state in 
writing that you will treat the basis of the gift shares as the 
fair market value at the time you acquire the shares. Y ou 
must provide this written statement when you make the 
election to use the average basis method, as described 
under Election of average basis method for covered se-
curities and Election for average basis method for noncov-
ered securities , earlier, or when you transfer the gift 
shares to an account for which you have made the aver-
age basis method election, whichever is later. The state-
ment must be effective for any gift shares identical to the 
T able 4-2. Example of How To Figure Basis of Shares Sold
This is an example showing two different ways to figure basis. It compares the cost basis using the FIFO method with the average basis method.
Date Action Share Price No. of Shares Total Shares Owned
2/10/2022 Invest $4,000 $25 160 160
8/11/2022 Invest $4,800 $20 240 400
12/15/2022 Reinvest $300 dividend $30 10 410
10/2/2024 Sell 210 shares for 
$6,720
$32 210 200
COST BASIS 
(FIFO)
T o figure the basis of the 210 shares sold on 10/2/2024, use the share price of the first 210 shares you 
bought, namely the 160 shares you purchased on 2/10/2022 and 50 of those purchased on 8/11/2022.
$4,000 (cost of 160 shares on 2/10/2022)
+ $1,000 (cost of 50 shares on 8/11/2022)
Basis = $5,000
AVERAGE BASIS T o figure the basis of the 210 shares sold on 10/2/2024, use the average basis of all 410 shares owned on 
10/2/2024.
$9,100 (cost of 410 shares)
÷ 410 (number of shares)
$22.20 (average basis per share)
$22.20
× 210
Basis = $4,662
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 69

Page 70 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gift shares to which the average basis method election ap-
plies that you acquire at any time and must remain in ef-
fect as long as the election remains in effect.
Y our basis in virtual currency received as a bona 
fide gift differs depending on whether you will 
have a gain or a loss when you sell or dispose of 
it. For purposes of determining whether you have a gain, 
your basis is equal to the donor’s basis, plus any gift tax 
the donor paid on the gift. For more information on basis 
of property received as a gift, see Publication 551, or go to 
IRS.gov/DigitalAssets.
When there is a sale, exchange, or redemption of 
your shares in a fund, keep the confirmation state-
ment you receive. The statement shows the price 
you received for the shares and other information you 
need to report gain or loss on your return. Additionally, if 
you had digital asset transactions, keep records that docu-
ment:
• Y our purchase, receipt, sale, exchange or any other 
disposition of the digital assets, and
• The fair market value as measured in U.S. dollars of all 
digital assets received as income or as payment in the 
ordinary course of a trade or business.
Nontaxable Trades
This section discusses trades that generally do not result 
in a taxable gain or a deductible loss. For more informa-
tion on nontaxable trades, see chapter 1 of Pub. 544.
Like-Kind Exchanges
If you trade business or investment real property solely for 
other business or investment real property of a like kind, 
you do not pay tax on any gain or deduct any loss from the 
trade. T o be nontaxable, a trade must meet all six of the 
following conditions.
1. The property must be business or investment prop-
erty. Y ou must hold both the property you trade and 
the property you receive for productive use in your 
trade or business or for investment. Neither property 
may be property used for personal purposes, such as 
your home or family car.
2. The property you trade and the property you receive 
must be real property.
3. There must be a trade of like-kind property. The trade 
of real estate for real estate is a trade of like-kind 
property. The trade of an apartment house for a store 
building is a trade of like-kind property. Real property 
located in the United States and real property located 
outside the United States are not like-kind property.
4. The property must not be held primarily for sale. The 
property you trade and the property you receive must 
not be property you sell to customers, such as mer-
chandise.
TIP
RECORDS
5. The property to be received must be identified in writ-
ing within 45 days after the date you transfer the prop-
erty given up in the trade. If you received the replace-
ment property before the end of the 45-day period, 
you are automatically treated as having met the 
45-day written notice requirement.
6. The property to be received must be received by the 
earlier of:
a. The 180th day after the date on which you transfer 
the property given up in the trade; or
b. The due date, including extensions, for your tax re-
turn for the year in which the transfer of the prop-
erty given up occurs.
If you trade property with a related party in a like -kind 
exchange, a special rule may apply. See Related Party 
T ransactions, later, in this chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of 
Pub. 544 for more information on exchanges of business 
property and special rules for exchanges using qualified 
intermediaries or involving multiple properties.
Transition rule for exchanges of personal or intangi-
ble property.  Under the T ax Cuts and Jobs Act, section 
1031 only applies to exchanges of real property, other 
than real property held primarily for sale. Before enact-
ment of the new tax law, section 1031 also applied to cer-
tain exchanges of personal or intangible property. A transi-
tion rule in the new law provides that section 1031 will still 
apply to a qualifying exchange of personal or intangible 
property if the taxpayer disposed of the exchanged prop-
erty on or before December 31, 2017, or received replace-
ment property on or before December 31, 2017.
Partly nontaxable exchange.  If you receive money or 
property that is not like -kind property in addition to the 
like-kind property, and the preceding six conditions are 
met, you have a partly nontaxable trade. Y ou are taxed on 
any gain you realize, but only up to the amount of the 
money and the fair market value of the property that is not 
like-kind you receive. Y ou cannot deduct a loss.
Like-kind property and unlike property transferred. 
If you give up unlike property in addition to the like -kind 
property, you must recognize gain or loss on the unlike 
property you give up. The gain or loss is the difference be-
tween the adjusted basis of the unlike property and its fair 
market value.
Like-kind property and money transferred.  If condi-
tions (1)–(6) above are met, you have a nontaxable trade 
even if you pay money in addition to the like-kind property.
Basis of property received.  Y ou figure your basis in 
property received in a nontaxable or partly nontaxable 
trade as explained under Basis Other Than Cost, earlier.
How to report.  Y ou must report the trade of like -kind 
property on Form 8824. If you figure a recognized gain or 
loss on Form 8824, report it on Schedule D (Form 1040) 
or on Form 4797, whichever applies.
For information on using Form 4797, see chapter 4 of 
Pub. 544.
70 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 71 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Corporate Stocks
The following trades of corporate stocks generally do not 
result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss.
Corporate reorganizations. In some instances, a com-
pany will give you common stock for preferred stock, pre-
ferred stock for common stock, or stock in one corporation 
for stock in another corporation. If this is a result of a 
merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlled corpora-
tion, bankruptcy, corporate division, corporate acquisition, 
or other corporate reorganization, you do not recognize 
gain or loss.
Example 1.  On April 11, 2024, KP1 Corporation was 
acquired by KP2 Corporation. Y ou held 100 shares of KP1 
stock with a basis of $3,500. As a result of the acquisition, 
you received 70 shares of KP2 stock in exchange for your 
KP1 stock. Y ou do not recognize gain or loss on the trans-
action. Y our basis in the 70 shares of the new stock is still 
$3,500.
Example 2.  On July 18, 2024, RGB Corporation di-
vests itself of SFH Corporation. Y ou hold 75 shares of 
RGB stock with a basis of $5,400. Y ou receive 25 shares 
of SFH stock as a result of the spin -off. Y ou do not recog-
nize any gain or loss on the transaction. Y ou receive infor-
mation from RGB Corporation that your basis in SFH 
stock is equal to 10.9624% of your basis in RGB stock 
($5,400). Thus, your basis in SFH stock is $592. Y our ba-
sis in RGB stock (after the spin -off) is $4,808 ($5,400 – 
$592).
Note.  In the case of a distribution, the divesting corpo-
ration should send you information that includes details on 
how to allocate basis between the old and new stock. 
Keep this information until the period of limitations expires 
for the year in which you dispose of the stock in a taxable 
disposition. Usually, this is 3 years from the date the return 
was due or filed, or 2 years from the date the tax was paid, 
whichever is later.
Stock for stock of the same corporation.  Y ou can ex-
change common stock for common stock or preferred 
stock for preferred stock in the same corporation without 
having a recognized gain or loss. This is true for a trade 
between two stockholders as well as a trade between a 
stockholder and the corporation.
Money or other property received.  If in an other-
wise nontaxable trade you receive money or other prop-
erty in addition to stock, then your gain on the trade, if any, 
is taxed, but only up to the amount of the money or other 
property. Any loss is not recognized.
If you received cash for fractional shares, see Fractional 
shares in chapter 1.
Nonqualified preferred stock. Nonqualified preferred 
stock is generally treated as property other than stock. 
Generally, this applies to preferred stock with one or more 
of the following features.
• The holder has the right to require the issuer or a rela-
ted person to redeem or purchase the stock.
• The issuer or a related person is required to redeem or 
purchase the stock.
• The issuer or a related person has the right to redeem 
the stock, and on the issue date, it is more likely than 
not that the right will be exercised.
• The dividend rate on the stock varies with reference to 
interest rates, commodity prices, or similar indices.
For a detailed definition of nonqualified preferred stock, 
see section 351(g)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Convertible stocks and bonds.  Y ou will generally not 
have a recognized gain or loss if you convert bonds into 
stock or preferred stock into common stock of the same 
corporation according to a conversion privilege in the 
terms of the bond or the preferred stock certificate.
Example.  In November, you bought for $1 a right is-
sued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, on payment of 
$99, to subscribe to a bond issued by that corporation.
On December 5, you subscribed to the bond, which 
was issued on December 12. The bond contained a 
clause stating that you would receive one share of XYZ 
Corporation common stock on surrender of one bond and 
the payment of $50.
Later, you presented the bond and $50 and received 
one share of XYZ Corporation common stock. Y ou did not 
have a recognized gain or loss. This is true whether the 
fair market value of the stock was more or less than $150 
on the date of the conversion.
The basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 + $99 + 
$50). Y our holding period is split. Y our holding period for 
the part based on your ownership of the bond ($100 ba-
sis) begins on December 5. Y our holding period for the 
part based on your cash investment ($50 basis) begins on 
the day after you acquired the share of stock.
Bonds for stock of another corporation.  Generally, if 
you convert the bonds of one corporation into common 
stock of another corporation, according to the terms of the 
bond issue, you must recognize gain or loss up to the dif-
ference between the fair market value of the stock re-
ceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds exchanged. In 
some instances, however, such as trades that are part of 
mergers or other corporate reorganizations, you will have 
no recognized gain or loss if certain requirements are met. 
For more information about the tax consequences of con-
verting securities of one corporation into common stock of 
another corporation, under circumstances such as those 
just described, consult the respective corporations and 
the terms of the bond issue. This information is also avail-
able on the prospectus of the bond issue.
Property for stock of a controlled corporation.  If you 
transfer property to a corporation solely in exchange for 
stock in that corporation, and immediately after the trade 
you are in control of the corporation, you will ordinarily not 
recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both to individu-
als and to groups who transfer property to a corporation. It 
does not apply if the corporation is an investment com-
pany.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 71

Page 72 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are in a bankruptcy or a similar proceeding and 
you transfer property to a controlled corporation under a 
plan, other than a reorganization, you must recognize gain 
to the extent the stock you receive in the exchange is used 
to pay off your debts.
For this purpose, to be in control of a corporation, you 
or your group of transferors must own, immediately after 
the exchange, at least 80% of the total combined voting 
power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 
80% of the outstanding shares of each class of nonvoting 
stock of the corporation.
If this provision applies to you, you may have to attach 
to your return a complete statement of all facts pertinent to 
the exchange. For details, see Regulations section 
1.351-3.
Money or other property received.  If, in an other-
wise nontaxable trade of property for corporate stock, you 
also receive money or property other than stock, you may 
have a taxable gain. However, you are taxed only up to the 
amount of money plus the fair market value of the other 
property you receive. The rules for figuring taxable gain in 
this situation generally follow those for a partly nontaxable 
exchange discussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. If 
the property you give up includes depreciable property, 
the taxable gain may have to be reported as ordinary in-
come because of depreciation. (See chapter 3 of Pub. 
544.) No loss is recognized.
Nonqualified preferred stock (described earlier under 
Stock for stock of the same corporation ) received is gen-
erally treated as property other than stock.
Basis of stock or other property received.  The ba-
sis of the stock you receive is generally the adjusted basis 
of the property you transfer. Increase this amount by any 
amount that was treated as a dividend, plus any gain rec-
ognized on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cash 
you received and the fair market value of any other prop-
erty you received.
The basis of any other property you receive is its fair 
market value on the date of the trade.
Exchange of Shares in One Mutual 
Fund For Shares in Another Mutual 
Fund
Any exchange of shares in one fund for shares in another 
fund is a taxable exchange. This is true even if you ex-
change shares in one fund for shares in another fund 
within the same family of funds. Report any gain or loss on 
the shares you gave up as a capital gain or loss in the year 
in which the exchange occurs. Usually, you can add any 
service charge or fee paid in connection with an exchange 
to the cost of the shares acquired. For an exception, see 
Commissions and load charges, earlier.
Insurance Policies and Annuities
Y ou will not have a recognized gain or loss if the insured or 
annuitant is the same under both contracts and you trade:
• A life insurance contract for another life insurance con-
tract or for an endowment or an annuity contract or for 
a qualified long-term care insurance contract,
• An endowment contract for another endowment con-
tract that provides for regular payments beginning at a 
date no later than the beginning date under the old 
contract or for an annuity contract or for a qualified 
long-term insurance contract,
• An annuity contract for an annuity contract or for a 
qualified long-term care insurance contract, or
• A qualified long-term care insurance contract for a 
qualified long-term care insurance contract.
Y ou may also not have to recognize gain or loss from an 
exchange of a portion of an annuity contract for another 
annuity contract. For transfers completed before October 
24, 2011, see Revenue Ruling 2003-76 and Revenue Pro-
cedure 2008 -24 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2008 -13. 
Revenue Ruling 2003 -76 is available at IRS.gov/irb/
2003-33_IRB#RR-2003-76. Revenue Procedure 2008 -24 
is available at IRS.gov/irb/2008-13_IRB#RP-2008-24. For 
transfers completed on or after October 24, 2011, see 
Revenue Ruling 2003-76, above, and Revenue Procedure 
2011-38 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2011 -30. Revenue 
Procedure 2011 -38 is available at IRS.gov/irb/
2011-30_IRB#RP-2011-38. For tax years beginning after 
2010, amounts received as an annuity for a period of 10 
years or more, or for the lives of one or more individuals, 
under any portion of an annuity, endowment, or life insur-
ance contract, are treated as a separate contract and are 
considered partial annuities. A portion of an annuity, en-
dowment, or life insurance contract may be annuitized, 
provided that the annuitization period is for 10 years or 
more or for the lives of one or more individuals. The invest-
ment in the contract is allocated between the part of the 
contract from which amounts are received as an annuity 
and the part of the contract from which amounts are not 
received as an annuity.
Exchanges of contracts not included in this list, such as 
an annuity contract for an endowment contract, or an an-
nuity or endowment contract for a life insurance contract, 
are taxable.
Demutualization of Life
Insurance Companies
A life insurance company may change from a mutual com-
pany to a stock company. This is commonly called demu-
tualization. If you were a policyholder or annuitant of the 
mutual company, you may have received either stock in 
the stock company or cash in exchange for your equity in-
terest in the mutual company.
72 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 73 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If the demutualization transaction qualifies as a tax -free 
reorganization under section 368(a)(1) of the Internal Rev-
enue Code, no gain or loss is recognized on the ex-
change. Y our holding period for the new stock includes the 
period you held an equity interest in the mutual company 
as a policyholder or annuitant.
If the demutualization transaction does not qualify as a 
tax-free reorganization under section 368(a)(1) of the In-
ternal Revenue Code, you must recognize a capital gain 
or loss. Y our holding period for the stock does not include 
the period you held an equity interest in the mutual com-
pany.
If you received cash in exchange for your equity inter-
est, you must recognize a capital gain. If you held an 
equity interest for more than 1 year, your gain is long term.
U.S. Treasury Notes or Bonds
Y ou can trade certain issues of U.S. T reasury obligations 
for other issues, designated by the Secretary of the T reas-
ury, with no gain or loss recognized on the trade.
See the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S. T reasury 
Bills, Notes, and Bonds for information about income from 
these investments.
Transfers Between Spouses
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a transfer of 
property from an individual to (or in trust for the benefit of) 
a spouse or, if incident to a divorce, a former spouse. This 
nonrecognition rule does not apply in the following situa-
tions.
• The recipient spouse or former spouse is a nonresi-
dent alien.
• Property is transferred in trust and liability exceeds ba-
sis. Gain must be recognized to the extent the amount 
of the liabilities assumed by the trust, plus any liabili-
ties on the property, exceed the adjusted basis of the 
property.
• An installment obligation is transferred in trust. For in-
formation on the disposition of an installment obliga-
tion, see Pub. 537.
• Certain stock redemptions, which are taxable to a 
spouse under the tax law, a divorce or separation in-
strument, or a valid written agreement, discussed in 
Regulations section 1.1041-2.
Any transfer of property to a spouse or former spouse 
on which gain or loss is not recognized is treated by the 
recipient as a gift and is not considered a sale or ex-
change. The recipient's basis in the property will be the 
same as the adjusted basis of the giver immediately be-
fore the transfer. This carryover basis rule applies whether 
the adjusted basis of the transferred property is less than, 
equal to, or greater than either its fair market value at the 
time of transfer or any consideration paid by the recipient. 
This rule applies for purposes of determining loss as well 
as gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer in trust increa-
ses the basis.
A transfer of property is incident to a divorce if the 
transfer occurs within 1 year after the date on which the 
marriage ends, or if the transfer is related to the ending of 
the marriage. For more information, see Property Settle-
ments in Pub. 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. 
Related Party Transactions
Special rules apply to the sale or trade of property be-
tween related parties.
Gain on Sale or Trade
of Depreciable Property
Y our gain from the sale or trade of property to a related 
party may be ordinary income, rather than capital gain, if 
the property can be depreciated by the party receiving it. 
See chapter 2 in Pub. 544 for more information.
Like-Kind Exchanges
Generally, if you trade business or investment real prop-
erty for other business or investment real property of a like 
kind, no gain or loss is recognized. See Like-Kind Ex-
changes under Nontaxable T rades, earlier.
This rule also applies to trades of real property between 
related parties, defined next under Losses on Sales or 
T rades of Property. However, if either you or the related 
party disposes of the like-kind property within 2 years after 
the trade, you both must report any gain or loss not recog-
nized on the original trade on your return for the year in 
which the later disposition occurs.
This rule generally does not apply to:
• Dispositions due to the death of either related party,
• Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 of Pub. 544), 
or
• T rades and later dispositions whose main purpose is 
not the avoidance of federal income tax.
If a property holder's risk of loss on the property is sub-
stantially diminished during any period, that period is not 
counted in determining whether the property was dis-
posed of within 2 years. The property holder's risk of loss 
is substantially diminished by:
• The holding of a put on the property,
• The holding by another person of a right to acquire the 
property, or
• A short sale or any other transaction.
Losses on Sales or Trades of Property
Y ou cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade of property, 
other than a distribution in complete liquidation of a 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 73

Page 74 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
corporation, if the transaction is directly or indirectly be-
tween you and the following related parties.
• Members of your family. This includes only your broth-
ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse, 
ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-
scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).
• A partnership in which you directly or indirectly own 
more than 50% of the capital interest or the profits in-
terest.
• A corporation in which you directly or indirectly own 
more than 50% in value of the outstanding stock (see 
Constructive ownership of stock, later).
• A tax-exempt charitable or educational organization 
directly or indirectly controlled, in any manner or by 
any method, by you or by a member of your family, 
whether or not this control is legally enforceable.
In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of property is not 
deductible if the transaction is directly or indirectly be-
tween the following related parties.
• A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciary and benefi-
ciary, of any trust.
• Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or the fiduciary and 
beneficiary of two different trusts, if the same person is 
the grantor of both trusts.
• A trust fiduciary and a corporation of which more than 
50% in value of the outstanding stock is directly or in-
directly owned by or for the trust, or by or for the gran-
tor of the trust.
• A corporation and a partnership if the same persons 
own more than 50% in value of the outstanding stock 
of the corporation and more than 50% of the capital in-
terest or the profits interest in the partnership.
• T wo S corporations if the same persons own more 
than 50% in value of the outstanding stock of each 
corporation.
• T wo corporations, one of which is an S corporation, if 
the same persons own more than 50% in value of the 
outstanding stock of each corporation.
• An executor and a beneficiary of an estate (except in 
the case of a sale or trade to satisfy a monetary be-
quest).
• T wo corporations that are members of the same con-
trolled group (under certain conditions, however, these 
losses are not disallowed but must be deferred).
• T wo partnerships if the same persons own, directly or 
indirectly, more than 50% of the capital interests or the 
profit interests in both partnerships.
Multiple property sales or trades.  If you sell or trade to 
a related party a number of blocks of stock or pieces of 
property in a lump sum, you must figure the gain or loss 
separately for each block of stock or piece of property. 
The gain on each item may be taxable. However, you can-
not deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannot reduce 
gains from the sales of any of these items by losses on the 
sales of any of the other items.
Indirect transactions.  Y ou cannot deduct your loss on 
the sale of stock through your broker if, under a prear-
ranged plan, a related party buys the same stock you had 
owned. This does not apply to a trade between related 
parties through an exchange that is purely coincidental 
and is not prearranged.
Constructive ownership of stock.  In determining 
whether a person directly or indirectly owns any of the out-
standing stock of a corporation, the following rules apply.
Rule 1.  Stock directly or indirectly owned by or for a 
corporation, partnership, estate, or trust is considered 
owned proportionately by or for its shareholders, partners, 
or beneficiaries.
Rule 2.  An individual is considered to own the stock 
directly or indirectly owned by or for his or her family. Fam-
ily includes only brothers and sisters, half -brothers and 
half-sisters, spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.
Rule 3.  An individual owning, other than by applying 
rule 2, any stock in a corporation is considered to own the 
stock directly or indirectly owned by or for his or her part-
ner.
Rule 4.  When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock construc-
tively owned by a person under rule 1 is treated as ac-
tually owned by that person. But stock constructively 
owned by an individual under rule 2 or rule 3 is not again 
treated as owned by that individual for applying either rule 
2 or rule 3 to make another person the constructive owner 
of the stock.
Property received from a related party.  If you sell or 
trade at a gain property you acquired from a related party, 
you recognize the gain only to the extent that it is more 
than the loss previously disallowed to the related party. 
This rule applies only if you are the original transferee and 
you acquired the property by purchase or exchange. This 
rule does not apply if the related party's loss was disal-
lowed because of the wash sale rules, described later un-
der Wash Sales.
If you sell or trade at a loss property you acquired from 
a related party, you cannot recognize the loss that was not 
allowed to the related party.
Example 1.  Y our sibling sells you stock for $7,600. 
Y our sibling’s cost basis is $10,000. Y our sibling cannot 
deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell the same stock 
to an unrelated party for $10,500, realizing a gain of 
$2,900. Y our reportable gain is $500 (the $2,900 gain mi-
nus the $2,400 loss not allowed to your sibling).
Example 2.  If, in Example 1 , you sold the stock for 
$6,900 instead of $10,500, your recognized loss is only 
$700 (your $7,600 basis minus $6,900). Y ou cannot de-
duct the loss that was not allowed to your sibling.
74 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 75 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Capital Gains and Losses
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Call
 Commodity future
 Conversion transaction
 Forward contract
 Limited partner
 Listed option
 Nonequity option
 Options dealer
 Put
 Regulated futures contract
 Section 1256 contract
 Straddle
 Wash sale
 
This section discusses the tax treatment of gains and los-
ses from different types of investment transactions.
Character of gain or loss.  Y ou need to classify your 
gains and losses as either ordinary or capital gains or los-
ses. Y ou then need to classify your capital gains and los-
ses as either short term or long term. If you have long-term 
gains and losses, you must identify your 28% rate gains 
and losses. If you have a net capital gain, you must also 
identify any unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
The correct classification and identification helps you 
figure the limit on capital losses and the correct tax on 
capital gains. For information about determining whether 
your capital gain or loss is short term or long term, see 
Holding Period, later. For information about 28% rate gain 
or loss and unrecaptured section 1250 gain, see Capital 
Gain T ax Rates, later.
Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss
If you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss from a 
transaction, it may be either a capital gain or loss or an or-
dinary gain or loss, depending on the circumstances. 
Generally, a sale or trade of a capital asset (defined next) 
results in a capital gain or loss. A sale or trade of a nonca-
pital asset generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De-
pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on a sale or 
trade of property used in a trade or business may be trea-
ted as either capital or ordinary, as explained in Pub. 544. 
In some situations, part of your gain or loss may be a capi-
tal gain or loss, and part may be an ordinary gain or loss.
If you own and use a digital asset for personal or 
investment purposes, the income would be taxed 
as a capital gain or loss when you sell or dispose 
of it.
Capital Assets and
Noncapital Assets
For the most part, everything you own and use for per-
sonal purposes, pleasure, or investment is a capital asset. 
Some examples are:
• Stocks or bonds held in your personal account;
• Digital assets that include: convertible virtual curren-
cies, cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, Stablecoins, 
and Nonfungible tokens (NFT s);
• A house owned and used by you and your family;
• Household furnishings;
• A car used for pleasure or commuting;
• Coin or stamp collections;
• Gems and jewelry; and
• Gold, silver, or any other metal.
Any property you own is a capital asset, except the fol-
lowing noncapital assets.
1. Property held mainly for sale to customers or property 
that will physically become a part of the merchandise 
for sale to customers. For an exception, see Capital 
asset treatment for self-created musical works, later.
2. Depreciable property used in your trade or business, 
even if fully depreciated.
3. Real property used in your trade or business.
4. A patent; invention, model, or design (whether or not 
patented); a secret formula or process; a copyright; a 
literary, musical, or artistic composition; a letter or 
memorandum; or similar property, held by:
a. A person whose personal efforts created such 
property;
b. In the case of a letter, memorandum, or similar 
property, a person for whom such property was 
prepared or produced; or
c. Acquired under circumstances (for example, by 
gift) entitling you to the basis of the person who 
created the property or for whom it was prepared 
or produced.
For an exception to this rule, see Capital asset 
treatment for self-created musical works, later.
5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in the ordinary 
course of a trade or business for services rendered or 
from the sale of property described in (1).
6. U.S. Government publications, including the Congres-
sional Record, that you received:
TIP
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 75

Page 76 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. From the U.S. Government (or any governmental 
agency) for an amount other than the normal sales 
price, or
b. Under circumstances (such as by gift) that entitle 
you to the basis of someone who received the 
publication for an amount other than the normal 
sales price.
7. Certain commodities derivative financial instruments 
held by commodities derivatives dealers. For more in-
formation, see section 1221 of the Internal Revenue 
Code.
8. Hedging transactions, but only if the transaction is 
clearly identified as a hedging transaction before the 
close of the day on which it was acquired, originated, 
or entered into. For more information, see the defini-
tion of hedging transaction, earlier, and the discussion 
of hedging transactions under Commodity Futures, 
later.
9. Supplies of a type you regularly use or consume in the 
ordinary course of your trade or business.
Investment property.  Investment property is a capital 
asset. Any gain or loss from its sale or trade is generally a 
capital gain or loss.
Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.  These are 
capital assets except when they are held for sale by a 
dealer. Any gain or loss from their sale or trade is gener-
ally a capital gain or loss.
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of these, includ-
ing stock received as a dividend, are capital assets except 
when they are held for sale by a securities dealer. How-
ever, see Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock 
and Losses on Small Business Investment Company 
Stock, later.
Personal use property.  Property held for personal use 
only, rather than for investment, is a capital asset, and you 
must report a gain from its sale as a capital gain. However, 
you cannot deduct a loss from selling personal use prop-
erty.
Capital asset treatment for self -created musical 
works.  Y ou can elect to treat musical compositions and 
copyrights in musical works as capital assets when you 
sell or exchange them if:
• Y our personal efforts created the property, or
• Y ou acquired the property under circumstances (for 
example, by gift) entitling you to the basis of the per-
son who created the property or for whom it was pre-
pared or produced.
Y ou must make a separate election for each musical 
composition (or copyright in a musical work) sold or ex-
changed during the tax year. Make the election by the due 
date (including extensions) of the income tax return for the 
tax year of the sale or exchange. Make the election on 
Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040) by treating the 
sale or exchange as the sale or exchange of a capital 
asset, according to Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 
1040) and their separate instructions.
Y ou can revoke the election if you have IRS approval. 
T o get IRS approval, you must submit a request for a letter 
ruling under the appropriate IRS revenue procedure. See, 
for example, Revenue Procedure 2020 -1, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2020-01_IRB#REV-PROC-2020-1. Alterna-
tively, you are granted an automatic 6 -month extension 
from the due date of your income tax return (excluding ex-
tensions) to revoke the election, provided you timely file 
your income tax return, and within this 6 -month extension 
period, you file Form 1040 -X that treats the sale or ex-
change as the sale or exchange of property that is not a 
capital asset.
Discounted Debt Instruments
T reat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption, or retire-
ment of a bond or other debt instrument originally issued 
at a discount or bought at a discount as capital gain or 
loss, except as explained in the following discussions.
Short-term government obligations.  T reat gains on 
short-term federal, state, or local government obligations 
(other than tax-exempt obligations) as ordinary income up 
to your ratable share of the acquisition discount. This 
treatment applies to obligations with a fixed maturity date 
of not more than 1 year from the date of issue. Acquisition 
discount is the stated redemption price at maturity minus 
your basis in the obligation.
However, do not treat these gains as income to the ex-
tent you previously included the discount in income. See 
Discount on Short -T erm Obligations in chapter 1 for more 
information.
Short-term nongovernment obligations.  T reat gains 
on short -term nongovernment obligations as ordinary in-
come up to your ratable share of OID. This treatment ap-
plies to obligations with a fixed maturity date of not more 
than 1 year from the date of issue.
However, to the extent you previously included the dis-
count in income, you do not have to include it in income 
again. See Discount on Short -T erm Obligations in chap-
ter 1 for more information.
Tax-exempt state and local government bonds.  If 
these bonds were originally issued at a discount before 
September 4, 1982, or you acquired them before March 2, 
1984, treat your part of OID as tax -exempt interest. T o fig-
ure your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these bonds, 
reduce the amount realized by your part of OID.
If the bonds were issued after September 3, 1982, and 
acquired after March 1, 1984, increase the adjusted basis 
by your part of OID to figure gain or loss. For more infor-
mation on the basis of these bonds, see Discounted 
tax-exempt obligations, earlier in this chapter.
Any gain from market discount is usually taxable on dis-
position or redemption of tax -exempt bonds. If you bought 
the bonds before May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis-
count is capital gain. If you bought the bonds after April 
30, 1993, the gain from market discount is ordinary in-
come.
76 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 77 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Y ou figure market discount by subtracting the price you 
paid for the bond from the sum of the original issue price 
of the bond and the amount of accumulated OID from the 
date of issue that represented interest to any earlier hold-
ers. For more information, see Market Discount Bonds  in 
chapter 1.
A loss on the sale or other disposition of a tax -exempt 
state or local government bond is deductible as a capital 
loss.
Redeemed before maturity.  If a state or local bond 
issued before June 9, 1980, is redeemed before it ma-
tures, the OID is not taxable to you.
If a state or local bond issued after June 8, 1980, is re-
deemed before it matures, the part of OID earned while 
you hold the bond is not taxable to you. However, you 
must report the unearned part of OID as a capital gain.
Example. On July 2, 2013, the date of issue, you 
bought a 20 -year, 6% municipal bond for $800. The face 
amount of the bond was $1,000. The $200 discount was 
OID. At the time the bond was issued, the issuer had no 
intention of redeeming it before it matured. The bond was 
callable at its face amount beginning 10 years after the is-
sue date.
The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of 11 years 
(July 2, 2024) for its face amount of $1,000 plus accrued 
annual interest of $60. The OID earned during the time 
you held the bond, $73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued 
annual interest is also not taxable. However, you must re-
port the unearned part of OID, $127 ($200 − $73), as a 
capital gain.
Long-term debt instruments issued after May 27, 
1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a government instru-
ment). If you hold one of these debt instruments, you 
must include a part of OID in your gross income each year 
you own the instrument. Y our basis in that debt instrument 
is increased by the amount of OID that you have included 
in your gross income. See Original Issue Discount (OID) in 
chapter 1.
If you sell or trade the debt instrument before maturity, 
your gain is a capital gain. However, if at the time the in-
strument was originally issued there was an intention to 
call it before its maturity, your gain is generally ordinary in-
come to the extent of the entire OID reduced by any 
amounts of OID previously includible in your income. In 
this case, the rest of the gain is capital gain.
An intention to call a debt instrument before maturity 
means there is a written or oral agreement or understand-
ing not provided for in the debt instrument between the is-
suer and original holder that the issuer will redeem the 
debt instrument before maturity. In the case of debt instru-
ments that are part of an issue, the agreement or under-
standing must be between the issuer and the original 
holders of a substantial amount of the debt instruments in 
the issue.
Example 1. On February 9, 2023, you bought at origi-
nal issue for $7,600, Jones Corporation's 10 -year, 5% 
bond which has a stated redemption price at maturity of 
$10,000. On February 13, 2024, you sold the bond for 
$9,040. Assume you have included $334 of OID in your 
gross income (including the amount accrued for 2024) 
and increased your basis in the bond by that amount. Y our 
basis is now $7,934. If at the time of the original issue 
there was no intention to call the bond before maturity, 
your gain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized minus 
$7,934 adjusted basis) is capital gain.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, at the time of original is-
sue there was an intention to call the bond before maturity, 
your entire gain is ordinary income. Y ou figure this as fol-
lows:
1. Entire OID ($10,000 stated redemption price at 
maturity minus $7,600 issue price) .......... $2,400 
2. Minus: Amount previously included
in income .......................... 334
3. Maximum amount of ordinary income ......... $2,066
Because the amount in (3) is more than your gain of 
$1,106, your entire gain is ordinary income.
Market discount bonds. If the debt instrument has mar-
ket discount and you chose to include the discount in in-
come as it accrued, increase your basis in the debt instru-
ment by the accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss 
on its disposition. If you did not choose to include the dis-
count in income as it accrued, you must report gain as or-
dinary interest income up to the instrument's accrued mar-
ket discount. See Market Discount Bonds  in chapter 1. 
The rest of the gain is capital gain.
However, a different rule applies if you dispose of a 
market discount bond that was:
• Issued before July 19, 1984; and
• Purchased by you before May 1, 1993.
In that case, any gain is treated as interest income up to 
the amount of your deferred interest deduction for the year 
you dispose of the bond. The rest of the gain is capital 
gain. (The limit on the interest deduction for market dis-
count bonds is discussed in chapter 3 under When T o De-
duct Investment Interest.)
Report the sale or trade of a market discount bond in 
Form 8949, Part I or Part II, whichever is appropriate. Use 
the table How T o Complete Form 8949, Columns (f) and 
(g) in the Instructions for Form 8949 to help you figure the 
amounts to report for a sale or trade of a market discount 
bond. Also report the amount of accrued market discount 
in column (g) as interest income on Schedule B (Form 
1040), line 1, and identify it as “Accrued Market Discount.”
Report your sales or trades of a market discount 
bond on Form 8949 with the correct box checked 
for these transactions. See Form 8949 and the In-
structions for Form 8949.
Retirement of debt instrument.  Any amount you re-
ceive on the retirement of a debt instrument is treated in 
the same way as if you had sold or traded that instrument.
Notes of individuals. If you hold an obligation of an indi-
vidual issued with OID after March 1, 1984, you must 
TIP
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 77

Page 78 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
generally include the OID in your income currently, and 
your gain or loss on its sale or retirement is generally capi-
tal gain or loss. An exception to this treatment applies if 
the obligation is a loan between individuals and all the fol-
lowing requirements are met.
• The lender is not in the business of lending money.
• The amount of the loan, plus the amount of any out-
standing prior loans, is $10,000 or less.
• Avoiding federal tax is not one of the principal purpo-
ses of the loan.
If the exception applies, or the obligation was issued 
before March 2, 1984, you do not include the OID in your 
income currently. When you sell or redeem the obligation, 
the part of your gain that is not more than your accrued 
share of OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest of 
the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the sale or re-
demption is capital loss.
Bearer Obligations
Y ou cannot deduct any loss on an obligation required to 
be in registered form that is instead held in bearer form. In 
addition, any gain on the sale or other disposition of the 
obligation is ordinary income. However, if the issuer was 
subject to a tax when the obligation was issued, then you 
can deduct any loss, and any gain may qualify for capital 
gain treatment.
Obligations required to be in registered form.  Any 
obligation must be in registered form unless:
• It is issued by a natural person,
• It is not of a type offered to the public,
• It has a maturity at the date of issue of not more than 1 
year, or
• It was issued before 1983.
Deposit in Insolvent or
Bankrupt Financial Institution
If you lose money you have on deposit in a bank, credit 
union, or other financial institution that becomes insolvent 
or bankrupt, you may be able to deduct your loss in one of 
two ways.
• Casualty loss.
• Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital loss).
Y ou can no longer claim any miscellaneous item-
ized deductions, including the deduction for an or-
dinary loss on deposits in insolvent or bankrupt fi-
nancial institutions.
Casualty loss. If you can reasonably estimate your loss, 
you can treat the estimated loss as a casualty loss in the 
current year.
If you claim a casualty loss, attach Form 4684 to your 
return. Each loss must be reduced by $100. The amount 
CAUTION
!
of your casualty loss may be limited. See Pub. 547, Casu-
alties, Disasters, and Thefts.
Y ou cannot choose this method if:
• Y ou own at least 1% of the financial institution,
• Y ou are an officer of the institution, or
• Y ou are related to such an owner or officer. Y ou are re-
lated if you and the owner or officer are “related par-
ties,” as defined earlier under Related Party T ransac-
tions, or if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, or niece of 
the owner or officer.
If the actual loss that is finally determined is more than 
the amount you deducted as an estimated loss, you can 
claim the excess loss as a nonbusiness bad debt. If the 
actual loss is less than the amount deducted as an esti-
mated loss, you must include in income (in the final deter-
mination year) the excess loss claimed. See Recoveries in 
Pub. 525.
Nonbusiness bad debt.  If you do not choose to deduct 
your estimated loss as a casualty loss or an ordinary loss, 
you wait until the year the amount of the actual loss is de-
termined and deduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that 
year. Report it as a short -term capital loss on Form 8949, 
Part I, line 1, as explained under How to report bad debts , 
later.
Sale of Annuity
The part of any gain on the sale of an annuity contract be-
fore its maturity date that is based on interest accumulated 
on the contract is ordinary income.
Conversion Transactions
Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversion transaction 
is treated as ordinary income. This applies to gain on the 
disposition or other termination of any position you held as 
part of a conversion transaction you entered into after 
April 30, 1993.
A conversion transaction is any transaction that meets 
both of these tests.
1. Substantially all of your expected return from the 
transaction is due to the time value of your net invest-
ment. In other words, the return on your investment is, 
in substance, like interest on a loan.
2. The transaction is one of the following.
a. A straddle as defined under Straddles, later, but 
including any set of offsetting positions on stock 
established before October 22, 2004.
b. Any transaction in which you acquire property 
(whether or not actively traded) at substantially the 
same time that you contract to sell the same prop-
erty, or substantially identical property, at a price 
set in the contract.
c. Any other transaction that is marketed or sold as 
producing capital gains from a transaction 
described in (1).
78 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 79 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Amount treated as ordinary income.  The amount of 
gain treated as ordinary income is the smaller of:
• The gain recognized on the disposition or other termi-
nation of the position, or
• The “applicable imputed income amount.”
Applicable imputed income amount.  Figure this 
amount as follows.
1. Figure the amount of interest that would have accrued 
on your net investment in the conversion transaction 
for the period ending on the earlier of:
a. The date you dispose of the position, or
b. The date the transaction stops being a conversion 
transaction.
T o figure this amount, use an interest rate equal to 
120% of the “applicable rate,” defined later.
2. Subtract from (1) the amount treated as ordinary in-
come from any earlier disposition or other termination 
of a position held as part of the same conversion 
transaction.
Applicable rate.  If the term of the conversion transac-
tion is indefinite, the applicable rate is the federal 
short-term rate in effect under section 6621(b) during the 
period of the conversion transaction, compounded daily.
In all other cases, the applicable rate is the “applicable 
federal rate” determined as if the conversion transaction 
were a debt instrument and compounded semiannually.
The rates discussed above are published by the IRS in 
the Internal Revenue Bulletin. The Internal Revenue Bulle-
tin is available through IRS.gov. Y ou can also find applica-
ble federal rates in the Index of Applicable Federal Rates 
(AFRs) Rulings at https://apps.IRS.gov/app/picklist/list/
federalRates.html.
See chapter 5, How T o Get T ax Help, for information on 
contacting the IRS.
Net investment.  T o determine your net investment in a 
conversion transaction, include the fair market value of 
any position at the time it becomes part of the transaction. 
This means your net investment will generally be the total 
amount you invested, less any amount you received for 
entering into the position (for example, a premium you re-
ceived for writing a call).
Position with built-in loss.  A special rule applies when 
a position with a built-in loss becomes part of a conversion 
transaction. A built-in loss is any loss you would have real-
ized if you had disposed of or otherwise terminated the 
position at its fair market value at the time it became part 
of the conversion transaction.
When applying the conversion transaction rules to a 
position with a built -in loss, use the position's fair market 
value at the time it became part of the transaction. But, 
when you dispose of or otherwise terminate the position in 
a transaction in which you recognize gain or loss, you 
must recognize the built -in loss. The conversion transac-
tion rules do not affect whether the built -in loss is treated 
as an ordinary or capital loss.
Netting rule for certain conversion transactions.  Be-
fore determining the amount of gain treated as ordinary in-
come, you can net certain gains and losses from positions 
of the same conversion transaction. T o do this, you have 
to dispose of all the positions within a 14-day period that is 
within a single tax year. Y ou cannot net the built -in loss 
against the gain.
Y ou can net gains and losses only if you identify 
the conversion transaction as an identified netting 
transaction on your books and records. Each po-
sition of the conversion transaction must be identified be-
fore the end of the day on which the position becomes 
part of the conversion transaction. For conversion transac-
tions entered into before February 20, 1996, this require-
ment is met if the identification was made by that date.
Options dealers and commodities traders.  These 
rules do not apply to options dealers and commodities 
traders.
How to report.  Use Form 6781 to report conversion 
transactions. See the instructions for lines 11 and 13 of 
Form 6781.
Commodity Futures
A commodity futures contract is a standardized, ex-
change-traded contract for the sale or purchase of a fixed 
amount of a commodity at a future date for a fixed price.
If the contract is a regulated futures contract, the rules 
described earlier under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to 
Market apply to it.
The termination of a commodity futures contract gener-
ally results in capital gain or loss unless the contract is a 
hedging transaction.
Hedging transaction. A futures contract that is a hedg-
ing transaction generally produces ordinary gain or loss. A 
futures contract is a hedging transaction if you enter into 
the contract in the ordinary course of your business pri-
marily to manage the risk of interest rate or price changes 
or currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinary property, 
or ordinary obligations. (Generally, ordinary property or 
obligations are those that cannot produce capital gain or 
loss under any circumstances.) For example, the offset or 
exercise of a futures contract that protects against price 
changes in your business inventory results in an ordinary 
gain or loss.
For more information about hedging transactions, see 
Regulations section 1.1221-2. Also, see Hedging T ransac-
tions under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market , 
earlier.
If you have multiple transactions in the commodity 
futures market during the year, the burden of proof 
is on you to show which transactions are hedging 
transactions. Clearly identify any hedging transactions on 
your books and records before the end of the day you en-
tered into the transaction. It may be helpful to have sepa-
rate brokerage accounts for your hedging and nonhedging 
RECORDS
RECORDS
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 79

Page 80 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
transactions. For specific requirements concerning identi-
fication of hedging transactions and the underlying item, 
items, or aggregate risk being hedged, see Regulations 
section 1.1221-2(f).
Gains From Certain Constructive Ownership 
Transactions
If you have a gain from a constructive ownership transac-
tion entered into after July 11, 1999, involving a financial 
asset (discussed later) and the gain would normally be 
treated as long -term capital gain, all or part of the gain 
may be treated instead as ordinary income. In addition, if 
any gain is treated as ordinary income, your tax is in-
creased by an interest charge.
Constructive ownership transactions.  The following 
are constructive ownership transactions.
• A notional principal contract in which you have the 
right to receive all or substantially all of the investment 
yield on a financial asset and you are obligated to re-
imburse all or substantially all of any decline in value 
of the financial asset.
• A forward or futures contract to acquire a financial as-
set.
• The holding of a call option and writing of a put option 
on a financial asset at substantially the same strike 
price and maturity date.
This provision does not apply if all the positions are 
marked to market. Mark -to-market rule for section 1256 
contracts is discussed in detail under Section 1256 Con-
tracts Marked to Market, earlier.
Financial asset.  A financial asset, for this purpose, is 
any equity interest in a pass -through entity. Pass-through 
entities include partnerships, S corporations, trusts, regu-
lated investment companies, and REIT s.
Amount of ordinary income.  Long-term capital gain is 
treated as ordinary income to the extent it is more than the 
net underlying long -term capital gain. The net underlying 
long-term capital gain is the net capital gain you would 
have realized if you acquired the asset for its fair market 
value on the date the constructive ownership transaction 
was opened and sold the asset for its fair market value on 
the date the transaction was closed. If you do not estab-
lish the amount of net underlying long -term capital gain by 
clear and convincing evidence, it is treated as zero.
More information.  For more information about construc-
tive ownership transactions, see section 1260 of the Inter-
nal Revenue Code.
Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) 
Stock
Subject to the limitations discussed under Ordinary loss 
limit, later, you can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than 
as a capital loss, a loss on the sale, trade, or worthless-
ness of section 1244 stock. Report the loss on Form 4797, 
line 10. Any loss in excess of the amounts described in 
Ordinary loss limit , later, should be reported on Form 
8949.
Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capital gain if the 
stock is a capital asset in your hands. Do not offset gains 
against losses that are within the ordinary loss limit, ex-
plained later in this discussion, even if the transactions are 
in stock of the same company. Report the gain on Form 
8949.
If you must figure a net operating loss, any ordinary loss 
from the sale of section 1244 stock is a business loss.
Ordinary loss limit.  The amount you can deduct as an 
ordinary loss is limited to $50,000 each year. On a joint re-
turn, the limit is $100,000, even if only one spouse has this 
type of loss. If your loss is $110,000 and your spouse has 
no loss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinary loss on a 
joint return. The remaining $10,000 is a capital loss.
Section 1244 (small business) stock.  This is stock is-
sued for money or property (other than stock and securi-
ties) in a domestic small business corporation. During its 5 
most recent tax years before the loss, this corporation 
must have derived more than 50% of its gross receipts 
from other than royalties, rents, dividends, interest, annui-
ties, and gains from sales and trades of stocks or securi-
ties. If the corporation was in existence for at least 1 year, 
but less than 5 years, the 50% test applies to the tax years 
ending before the loss. If the corporation was in existence 
less than 1 year, the 50% test applies to the entire period 
the corporation was in existence before the day of the 
loss. However, if the corporation's deductions (other than 
the net operating loss and dividends received deductions) 
were more than its gross income during this period, this 
50% test does not apply.
The corporation must have been largely an operating 
company for ordinary loss treatment to apply.
If the stock was issued before July 19, 1984, the stock 
must be common stock. If issued after July 18, 1984, the 
stock may be either common or preferred. For more infor-
mation about the requirements of a small business corpo-
ration or the qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec-
tion 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and its 
regulations.
The stock must be issued to the person taking the 
loss.  Y ou must be the original owner of the stock to be 
allowed ordinary loss treatment. T o claim a deductible loss 
on stock issued to your partnership, you must have been a 
partner when the stock was issued and have remained so 
until the time of the loss. Y ou add your distributive share of 
the partnership loss to any individual section 1244 stock 
loss you may have before applying the ordinary loss limit.
Stock distributed by partnership.  If your partner-
ship distributes the stock to you, you cannot treat any later 
loss on that stock as an ordinary loss.
Stock sold through underwriter.  Stock sold through 
an underwriter is not section 1244 stock unless the under-
writer only acted as a selling agent for the corporation.
80 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 81 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Stock dividends and reorganizations.  Stock you re-
ceive as a stock dividend qualifies as section 1244 stock 
if:
• Y ou receive it from a small business corporation in 
which you own stock, and
• The stock you own meets the requirements when the 
stock dividend is distributed.
If you trade your section 1244 stock for new stock in the 
same corporation in a reorganization that qualifies as a re-
capitalization or that is only a change in identity, form, or 
place of organization, the new stock is section 1244 stock 
if the stock you trade meets the requirements when the 
trade occurs.
If you hold section 1244 stock and other stock in the 
same corporation, not all of the stock you receive as a 
stock dividend or in a reorganization will qualify as section 
1244 stock. Only that part based on the section 1244 
stock you hold will qualify.
Example.  Y our basis for 100 shares of X common 
stock is $1,000. These shares qualify as section 1244 
stock. If, as a nontaxable stock dividend, you receive 50 
more shares of common stock, the basis of which is deter-
mined from the 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are 
also section 1244 stock.
If you also own stock in the corporation that is not sec-
tion 1244 stock when you receive the stock dividend, you 
must divide the shares you receive as a dividend between 
the section 1244 stock and the other stock. Only the 
shares from the former can be section 1244 stock.
Contributed property.  T o determine ordinary loss on 
section 1244 stock you receive in a trade for property, you 
have to reduce the basis of the stock if:
• The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of the property, 
immediately before the trade, was more than its fair 
market value; and
• The basis of the stock is determined by the basis of 
the property.
Reduce the basis of the stock by the difference between 
the adjusted basis of the property and its fair market value 
at the time of the trade. Y ou reduce the basis only to figure 
the ordinary loss. Do not reduce the basis of the stock for 
any other purpose.
Example.  Y ou transfer property with an adjusted basis 
of $1,000 and a fair market value of $250 to a corporation 
for its section 1244 stock. The basis of your stock is 
$1,000, but to figure the ordinary loss under these rules, 
the basis of your stock is $250 ($1,000 − $750). If you 
later sell the section 1244 stock for $200, your $800 loss 
is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capital loss of $750.
Contributions to capital.  If the basis of your section 
1244 stock has increased, through contributions to capital 
or otherwise, you must treat this increase as applying to 
stock that is not section 1244 stock when you figure an or-
dinary loss on its sale.
Example.  Y ou buy 100 shares of section 1244 stock 
for $10,000. Y ou are the original owner. Y ou later make a 
$2,000 contribution to capital that increases the total basis 
of the 100 shares to $12,000. Y ou then sell the 100 shares 
for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. Y ou can deduct only 
$2,500 ($3,000 × $10,000/$12,000) as an ordinary loss 
under these rules. The remaining $500 is a capital loss.
Recordkeeping. Y ou must keep records suffi-
cient to show that your stock qualifies as section 
1244 stock. Y our records must also distinguish 
your section 1244 stock from any other stock you own in 
the corporation.
Losses on Small Business Investment 
Company Stock
A small business investment company (SBIC) is one that 
is licensed and operated under the Small Business Invest-
ment Act of 1958.
If you are an investor in SBIC stock, you can deduct as 
an ordinary loss, rather than a capital loss, a loss from the 
sale, trade, or worthlessness of that stock. A gain from the 
sale or trade of that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset 
your gains and losses, even if they are on stock of the 
same company.
How to report.  Y ou report this type of ordinary loss on 
Form 4797, Part II, line 10. In addition to the information 
required by the form, you must include the name and ad-
dress of the company that issued the stock. If applicable, 
also include the reason the stock is worthless and the ap-
proximate date it became worthless. Report a capital gain 
from the sale of SBIC stock on Form 8949.
Short sale. If you close a short sale of SBIC stock with 
other SBIC stock you bought only for that purpose, any 
loss you have on the sale is a capital loss. See Short 
Sales, later in this chapter, for more information.
Holding Period
If you sold or traded investment property, you must deter-
mine your holding period for the property. Y our holding pe-
riod determines whether any capital gain or loss was a 
short-term or a long-term capital gain or loss.
Long-term or Short -term.  If you hold investment prop-
erty more than 1 year, any capital gain or loss is a 
long-term capital gain or loss. If you hold the property 1 
year or less, any capital gain or loss is a short -term capital 
gain or loss.
T o determine how long you held the investment prop-
erty, begin counting on the date after the day you acquired 
the property. The day you disposed of the property is part 
of your holding period.
Example.  If you bought investment property on Janu-
ary 31, 2023, and sold it on January 29, 2024, your hold-
ing period is not more than 1 year and you have a 
short-term capital gain or loss. If you sold it on February 6, 
RECORDS
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 81

Page 82 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2024, your holding period is more than 1 year and you 
have a long-term capital gain or loss.
Holding period and digital assets.  A digital asset is 
treated as property, and general tax principles that apply 
to property transactions apply to transactions using digital 
assets, including how to figure your holding period for 
short-term and long -term capital gains and losses ex-
plained earlier under Long-T erm or Short-T erm. Digital as-
sets include property that has been referred to as "conver-
tible virtual currency," "cryptocurrency," and "non -fungible 
tokens."
If a particular asset has the characteristics of a digital 
asset, it will be treated as a digital asset for federal income 
tax purposes. For more information on the tax treatment of 
digital assets, see Notice 2014 -21, 2014 -16 I.R.B. 938, 
available at IRS.gov/irb/ 2014-16 IRB#NOT -2014-21, (as 
modified by Notice 2023-34, 2023-19 I.R.B. 837, available 
at IRS.gov/irb/2023-19 IRB#NOT -2023-34). For more in-
formation on virtual currency transactions, see IRS.gov/
VirtualCurrencyFAQs, Instructions for Form 1040 or go to 
IRS.gov/DigitalAsset.
Securities traded on an established market.  For se-
curities traded on an established securities market, your 
holding period begins the day after the trade date you 
bought the securities, and ends on the trade date you sold 
them.
Do not confuse the trade date with the settlement 
date, which is the date by which the stock must be 
delivered and payment must be made.
Example.  Y ou are a cash method, calendar year tax-
payer. Y ou sold stock on December 31, 2024. According 
to the rules of the stock exchange, the sale was closed by 
delivery of the stock and payment of the sale price in Jan-
uary 2025. Y ou received payment of the sale price on that 
same day. Report your gain or loss on your 2024 return, 
even though you received the payment in 2025. The gain 
or loss is long term or short term depending on whether 
you held the stock more than 1 year. Y our holding period 
ended on December 31.
U.S. Treasury notes and bonds.  The holding period of 
U.S. T reasury notes and bonds sold at auction on the ba-
sis of yield starts the day after the Secretary of the T reas-
ury, through news releases, gives notification of accept-
ance to successful bidders. The holding period of U.S. 
T reasury notes and bonds sold through an offering on a 
subscription basis at a specified yield starts the day after 
the subscription is submitted.
Automatic investment service.  In determining your 
holding period for shares bought by the bank or other 
agent, full shares are considered bought first and any frac-
tional shares are considered bought last. Y our holding pe-
riod starts on the day after the bank's purchase date. If a 
share was bought over more than one purchase date, your 
holding period for that share is a split holding period. A 
part of the share is considered to have been bought on 
CAUTION
!
each date that stock was bought by the bank with the pro-
ceeds of available funds.
Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investment property in 
a trade for other investment property and your basis for 
the new property is determined, in whole or in part, by 
your basis in the old property, your holding period for the 
new property begins on the day following the date you ac-
quired the old property.
Property received as a gift. If you receive a gift of prop-
erty and your basis is determined by the donor's adjusted 
basis, your holding period is considered to have started on 
the same day the donor's holding period started.
If your basis is determined by the fair market value of 
the property, your holding period starts on the day after 
the date of the gift.
Digital assets received as a gift.  Y our basis in virtual 
currency received as a bona fide gift differs depending on 
whether you will have a gain or a loss when you sell or dis-
pose of it. For purposes of determining whether you have 
a gain, your basis is equal to the donor's basis, plus any 
gift tax the donor paid on the gift. For purposes of deter-
mining whether you have a loss, your basis is equal to the 
lesser of the donor's basis or the fair market value of the 
virtual currency at the time you received the gift. If you do 
not have any documentation to substantiate the donor's 
basis, then your basis is zero. For more information on ba-
sis of property received as a gift, see Pub. 551.
Holding period of digital assets received as a gift. 
Y our holding period in virtual currency received as a gift in-
cludes the time that the virtual currency was held by the 
person from whom you received the gift. However, if you 
do not have documentation substantiating that person's 
holding period, then your holding period begins the day af-
ter you receive the gift. For more information on holding 
periods, see Pub. 544.
Inherited property. If you inherited property from some-
one who died before or after 2010, or from someone who 
died in 2010 and the executor of the decedent’s estate did 
not elect to file Form 8939, your capital gain or loss on any 
later disposition of that property is treated as long -term 
gain or loss, regardless of how long you held the property. 
If you acquired the property from someone who died in 
2010 and the executor made the election to file Form 
8939, see Revenue Procedure 2011-41 to determine your 
holding period. Revenue Procedure 2011 -41 is available 
at IRS.gov/irb/2011-35_IRB#RP-2011-41. For additional 
information on the executor making the election see also 
Notice 2011 -66, 2011 -35 I.R.B. 184, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2011-35_IRB#NOT -2011-66.
Real property bought.  T o figure how long you have 
held real property bought under an unconditional contract, 
begin counting on the day after you received title to it or on 
the day after you took possession of it and assumed the 
burdens and privileges of ownership, whichever happened 
first. However, taking delivery or possession of real prop-
erty under an option agreement is not enough to start the 
82 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 83 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
holding period. The holding period cannot start until there 
is an actual contract of sale. The holding period of the 
seller cannot end before that time.
Real property repossessed. If you sell real property but 
keep a security interest in it, and then later repossess the 
property under the terms of the sales contract, your hold-
ing period for a later sale includes the period you held the 
property before the original sale and the period after the 
repossession. Y our holding period does not include the 
time between the original sale and the repossession. That 
is, it does not include the period during which the first 
buyer held the property. However, the holding period for 
any improvements made by the first buyer begins at the 
time of repossession.
Stock dividends.  The holding period for stock you re-
ceived as a taxable stock dividend begins on the date of 
distribution.
The holding period for new stock you received as a 
nontaxable stock dividend begins on the same day as the 
holding period of the old stock. This rule also applies to 
stock acquired in a spin-off, which is a distribution of stock 
or securities in a controlled corporation.
Nontaxable stock rights.  Y our holding period for non-
taxable stock rights includes the holding period of the un-
derlying stock. The holding period for stock acquired 
through the exercise of stock rights begins on the date the 
right was exercised.
Section 1256 contracts.  Gains or losses on section 
1256 contracts open at the end of the year, or terminated 
during the year, are treated as 60% long term and 40% 
short term, regardless of how long the contracts were 
held. See Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market , ear-
lier.
Option exercised. Y our holding period for property you 
acquire when you exercise an option begins the day after 
you exercise the option.
Wash sales. Y our holding period for substantially identi-
cal stock or securities you acquire in a wash sale includes 
the period you held the old stock or securities.
Qualified small business stock. Y our holding period for 
stock you acquired in a tax-free rollover of gain from a sale 
of qualified small business stock, described later under 
Gains on Qualified Small Business Stock, includes the pe-
riod you held the old stock.
Commodity futures. Y our holding period for a commod-
ity received in satisfaction of a commodity futures con-
tract, other than a regulated futures contract subject to In-
ternal Revenue Code section 1256, includes your holding 
period for the futures contract if you held the contract as a 
capital asset.
Securities futures contract.  Y our holding period for a 
security received in satisfaction of a securities futures con-
tract, other than one that is a section 1256 contract, in-
cludes your holding period for the futures contract if you 
held the contract as a capital asset.
Y our holding period for a security received in satisfac-
tion of a securities futures contract to sell, other than one 
that is a section 1256 contract, is determined by the rules 
that apply to short sales, discussed later under Short 
Sales.
Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6 months or 
less. If you hold stock in a mutual fund (or other regulated 
investment company) or REIT for 6 months or less and 
then sell it at a loss (other than under a periodic liquidation 
plan), special rules may apply.
Capital gain distributions received.  The loss (after 
reduction for any exempt -interest dividends you received, 
as explained later) is treated as a long-term capital loss up 
to the total of any capital gain distributions you received 
and your share of any undistributed capital gains. Any re-
maining loss is short-term capital loss.
Reinvested distributions. If your dividends and capital 
gain distributions are reinvested in new shares, the hold-
ing period of each new share begins the day after that 
share was purchased. Therefore, if you sell both the new 
shares and the original shares, you might have both 
short-term and long-term gains and losses.
Example.  On April 3, 2024, you bought a mutual fund 
share for $20. On June 17, 2024, the mutual fund paid a 
capital gain distribution of $2 per share, which is taxed as 
a long -term capital gain. On July 15, 2024, you sold the 
share for $17.50. If it were not for the capital gain distribu-
tion, your loss would be a short -term loss of $2.50 ($20 − 
$17.50). However, the part of the loss that is not more 
than the capital gain distribution ($2) must be reported as 
a long-term capital loss. The remaining $0.50 of the loss 
can be reported as a short-term capital loss.
Exempt-interest dividends on mutual fund stock. If 
you received exempt -interest dividends on the stock, at 
least part of your loss is disallowed. Y ou can deduct only 
the amount of loss that is more than the exempt -interest 
dividends. Report the loss as a short -term capital loss. On 
Form 8949, Part I, line 1, column (d), increase the sales 
price by the amount of exempt -interest dividends, but do 
not increase it to more than the cost or other basis shown 
in column (e).
For more information on Form 8949 and Sched-
ule D (Form 1040), see the Instructions for Form 
8949 and the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 
1040).
Example.  On January 10, 2024, you bought a mutual 
fund share for $40. On February 7, 2024, the mutual fund 
paid a $5 dividend from tax -exempt interest, which is not 
taxable to you. On February 14, 2024, you sold the share 
for $34. If it were not for the tax-exempt dividend, your loss 
would be $6 ($40 − $34). However, you must increase the 
sales price from $34 to $39 (to account for the $5 portion 
of the loss that is not deductible). Y ou can deduct only $1 
as a short-term capital loss.
TIP
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 83

Page 84 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Loss on stock that paid qualified dividends.  Any loss 
on the sale or trade of stock must be treated as a 
long-term capital loss to the extent you received, from that 
stock, qualified dividends  (defined in chapter 1) that are 
extraordinary dividends. This is true regardless of how 
long you actually held the stock. Generally, an extraordi-
nary dividend is a dividend that equals or exceeds 10% 
(5% in the case of preferred stock) of your adjusted basis 
in the stock.
Nonbusiness Bad Debts
If someone owes you money that you cannot collect, you 
have a bad debt. Y ou may be able to deduct the amount 
owed to you when you figure your tax for the year the debt 
becomes worthless.
There are two kinds of bad debts —business and non-
business. A business bad debt, generally, is one that 
comes from operating your trade or business and is de-
ductible as a business loss. All other bad debts are non-
business bad debts and are deductible as short -term cap-
ital losses.
Example.  An architect made personal loans to sev-
eral friends who were not clients. The architect could not 
collect on some of these loans. They are deductible only 
as nonbusiness bad debts because the architect was not 
in the business of lending money and the loans do not 
have any relationship to the architect’s business.
Business bad debts.  For information on business bad 
debts of an employee, see Pub. 334, T ax Guide For Small 
Business (For Individuals Who Use Schedule C).
Deductible nonbusiness bad debts.  T o be deductible, 
nonbusiness bad debts must be totally worthless. Y ou 
cannot deduct a partly worthless nonbusiness debt.
Genuine debt required.  A debt must be genuine for 
you to deduct a loss. A debt is genuine if it arises from a 
debtor-creditor relationship based on a valid and enforce-
able obligation to repay a fixed or determinable sum of 
money.
Loan or gift.  For a bad debt, you must show there 
was an intention at the time of the transaction to make a 
loan and not a gift. If you lend money to a relative or friend 
with the understanding that it may not be repaid, it is con-
sidered a gift and not a loan. Y ou cannot take a bad debt 
deduction for a gift. There cannot be a bad debt unless 
there is a true creditor -debtor relationship between you 
and the person or organization that owes you the money.
When minor children borrow from their parents to pay 
for their basic needs, there is no genuine debt. A bad debt 
cannot be deducted for such a loan.
Basis in bad debt required.  T o deduct a bad debt, 
you must have a basis in it—that is, you must have already 
included the amount in your income or loaned out your 
cash. For example, you cannot claim a bad debt deduc-
tion for court-ordered child support not paid to you by your 
former spouse. If you are a cash method taxpayer (most 
individuals are), you generally cannot take a bad debt 
deduction for unpaid salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, 
dividends, and similar items.
When deductible.  Y ou can take a bad debt deduction 
only in the year the debt becomes worthless. Y ou do not 
have to wait until a debt is due to determine whether it is 
worthless. A debt becomes worthless when there is no 
longer any chance that the amount owed will be paid.
It is not necessary to go to court if you can show that a 
judgment from the court would be uncollectible. Y ou must 
only show that you have taken reasonable steps to collect 
the debt. Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-
dence of the worthlessness of at least a part of an unse-
cured and unpreferred debt.
If your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in a financial in-
stitution, see Deposit in Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial In-
stitution, earlier.
Filing a claim for refund.  If you do not deduct a bad 
debt on your original return for the year it becomes worth-
less, you can file a claim for a credit or refund due to the 
bad debt. T o do this, use Form 1040-X to amend your re-
turn for the year the debt became worthless. Y ou must file 
it within 7 years from the date your original return for that 
year had to be filed, or 2 years from the date you paid the 
tax, whichever is later. (Claims not due to bad debts or 
worthless securities must generally be filed within 3 years 
from the date a return is filed, or 2 years from the date the 
tax is paid, whichever is later.) For more information about 
filing a claim, see Pub. 556.
Loan guarantees. If you guarantee a debt that becomes 
worthless, you cannot take a bad debt deduction for your 
payments on the debt unless you can show either that 
your reason for making the guarantee was to protect your 
investment or that you entered the guarantee transaction 
with a profit motive. If you make the guarantee as a favor 
to friends and do not receive any consideration in return, 
your payments are considered a gift and you cannot take 
a deduction.
Example 1.  Henry Lloyd, an officer and principal 
shareholder of the Spruce Corporation, guaranteed pay-
ment of a bank loan the corporation received. The corpo-
ration defaulted on the loan and Henry made full payment. 
Because Henry guaranteed the loan to protect his invest-
ment in the corporation, Henry can take a nonbusiness 
bad debt deduction.
Example 2.  Milt and Pat are co -workers. Milt, as a fa-
vor to Pat, guarantees a note at their local credit union. Pat 
does not pay the note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays 
off the note. However, since Milt did not enter into the 
guarantee agreement to protect an investment or to make 
a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debt deduction.
Deductible in year paid.  Unless you have rights 
against the borrower, discussed next, a payment you 
make on a loan you guaranteed is deductible in the year 
you make the payment.
Rights against the borrower.  When you make pay-
ment on a loan you guaranteed, you may have the right to 
84 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 85 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
take the place of the lender (the right of subrogation). The 
debt is then owed to you. If you have this right or some 
other right to demand payment from the borrower, you 
cannot take a bad debt deduction until these rights be-
come totally worthless.
Debts owed by political parties.  Y ou cannot take a 
nonbusiness bad debt deduction for any worthless debt 
owed to you by:
• A political party;
• A national, state, or local committee of a political 
party; or
• A committee, association, or organization that either 
accepts contributions or spends money to influence 
elections.
Mechanics' and suppliers' liens.  Workers and material 
suppliers may file liens against property because of debts 
owed by a builder or contractor. If you pay off the lien to 
avoid foreclosure and loss of your property, you are enti-
tled to repayment from the builder or contractor. If the debt 
is uncollectible, you can take a bad debt deduction.
Insolvency of contractor.  Y ou can take a bad debt de-
duction for the amount you deposit with a contractor if the 
contractor becomes insolvent and you are unable to re-
cover your deposit. If the deposit is for work unrelated to 
your trade or business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt de-
duction.
Secondary liability on home mortgage.  If the buyer of 
your home assumes your mortgage, you may remain sec-
ondarily liable for repayment of the mortgage loan. If the 
buyer defaults on the loan and the house is then sold for 
less than the amount outstanding on the mortgage, you 
may have to make up the difference. Y ou can take a bad 
debt deduction for the amount you pay to satisfy the mort-
gage if you cannot collect it from the buyer.
Worthless securities. If you own securities that become 
totally worthless, you can take a deduction for a loss, but 
not for a bad debt. See Worthless Securities under What 
Is a Sale or T rade, earlier in this chapter.
Recovery of a bad debt.  If you deducted a bad debt 
and in a later tax year you recover (collect) all or part of it, 
you may have to include the amount you recover in your 
gross income. However, you can exclude from gross in-
come the amount recovered up to the amount of the de-
duction that did not reduce your tax in the year deducted. 
See Recoveries in Pub. 525.
How to report bad debts.  Deduct nonbusiness bad 
debts as short-term capital losses on Form 8949.
On Form 8949, Part I, line 1, enter the name of the 
debtor and “bad debt statement attached” in column (a). 
Enter your basis in the bad debt in column (e) and enter 
zero in column (d). Use a separate line for each bad debt.
Make sure you report your bad debt(s) (and any 
other short -term transactions for which you did 
not receive a Form 1099 -B) on Form 8949 with 
box C checked.
For each bad debt, attach a statement to your return 
that contains:
• A description of the debt, including the amount, and 
the date it became due;
• The name of the debtor, and any business or family re-
lationship between you and the debtor;
• The efforts you made to collect the debt; and
• Why you decided the debt was worthless. For exam-
ple, you could show that the borrower has declared 
bankruptcy, or that legal action to collect would proba-
bly not result in payment of any part of the debt.
Short Sales
A short sale occurs when you agree to sell property you 
do not own (or own but do not wish to sell). Y ou make this 
type of sale in two steps.
• Y ou sell short. Y ou borrow property and deliver it to a 
buyer.
• Y ou close the sale. At a later date, you either buy sub-
stantially identical property and deliver it to the lender 
or make delivery out of property you held at the time of 
the sale. Delivery of property borrowed from another 
lender does not satisfy this requirement.
Y ou do not realize gain or loss until delivery of property to 
close the short sale. Y ou will have a capital gain or loss if 
the property used to close the short sale is a capital asset.
The Instructions for Form 1099 -B discuss when you 
should receive a Form 1099-B for short sales. For more in-
formation, see the Instructions for Form 1099-B.
Reporting a short sale.  Report any short sale on Form 
8949 in the year it closes. If a short sale closed in 2024 
but you did not get a Form 1099 -B for it because you en-
tered into it before 2011, report it on a Form 8949 in Part I 
or Part II (whichever applies). In column (a), enter (for ex-
ample) “100 sh. XYZ Co. — 2010 short sale closed.” Fill in 
the other columns according to their instructions. Report 
the short sale the same way if you received a 2024 Form 
1099-B that does not show proceeds (sales price).
Exception if property becomes worthless.  A different 
rule applies if the property sold short becomes substan-
tially worthless. In that case, you must recognize gain as if 
the short sale were closed when the property became 
substantially worthless.
Exception for constructive sales.  Entering into a short 
sale may cause you to be treated as having made a con-
structive sale of property. In that case, you will have to rec-
ognize gain on the date of the constructive sale. For de-
tails, see Constructive Sales of Appreciated Financial 
Positions, earlier.
CAUTION
!
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 85

Page 86 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example.  On May 6, 2024, you bought 100 shares of 
Baker Corporation stock for $1,000. On September 9, 
2024, you sold short 100 shares of similar Baker stock for 
$1,600. Y ou made no other transactions involving Baker 
stock for the rest of 2024 and the first 30 days of 2025. 
Y our short sale is treated as a constructive sale of an ap-
preciated financial position because a sale of your Baker 
stock on the date of the short sale would have resulted in 
a gain. Y ou recognize a $600 short-term capital gain from 
the constructive sale and your new holding period in the 
Baker stock begins on September 8.
Short-Term or Long-Term Capital Gain or 
Loss
As a general rule, you determine whether you have 
short-term or long-term capital gain or loss on a short sale 
by the amount of time you actually hold the property even-
tually delivered to the lender to close the short sale.
Example.  Even though you do not own any stock of 
Ace Corporation, you contract to sell 100 shares of it, 
which you borrow from your broker. After 13 months, when 
the price of the stock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Ace 
Corporation stock and immediately deliver them to your 
broker to close out the short sale. Y our loss is a short-term 
capital loss because your holding period for the delivered 
property is less than 1 day.
Special rules.  Special rules may apply to gains and los-
ses from short sales of stocks, securities, and commodity 
and securities futures (other than certain straddles) if you 
held or acquired property substantially identical to prop-
erty that sold short. But if the amount of property you sold 
short is more than the amount of that substantially identi-
cal property, the special rules do not apply to the gain or 
loss on the excess.
Gains and holding period.  If you held the substan-
tially identical property for 1 year or less on the date of the 
short sale, or if you acquired the substantially identical 
property after the short sale and by the date of closing the 
short sale, then:
 Rule 1. Y our gain, if any, when you close the short sale 
is a short-term capital gain; and
 Rule 2. The holding period of the substantially identi-
cal property begins on the date of the closing of the 
short sale or on the date of the sale of this property, 
whichever comes first.
Losses.  If, on the date of the short sale, you held sub-
stantially identical property for more than 1 year, any loss 
you realize on the short sale is a long -term capital loss, 
even if you held the property used to close the sale for 1 
year or less. Certain losses on short sales of stock or se-
curities are also subject to wash sale treatment. For infor-
mation, see Wash Sales, later.
Mixed straddles.  Under certain elections, you can 
avoid the treatment of loss from a short sale as long term 
under the special rule. These elections are for positions 
that are part of a mixed straddle. See Other elections , 
later, for more information about these elections.
Reporting Substitute Payments
If any broker transferred your securities for use in a short 
sale or similar transaction and received certain substitute 
dividend payments on your behalf while the short sale was 
open, that broker must give you a Form 1099 -MISC or a 
similar statement reporting the amount of these payments. 
Form 1099-MISC must be used for those substitute pay-
ments totaling $10 or more that are known on the pay-
ment's record date to be in lieu of an exempt -interest divi-
dend, a capital gain dividend, a return of capital 
distribution, or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, or 
that are in lieu of tax -exempt interest. Do not treat these 
substitute payments as dividends or interest. Instead, re-
port the substitute payments shown on Form 1099 -MISC 
as “Other income” on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z.
Substitute payment.  A substitute payment means a 
payment in lieu of:
• T ax-exempt interest (including OID) accrued while the 
short sale was open; and
• A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is after the transfer 
of stock for use in a short sale and before the closing 
of the short sale.
Payments in lieu of dividends.  If you borrow stock to 
make a short sale, you may have to remit to the lender 
payments in lieu of the dividends distributed while you 
maintain your short position. Y ou can deduct these pay-
ments only if you hold the short sale open at least 46 days 
(more than 1 year in the case of an extraordinary dividend, 
as defined later) and you itemize your deductions.
Y ou deduct these payments as investment interest on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). See Interest Expenses in chap-
ter 3 for more information.
If you close the short sale by the 45th day after the date 
of the short sale (1 year or less in the case of an extraordi-
nary dividend), you cannot deduct the payment in lieu of 
the dividend you make to the lender. Instead, you must in-
crease the basis of the stock used to close the short sale 
by that amount.
T o determine how long a short sale is kept open, do not 
include any period during which you hold, have an option 
to buy, or are under a contractual obligation to buy sub-
stantially identical stock or securities.
If your payment is made for a liquidating distribution or 
nontaxable stock distribution, or if you buy more shares 
equal to a stock distribution issued on the borrowed stock 
during your short position, you have a capital expense. 
Y ou must add the payment to the cost of the stock sold 
short.
Exception.  If you close the short sale within 45 days, 
the deduction for amounts you pay in lieu of dividends will 
be disallowed only to the extent the payments are more 
than the amount you receive as ordinary income from the 
lender of the stock for the use of collateral with the short 
86 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 87 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sale. This exception does not apply to payments in place 
of extraordinary dividends.
Extraordinary dividends. If the amount of any dividend 
you receive on a share of preferred stock equals or ex-
ceeds 5% (10% in the case of other stock) of the amount 
realized on the short sale, the dividend you receive is an 
extraordinary dividend.
Wash Sales
Y ou cannot deduct losses from sales or trades of stock or 
securities in a wash sale unless the loss was incurred in 
the ordinary course of your business as a dealer in stock 
or securities.
A wash sale occurs when you sell or trade stock or se-
curities at a loss and within 30 days before or after the 
sale you:
1. Buy substantially identical stock or securities,
2. Acquire substantially identical stock or securities in a 
fully taxable trade,
3. Acquire a contract or option to buy substantially iden-
tical stock or securities, or
4. Acquire substantially identical stock for your individual 
retirement arrangement (IRA) or Roth IRA.
If you sell stock and your spouse or a corporation you con-
trol buys substantially identical stock, you also have a 
wash sale.
If your loss was disallowed because of the wash sale 
rules, add the disallowed loss to the cost of the new stock 
or securities (except in (4) above). The result is your basis 
in the new stock or securities. This adjustment postpones 
the loss deduction until the disposition of the new stock or 
securities. Y our holding period for the new stock or securi-
ties includes the holding period of the stock or securities 
sold.
Example 1.  Y ou buy 100 shares of X stock for $1,000. 
Y ou sell these shares for $750 and within 30 days from the 
sale you buy 100 shares of the same stock for $800. Be-
cause you bought substantially identical stock, you cannot 
deduct your loss of $250 on the sale. However, you add 
the disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of the new stock, 
$800, to obtain your basis in the new stock, which is 
$1,050.
Example 2.  Y ou are an employee of a corporation 
with an incentive pay plan. Under this plan, you are given 
10 shares of the corporation's stock as a bonus award. 
Y ou include the fair market value of the stock in your gross 
income as additional pay. Y ou later sell these shares at a 
loss. If you receive another bonus award of substantially 
identical stock within 30 days of the sale, you cannot de-
duct your loss on the sale.
Options and futures contracts. The wash sale rules ap-
ply to losses from sales or trades of contracts and options 
to acquire or sell stock or securities. They do not apply to 
losses from sales or trades of commodity futures con-
tracts and foreign currencies. See Coordination of Loss 
Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules , later, for information 
about the tax treatment of losses on the disposition of po-
sitions in a straddle.
Securities futures contract to sell.  Losses from the 
sale, exchange, or termination of a securities futures con-
tract to sell are generally treated in the same manner as 
losses from the closing of a short sale, discussed later in 
this section under Short sales.
Warrants. The wash sale rules apply if you sell com-
mon stock at a loss and, at the same time, buy warrants 
for common stock of the same corporation. But if you sell 
warrants at a loss and, at the same time, buy common 
stock in the same corporation, the wash sale rules apply 
only if the warrants and stock are considered substantially 
identical, as discussed next.
Substantially identical.  In determining whether stock or 
securities are substantially identical, you must consider all 
the facts and circumstances in your particular case. Ordi-
narily, stocks or securities of one corporation are not con-
sidered substantially identical to stocks or securities of an-
other corporation. However, they may be substantially 
identical in some cases. For example, in a reorganization, 
the stocks and securities of the predecessor and succes-
sor corporations may be substantially identical.
Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a corporation are 
not ordinarily considered substantially identical to the 
common stock of the same corporation. However, where 
the bonds or preferred stock are convertible into common 
stock of the same corporation, the relative values, price 
changes, and other circumstances may make these 
bonds or preferred stock and the common stock substan-
tially identical. For example, preferred stock is substan-
tially identical to the common stock if the preferred stock:
• Is convertible into common stock,
• Has the same voting rights as the common stock,
• Is subject to the same dividend restrictions,
• T rades at prices that do not vary significantly from the 
conversion ratio, and
• Is unrestricted as to convertibility.
More or less stock bought than sold.  If the number of 
shares of substantially identical stock or securities you 
buy within 30 days before or after the sale is either more or 
less than the number of shares you sold, you must deter-
mine the particular shares to which the wash sale rules 
apply. Y ou do this by matching the shares bought with an 
equal number of the shares sold. Match the shares bought 
in the same order that you bought them, beginning with 
the first shares bought. The shares or securities so 
matched are subject to the wash sale rules.
Example 1.  Y ou bought 100 shares of M stock on 
September 20, 2023, for $5,000. On December 13, 2023, 
you bought 50 shares of substantially identical stock for 
$2,750. On December 20, 2023, you bought 25 shares of 
substantially identical stock for $1,125. On January 3, 
2024, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares you bought in 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 87

Page 88 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
September. Y ou have a $1,000 loss on the sale. However, 
because you bought 75 shares of substantially identical 
stock within 30 days before the sale, you cannot deduct 
the loss ($750) on 75 shares. Y ou can deduct the loss 
($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of the 50 shares 
bought on December 13, 2023, is increased by two -thirds 
(50 ÷ 75) of the $750 disallowed loss. The new basis of 
those shares is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 
25 shares bought on December 20, 2023, is increased by 
the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125 + $250).
Example 2.  Y ou bought 100 shares of M stock on 
September 15, 2023. On January 29, 2024, you sold 
those shares at a $1,000 loss. On each of the 4 days from 
February 1, 2024, to February 6, 2024, you bought 50 
shares of substantially identical stock. Y ou cannot deduct 
your $1,000 loss. Y ou must add half the disallowed loss 
($500) to the basis of the 50 shares bought on February 1. 
Add the other half ($500) to the basis of the shares bought 
on February 2.
Loss and gain on same day.  Loss from a wash sale of 
one block of stock or securities cannot be used to reduce 
any gains on identical blocks sold the same day.
Example.  During 2018, you bought 100 shares of X 
stock on each of three occasions. Y ou paid $158 per 
share for the first block of 100 shares, $100 per share for 
the second block, and $95 per share for the third block. 
On December 27, 2023, you sold 300 shares of X stock 
for $125 per share. On January 10, 2024, you bought 250 
shares of identical X stock. Y ou cannot deduct the loss of 
$33 per share on the first block because within 30 days af-
ter the date of sale you bought 250 identical shares of X 
stock. In addition, you cannot reduce the gain realized on 
the sale of the second and third blocks of stock by this 
loss.
Dealers.  The wash sale rules do not apply to a dealer in 
stock or securities if the loss is from a transaction made in 
the ordinary course of business.
Short sales.  The wash sale rules apply to a loss realized 
on a short sale if you sell, or enter into another short sale 
of, substantially identical stock or securities within a pe-
riod beginning 30 days before the date the short sale is 
complete and ending 30 days after that date.
For purposes of the wash sale rules, a short sale is con-
sidered complete on the date the short sale is entered into 
if:
• On that date, you own stock or securities identical to 
those sold short (or by that date you enter into a con-
tract or option to acquire that stock or those securi-
ties); and
• Y ou later deliver the stock or securities to close the 
short sale.
Otherwise, a short sale is not considered complete until 
the property is delivered to close the sale.
This treatment also applies to losses from the sale, ex-
change, or termination of a securities futures contract to 
sell.
Example.  On June 4, you buy 100 shares of stock for 
$1,000. Y ou sell short 100 shares of the stock for $750 on 
October 15. On October 16, you buy 100 shares of the 
same stock for $750. Y ou close the short sale on Novem-
ber 19 by delivering the shares bought on June 4. Y ou 
cannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750) because the 
date of entering into the short sale (October 15) is consid-
ered the date the sale is complete for wash sale purposes 
and you bought substantially identical stock within 30 days 
from that date.
Residual interests in a real estate mortgage invest-
ment conduit (REMIC).  The wash sale rules will gener-
ally apply to the sale of your residual interest in a REMIC 
if, during the period beginning 6 months before the sale of 
the interest and ending 6 months after that sale, you ac-
quire any residual interest in any REMIC or any interest in 
a taxable mortgage pool that is comparable to a residual 
interest. REMICs are discussed in chapter 1.
Nondeductible wash sale loss.  If you received a Form 
1099-B, box 1g will show the amount of wash sale loss 
disallowed if:
• The stock or securities sold were covered securities, 
and
• The substantially identical stock or securities you 
bought had the same CUSIP numbers as the stock or 
securities you sold and were bought in the same ac-
count as the stock or securities you sold.
However, you cannot deduct a loss from a wash sale 
even if it is not reported on Form 1099-B.
How to report.  Report a wash sale transaction in Part I 
or Part II of Form 8949 with the appropriate box checked. 
Complete all columns. Enter “W” in column (f). Enter as a 
positive number in column (g) the amount of the loss not 
allowed. See the Instructions for Form 8949.
Securities Futures Contracts
A securities futures contract is a contract of sale for future 
delivery of a single security or of a narrow -based security 
index.
Gain or loss from the contract will generally be treated 
in a manner similar to gain or loss from transactions in the 
underlying security. This means gain or loss from the sale, 
exchange, or termination of the contract will generally 
have the same character as gain or loss from transactions 
in the property to which the contract relates. Any capital 
gain or loss on a sale, exchange, or termination of a con-
tract to sell property will be considered short term, regard-
less of how long you hold the contract. These contracts 
are not section 1256 contracts (unless they are dealer se-
curities futures contracts).
Options
Options are generally subject to the rules described in this 
section. If the option is part of a straddle, the Loss Deferral 
Rules covered later under Straddles may also apply. For 
88 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 89 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
special rules that apply to nonequity options and dealer 
equity options, see Section 1256 Contracts Marked to 
Market, earlier.
Gain or loss from the sale or trade of an option to buy or 
sell property that is a capital asset in your hands, or would 
be if you acquired it, is capital gain or loss. If the property 
is not or would not be a capital asset, the gain or loss is 
ordinary gain or loss.
Example 1.  Y ou purchased an option to buy 100 
shares of XYZ Company stock. The stock increases in 
value, and you sell the option for more than you paid for it. 
Y our gain is capital gain because the stock underlying the 
option would have been a capital asset in your hands.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except the stock decreases in value and you sell the op-
tion for less than you paid for it. Y our loss is a capital loss.
Option not exercised.  If you have a loss because you 
did not exercise an option to buy or sell, you are consid-
ered to have sold or traded the option on the date it ex-
pired.
Writer of option.  If you write (grant) an option, how you 
report your gain or loss depends on whether it was exer-
cised.
If you are not in the business of writing options and an 
option you write on stocks, securities, commodities, or 
commodity futures is not exercised (or repurchased), the 
amount you receive is a short-term capital gain.
If an option requiring you to buy or sell property is exer-
cised, see Writers of puts and calls, later.
Section 1256 contract options.  Gain or loss is recog-
nized on the exercise of an option on a section 1256 con-
tract. Section 1256 contracts are defined under Section 
1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.
Cash settlement option.  A cash settlement option is 
treated as an option to buy or sell property. A cash settle-
ment option is any option that on exercise is settled in, or 
could be settled in, cash or property other than the under-
lying property.
How to report.  Report on Form 8949 gain or loss from 
the closing or expiration of an option that is not a section 
1256 contract but is a capital asset in your hands. If an op-
tion you purchased expired, enter the expiration date in 
column (c) and enter “Expired” in column (d). If an option 
that was granted (written) expired, enter the expiration 
date in column (b) and enter “Expired” in column (e). Fill in 
the other columns as appropriate.
If a call option you sold was exercised and the option 
premium you received was not reflected in the sales price 
shown on the Form 1099 -B you received, enter the pre-
mium as a positive number in column (g) of Form 8949 
and enter “E” in column (f).
Puts and Calls
Puts and calls are options on securities and are covered 
by the rules just discussed for options. The following are 
specific applications of these rules to holders and writers 
of options that are bought, sold, or “closed out” in transac-
tions on a national securities exchange, such as the Chi-
cago Board Options Exchange. (But see Section 1256 
Contracts Marked to Market , earlier, for special rules that 
may apply to nonequity options and dealer equity op-
tions.) These rules are also presented in T able 4-3.
Puts and calls are issued by writers (grantors) to hold-
ers for cash premiums. They are ended by exercise, clos-
ing transaction, or lapse.
A “put option” is the right to sell to the writer, at any time 
before a specified future date, a stated number of shares 
at a specified price. Conversely, a “call option” is the right 
to buy from the writer of the option, at any time before a 
specified future date, a stated number of shares of stock 
at a specified price.
Holders of puts and calls.  If you buy a put or a call, you 
may not deduct its cost. It is a capital expenditure.
If you sell the put or the call before you exercise it, the 
difference between its cost and the amount you receive for 
it is either a long -term or short -term capital gain or loss, 
depending on how long you held it.
If the option expires, its cost is either a long -term or 
short-term capital loss, depending on your holding period, 
which ends on the expiration date.
If you exercise a call, add its cost to the basis of the 
stock you bought. If you exercise a put, reduce your 
amount realized on the sale of the underlying stock by the 
cost of the put when figuring your gain or loss. Any gain or 
loss on the sale of the underlying stock is long term or 
short term depending on your holding period for the un-
derlying stock.
Put option as short sale.  Buying a put option is gen-
erally treated as a short sale, and the exercise, sale, or ex-
piration of the put is a closing of the short sale. See Short 
Sales, earlier. If you have held the underlying stock for 1 
year or less at the time you buy the put, any gain on the 
exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a short -term capi-
tal gain. The same is true if you buy the underlying stock 
after you buy the put but before its exercise, sale, or expi-
ration. Y our holding period for the underlying stock begins 
on the earliest of:
• The date you dispose of the stock,
• The date you exercise the put,
• The date you sell the put, or
• The date the put expires.
Writers of puts and calls.  If you write (grant) a put or a 
call, do not include the amount you receive for writing it in 
your income at the time of receipt. Carry it in a deferred 
account until:
• Y our obligation expires;
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 89

Page 90 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Y ou buy, in the case of a put, or sell, in the case of a 
call, the underlying stock when the option is exercised; 
or
• Y ou engage in a closing transaction.
If your obligation expires, the amount you received for 
writing the call or put is short-term capital gain.
If a put you write is exercised and you buy the underly-
ing stock, decrease your basis in the stock by the amount 
you received for the put. Y our holding period for the stock 
begins on the date you buy it, not on the date you wrote 
the put.
If a call you write is exercised and you sell the underly-
ing stock, increase your amount realized on the sale of the 
stock by the amount you received for the call when figur-
ing your gain or loss. The gain or loss is long term or short 
term depending on your holding period of the stock.
If you enter into a closing transaction by paying an 
amount equal to the value of the put or call at the time of 
the payment, the difference between the amount you pay 
and the amount you receive for the put or call is a 
short-term capital gain or loss.
Examples of nondealer transactions. 
1. Expiration. T en JJJ call options were issued on April 
8, 2024, for $4,000. These equity options expired in 
December 2024 without being exercised. If you were 
a holder (buyer) of the options, you would recognize a 
short-term capital loss of $4,000. If you were a writer 
of the options, you would recognize a short-term capi-
tal gain of $4,000.
2. Closing transaction. The facts are the same as in 
(1), except that on May 6, 2024, the options were sold 
for $6,000. If you were the holder of the options who 
sold them, you would recognize a short-term capital 
gain of $2,000. If you were the writer of the options 
and you bought them back, you would recognize a 
short-term capital loss of $2,000.
3. Exercise. The facts are the same as in (1), except 
that the options were exercised on May 20, 2024. The 
buyer adds the cost of the options to the basis of the 
stock bought through the exercise of the options. The 
writer adds the amount received from writing the op-
tions to the amount realized from selling the stock to 
figure gain or loss. The gain or loss is short term or 
long term depending upon the holding period of the 
stock.
4. Section 1256 contracts. The facts are the same as 
in (1), except the options were nonequity options, sub-
ject to the rules for section 1256 contracts. If you were 
a buyer of the options, you would recognize a 
short-term capital loss of $1,600, and a long-term 
capital loss of $2,400. If you were a writer of the op-
tions, you would recognize a short-term capital gain of 
$1,600, and a long-term capital gain of $2,400. See 
Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier, for 
more information.
Straddles
This section discusses the loss deferral rules that apply to 
the sale or other disposition of positions in a straddle. 
These rules do not apply to the straddles described under 
Exceptions, later.
Puts and Calls
Puts
When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
Is exercised Reduce your amount realized from the sale of the 
underlying stock by the cost of the put.
Reduce your basis in the stock you buy by the amount 
you received for the put.
Expires Report the cost of the put as a capital loss on the date it 
expires.*
Report the amount you received for the put as a 
short-term capital gain.
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the cost of the put and the 
amount you receive for it as a capital gain or loss.*
This does not affect you. (But if you buy back the put, 
report the difference between the amount you pay and 
the amount you received for the put as a short-term 
capital gain or loss.)
Calls
When a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
Is exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis in the stock 
purchased.
Increase your amount realized on the sale of the stock by 
the amount you received for the call.
Expires Report the cost of the call as a capital loss on the date it 
expires.*
Report the amount you received for the call as a 
short-term capital gain.
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the cost of the call and the 
amount you receive for it as a capital gain or loss.*
This does not affect you. (But if you buy back the call, 
report the difference between the amount you pay and 
the amount you received for the call as a short-term 
capital gain or loss.)
* See Holders of puts and calls and Writers of puts and calls in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or loss is short term or long term.
T able 4-3.
90 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 91 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A straddle is any set of offsetting positions on personal 
property. For example, a straddle may consist of a pur-
chased option to buy and a purchased option to sell on 
the same number of shares of the security, with the same 
exercise price and period.
Personal property.  This is any actively traded property. 
It includes stock options and contracts to buy stock but 
generally does not include stock.
Straddle rules for stock.  Although stock is generally 
excluded from the definition of personal property when ap-
plying the straddle rules, it is included in the following two 
situations.
1. The stock is of a type that is actively traded, and at 
least one of the offsetting positions is a position on 
that stock or substantially similar or related property.
2. The stock is in a corporation formed or availed of to 
take positions in personal property that offset posi-
tions taken by any shareholder.
Note.  For positions established before October 22, 
2004, condition 1 above does not apply. Instead, personal 
property includes stock if condition 2 above applies or the 
stock was part of a straddle in which at least one of the 
offsetting positions was:
• An option to buy or sell the stock or substantially iden-
tical stock or securities,
• A securities futures contract on the stock or substan-
tially identical stock or securities, or
• A position on substantially similar or related property 
(other than stock).
Position.  A position is an interest in personal property. A 
position can be a forward or futures contract or an option.
An interest in a loan denominated in a foreign currency 
is treated as a position in that currency. For the straddle 
rules, foreign currency for which there is an active inter-
bank market is considered to be actively traded personal 
property. See also Foreign currency contract, earlier.
Offsetting position.  This is a position that substantially 
reduces any risk of loss you may have from holding an-
other position. However, if a position is part of a straddle 
that is not an identified straddle (described later), do not 
treat it as offsetting to a position that is part of an identified 
straddle.
Presumed offsetting positions.  T wo or more posi-
tions will be presumed to be offsetting if:
• The positions are established in the same personal 
property (or in a contract for this property), and the 
value of one or more positions varies inversely with the 
value of one or more of the other positions;
• The positions are in the same personal property, even 
if this property is in a substantially changed form, and 
the positions' values vary inversely as described in the 
first condition;
• The positions are in debt instruments with a similar 
maturity, and the positions' values vary inversely as 
described in the first condition;
• The positions are sold or marketed as offsetting posi-
tions, whether or not the positions are called a strad-
dle, spread, butterfly, or any similar name; or
• The aggregate margin requirement for the positions is 
lower than the sum of the margin requirements for 
each position if held separately.
Related persons.  T o determine if two or more posi-
tions are offsetting, you will be treated as holding any po-
sition your spouse holds during the same period. If you 
take into account part or all of the gain or loss for a posi-
tion held by a flow-through entity, such as a partnership or 
trust, you are also considered to hold that position.
Loss Deferral Rules
Generally, you can deduct a loss on the disposition of one 
or more positions only to the extent the loss is more than 
any unrecognized gain you have on offsetting positions. 
Unused losses are treated as sustained in the next tax 
year.
Unrecognized gain.  This is:
• The amount of gain you would have had on an open 
position if you had sold it on the last business day of 
the tax year at its fair market value; and
• The amount of gain realized on a position if, as of the 
end of the tax year, gain has been realized but not rec-
ognized.
Example.  On July 8, 2024, you entered into a strad-
dle. On December 11, 2024, you closed one position of 
the straddle at a loss of $15,000. On December 30, 2024, 
the end of your tax year, you have an unrecognized gain of 
$12,750 in the offsetting open position. On your 2024 re-
turn, your deductible loss on the position you closed is 
limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750). Y ou must carry for-
ward the unused loss of $12,750.
Note.  If you physically settle a position established af-
ter October 21, 2004, that is part of a straddle by deliver-
ing property to which the position relates (and you would 
realize a loss on that position if you terminated it), you are 
treated as having terminated the position for its fair market 
value immediately before the settlement and as having 
sold the property used to physically settle the position at 
its fair market value.
Exceptions.  The loss deferral rules do not apply to:
1. Positions established after October 21, 2004, com-
prising an identified straddle;
2. Certain straddles consisting of qualified covered call 
options and the stock to be purchased under the op-
tions;
3. Hedging transactions, described earlier under Section 
1256 Contracts Marked to Market; and
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 91

Page 92 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. Straddles consisting entirely of section 1256 con-
tracts, as described earlier under Section 1256 Con-
tracts Marked to Market (but see Identified straddle, 
later).
Note.  For positions established before October 22, 
2004, the loss deferral rules also do not apply to a strad-
dle that is an identified straddle at the end of the tax year.
Identified straddle.  Any straddle (other than a strad-
dle described in (2) or (3) above) is an identified straddle if 
all the following conditions exist.
• Y ou clearly identified the straddle on your records be-
fore the close of the day on which you acquired it.
• For straddles acquired after December 29, 2007, you 
identified the positions in the straddle that are offset-
ting with respect to one another (for example, position 
A offsets position D, and position B offsets position C).
• The straddle is not part of a larger straddle.
If there is a loss from any position in an identified strad-
dle, you must increase the basis of each of the positions 
that offset the loss position in the identified straddle. The 
increase is the loss multiplied by the following fraction:
Unrecognized gain (if any) on the offsetting position 
The total unrecognized gain on all positions that offset 
the loss position in the identified straddle
For this purpose, your unrecognized gain is the excess 
of the fair market value of the position that is part of an 
identified straddle at the time you incur a loss on another 
position in the identified straddle, over the fair market 
value of that position when you identified it as a position in 
the straddle.
If the application of the above rule does not result in the 
increase in basis of any offsetting position in the identified 
straddle, you must increase the basis of each of the offset-
ting positions in the straddle in a manner that:
• Is reasonable,
• Is consistently applied by you,
• Is consistent with the purposes of the identified strad-
dle rules, and
• Results in a total increase in the basis of those offset-
ting positions equal to the loss.
If you adopt an allocation method under this rule, you 
must describe that method in your books and records.
The identified straddle rules also apply to positions that 
are or have been a liability or obligation to you (for exam-
ple, a debt obligation you issued, a written option, or a no-
tional principal contract you entered into).
Neither you nor anyone else can take into account any 
loss on a position that is part of an identified straddle to 
the extent the loss increases the basis of any positions 
that offset the loss position in the identified straddle.
Note.  For positions established before October 22, 
2004, identified straddles have to meet two additional con-
ditions.
1. All the original positions that you identify were ac-
quired on the same day.
2. All the positions included in condition 1 were dis-
posed of on the same day during the tax year, or none 
of the positions were disposed of by the end of the tax 
year.
Also, the losses from positions are deferred until you dis-
pose of all the positions in the straddle. The rule dis-
cussed above for increasing the basis of each of the posi-
tions does not apply.
Qualified covered call options and optioned stock. 
A straddle is not subject to the loss deferral rules for strad-
dles if both of the following are true.
• All the offsetting positions consist of one or more 
qualified covered call options and the stock to be pur-
chased from you under the options.
• The straddle is not part of a larger straddle.
But see Special year-end rule, later, for an exception.
A qualified covered call option is any option you grant to 
purchase stock you hold (or stock you acquire in connec-
tion with granting the option), but only if all the following 
are true.
• The option is traded on a national securities exchange 
or other market approved by the Secretary of the 
T reasury.
• The option is granted more than 30 days before its ex-
piration date.
For covered call options entered into after July 28, 
2002, the option is granted not more than 12 months 
before its expiration date or satisfies term limitation 
and qualified benchmark requirements published in 
the Internal Revenue Bulletin.
• The option is not a deep-in-the-money option.
• Y ou are not an options dealer who granted the option 
in connection with your activity of dealing in options.
• Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or loss.
A deep -in-the-money option is an option with a strike 
price lower than the lowest qualified benchmark (LQB). 
The strike price is the price at which the option is to be ex-
ercised. Strike prices are listed in the financial sections of 
many newspapers. The LQB is the highest available strike 
price that is less than the applicable stock price. However, 
the LQB for an option with a term of more than 90 days 
and a strike price of more than $50 is the second -highest 
available strike price that is less than the applicable stock 
price.
The availability of strike prices for equity options with 
flexible terms does not affect the determination of the LQB 
for an option that is not an equity option with flexible 
terms.
The applicable stock price for any stock for which an 
option has been granted is:
1. The closing price of the stock on the most recent day 
on which that stock was traded before the date on 
which the option was granted; or
92 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 93 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. The opening price of the stock on the day on which 
the option was granted, but only if that price is greater 
than 110% of the price determined in (1).
If the applicable stock price is $25 or less, the LQB will 
be treated as not less than 85% of the applicable stock 
price. If the applicable stock price is $150 or less, the LQB 
will be treated as not less than an amount that is $10 be-
low the applicable stock price.
Example.  On May 10, 2024, you held XYZ stock and 
you wrote an XYZ/September call option with a strike price 
of $120. The closing price of one share of XYZ stock on 
May 9, 2024, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/
September call options offered on May 10, 2024, were as 
follows: $110, $115, $120, $125, $130, and $135. Be-
cause the option has a term of more than 90 days, the 
LQB is $125, the second -highest strike price that is less 
than $130.25, the applicable stock price. The call option is 
a deep -in-the-money option because its strike price is 
lower than the LQB. As a result, the option is not a quali-
fied covered call option, and the loss deferral rules apply if 
you closed out the option or the stock at a loss during the 
year.
Capital loss on qualified covered call options.  If 
you hold stock and you write a qualified covered call op-
tion on that stock with a strike price less than the applica-
ble stock price, treat any loss from the option as long -term 
capital loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gain on the 
sale or exchange of the stock would be treated as 
long-term capital gain. The holding period of the stock 
does not include any period during which you are the 
writer of the option.
Special year -end rule.  The loss deferral rules for 
straddles apply if all the following are true.
• The qualified covered call options are closed, or the 
stock is disposed of at a loss during any tax year.
• Gain on disposition of the stock or gain on the options 
is includible in gross income in a later tax year.
• The stock or options were held less than 30 days after 
the closing of the options or the disposition of the 
stock.
How To Report Gains and Losses (Form 
6781)
As a general rule, report each position (whether or not it is 
part of a straddle) on which you have unrecognized gain at 
the end of the tax year and the amount of this unrecog-
nized gain in Part III of Form 6781. Use Part II of Form 
6781 to figure your gains and losses on straddles. See the 
Form 6781 instructions for how to report these gains and 
losses.
Coordination of Loss Deferral Rules and 
Wash Sale Rules
Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to any disposi-
tion of a position or positions of a straddle. First apply 
Rule 1, explained next, then apply Rule 2. However, Rule 
1 applies only if stocks or securities make up a position 
that is part of the straddle. If a position in the straddle 
does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2.
Rule 1.  Y ou cannot deduct a loss on the disposition of 
shares of stock or securities that make up the positions of 
a straddle if, within a period beginning 30 days before the 
date of that disposition and ending 30 days after that date, 
you acquired substantially identical stock or securities. In-
stead, the loss will be carried over to the following tax 
year, subject to any further application of Rule 1 in that 
year. This rule will also apply if you entered into a contract 
or option to acquire the stock or securities within the time 
period described above. See Loss carryover , later, for 
more information about how to treat the loss in the follow-
ing tax year.
Dealers.  If you are a dealer in stock or securities, this 
loss treatment will not apply to any losses you sustained in 
the ordinary course of your business.
Example.  Y ou are not a dealer in stock or securities. 
On December 2, 2024, you bought stock in XX Corpora-
tion (XX stock) and an offsetting put option. On December 
9, 2024, there was $20 of unrealized gain in the put option 
and you sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By December 16, 
2024, the value of the put option had declined, eliminating 
all unrealized gain in the position. On December 16, you 
bought a second XX stock position that is substantially 
identical to the XX stock you sold on December 9. At the 
end of the year, there is no unrecognized gain in the put 
option or in the XX stock. Under these circumstances, the 
$20 loss will be disallowed for 2024 under Rule 1 be-
cause, within a period beginning 30 days before Decem-
ber 9 and ending 30 days after that date, you bought stock 
substantially identical to the XX stock you sold.
Rule 2.  Y ou cannot deduct a loss on the disposition of 
less than all the positions of a straddle (your loss position) 
to the extent that any unrecognized gain at the close of the 
tax year in one or more of the following positions is more 
than any loss disallowed under Rule 1.
• Successor positions.
• Offsetting positions to the loss position.
• Offsetting positions to any successor position.
Successor position.  A successor position is a posi-
tion that is or was at any time offsetting to a second posi-
tion if both the following conditions are met.
• The second position was offsetting to the loss position 
that was sold.
• The successor position is entered into during a period 
beginning 30 days before and ending 30 days after the 
sale of the loss position.
Example 1.  On November 4, 2024, you entered into 
offsetting long and short positions in non -section 1256 
contracts. On November 11, 2024, you disposed of the 
long position at a $10 loss. On November 18, 2024, you 
entered into a new long position (successor position) that 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 93

Page 94 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is offsetting to the retained short position, but not substan-
tially identical to the long position disposed of on Novem-
ber 11. Y ou held both positions through year end, at which 
time there was $10 of unrecognized gain in the successor 
long position and no unrecognized gain in the offsetting 
short position. Under these circumstances, the entire $10 
loss will be disallowed for 2024 because there is $10 of 
unrecognized gain in the successor long position.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except that at year end you have $4 of unrecognized gain 
in the successor long position and $6 of unrecognized 
gain in the offsetting short position. Under these circum-
stances, the entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2024 be-
cause there is a total of $10 of unrecognized gain in the 
successor long position and offsetting short position.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except that at year end you have $8 of unrecognized gain 
in the successor long position and $8 of unrecognized 
loss in the offsetting short position. Under these circum-
stances, $8 of the total $10 realized loss will be disallowed 
for 2024 because there is $8 of unrecognized gain in the 
successor long position.
Loss carryover.  If you have a disallowed loss that resul-
ted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2, you must carry it 
over to the next tax year and apply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to 
that carryover loss. For example, a loss disallowed in 2023 
under Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2024, unless the sub-
stantially identical stock or securities (which caused the 
loss to be disallowed in 2023) were disposed of during 
2024. In addition, the carryover loss will not be allowed in 
2024 if Rule 1 or Rule 2 disallows it.
Example.  The facts are the same as in the example 
under Rule 1. On December 29, 2025, you sell the second 
XX stock at a $20 loss and there is $40 of unrecognized 
gain in the put option. Under these circumstances, you 
cannot deduct in 2025 either the $20 loss disallowed in 
2024 or the $20 loss you incurred for the December 29, 
2025, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 does not apply because 
the substantially identical XX stock was sold during the 
year and no substantially identical stock or securities were 
bought within the 61 -day period. However, Rule 2 does 
apply because there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the put 
option, an offsetting position to the loss positions.
Capital loss carryover.  If the sale of a loss position 
would have resulted in a capital loss, you treat the carry-
over loss as a capital loss on the date it is allowed, even if 
you would treat the gain or loss on any successor posi-
tions as ordinary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of a 
loss position (in the case of section 1256 contracts) would 
have resulted in a 60% long -term capital loss and a 40% 
short-term capital loss, you treat the carryover loss under 
the 60/40 rule, even if you would treat any gain or loss on 
any successor positions as 100% long -term or short -term 
capital gain or loss.
Exceptions.  The rules for coordinating straddle losses 
and wash sales do not apply to the following loss situa-
tions.
• Loss on the sale of one or more positions in a hedging 
transaction. (Hedging transactions are described un-
der Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.)
• Loss on the sale of a loss position in a mixed straddle 
account. (See Mixed straddle account (Election C), 
later.)
• Loss on the sale of a position that is part of a straddle 
consisting only of section 1256 contracts.
Holding Period and Loss Treatment Rules
The holding period of a position in a straddle generally be-
gins no earlier than the date on which the straddle ends 
(the date you no longer hold an offsetting position). This 
rule does not apply to any position you held more than 1 
year before you established the straddle. But see Excep-
tions, later.
Example.  On March 10, 2023, you acquired gold. On 
January 10, 2024, you entered into an offsetting short gold 
forward contract (nonregulated futures contract). On April 
3, 2024, you disposed of the short gold forward contract at 
no gain or loss. On April 12, 2024, you sold the gold at a 
gain. Because the gold had been held for 1 year or less 
before the offsetting short position was entered into, the 
holding period for the gold begins on April 3, 2024, the 
date the straddle ended. Gain recognized on the sale of 
the gold will be treated as short-term capital gain.
Loss treatment.  T reat the loss on the sale of one or 
more positions (the loss position) of a straddle as a 
long-term capital loss if both the following are true.
• Y ou held (directly or indirectly) one or more offsetting 
positions to the loss position on the date you entered 
into the loss position.
• Y ou would have treated all gain or loss on one or more 
of the straddle positions as long-term capital gain or 
loss if you had sold these positions on the day you en-
tered into the loss position.
Mixed straddles. Special rules apply to a loss position 
that is part of a mixed straddle and that is a non -section 
1256 position. A mixed straddle is a straddle:
• That is not part of a larger straddle,
• In which all positions are held as capital assets,
• In which at least one (but not all) of the positions is a 
section 1256 contract, and
• For which the mixed straddle election (Election A, dis-
cussed later) has not been made.
T reat the loss as 60% long -term capital loss and 40% 
short-term capital loss if all the following conditions apply.
• Gain or loss from the sale of one or more of the strad-
dle positions that are section 1256 contracts would be 
considered gain or loss from the sale or exchange of a 
capital asset.
94 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 95 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The sale of no position in the straddle, other than a 
section 1256 contract, would result in a long-term cap-
ital gain or loss.
• Y ou have not made a straddle-by-straddle identifica-
tion election (Election B) or mixed straddle account 
election (Election C), both discussed later.
Example.  On March 4, 2024, you entered into a long 
gold forward contract. On July 15, 2024, you entered into 
an offsetting short gold regulated futures contract. Y ou did 
not make an election to offset gains and losses from posi-
tions in a mixed straddle. On August 5, 2024, you dis-
posed of the long forward contract at a loss. Because the 
gold forward contract was part of a mixed straddle and the 
disposition of this non -section 1256 position would not re-
sult in long -term capital loss, the loss recognized on the 
termination of the gold forward contract will be treated as 
a 60% long-term and 40% short-term capital loss.
Exceptions.  The special holding period and loss treat-
ment for straddle positions do not apply to positions that:
• Constitute part of a hedging transaction;
• Are included in a straddle consisting only of section 
1256 contracts; or
• Are included in a mixed straddle account (Election C), 
discussed later.
Mixed Straddle Elections
If you disposed of a position in a mixed straddle and make 
one of the elections described in the following discus-
sions, report your gain or loss as indicated in those dis-
cussions. If you do not make any of the elections, report 
your gain or loss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed of 
the section 1256 component of the straddle, enter the rec-
ognized loss (line 10, column (h)) or your gain (line 12, 
column (f)) in Part I of Form 6781, on line 1. Do not include 
it on line 11 or 13 (Part II).
Mixed straddle election (Election A). Y ou can elect out 
of the mark-to-market rule, discussed under Section 1256 
Contracts Marked to Market , earlier, for all section 1256 
contracts that are part of a mixed straddle. Instead, the 
gain and loss rules for straddles will apply to these con-
tracts. However, if you make this election for an option on 
a section 1256 contract, the gain or loss treatment dis-
cussed earlier under Options will apply, subject to the gain 
and loss rules for straddles.
Y ou can make this election if:
• At least one (but not all) of the positions is a section 
1256 contract, and
• Each position forming part of the straddle is clearly 
identified as being part of that straddle on the day the 
first section 1256 contract forming part of the straddle 
is acquired.
If you make this election, it will apply for all later years 
as well. It cannot be revoked without the consent of the 
IRS. If you made this election, check box A of Form 6781. 
Do not report the section 1256 component in Part I.
Other elections.  Y ou can avoid the 60% long-term capi-
tal loss treatment required for a non -section 1256 loss po-
sition that is part of a mixed straddle, described earlier, if 
you choose either of the two following elections to offset 
gains and losses for these positions.
• Election B. Make a separate identification of the posi-
tions of each mixed straddle for which you are electing 
this treatment (the straddle-by-straddle identification 
method).
• Election C. Establish a mixed straddle account for a 
class of activities for which gains and losses will be 
recognized and offset on a periodic basis.
These two elections are alternatives to the mixed straddle 
election. Y ou can choose only one of the three elections. 
Use Form 6781 to indicate your election choice by check-
ing box A, B, or C, whichever applies.
Straddle-by-straddle identification election (Elec-
tion B).  Under this election, you must clearly identify 
each position that is part of the identified mixed straddle 
by the earlier of:
• The close of the day the identified mixed straddle is 
established, or
• The time the position is disposed of.
If you dispose of a position in the mixed straddle before 
the end of the day on which the straddle is established, 
this identification must be made by the time you dispose 
of the position. Y ou are presumed to have properly identi-
fied a mixed straddle if independent verification is used.
If you make this election, any positions you held on the 
day before the election are deemed sold for their fair mar-
ket value at the close of the last business day before the 
day of the election. For elections made on or before Au-
gust 18, 2014, take this gain or loss into account when fig-
uring taxable income for the year in which the election was 
made. For elections made after August 18, 2014, take this 
gain or loss into account in the year you would have repor-
ted the gain or loss if the identified mixed straddle had not 
been established. In addition, when the gain or loss that 
accrued prior to the time the identified mixed straddle was 
established is taken into account, it will have the same 
character it would have had if the identified mixed straddle 
had not been established. See Regulations section 
1.1092(b)-6 for details.
The basic tax treatment of gain or loss under this elec-
tion depends on which side of the straddle produced the 
total net gain or loss. If the net gain or loss from the strad-
dle is due to the section 1256 contracts, gain or loss is 
treated as 60% long -term capital gain or loss and 40% 
short-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain or loss in 
Part I of Form 6781 and identify the election by checking 
box B.
If the net gain or loss is due to the non-section 1256 po-
sitions, gain or loss is short -term capital gain or loss. See 
the Form 6781 instructions for how to report the net gain 
or loss.
For the specific application of the rules of this election, 
see Regulations sections 1.1092(b)-3T and 1.1092(b)-6.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 95

Page 96 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1.  Straddle established on or before August 
18, 2014. On April 2, 2014, you entered into a non -section 
1256 position and an offsetting section 1256 contract. Y ou 
also made a valid election to treat this straddle as an iden-
tified mixed straddle. On April 9, 2014, you disposed of 
the non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and the sec-
tion 1256 contract at an $800 gain. Under these circum-
stances, the $600 loss on the non -section 1256 position 
was offset against the $800 gain on the section 1256 con-
tract. The net gain of $200 from the straddle was treated 
as 60% long-term capital gain and 40% short -term capital 
gain because it was due to the section 1256 contract.
Example 2.  Straddle established after August 18, 
2014. On December 1, 2023, you entered into a non -sec-
tion 1256 position for $100. At the end of the day on Janu-
ary 24, 2024, the position had a value of $500. On Janu-
ary 25, 2024, you entered into an offsetting section 1256 
position. Y ou elected to treat the straddle as an identified 
mixed straddle.
On February 12, 2024, you closed out the section 1256 
contract at a $500 loss and disposed of the non -section 
1256 position for $975. Prior to entering into the identified 
mixed straddle, you had a $400 unrealized short -term 
capital gain on the non -section 1256 position. When you 
disposed of the non -section 1256 position on February 
12, 2024, you recognized the $400 gain. This gain is fig-
ured as though you had disposed of the position on the 
day prior to establishing the identified mixed straddle.
Y ou also realized a gain of $475 ($975 proceeds – $500 
value before entering into the identified mixed straddle). 
This gain is offset by the $500 loss on the section 1256 
contract for a net loss of $25. This net loss is recognized 
and treated as 60% long -term capital loss and 40% 
short-term capital loss attributable to the section 1256 
contract.
Mixed straddle account (Election C).  Y ou may elect 
to establish one or more accounts for determining gains 
and losses from all positions in a mixed straddle. Y ou must 
establish a separate mixed straddle account for each sep-
arate designated class of activities.
Generally, you must determine gain or loss for each po-
sition in a mixed straddle account as of the close of each 
business day of the tax year. Y ou offset the net section 
1256 contracts against the net non -section 1256 positions 
to determine the “daily account net gain or loss.”
If the daily account amount is due to non -section 1256 
positions, the amount is treated as short -term capital gain 
or loss. If the daily account amount is due to section 1256 
contracts, the amount is treated as 60% long -term and 
40% short-term capital gain or loss.
On the last business day of the tax year, you determine 
the “annual account net gain or loss” for each account by 
netting the daily account amounts for that account for the 
tax year. The “total annual account net gain or loss” is de-
termined by netting the annual account amounts for all 
mixed straddle accounts that you had established.
The net amounts keep their long -term or short -term 
classification. However, no more than 50% of the total an-
nual account net gain for the tax year can be treated as 
long-term capital gain. Any remaining gain is treated as 
short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40% of the to-
tal annual account net loss can be treated as short -term 
capital loss. Any remaining loss is treated as long -term 
capital loss.
The election to establish one or more mixed straddle 
accounts for each tax year must be made by the due date 
(without extensions) of your income tax return for the im-
mediately preceding tax year. If you begin trading in a new 
class of activities during a tax year, you must make the 
election for the new class of activities by the later of either:
• The due date of your return for the immediately pre-
ceding tax year (without extensions), or
• 60 days after you entered into the first mixed straddle 
in the new class of activities.
Y ou make the election on Form 6781 by checking box 
C. Attach Form 6781 to your income tax return for the im-
mediately preceding tax year, or file it within 60 days, if 
that applies. Report the annual account net gain or loss 
from a mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781. In 
addition, you must attach a statement to Form 6781 spe-
cifically designating the class of activities for which a 
mixed straddle account is established.
For the specific application of the rules of this election, 
see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-4T .
Interest expense and carrying charges relating to 
mixed straddle account positions.  Y ou cannot deduct 
interest and carrying charges that are allocable to any po-
sitions held in a mixed straddle account. T reat these 
charges as an adjustment to the annual account net gain 
or loss and allocate them proportionately between the net 
short-term and the net long-term capital gains or losses.
T o find the amount of interest and carrying charges that 
is not deductible and that must be added to the annual ac-
count net gain or loss, apply the rules described earlier to 
the positions held in the mixed straddle account. See In-
terest expense and carrying charges on straddles in chap-
ter 3.
For special rules on the deferral of gain related to a 
straddle where the gain is invested in a Qualified Opportu-
nity Fund, see section 1400Z-2 for more details.
Sales of Stock to Employee Stock 
Ownership Plans (ESOPs) or Certain
Cooperatives
If you sold qualified securities held for at least 3 years to 
an ESOP or eligible worker -owned cooperative, you may 
be able to elect to postpone all or part of the gain on the 
sale if you bought qualified replacement property (certain 
securities) within the period that began 3 months before 
the sale and ended 12 months after the sale. If you make 
the election, you must recognize gain on the sale only to 
the extent the proceeds from the sale exceed the cost of 
the qualified replacement property.
Y ou must reduce the basis of the replacement property 
by any postponed gain. If you dispose of any replacement 
property, you may have to recognize all of the postponed 
gain.
96 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 97 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Generally, to qualify for the election, the ESOP or coop-
erative must own at least 30% of the outstanding stock of 
the corporation that issued the qualified securities. Also, 
the qualified replacement property must have been issued 
by a domestic operating corporation.
How to make the election.  Y ou must make the election 
no later than the due date (including extensions) for filing 
your tax return for the year in which you sold the stock. If 
your original return was filed on time, you may make the 
election on an amended return filed no later than 6 months 
after the due date of your return (excluding extensions). 
Enter “Filed pursuant to section 301. 9100-2” at the top of 
the amended return and file it at the same address you 
used for your original return.
How to report and postpone gain.  Report the sale 
in Part II of Form 8949 as you would if you were not mak-
ing the election. Then enter “R” in column (f). Enter the 
amount of the postponed gain as a negative number in 
column (g). Put it in parentheses to show it is negative. 
Complete all remaining columns. If the actual postponed 
gain is different from the amount you report, file an amen-
ded return.
Report your sales of stock to ESOPs or certain 
cooperatives on Form 8949 with the correct box 
checked for these transactions. See Form 8949 
and the Instructions for Form 8949.
Also attach the following statements.
1. A “statement of election” that indicates you are mak-
ing an election under section 1042(a) of the Internal 
Revenue Code and that includes the following infor-
mation.
a. A description of the securities sold, including the 
type and number of shares, the date of the sale, 
the amount realized on the sale, and the adjusted 
basis of the securities.
b. The name of the ESOP or cooperative to which 
the qualified securities were sold.
c. For a sale that was part of a single interrelated 
transaction under a prearranged agreement be-
tween taxpayers involving other sales of qualified 
securities, the names and identifying numbers of 
the other taxpayers under the agreement and the 
number of shares sold by the other taxpayers.
2. A notarized “statement of purchase” describing the 
qualified replacement property, date of purchase, and 
the cost of the property and declaring the property to 
be qualified replacement property for the qualified 
stock you sold. The statement must have been nota-
rized no later than 30 days after the purchase. If you 
have not yet purchased the qualified replacement 
property, you must attach the notarized “statement of 
purchase” to your income tax return for the year fol-
lowing the election year (or the election will not be 
valid).
3. A verified written statement of the domestic corpora-
tion whose employees are covered by the ESOP 
CAUTION
!
acquiring the securities, or of any authorized officer of 
the cooperative, consenting to the taxes under sec-
tions 4978 and 4979A of the Internal Revenue Code 
on certain dispositions, and prohibited allocations of 
the stock purchased by the ESOP or cooperative.
More information.  For details, see section 1042 of the 
Internal Revenue Code and Regulations section 
1.1042-1T .
Gains on Qualified Small Business 
Stock
This section discusses two provisions of the law that may 
apply to gain from the sale or trade of qualified small busi-
ness stock. Y ou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of all or 
part of the gain. Y ou may be able to exclude gain from 
your income.
Qualified small business stock.  This is stock that 
meets all the following tests.
1. It must be stock in a C corporation.
2. It must have been originally issued after August 10, 
1993.
3. The corporation must have total gross assets of $50 
million or less at all times after August 9, 1993, and 
before it issued the stock. Its total gross assets imme-
diately after it issued the stock must also be $50 mil-
lion or less.
When figuring the corporation's total gross assets, 
you must also count the assets of any predecessor of 
the corporation. In addition, you must treat all corpora-
tions that are members of the same parent -subsidiary 
controlled group as one corporation.
4. Y ou must have acquired the stock at its original issue, 
directly or through an underwriter, in exchange for 
money or other property (not including stock), or as 
pay for services provided to the corporation (other 
than services performed as an underwriter of the 
stock). In certain cases, your stock may also meet this 
test if you acquired it from another person who met 
this test, or through a conversion or trade of qualified 
small business stock that you held.
5. The corporation must have met the active business 
test, defined next, and must have been a C corpora-
tion during substantially all the time you held the 
stock.
6. Within the period beginning 2 years before and end-
ing 2 years after the stock was issued, the corporation 
cannot have bought more than a de minimis amount 
of its stock from you or a related party.
7. Within the period beginning 1 year before and ending 
1 year after the stock was issued, the corporation can-
not have bought more than a de minimis amount of its 
stock from anyone, unless the total value of the stock 
it bought is 5% or less of the total value of all its stock.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 97

Page 98 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information about tests 6 and 7, see the regula-
tions under section 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Active business test.  A corporation meets this test for 
any period of time if, during that period, both the following 
are true.
• It was an eligible corporation, defined below.
• It used at least 80% (by value) of its assets in the ac-
tive conduct of at least one qualified trade or business, 
defined below.
Exception for Specialized Small Business Invest-
ment Company (SSBIC). Any SSBIC is treated as meet-
ing the active business test. An SSBIC is an eligible cor-
poration licensed to operate under section 301(d) of the 
Small Business Investment Act of 1958, as in effect on 
May 13, 1993.
Eligible corporation.  This is any U.S. corporation 
other than:
• A Domestic International Sales Corporation (DISC) or 
a former DISC;
• A corporation that has made, or whose subsidiary has 
made, an election under section 936 of the Internal 
Revenue Code;
• A regulated investment company;
• A REIT;
• A REMIC;
• Certain financial asset securitization investment trusts 
(FASIT s); or
• A cooperative.
Qualified trade or business.  This is any trade or 
business other than:
• One involving services performed in the fields of 
health, law, engineering, architecture, accounting, ac-
tuarial science, performing arts, consulting, athletics, 
financial services, or brokerage services;
• One whose principal asset is the reputation or skill of 
one or more employees;
• Any banking, insurance, financing, leasing, investing, 
or similar business;
• Any farming business (including the business of rais-
ing or harvesting trees);
• Any business involving the production or extraction of 
products for which percentage depletion can be 
claimed; or
• Any business of operating a hotel, motel, restaurant, 
or similar business.
Rollover of Gain
Y ou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capital gain from 
the sale of qualified small business stock held more than 6 
months. This means that, if you buy certain replacement 
stock and make the choice described in this section, you 
postpone part or all of your gain.
Y ou postpone the gain by adjusting the basis of the re-
placement stock as described in Basis of replacement 
stock, later. This postpones your gain until the year you 
dispose of the replacement stock.
Y ou can make this choice if you meet all the following 
tests.
• Y ou buy replacement stock during the 60-day period 
beginning on the date of the sale.
• The replacement stock is qualified small business 
stock.
• The replacement stock continues to meet the active 
business requirement for small business stock for at 
least the first 6 months after you buy it.
Amount of gain recognized.  If you make the choice de-
scribed in this section, you must recognize the capital gain 
only up to the following amount.
• The amount realized on the sale, minus
• The cost of any qualified small business stock you 
bought during the 60-day period beginning on the date 
of sale (and did not previously take into account on an 
earlier sale of qualified small business stock).
If this amount is less than the amount of your capital gain, 
you can postpone the rest of that gain. If this amount 
equals or is more than the amount of your capital gain, you 
must recognize the full amount of your gain.
Basis of replacement stock.  Y ou must subtract the 
amount of postponed gain from the basis of your replace-
ment stock.
Holding period of replacement stock. Y our holding pe-
riod for the replacement stock includes your holding pe-
riod for the stock sold, except for the purpose of applying 
the 6 -month holding period requirement for choosing to 
roll over the gain on its sale.
Pass-through entity.  A pass -through entity (a partner-
ship, S corporation, or mutual fund or other regulated in-
vestment company) may also make the choice to post-
pone gain. The benefit of the postponed gain applies to 
your share of the entity's postponed gain if you held an in-
terest in the entity for the entire period the entity held the 
stock.
If a pass -through entity sold qualified small business 
stock held for more than 6 months and you held an inter-
est in the entity for the entire period the entity held the 
stock, you may also choose to postpone gain if you, rather 
than the pass -through entity, buy the replacement stock 
within the 60-day period.
How to report gain.  Report the entire gain realized from 
the sale in Part I or Part II of Form 8949. T o make the elec-
tion to postpone gain, report the gain as you would if you 
were not making the election. Enter “R” in column (f). En-
ter the amount of the postponed gain as a negative num-
ber in column (g). Put it in parentheses to show it is nega-
tive. Complete all remaining columns.
98 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 99 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Report these transactions on Form 8949 with the 
correct box checked. See Form 8949 and the In-
structions for Form 8949.
Y ou must make the choice to postpone gain no later 
than the due date (including extensions) for filing your tax 
return for the year in which you sold the stock. If your origi-
nal return was filed on time, you may make the choice on 
an amended return filed no later than 6 months after the 
due date of your return (excluding extensions). Enter 
“Filed pursuant to section 301. 9100-2” at the top of the 
amended return and file it at the same address you used 
for your original return.
Section 1202 Exclusion
Y ou can generally exclude from your income up to 50% of 
your gain from the sale or trade of qualified small business 
stock held by you for more than 5 years. The exclusion 
can be up to 75% for stock acquired after February 17, 
2009, and no later than September 27, 2010, and up to 
100% for stock acquired after September 27, 2010. The 
exclusion can be up to 60% for certain empowerment 
zone business stock for gain attributable to periods on or 
before December 31, 2018. The 60% exclusion doesn't 
apply to gain attributable to periods after December 31, 
2018. See Empowerment zone business stock , later. The 
eligible gain minus your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% 
rate gain. See Capital Gain T ax Rates, later.
Specialized Small Business Investment Company 
(SSBIC) stock. If the stock is SSBIC stock you bought as 
replacement property for publicly traded securities you 
sold at a gain before 2018, you must reduce the basis of 
the stock by the amount of any postponed gain on that 
earlier sale. But do not reduce your basis by that amount 
when figuring your section 1202 exclusion.
Limit on eligible gain.  The amount of your gain from 
the stock of any one issuer that is eligible for the exclusion 
in 2022 is limited to the greater of:
• T en times your basis in all qualified stock of the issuer 
you sold or exchanged during the year; or
• $10 million ($5 million for married individuals filing 
separately), minus the amount of gain from the stock 
of the same issuer you used to figure your exclusion in 
earlier years.
How to report gain.  Report the sale or exchange on 
Form 8949, Part II, with the appropriate box checked, as 
you would if you were not taking the exclusion. Then enter 
“Q” in column (f) and enter the amount of the excluded 
gain as a negative number in column (g). Put it in paren-
theses to show it is negative. Complete all remaining col-
umns. If you are completing line 18 of Schedule D (Form 
1040), enter as a positive number the amount of the exclu-
sion on line 2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the 
Schedule D (Form 1040) instructions. But if you exclude 
60% of the gain, enter 2/3 of the exclusion. If you exclude 
75% of the gain, enter 1/3 of the exclusion. If you exclude 
100% of the gain, do not enter an amount.
CAUTION
!
Report these transactions on Form 8949 with the 
correct box checked. See Form 8949 and the In-
structions for Form 8949.
More information.  For information about additional re-
quirements that may apply, see section 1202 of the Inter-
nal Revenue Code.
Empowerment zone business stock.  Y ou can exclude 
up to 60% of your gain if you meet all the following addi-
tional requirements.
1. Y ou sell or trade stock in a corporation that qualifies 
as an empowerment zone business during substan-
tially all of the time you held the stock.
2. Y ou acquired the stock after December 21, 2000, and 
before February 18, 2009.
3. The gain from the sale or exchange of the stock is at-
tributable to periods on or before December 31, 2018.
Condition 1 will still be met if the corporation ceased to 
qualify after the 5 -year period that begins on the date you 
acquired the stock. However, the gain that qualifies for the 
60% exclusion cannot be more than the gain you would 
have had if you had sold the stock on the date the corpo-
ration ceased to qualify.
Note.  If either the 75% or 100% exclusion applies, 
then the 60% exclusion does not apply.
Exclusion of Gain From DC Zone 
Assets
If you sold or exchanged a District of Columbia Enterprise 
Zone (DC Zone) asset that you acquired after 1997 and 
before 2012 and held for more than 5 years, you may be 
able to exclude the amount of qualified capital gain that 
you would otherwise include in income. The exclusion ap-
plies to an interest in, or property of, certain businesses 
operating in the District of Columbia.
How to report.  Report the sale or exchange on Form 
8949, Part II, as you would if you were not taking the exclu-
sion. Enter “X” in column (f) and enter the amount of the 
exclusion as a negative number in column (g). Put the 
amount in parentheses to show it is negative. See the in-
structions for Form 8949, columns (f), (g), and (h). Com-
plete all remaining columns.
Rollover of Gain From Empowerment 
Zone Assets
The election to roll over gain from the sale of empower-
ment zone assets doesn’t apply to sales in tax years be-
ginning after 2020. See section 1397B.
CAUTION
!
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 99

Page 100 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting Capital Gains and 
Losses
If, in 2024, you disposed of any digital asset, 
which you held as a capital asset, through a sale, 
trade, exchange, payment, or other transfer, 
check "Y es" and use Form 8949 to calculate your capital 
gain or loss and report that gain or loss on Schedule D 
(Form 1040). For more information on how to report Digital 
Asset T ransactions, see Form1040 Instructions.
Generally, report capital gains and losses on Form 
8949. Complete Form 8949 before you complete line 1b, 
2, 3, 8b, 9, or 10 of Schedule D (Form 1040).
Use Form 8949 to report:
• The sale or exchange of a capital asset not reported 
on another form or schedule,
• Gains from involuntary conversions (other than from 
casualty or theft) of capital assets not held for busi-
ness or profit,
• Nonbusiness bad debts, and
• Worthlessness of a security.
Use Schedule D (Form 1040) to report:
• Overall gain or loss from transactions reported on 
Form 8949;
• Certain transactions you do not have to report on 
Form 8949;
• Gain from Form 2439 or 6252 or Part I of Form 4797;
• Gain or loss from Form 4684, 6781, or 8824;
• Gain or loss from a partnership, S corporation, estate, 
or trust;
• Capital gain distributions not reported directly on your 
Form 1040; and
• Capital loss carryover from the previous year to the 
current year.
On Form 8949, enter all sales and exchanges of capital 
assets, including stocks, bonds, etc., and real estate (if 
not reported on Form 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, 8824, or 
line 1a or 8a of Schedule D (Form 1040). Include these 
transactions even if you did not receive a Form 1099 -B or 
Form 1099 -S, Proceeds From Real Estate T ransactions, 
for the transaction. Report short -term gains or losses in 
Part I. Report long -term gains or losses in Part II. Use as 
many Forms 8949 as you need.
Exceptions to filing Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 
1040). There are certain situations where you may not 
have to file Form 8949 and/or Schedule D (Form 1040).
Exception 1.  Y ou do not have to file Form 8949 or 
Schedule D (Form 1040) if you have no capital losses and 
your only capital gains are capital gain distributions from 
box 2a of Form(s) 1099 -DIV . If any Form 1099-DIV you 
receive has an amount in box 2b (unrecaptured section 
TIP
1250 gain), box 2c (section 1202 gain), or box 2d (collecti-
bles (28%) gain), you do not qualify for this exception.
If you qualify for this exception, report your capital gain 
distributions directly on Form 1040, line 7, and check the 
box on that line. Also use the Qualified Dividends and 
Capital Gain T ax Worksheet in the Instructions for Forms 
1040 to figure your tax.
Exception 2.  Y ou must file Schedule D (Form 1040), 
but generally do not have to file Form 8949, if Exception 1 
above does not apply and your only capital gains and los-
ses are:
• Capital gain distributions;
• A capital loss carryover;
• A gain from Form 2439 or 6252 or Part I of Form 4797;
• A gain or loss from Form 4684, 6781, or 8824;
• A gain or loss from a partnership, S corporation, es-
tate, or trust; or
• Gains and losses from transactions for which you re-
ceived a Form 1099-B that shows basis was reported 
to the IRS, for which the Ordinary box in box 2 is not 
checked, and for which you do not need to make any 
adjustments in column (g) of Form 8949 or enter any 
codes in column (f) of Form 8949.
Installment sales.  Y ou cannot use the installment 
method to report a gain from the sale of stock or securities 
traded on an established securities market. Y ou must re-
port the entire gain in the year of sale (the year in which 
the trade date occurs).
At-risk rules.  Special at -risk rules apply to most in-
come-producing activities. These rules limit the amount of 
loss you can deduct to the amount you risk losing in the 
activity. The at-risk rules also apply to a loss from the sale 
or trade of an asset used in an activity to which the at -risk 
rules apply. For more information, see Pub. 925. Use Form 
6198, At-Risk Limitations, to figure the amount of loss you 
can deduct.
Passive activity gains and losses.  If you have gains or 
losses from a passive activity, you may also have to report 
them on Form 8582. In some cases, the loss may be limi-
ted under the passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 
and its instructions for more information about reporting 
capital gains and losses from a passive activity.
Form 1099-B transactions. If you sold property, such as 
stocks, bonds, or certain commodities, through a broker, 
you should receive Form 1099 -B from the broker. Use the 
Form 1099-B to complete Form 8949 and/or Schedule D 
(Form 1040).
If you received a Form 1099 -B for a transaction, you 
usually report the transaction on Form 8949. Report the 
proceeds shown in box 1d of Form 1099 -B in column (d) 
of either Part I or Part II of Form 8949, whichever applies.
Include in column (g) any selling expenses or option 
premiums not reflected in box 1d or box 1e of Form 
1099-B. If you include a selling expense in column (g), en-
ter “E” in column (f).
100 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 101 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Enter the basis shown in box 1e in column (e). If the ba-
sis shown on Form 1099 -B is not correct, see the table 
How T o Complete Form 8949, Columns (f) and (g), in the 
Instructions for Form 8949 for the adjustment you must 
make. If no basis is shown on Form 1099 -B, enter the cor-
rect basis of the property in column (e). See the instruc-
tions for Form 1099-B, Form 8949, and Schedule D (Form 
1040) for more information.
Example 1.  Y ou sold 100 shares of Fund HIJ for 
$2,500. Y ou paid a $75 commission to the broker for han-
dling the sale. Y our Form 1099-B shows that the net sales 
proceeds, $2,425 ($2,500 − $75), were reported to the 
IRS. Report $2,425 in column (d) of Form 8949. Complete 
columns (a), (b), (c), and (e).
Example 2.  Y ou sold 200 shares of Fund KLM for 
$10,000. Y ou paid a $100 commission at the time of the 
sale. The broker reported the gross proceeds to the IRS 
on Form 1099 -B, so on Form 8949, you enter “E” in col-
umn (f), $10,000 in column (d), and $100 as a negative 
adjustment in column (g). Complete all remaining col-
umns.
Section 1256 contracts and straddles.  Use Form 
6781 to report gains and losses from section 1256 con-
tracts and straddles before entering these amounts on 
Schedule D (Form 1040). Include a copy of Form 6781 
with your income tax return.
Market discount bonds. Report the sale or trade of a 
market discount bond on Part I or Part II of Form 8949, 
whichever is appropriate. See the table How T o Complete 
Form 8949, Columns (f) and (g), in the Instructions for 
Form 8949 to help you figure the amounts to report for a 
sale or trade of a market discount bond. Use the Work-
sheet for Accrued Market Discount Adjustment in Column 
(g) in those instructions to figure the adjusted accrued 
market discount. Also report the amount of accrued mar-
ket discount as interest income on Schedule B (Form 
1040), line 1, and identify it as “Accrued Market Discount.” 
See the Instructions for Form 8949 for more information.
Form 1099-CAP transactions. If a corporation in which 
you own stock has had a change in control or a substantial 
change in capital structure, you should receive Form 
1099-CAP , Changes in Corporate Control and Capital 
Structure, from the corporation. Use the Form 1099 -CAP 
to fill in Form 8949. If your computations show that you 
would have a loss because of the change, do not enter 
any amounts on Form 8949 or Schedule D (Form 1040) as 
a result of this transaction.
Report the aggregate amount received shown in box 2 
of Form 1099 -CAP as the sales price in column (d) of ei-
ther Part I or Part II of Form 8949, whichever applies.
Form 1099-S transactions. If you sold or traded reporta-
ble real estate, you should generally receive from the real 
estate reporting person a Form 1099 -S showing the gross 
proceeds.
“Reportable real estate” is defined as any present or fu-
ture ownership interest in any of the following.
• Improved or unimproved land, including air space.
• Inherently permanent structures, including any resi-
dential, commercial, or industrial building.
• A condominium unit and its accessory fixtures and 
common elements, including land.
• Stock in a cooperative housing corporation (as de-
fined in section 216 of the Internal Revenue Code).
• Any noncontingent interest in standing timber.
A “real estate reporting person” could include the buy-
er's attorney, your attorney, the title or escrow company, a 
mortgage lender, your broker, the buyer's broker, or the 
person acquiring the biggest interest in the property.
Y our Form 1099-S will show the gross proceeds from 
the sale or exchange in box 2. See the Instructions for 
Form 8949 and the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 
1040) for how to report these transactions and include 
them in Part I or Part II of Form 8949, as appropriate. How-
ever, report like-kind exchanges on Form 8824 instead.
It is unlawful for any real estate reporting person to sep-
arately charge you for complying with the requirement to 
file Form 1099-S.
Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a nominee 
(that is, the gross proceeds are in your name but actually 
belong to someone else), see the Instructions for Form 
8949 for how to report these amounts on Form 8949.
File Form 1099 -B or Form 1099 -S with the IRS.  If 
you received gross proceeds as a nominee in 2024, you 
must file a Form 1099 -B or Form 1099 -S for those pro-
ceeds with the IRS. Send the Form 1099 -B or Form 
1099-S with a Form 1096 to your Internal Revenue Serv-
ice Center by February 28, 2025 (March 31, 2025, if you 
file Form 1099-B or Form 1099 -S electronically). Give the 
actual owner of the proceeds Copy B of the Form 1099 -B 
or Form 1099 -S by February 17, 2025. On Form 1099 -B, 
you should be listed as the “Payer.” The actual owner 
should be listed as the “Recipient.” On Form 1099 -S, you 
should be listed as the “Filer.” The actual owner should be 
listed as the “T ransferor.” Y ou do not have to file a Form 
1099-B or Form 1099 -S to show proceeds for your 
spouse. For more information about the reporting require-
ments and the penalties for failure to file (or furnish) cer-
tain information returns, see the General Instructions for 
Certain Information Returns.
Sale of property bought at various times.  If you sell a 
block of stock or other property that you bought at various 
times, report the short -term gain or loss from the sale on 
one row in Part I of Form 8949 and the long -term gain or 
loss on one row in Part II of Form 8949. Enter “Various” in 
column (b) for the “Date acquired.”
Sale expenses.  On Form 8949, include in column (g) 
any expense of sale, such as broker's fees, commissions, 
state and local transfer taxes, and option premiums, un-
less you reported the net sales price in column (d). If you 
include an expense of sale in column (g), enter “E” in col-
umn (f).
Short-term gains and losses.  Capital gain or loss on 
the sale or trade of investment property held 1 year or less 
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 101

Page 102 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is a short-term capital gain or loss. Y ou report it in Part I of 
Form 8949.
Y ou combine your share of short -term capital gain or 
loss from partnerships, S corporations, and fiduciaries, 
and any short -term capital loss carryover, with your other 
short-term capital gains and losses to figure your net 
short-term capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D 
(Form 1040).
Long-term gains and losses.  A capital gain or loss on 
the sale or trade of investment property held more than 1 
year is a long-term capital gain or loss. Y ou report it in Part 
II of Form 8949.
Y ou also report the following in Part II of Schedule D 
(Form 1040).
• Undistributed long-term capital gains from a mutual 
fund (or other regulated investment company) or REIT .
• Y our share of long-term capital gains or losses from 
partnerships, S corporations, and fiduciaries.
• All capital gain distributions from mutual funds and 
REIT s not reported directly on Form 1040, line 7.
• Long-term capital loss carryovers.
The result after combining these items with your other 
long-term capital gains and losses is your net long -term 
capital gain or loss (line 15 of Schedule D (Form 1040)).
Total net gain or loss.  T o figure your total net gain or 
loss, combine your net short -term capital gain or loss 
(Schedule D (Form 1040), line 7) with your net long -term 
capital gain or loss (Schedule D (Form 1040), line 15). En-
ter the result on Schedule D (Form 1040), Part III, line 16. 
If your losses are more than your gains, see Capital Los-
ses, next. If both lines 15 and 16 of your Schedule D 
(Form 1040) are gains and your taxable income on your 
Form 1040 is greater than zero, see Capital Gain T ax 
Rates, later.
Capital Losses
If your capital losses are more than your capital gains, you 
can claim a capital loss deduction. Report the deduction 
on Form 1040, line 7, enclosed in parentheses.
Limit on deduction.  Y our allowable capital loss deduc-
tion, figured on Schedule D (Form 1040), is the lesser of:
• $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file a separate 
return), or
• Y our total net loss as shown on line 16 of Schedule D 
(Form 1040).
Y ou can use your total net loss to reduce your income dol-
lar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.
Capital loss carryover.  If you have a total net loss on 
line 16 of Schedule D (Form 1040) that is more than the 
yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you can carry over 
the unused part to the next year and treat it as if you had 
incurred it in that next year. If part of the loss is still un-
used, you can carry it over to later years until it is com-
pletely used up.
Worksheet 4-1. Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet Keep for Y our Records
Use this worksheet to figure your capital loss carryovers from 2024 to 2025 if Schedule D (Form 1040), line 21, is a loss 
and (a) that loss is a smaller loss than the loss on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 16, or (b) if the amount on your 2024 
Form 1040, line 15, would be less than zero if you could enter a negative amount on that line. Otherwise, you do not have 
any carryovers.
1. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 15. If the amount would have been a loss and if you could enter a 
negative number on that line, enclose the amount in parentheses ............................... 1.  
2. Enter the loss from Schedule D (Form 1040), line 21, as a positive amount ........................ 2.  
3. Combine lines 1 and 2. If zero or less, enter -0- ............................................... 3.  
4. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 3 ......................................................... 4.  
If line 7 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 5; otherwise, enter -0- on line 5 and go to line 9.
5. Enter the loss from Schedule D (Form 1040), line 7, as a positive amount ......................... 5.  
6. Enter any gain from Schedule D (Form 1040), line 15. If a loss, enter -0- ........... 6.  
7. Add lines 4 and 6 ....................................................................... 7.  
8. Short-term capital loss carryover to 2025. Subtract line 7 from line 5. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... 8.  
If line 15 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 9; otherwise, skip lines 9 through 13.
9. Enter the loss from Schedule D (Form 1040), line 15, as a positive amount ........................ 9.  
10. Enter any gain from Schedule D (Form 1040), line 7. If a loss, enter -0- ............ 10.  
11. Subtract line 5 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0- ............................. 11.  
12. Add lines 10 and 11 ..................................................................... 12.  
13. Long-term capital loss carryover to 2025. Subtract line 12 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0- ..... 13.  
102 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 103 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
When you figure the amount of any capital loss carry-
over to the next year, you must take the current year's al-
lowable deduction into account, whether or not you 
claimed it and whether or not you filed a return for the cur-
rent year.
When you carry over a loss, it remains long term or 
short term. A long -term capital loss you carry over to the 
next tax year will reduce that year's long-term capital gains 
before it reduces that year's short-term capital gains.
Figuring your carryover.  The amount of your capital 
loss carryover is the amount of your total net loss that is 
more than the lesser of:
1. Y our allowable capital loss deduction for the year, or
2. Y our taxable income increased by your allowable cap-
ital loss deduction for the year.
If your deductions are more than your gross income for 
the tax year, use your negative taxable income in figuring 
the amount in (2) above.
Complete Worksheet 4-1 to determine the part of your 
capital loss that you can carry over.
Example.  Bob and Shelly sold securities in 2024. The 
sales resulted in a capital loss of $7,000. They had no 
other capital transactions. Their taxable income was 
$26,000. On their joint 2024 return, they can deduct 
$3,000. The unused part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − 
$3,000), can be carried over to 2025.
If their capital loss had been $2,000, their capital loss 
deduction would have been $2,000. They would have no 
carryover.
Use short -term losses first.  When you figure your 
capital loss carryover, use your short -term capital losses 
first, even if you incurred them after a long -term capital 
loss. If you have not reached the limit on the capital loss 
deduction after using the short -term capital losses, use 
the long-term capital losses until you reach the limit.
Decedent's capital loss. A capital loss sustained by a 
decedent during the decedent’s last tax year (or carried 
over to that year from an earlier year) can be deducted 
only on the final income tax return filed for the decedent. 
The capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply in this 
situation. The decedent's estate cannot deduct any of the 
loss or carry it over to following years.
Joint and separate returns.  If you and your spouse 
once filed separate returns and are now filing a joint re-
turn, combine your separate capital loss carryovers. How-
ever, if you and your spouse once filed a joint return and 
are now filing separate returns, any capital loss carryover 
from the joint return can be deducted only on the return of 
the spouse who actually had the loss.
Capital Gain Tax Rates
The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are generally 
lower than the tax rates that apply to other income. These 
lower rates are called the maximum capital gain rates.
The term “net capital gain” means the amount by which 
your net long -term capital gain for the year is more than 
your net short-term capital loss.
For 2023, the maximum capital gain rates are 0%, 15%, 
20%, 25%, and 28%. See T able 4-4 for details.
If you figure your tax using the maximum capital 
gain rate and the regular tax computation results 
in a lower tax, the regular tax computation applies.
Example.  All of your net capital gain is from selling 
collectibles, so the capital gain rate would be 28%. If you 
are otherwise subject to a rate lower than 28%, the 28% 
rate does not apply.
TIP
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 103

Page 104 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Investment interest deducted. If you claim a deduction 
for investment interest, you may have to reduce the 
amount of your net capital gain that is eligible for the capi-
tal gain tax rates. Reduce it by the amount of the net capi-
tal gain you choose to include in investment income when 
figuring the limit on your investment interest deduction. 
This is done on the Schedule D T ax Worksheet or the 
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain T ax Worksheet. For 
more information about the limit on investment interest, 
see Interest Expenses in chapter 3.
28% rate gain.  This gain includes gain or loss from the 
sale of collectibles and the eligible gain from the sale of 
qualified small business stock minus the section 1202 ex-
clusion.
Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain or loss from the 
sale or trade of a work of art, rug, antique, metal (such as 
gold, silver, and platinum bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or al-
coholic beverage held more than 1 year.
Collectibles gain includes gain from the sale of an inter-
est in a partnership, S corporation, or trust due to unreal-
ized appreciation of collectibles.
Gain on qualified small business stock.  If you real-
ized a gain from qualified small business stock that you 
held more than 5 years, you can generally exclude some 
or all of your gain under section 1202. The eligible gain mi-
nus your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain. See 
Gains on Qualified Small Business Stock , earlier in this 
chapter.
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain.  Generally, this is any 
part of your capital gain from selling section 1250 property 
(real property) that is due to depreciation (but not more 
than your net section 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss 
in the 28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250 
Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D (Form 1040) instruc-
tions to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain. For 
more information about section 1250 property and section 
1231 gain, see chapter 3 of Pub. 544.
Tax computation using maximum capital gain rates. 
Use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain T ax Work-
sheet or the Schedule D T ax Worksheet (whichever ap-
plies) to figure your tax if you have qualified dividends or 
net capital gain. Y ou have net capital gain if Schedule D 
(Form 1040), lines 15 and 16, are both gains.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet.  Use the Schedule D 
T ax Worksheet in the Schedule D (Form 1040) instructions 
to figure your tax if:
• Y ou have to file Schedule D (Form 1040); and
• Schedule D (Form 1040), line 18 (28% rate gain) or 
line 19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), is more than 
zero.
T able 4-4. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
IF your net capital gain is from... AND...
THEN your maximum 
capital gain rate is...
collectibles gain 28%
eligible gain on qualified small business stock minus 
the section 1202 exclusion 28%
unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25%
other gain 1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 
37%
your taxable income is...
$583,751 or more if married filing jointly or surviving 
spouse;
$551,351 or more if head of household;
$291,851 or more if married filing separately;
$518,901 or more if single; or
$15,451 or more if estate or trust… 20%
other gain 1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 
22%, 24%, 32%, or 35% 
your taxable income is...
$94,051 – $583,750 if married filing jointly or surviving 
spouse;
$63,001 – $551,350 if head of household;
$47,026 – $291,850 if married filing separately;
$47,026 – $518,900 if single; or
$3,151 – $15,450 if estate or trust… 15%
other gain 1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 
10% or 12%
your taxable income is...
$0 – $94,050 if married filing jointly or surviving 
spouse;
$0 – $63,000 if head of household;
$0 – $47,025 if married filing separately;
$0 – $47,025 if single; or
$0 – $3,150 if estate or trust… 0%
1 “Other gain” means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
104 Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property Publication 550 (2024)

Page 105 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-
sheet.  If you do not have to use the Schedule D T ax 
Worksheet (as explained above) and any of the following 
apply, use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain T ax 
Worksheet in the Instructions for Form 1040 to figure your 
tax.
• Y ou received qualified dividends. (See Qualified Divi-
dends in chapter 1.)
• Y ou do not have to file Schedule D (Form 1040) and 
you received capital gain distributions. (See Excep-
tions to filing Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 
1040 ), earlier.)
• Schedule D (Form 1040), lines 15 and 16, are both 
more than zero.
Alternative minimum tax.  These capital gain rates are 
also used in figuring alternative minimum tax.
Special Rules for Traders in 
Securities or Commodities
Special rules apply if you are a trader in securities or com-
modities in the business of buying and selling securities or 
commodities for your own account. T o be engaged in busi-
ness as a trader in securities or commodities, you must 
meet all the following conditions.
• Y ou must seek to profit from daily market movements 
in the prices of securities or commodities and not from 
dividends, interest, or capital appreciation.
• Y our activity must be substantial.
• Y ou must carry on the activity with continuity and regu-
larity.
The following facts and circumstances should be con-
sidered in determining if your activity is a securities or 
commodities trading business.
• T ypical holding periods for securities or commodities 
bought and sold.
• The frequency and dollar amount of your trades during 
the year.
• The extent to which you pursue the activity to produce 
income for a livelihood.
• The amount of time you devote to the activity.
If your trading activities do not meet the above defini-
tion of a business, you are considered an investor, and not 
a trader. It does not matter whether you call yourself a 
trader or a “day trader.”
How To Report
T ransactions from trading activities result in capital gains 
and losses (unless a section 475(f) election has been 
made) and must be reported on Form 8949 and Sched-
ule D (Form 1040), as appropriate. Losses from these 
transactions are subject to the limit on capital losses 
explained earlier in this chapter.
Mark-to-market election made. If you made the section 
475(f) mark-to-market election, you should report all gains 
and losses from trading as ordinary gains and losses in 
Part II of Form 4797, instead of as capital gains and losses 
on Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040). In that case, 
securities or commodities (depending upon which election 
was made) held at the end of the year in your business as 
a trader are marked to market by treating them as if they 
were sold for fair market value on the last business day of 
the year and gain or loss is recognized. But do not mark to 
market any securities or commodities you held for invest-
ment. Report sales from those securities or commodities 
on Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040), as appropri-
ate, not Form 4797. See the Instructions for Form 8949 
and the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Note.  Y ou may be a trader in some securities or com-
modities and have some securities or commodities that 
are not held in connection with your activities as a trader, 
such as those held for investment. The mark -to-market 
special rules discussed here do not apply to the securities 
or commodities held for investment. Y ou must keep de-
tailed records to distinguish those securities or commodi-
ties. The securities or commodities held for investment 
must be identified as such in your records on the day you 
acquired them (for example, by holding them in a separate 
brokerage account) specifically identified under section 
475.
Expenses.  Interest expense and other investment ex-
penses that an investor would deduct on Schedule A 
(Form 1040) are deducted by a trader on Schedule C 
(Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Business, if the expen-
ses are from the trading business. Commissions and other 
costs of acquiring or disposing of securities or commodi-
ties (depending upon which election was made) are not 
deductible but must be used to figure gain or loss. The 
limit on investment interest expense, which applies to in-
vestors, does not apply to interest paid or incurred in a 
trading business.
Self-employment tax. Gains and losses from selling se-
curities or commodities as a trader are not subject to 
self-employment tax. This is true whether the election is 
made or not. For an exception that applies to section 1256 
contracts, see Self-Employment Income, earlier.
How To Make the
Mark-to-Market Election
T o make the mark-to-market election for 2025, you must 
have filed an election statement no later than the due date 
for your 2024 return (without regard to extensions). The 
statement must be attached to that return or with a prop-
erly filed request for extension of time to file that 2024 re-
turn (Form 4868, Application for Automatic Extension of 
Time T o File U.S. Individual Income T ax Return). The 
statement must have included the following information.
• That you are making an election under section 475(f)
(1) or (f)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
• The first tax year for which the election is effective.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 4 Sales and T rades of Investment Property 105

Page 106 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The trade or business for which you are making the 
election.
If you’re a new taxpayer that wasn’t required to file a tax 
return for the prior year, you may make the election by 
placing the above statement in your books and records no 
later than 2 months and 15 days after the first day of the 
year for which you intend the election to become effective. 
Y ou must attach a copy of the statement to your tax return 
for that year.
If your method of accounting for 2024 is inconsistent 
with the mark -to-market election, you must change your 
method of accounting for securities under Revenue Proce-
dure 2024 -23 (or its successor), available at IRS.gov/irb/
2024-23_IRB#REV-PROC-2024-23. Revenue Procedure 
2024-23 requires you to file Form 3115, Application for 
Change in Accounting Method. Follow its instructions. En-
ter “64” on line 1a of the Form 3115.
If you made a mark -to-market election within 5 tax 
years of revoking a prior election, you can resume the 
mark-to-market election of the new election. T o restart the 
mark-to-market election, you must file an election state-
ment no later than the due date for your 2024 return (with-
out regard to extensions) under Revenue Procedure 
99-17, sections 5.03 and 5.04, and follow the non -auto-
matic change procedures to request a change in method 
of accounting as described in Rev. Proc. 2015-13.
Once you make the election, it will apply to 2024 and all 
later tax years, unless you get permission from the IRS to 
revoke it. The effect of making the election is described 
under Mark-to-market election made, earlier.
If you want to revoke a prior mark -to-market election 
within the 5 tax years ending with the year of change for 
the election, you must follow the non -automatic change 
procedures in Revenue Procedure 2015 -13 and Revenue 
Procedure 2024-23, section 24.02(9).
For more information on this election, see Revenue 
Procedure 99-17, on page 52 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 
1999-7 at IRS.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb99-07.pdf.
For information about method of accounting using the 
non-automatic change, see Revenue Procedure 2015 -13 
in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2015 -5, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2015-05_IRB#RP-2015-13 and Revenue Pro-
cedure 2024 -23 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2024 -23, 
available at IRS.gov/irb/2024-23_IRB#REV-
PROC-2024-23.
5.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue; need help prepar-
ing your tax return; or want to download free publications, 
forms, or instructions, go to IRS.gov to find resources that 
can help you right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After receiving all 
your wage and earnings statements (Forms W -2, W -2G, 
1099-R, 1099 -MISC, 1099 -NEC, etc.); unemployment 
compensation statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 1099 -G); 
and interest, dividend, and retirement statements from 
banks and investment firms (Forms 1099), you have sev-
eral options to choose from to prepare and file your tax re-
turn. Y ou can prepare the tax return yourself, see if you 
qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax professional to 
prepare your return.
Free options for tax preparation.  Y our options for pre-
paring and filing your return online or in your local com-
munity, if you qualify, include the following.
• Direct File. Direct File is a permanent option to file in-
dividual federal tax returns online—for free—directly 
and securely with the IRS. Direct File is an option for 
taxpayers in participating states who have relatively 
simple tax returns reporting certain types of income 
and claiming certain credits and deductions. While Di-
rect File doesn't prepare state returns, if you live in a 
participating state, Direct File guides you to a 
state-supported tool you can use to prepare and file 
your state tax return for free. Go to IRS.gov/DirectFile 
for more information, program updates, and frequently 
asked questions.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare and file your 
federal individual income tax return for free using soft-
ware or Free File Fillable Forms. However, state tax 
preparation may not be available through Free File. Go 
to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if you qualify for free online 
federal tax preparation, e-filing, and direct deposit or 
payment options.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income T ax Assistance (VITA) 
program offers free tax help to people with 
low-to-moderate incomes, persons with disabilities, 
and limited-English-speaking taxpayers who need 
help preparing their own tax returns. Go to IRS.gov/
VITA, download the free IRS2Go app, or call 
800-906-9887 for information on free tax return prepa-
ration.
• TCE. The T ax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) pro-
gram offers free tax help for all taxpayers, particularly 
those who are 60 years of age and older. TCE volun-
teers specialize in answering questions about pen-
sions and retirement-related issues unique to seniors. 
106 Chapter 5 How T o Get T ax Help Publication 550 (2024)

Page 107 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Go to IRS.gov/TCE or download the free IRS2Go app 
for information on free tax return preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed Forces and quali-
fied veterans may use MilT ax, a free tax service of-
fered by the Department of Defense through Military 
OneSource. For more information, go to 
MilitaryOneSource (MilitaryOneSource.mil/MilT ax).
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable Forms, which can 
be completed online and then e -filed regardless of in-
come.
Using online tools to help prepare your return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/T ools for the following.
• IRS.gov/DirectFile offers an Eligibility Checker to help 
you determine if Direct File is the right choice for your 
tax filing needs.
• The Earned Income T ax Credit Assistant (IRS.gov/
EITCAssistant) determines if you’re eligible for the 
earned income credit (EIC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) helps you 
get an employer identification number (EIN) at no 
cost.
• The T ax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/W4App) 
makes it easier for you to estimate the federal income 
tax you want your employer to withhold from your pay-
check. This is tax withholding. See how your withhold-
ing affects your refund, take-home pay, or tax due.
• The First- Time Homebuyer Credit Account Look-up 
(IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool provides information on 
your repayments and account balance.
• The Sales T ax Deduction Calculator (IRS.gov/
SalesT ax) figures the amount you can claim if you 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax questions.  On 
IRS.gov, you can get up -to-date information on 
current events and changes in tax law.
• IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to help you get an-
swers to some of the most common tax questions.
• IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive T ax Assistant, a tool that 
will ask you questions and, based on your input, pro-
vide answers on a number of tax topics.
• IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instructions, and publica-
tions. Y ou will find details on the most recent tax 
changes and interactive links to help you find answers 
to your questions.
• Y ou may also be able to access tax information in your 
e-filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return?  There are 
various types of tax return preparers, including enrolled 
agents, certified public accountants (CPAs), accountants, 
and many others who don’t have professional credentials. 
If you choose to have someone prepare your tax return, 
choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax preparer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall substantive accu-
racy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax identification 
number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs the return, 
you're ultimately responsible for providing all the 
information required for the preparer to accurately 
prepare your return and for the accuracy of every item re-
ported on the return. Anyone paid to prepare tax returns 
for others should have a thorough understanding of tax 
matters. For more information on how to choose a tax pre-
parer, go to Tips for Choosing a T ax Preparer on IRS.gov.
Employers can register to use Business Services On-
line. The Social Security Administration (SSA) offers on-
line service at SSA.gov/employer for fast, free, and secure 
W-2 filing options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled agents, 
and individuals who process Form W -2, Wage and T ax 
Statement; and Form W -2c, Corrected Wage and T ax 
Statement.
Business tax account.  If you are a sole proprietor, a 
partnership, or an S corporation, you can view your tax in-
formation on record with the IRS and do more with a busi-
ness tax account. Go to IRS.gov/Business- T ax-Account for 
more information.
IRS social media. Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia to see the 
various social media tools the IRS uses to share the latest 
information on tax changes, scam alerts, initiatives, prod-
ucts, and services. At the IRS, privacy and security are our 
highest priority. We use these tools to share public infor-
mation with you. Don’t post your social security number 
(SSN) or other confidential information on social media 
sites. Always protect your identity when using any social 
networking site.
The following IRS Y ouT ube channels provide short, in-
formative videos on various tax -related topics in English, 
Spanish, and ASL.
• Y outube.com/irsvideos.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosASL.
Online tax information in other languages.  Y ou can 
find information on IRS.gov/MyLanguage if English isn’t 
your native language.
Free Over -the-Phone Interpreter (OPI) Service.  The 
IRS is committed to serving taxpayers with limited -English 
proficiency (LEP) by offering OPI services. The OPI Serv-
ice is a federally funded program and is available at T ax-
payer Assistance Centers (TACs), most IRS offices, and 
every VITA/TCE tax return site. The OPI Service is acces-
sible in more than 350 languages.
Accessibility Helpline available for taxpayers with 
disabilities. T axpayers who need information about ac-
cessibility services can call 833 -690-0598. The Accessi-
bility Helpline can answer questions related to current and 
future accessibility products and services available in al-
ternative media formats (for example, braille, large print, 
CAUTION
!
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 5 How T o Get T ax Help 107

Page 108 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
audio, etc.). The Accessibility Helpline does not have ac-
cess to your IRS account. For help with tax law, refunds, or 
account-related issues, go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp.
Alternative media preference.  Form 9000, Alternative 
Media Preference, or Form 9000(SP) allows you to elect to 
receive certain types of written correspondence in the fol-
lowing formats.
• Standard Print.
• Large Print.
• Braille.
• Audio (MP3).
• Plain T ext File (TXT).
• Braille Ready File (BRF).
Disasters. Go to IRS.gov/DisasterRelief to review the 
available disaster tax relief.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to IRS.gov/
Forms to view, download, or print all the forms, instruc-
tions, and publications you may need. Or, you can go to 
IRS.gov/OrderForms to place an order.
Mobile-friendly forms.  Y ou'll need an IRS Online Ac-
count (OLA) to complete mobile-friendly forms that require 
signatures. Y ou'll have the option to submit your form(s) 
online or download a copy for mailing. Y ou'll need scans of 
your documents to support your submission. Go to 
IRS.gov/MobileFriendlyForms for more information.
Getting tax publications and instructions in eBook 
format. Download and view most tax publications and in-
structions (including the Instructions for Form 1040) on 
mobile devices as eBooks at IRS.gov/eBooks.
IRS eBooks have been tested using Apple's iBooks for 
iPad. Our eBooks haven’t been tested on other dedicated 
eBook readers, and eBook functionality may not operate 
as intended.
Access your online account (individual taxpayers 
only). Go to IRS.gov/Account to securely access infor-
mation about your federal tax account.
• View the amount you owe and a breakdown by tax 
year.
• See payment plan details or apply for a new payment 
plan.
• Make a payment or view 5 years of payment history 
and any pending or scheduled payments.
• Access your tax records, including key data from your 
most recent tax return, and transcripts.
• View digital copies of select notices from the IRS.
• Approve or reject authorization requests from tax pro-
fessionals.
• View your address on file or manage your communica-
tion preferences.
Get a transcript of your return. With an online account, 
you can access a variety of information to help you during 
the filing season. Y ou can get a transcript, review your 
most recently filed tax return, and get your adjusted gross 
income. Create or access your online account at IRS.gov/
Account.
Tax Pro Account.  This tool lets your tax professional 
submit an authorization request to access your individual 
taxpayer IRS OLA. For more information, go to IRS.gov/
T axProAccount.
Using direct deposit.  The safest and easiest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to e -file and choose direct deposit, 
which securely and electronically transfers your refund di-
rectly into your financial account. Direct deposit also 
avoids the possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
destroyed, or returned undeliverable to the IRS. Eight in 
10 taxpayers use direct deposit to receive their refunds. If 
you don’t have a bank account, go to IRS.gov/
DirectDeposit for more information on where to find a bank 
or credit union that can open an account online.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related identity 
theft issues. 
• T ax-related identity theft happens when someone 
steals your personal information to commit tax fraud. 
Y our taxes can be affected if your SSN is used to file a 
fraudulent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with taxpayers by 
email, text messages (including shortened links), tele-
phone calls, or social media channels to request or 
verify personal or financial information. This includes 
requests for personal identification numbers (PINs), 
passwords, or similar information for credit cards, 
banks, or other financial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Identity Theft 
Central webpage, for information on identity theft and 
data security protection for taxpayers, tax professio-
nals, and businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of tax-related 
identity theft, you can learn what steps you should 
take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP PINs are 
six-digit numbers assigned to taxpayers to help pre-
vent the misuse of their SSNs on fraudulent federal in-
come tax returns. When you have an IP PIN, it pre-
vents someone else from filing a tax return with your 
SSN. T o learn more, go to IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Ways to check on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your mobile de-
vice to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 800-829-1954.
The IRS can’t issue refunds before mid -February 
for returns that claimed the EIC or the additional 
child tax credit (ACTC). This applies to the entire 
refund, not just the portion associated with these credits.
CAUTION
!
108 Chapter 5 How T o Get T ax Help Publication 550 (2024)

Page 109 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Making a tax payment.  Payments of U.S. tax must be 
remitted to the IRS in U.S. dollars. Digital assets are not 
accepted. Go to IRS.gov/Payments for information on how 
to make a payment using any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill or estimated 
tax payment directly from your checking or savings ac-
count at no cost to you.
• Debit Card, Credit Card, or Digital Wallet: Choose an 
approved payment processor to pay online or by 
phone.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Schedule a payment 
when filing your federal taxes using tax return prepara-
tion software or through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal T ax Payment System: This is the 
best option for businesses. Enrollment is required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment to the ad-
dress listed on the notice or instructions.
• Cash: Y ou may be able to pay your taxes with cash at 
a participating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: Y ou may be able to do same-day 
wire from your financial institution. Contact your finan-
cial institution for availability, cost, and time frames.
Note. The IRS uses the latest encryption technology to 
ensure that the electronic payments you make online, by 
phone, or from a mobile device using the IRS2Go app are 
safe and secure. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and 
faster than mailing in a check or money order.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/Payments for 
more information about your options.
• Apply for an online payment agreement (IRS.gov/
OPA) to meet your tax obligation in monthly install-
ments if you can’t pay your taxes in full today. Once 
you complete the online process, you will receive im-
mediate notification of whether your agreement has 
been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier to see if 
you can settle your tax debt for less than the full 
amount you owe. For more information on the Offer in 
Compromise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  Go to IRS.gov/Form1040X 
for information and updates.
Checking the status of your amended return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status of Form 1040 -X amen-
ded returns.
It can take up to 3 weeks from the date you filed 
your amended return for it to show up in our sys-
tem, and processing it can take up to 16 weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter you’ve re-
ceived. Go to IRS.gov/Notices to find additional informa-
tion about responding to an IRS notice or letter.
IRS Document Upload Tool.  Y ou may be able use the 
Document Upload T ool to respond digitally to eligible IRS 
CAUTION
!
notices and letters by securely uploading required docu-
ments online through IRS.gov. For more information, go to 
IRS.gov/DUT.
Schedule LEP . Y ou can use Schedule LEP (Form 1040), 
Request for Change in Language Preference, to state a 
preference to receive notices, letters, or other written com-
munications from the IRS in an alternative language. Y ou 
may not immediately receive written communications in 
the requested language. The IRS’s commitment to LEP 
taxpayers is part of a multi -year timeline that began pro-
viding translations in 2023. Y ou will continue to receive 
communications, including notices and letters, in English 
until they are translated to your preferred language.
Contacting your local TAC.  Keep in mind, many ques-
tions can be answered on IRS.gov without visiting a TAC. 
Go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp for the topics people ask about 
most. If you still need help, TACs provide tax help when a 
tax issue can’t be handled online or by phone. All TACs 
now provide service by appointment, so you’ll know in ad-
vance that you can get the service you need without long 
wait times. Before you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to 
find the nearest TAC and to check hours, available serv-
ices, and appointment options. Or, on the IRS2Go app, 
under the Stay Connected tab, choose the Contact Us op-
tion and click on “Local Offices.”
—————————————————————
Below is a message to you from the T axpayer Advocate 
Service, an independent organization established by Con-
gress.
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) Is Here To Help 
You
What Is the Taxpayer Advocate Service?  The T ax-
payer Advocate Service (TAS) is an independent organi-
zation within the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). TAS 
helps taxpayers resolve problems with the IRS, makes ad-
ministrative and legislative recommendations to prevent or 
correct the problems, and protects taxpayer rights. We 
work to ensure that every taxpayer is treated fairly and that 
you know and understand your rights under the T axpayer 
Bill of Rights. We are Y our Voice at the IRS.
How Can TAS Help Me? TAS can help you resolve prob-
lems that you haven’t been able to resolve with the IRS on 
your own. Always try to resolve your problem with the IRS 
first, but if you can’t, then come to TAS. Our services are 
free.
• TAS helps all taxpayers (and their representatives), in-
cluding individuals, businesses, and exempt organiza-
tions. Y ou may be eligible for TAS help if your IRS 
problem is causing financial difficulty, if you’ve tried 
and been unable to resolve your issue with the IRS, or 
if you believe an IRS system, process, or procedure 
just isn't working as it should.
Publication 550 (2024) Chapter 5 How T o Get T ax Help 109

Page 110 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• T o get help any time with general tax topics, visit 
www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov. The site can help 
you with common tax issues and situations, such as 
what to do if you make a mistake on your return or if 
you get a notice from the IRS.
• TAS works to resolve large-scale (systemic) problems 
that affect many taxpayers. Y ou can report systemic is-
sues at www.IRS.gov/SAMS. (Be sure not to include 
any personal identifiable information.)
How Do I Contact TAS?  TAS has offices in every state, 
the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. T o find your lo-
cal advocate’s number:
• Go to www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-Us,
• Check your local directory, or
• Call TAS toll free at 877-777-4778.
What Are My Rights as a Taxpayer?  The T axpayer Bill 
of Rights describes ten basic rights that all taxpayers have 
when dealing with the IRS. Go to 
www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/T axpayer-Rights for 
more information about the rights, what they mean to you, 
and how they apply to specific situations you may encoun-
ter with the IRS. TAS strives to protect taxpayer rights and 
ensure the IRS is administering the tax law in a fair and 
equitable way.
110 Chapter 5 How T o Get T ax Help Publication 550 (2024)

Page 111 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
Accrual method:  An accounting 
method under which you report your in-
come when you earn it, whether or not 
you have received it. Y ou generally de-
duct your expenses when you incur a 
liability for them, rather than when you 
pay them.
At-risk rules:  Rules that limit the 
amount of loss you may deduct to the 
amount you risk losing in the activity.
Basis: Basis is the amount of your in-
vestment in property for tax purposes. 
The basis of property you buy is usu-
ally the cost. Basis is used to figure 
gain or loss on the sale or disposition 
of investment property.
Below-market loan:  A demand loan 
(defined later) on which interest is pay-
able at a rate below the applicable fed-
eral rate, or a term loan where the 
amount loaned is more than the 
present value of all payments due un-
der the loan.
Call: An option that entitles the pur-
chaser to buy, at any time before a 
specified future date, property such as 
a stated number of shares of stock at a 
specified price.
Cash method: An accounting method 
under which you report your income in 
the year in which you actually or con-
structively receive it. Y ou generally de-
duct your expenses in the year you pay 
them.
Commodities trader:  A person who 
is actively engaged in trading section 
1256 contracts and is registered with a 
domestic board of trade designated as 
a contract market by the Commodities 
Futures T rading Commission.
Commodity future:  A contract made 
on a commodity exchange, calling for 
the sale or purchase of a fixed amount 
of a commodity at a future date for a 
fixed price.
Covered security: Covered securities 
are certain securities subject to added 
reporting by your broker on any Form 
1099-B you may receive. See the 
Instructions for Form 1099 -B for more 
details.
Conversion transaction:  Any trans-
action that you entered into after April 
30, 1993, that meets both of these 
tests.
1. Substantially all of your expected 
return from the transaction is due 
to the time value of your net invest-
ment.
2. The transaction is one of the fol-
lowing.
a. A straddle, including any set of 
offsetting positions on stock.
b. Any transaction in which you 
acquire property (whether or 
not actively traded) at substan-
tially the same time that you 
contract to sell the same prop-
erty or substantially identical 
property at a price set in the 
contract.
c. Any other transaction that is 
marketed or sold as producing 
capital gains from a transaction 
described in (1).
Demand loan: A loan payable in full at 
any time upon demand by the lender.
Dividend: A distribution of money or 
other property made by a corporation 
to its shareholders out of its earnings 
and profits.
Equity option: Any option:
• T o buy or sell stock, or
• That is valued directly or indirectly 
by reference to any stock or nar-
row-based security index.
Fair market value: The price at which 
property would change hands between 
a willing buyer and a willing seller, both 
having reasonable knowledge of the 
relevant facts.
Forgone interest:  The amount of in-
terest that would be payable for any pe-
riod if interest accrued at the applicable 
federal rate and was payable annually 
on December 31, minus any interest 
payable on the loan for that period.
Forward contract:  A contract to de-
liver a substantially fixed amount of 
property (including cash) for a substan-
tially fixed price.
Futures contract:  An exchange -tra-
ded contract to buy or sell a specified 
commodity or financial instrument at a 
specified price at a specified future 
date. See also Commodity future.
Gift loan:  Any below -market loan 
where the forgone interest is in the na-
ture of a gift.
Interest: Compensation for the use or 
forbearance of money.
Investment interest: The interest you 
paid or accrued on money you bor-
rowed that is allocable to property held 
for investment.
Limited partner:  A partner whose 
participation in partnership activities is 
restricted, and whose personal liability 
for partnership debts is limited to the 
amount of money or other property that 
they contributed or may have to con-
tribute.
Listed option: Any option (other than 
a right to acquire stock from the issuer) 
that is traded on (or subject to the rules 
of) a qualified board or exchange.
Mark-to-market rule:  The treatment 
of each section 1256 contract (defined 
later) held by a taxpayer at the close of 
the year as if it were sold for its fair 
market value on the last business day 
of the year.
Market discount: The stated redemp-
tion price of a bond at maturity minus 
your basis in the bond immediately af-
ter you acquire it. Market discount ari-
ses when the value of a debt obligation 
decreases after its issue date.
Market discount bond:  Any bond 
having market discount except:
• Short-term obligations with fixed 
maturity dates of up to 1 year from 
the date of issue,
• T ax-exempt obligations that you 
bought before May 1, 1993,
Publication 550 (2024) 111

Page 112 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• U.S. savings bonds, and
• Certain installment obligations.
Mutual fund: A mutual fund is a regu-
lated investment company generally 
created by “pooling” funds of investors 
to allow them to take advantage of di-
versity of investments and professional 
management.
Nominee: A person who receives, in 
their name, income that actually be-
longs to someone else.
Noncovered security:  Noncovered 
securities are securities that are not 
subject to added reporting by your 
broker on any Form 1099 -B you may 
receive. See the Instructions for Form 
1099-B for more details.
Nonequity option:  Any listed option 
that is not an equity option, such as 
debt options, commodity futures op-
tions, currency options, and 
broad-based stock index options.
Options dealer:  Any person regis-
tered with an appropriate national se-
curities exchange as a market maker or 
specialist in listed options.
Original issue discount (OID):  The 
amount by which the stated redemp-
tion price at maturity of a debt instru-
ment is more than its issue price.
Passive activity: An activity involving 
the conduct of a trade or business in 
which you do not materially participate 
and any rental activity. However, the 
rental of real estate is not a passive ac-
tivity if both of the following are true.
• More than one-half of the personal 
services you perform during the 
year in all trades or businesses are 
performed in real property trades 
or businesses in which you materi-
ally participate.
• Y ou perform more than 750 hours 
of services during the year in real 
property trades or businesses in 
which you materially participate.
Portfolio income: Gross income from 
interest, dividends, annuities, or royal-
ties that is not derived in the ordinary 
course of a trade or business. It in-
cludes gains from the sale or trade of 
property (other than an interest in a 
passive activity) producing portfolio 
income or held for investment.
Premium: The amount by which your 
cost or other basis in a bond right after 
you get it is more than the total of all 
amounts payable on the bond after you 
get it (other than payments of qualified 
stated interest).
Private activity bond:  A bond that is 
part of a state or local government 
bond issue of which:
1. More than 10% of the proceeds 
are to be used for a private busi-
ness use, and
2. More than 10% of the payment of 
the principal or interest is:
a. Secured by an interest in prop-
erty to be used for a private 
business use (or payments for 
the property), or
b. Derived from payments for 
property (or borrowed money) 
used for a private business 
use.
Put: An option that entitles the pur-
chaser to sell, at any time before a 
specified future date, property such as 
a stated number of shares of stock at a 
specified price.
Real estate mortgage investment 
conduit (REMIC):  An entity that is 
formed for the purpose of holding a 
fixed pool of mortgages secured by in-
terests in real property, with multiple 
classes of interests held by investors. 
These interests may be either regular 
or residual.
Regulated futures contract:  A sec-
tion 1256 contract that:
• Provides that amounts that must be 
deposited to, or may be withdrawn 
from, your margin account depend 
on daily market conditions (a sys-
tem of marking to market); and
• Is traded on, or subject to the rules 
of, a qualified board of exchange, 
such as a domestic board of trade 
designated as a contract market by 
the Commodity Futures T rading 
Commission or any board of trade 
or exchange approved by the Sec-
retary of the T reasury.
Restricted stock:  Stock you get for 
services you perform that is nontrans-
ferable and is subject to a substantial 
risk of forfeiture.
Section 1256 contract: Any:
• Regulated futures contract,
• Foreign currency contract as de-
fined in chapter 4 under Foreign 
currency contract,
• Nonequity option,
• Dealer equity option, or
• Dealer securities futures contract.
A section 1256 contract does not in-
clude certain swaps as listed in Excep-
tions under Section 1256 Contracts 
Marked to Market in chapter 4.
Securities futures contract:  A con-
tract of sale for future delivery of a sin-
gle security or of a narrow -based se-
curity index.
Short sale:  The sale of property that 
you generally do not own. Y ou borrow 
the property to deliver to a buyer and, 
at a later date, you buy substantially 
identical property and deliver it to the 
lender.
Straddle: Generally, a set of offsetting 
positions on personal property. A strad-
dle may consist of a purchased option 
to buy and a purchased option to sell 
on the same number of shares of the 
security, with the same exercise price 
and period.
Stripped preferred stock:  Stock that 
meets the following tests:
1. There has been a separation in 
ownership between the stock and 
any dividend on the stock that has 
not become payable.
2. The stock:
a. Is limited and preferred as to 
dividends,
b. Does not participate in corpo-
rate growth to any significant 
extent, and
c. Has a fixed redemption price.
Term loan: Any loan that is not a de-
mand loan.
Wash sale: A sale of stock or securi-
ties at a loss within 30 days before or 
112 Publication 550 (2024)

Page 113 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
after you buy or acquire in a fully taxa-
ble trade, or acquire a contract or op-
tion to buy, substantially identical stock 
or securities.
Publication 550 (2024) 113

Page 114 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
T o help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
A
Abusive tax shelters (See T ax 
shelters)
Accrual method 10, 24, 35, 46, 111
Accuracy-related penalty 6
Acquisition discount 23, 66
Adjusted basis 30, 61, 62, 65
Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends 33, 48
Amortization of bond premium 49
Annuities:
Borrowing on 50
Interest on 8
Life insurance proceeds used to 
buy 16
Sale of 78
Single-premium 50
T rade for54, 72
Applicable federal rate 9
Appreciated financial positions 55
Arbitrage bonds 17
Assistance (See T ax help)
At-risk rules 45, 100, 111
Automatic investment service 63, 
82
Average basis 67
Double-category method 67
Illustrated 68
B
Backup withholding 4
Bad debts 78, 84
Bankrupt financial institutions:
Deposit in 78
Bargain purchases 60
Basis 59, 73, 111
Adjusted 30, 61, 62, 65
Average 67
Cost 59, 67
Inherited property 61
Investment property 59
Like-kind exchanges 70
Other than cost 59
REIT s62
REMIC, residual interest 36
Replacement stock 98
Shares acquired by 
reinvestment 63
Stocks and bonds 30, 32, 49, 62
Bearer obligations 20, 78
Below-market loans 8, 111
Bonds:
Accrued interest on 26
Amortization of premium 49
Arbitrage 17
Basis 49, 62
Capital asset 76
Convertible 71
Coupon 24
Enterprise zone facility 18
Federally guaranteed 17
Identification 62
Market discount 18, 47, 65, 77, 
101, 111
New Y ork Liberty bonds18
Par value 66
Premiums on 49, 65, 112
Private activity 17, 112
Redemption or retirement of 54
Sold between interest dates 16
State and local government 76
Stripped 16, 20, 66
T ax credit bonds17
T ax-exempt76
T raded flat8
U.S. savings (See U.S. savings 
bonds)
U.S. T reasury (See U.S. T reasury 
bills, notes, and bonds)
Brokerage fees 101
C
Calls and puts 89, 111
T able 4-390
Capital assets 75
Capital gain distributions 30, 34, 
48, 83
Capital gains and losses 75-84
Constructive ownership 
transactions 80
Definition 75
Empowerment zone assets 99
Investment property 76
Long-term 86, 102
Losses, limit on 102
Passive activities 100
Qualified covered call options 93
Qualified small business stock 97
Reporting requirements 93, 98
Short-term 86, 101
T ax rates103, 104
T able 4-4104
Capital loss carryover 94, 102
Worksheet 4-1 102
Cash method 10, 23, 46, 111
Reporting options for savings bond 
interest 10
Cash-settled options 56
Casualty losses 78
CDOs (Collateralized debt 
obligations) 36
Certificates of deposit (CDs) 20
Children:
Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends 48
Capital gain distributions 48
Custodian account for 4
Gifts to 5
Investment income of 4, 48
Qualified dividends 48
Savings account with parent as 
trustee 5
U.S. savings bond owner 11
Co-owners of U.S. savings 
bonds 11
Collateralized debt obligations 
(CDOs) 36
Collectibles 104
Commissions 63
Commodities traders 111
Commodity futures 79, 83, 111
Community property:
U.S. savings bonds 11
Constructive ownership 
transactions 74, 80
Constructive receipt 23
Constructive sales 55
Contractors, insolvency of 85
Conversion transactions 78, 111
Convertible stocks and bonds 71
Cooperatives, sales of stock to 96
Corporate distributions 27
Capital gain 34, 48, 83
Constructive 31
Dividends (See Dividends)
Fractional shares 32
Liquidating 31
Nondividend 30, 34
Return of capital 30
Stock rights 31
Undistributed capital gains 30
Corporate reorganizations 71
Cost basis 59, 67
Coupon bonds 24
Covered security, defined 111
D
Day traders 105
Dealer equity options 57
Dealer securities futures 
contracts 57
Debt instruments, retirement of 77
Decedents 61, 103
U.S. savings bond interest, reporting 
of 12
Demand loans 111
Demutualization 72
Deposits, loss on 78
Discount on debt instruments 18
Certificates of deposit 20
Election to report all interest as 
OID 23
Face-amount certificates 20
Gain or loss treatment 76
Inflation-indexed 20
114 Publication 550 (2024)

Page 115 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Market discount bonds (See Market 
discount bonds)
Original issue discount 
(See Original issue discount 
(OID))
Short-term obligations 22, 76
Stripped bonds and coupons 20
Discounted debt instruments 18
Discounted tax-exempt 
obligations 66
Dividends 27, 111
(See also Form 1099-DIV)
Alaska Permanent Fund 33, 48
Exempt-interest 7, 33, 83
Extraordinary 87
Holding period 28
Insurance policies 33
Money market funds 30
Nominees 27, 34
Ordinary 28
Patronage 33
Payments in lieu of 86
Qualified 28, 34, 48
Qualified foreign corporation 29
Received in January 28
Reinvestment of 83
Reinvestment plans 30, 63
Reporting requirements 27, 33-35
Restricted stock 33
Sale or trade vs. 54
Scrip 32
Sold stock 28
Stock 63, 83
Underreported 5
Veterans' insurance 7, 33
Divorce 60, 73
E
Education Savings Bond 
Program 14
Interest excluded under 26
Employee stock options 2
Employee stock ownership plans 
(ESOPs), sales of stock to 96
Employer identification numbers 
(EINs) 38
Empowerment zone 99
Endowment contracts 50
Enterprise zone facility bonds 18
Equity option 57, 111
Estate income received by 
beneficiary 4
Exchanges of mutual fund 
shares 72
Exclusion of gain:
DC zone assets 99
Exempt-interest dividends on 
mutual fund stock 83
F
Face-amount certificates 20
Fair market 111
Fair market value 59, 60, 66
Federal guarantee on bonds 17
Financial asset securitization 
investment trusts (FASITs) 37
First-in first-out (FIFO) 67
Foreign currency transactions 56
Foreign income 2
Forgone interest 111
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, 
Schedule B 24
Form 1040 or Form 1040-SR 33
Form 1040-X 55
Form 1040, Schedule D 100
Form 1041 39
Form 1065 38
Schedule K-1 38
Form 1066, Schedule Q 36, 51
Form 1096 27, 34, 101
Form 1099-B 52, 100, 101
Covered security, defined 111
Noncovered security, defined 112
Form 1099-CAP 101
Form 1099-DIV 4, 27, 33, 34
Form 1099-INT 4, 6, 14, 24, 27, 36, 
37
Form 1099-MISC 28, 86
Form 1099-OID 7, 19, 25, 36, 37
Form 1099-S 101
Form 1120 38
Form 2439 30
Form 3115 11, 50, 106
Form 4684 78
Form 4797 70, 80, 81
Form 4952 48
Form 6198 100
Form 6781 58, 79, 93, 101
Form 8275 42
Form 8275-R 42
Form 8582 37
Form 8615 4
Form 8815 14, 26
Form 8824 70
Form 8832 38
Form 8886 41, 42
Form 8949:
Bad debts 85
Basis adjustment 30
Capital Gains 100
Capital Losses 100
Cooperative, sale to certain 96
Copyrights in musical works 76
Employee stock ownership plan, 
sale to 96
Empowerment Zone Assets 99
Exempt-interest dividends 83
Form 1099-B 52, 100
Form 1099-CAP 101
Form 1099-S 101
Fractional shares 32
Gain, qualified small business 
stock 99
How to fill in, generally 100
Long-term gains and losses 102
Mark-to-market election 105
Market discount bonds 77, 101
Musical compositions 76
Nominees 101
Nonbusiness bad debt 78
Nondividend distributions 34
Option 89
Property bought at various 
times 101
Rollover, qualified small business 
stock 98
Sale expenses 101
Short-term gains and losses 101
Software 62
Worthless securities 55
Form SS-4 38
Form W-8BEN 5
Form W-9 5
Forward contracts 111
Fractional shares 32, 82
Frozen deposits 8, 26
Futures contracts:
Definition 111
Regulated 56, 112
Securities 83, 87, 88
Futures, commodity 79, 83, 111
Wash sales 87
G
Gains on qualified small business 
stock 97
Gains on sales or trades 66, 73, 74
(See also Capital gains and losses)
Gifts 5, 60, 82, 111
Gifts of shares 69
Glossary 111
Government obligations 23
H
Hedging transactions 57, 58, 79
Holding period:
Investment property 81
Replacement stock 98
Shares acquired by 
reinvestment 83
Straddles 94
I
Income from sources outside 
U.S. 2
Income tax treaties (Table 1-3s) 29
Indian tribal government 16
Individual retirement arrangements 
(IRAs):
Interest income 7
Inflation-indexed debt 
instruments 20, 21
Inherited property:
Basis 61
Holding period 82
T ransfer by inheritance54
Publication 550 (2024) 115

Page 116 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Insolvency of contractors 85
Installment sales 100
Insurance:
Borrowing on 50
Dividends, interest on 8, 33
Interest option on 16
Life insurance companies, 
demutualization 72
Life, paid to beneficiary 16
Prepaid premiums 8
Single-premium life 50
T rades72
Veterans' dividends, interest on 7, 
33
Interest expenses:
Allocation of 46
Investment interest 45, 111
Limit on 47
When to deduct 46
Margin accounts 46
Paid in advance 46
Straddles 51
Interest income 6
Annuity contracts 8
Bonds traded flat 8
Certificates of deposits 7
Condemnation awards 8
Deferred interest accounts 7
Dividends on deposit or share 
accounts 7
Frozen deposits 8, 26
Gift for opening account 7
Individual retirement arrangements 
(IRAs) 7
Installment sale payments 8
Insurance dividends 8
Money market funds 7
Nominee distributions 6, 11, 14, 27
Prepaid insurance premiums 8
Reporting 23-27
Reporting requirements 24
Seller-financed mortgage 26
T ax refunds8
T ax-exempt16, 24
T axable7, 8, 15, 17
U.S. savings bonds, person 
responsible for tax (T able 1-2)12
Underreported 5
Unstated 59
Usurious interest 8
VA insurance dividends 7
Investment clubs 37-39
Investment expenses 44
Allocated 36
At-risk rules 45
Interest 104
Limits on deductions 45
Nondeductible 50
nonpublicly offered mutual fund or 
REMIC 51
Investment income 2
Children 4, 48
General information 3
Net income 47
Records to keep 4
Reporting of (T able 1-1)6
Investment interest expenses:
Reporting requirements 51
Investment property 45
Basis 59
Definition 52
Gain or loss treatment 76
Gift, received as 60
Holding period 81
Liquidation, received in 65
Nontaxable trades, received in 60
Sales and trades 52
Services, received for 59
Spouse, received from 60
T axable trades, received in60
J
Joint accounts 5
Joint and separate returns 44, 103
L
Life insurance companies:
demutualization 72
Like-kind exchanges 70, 73
Basis of property received 70
Reporting requirements 70
Limited partners 111
Liquidating distributions 31, 65
Listed options 57, 111
Load charges 63
Loans
Below-market 8, 111
Gift and demand 9, 111
Guarantees 84
T erm9, 112
Local government obligations 
(See State or local government 
obligations)
Long-term capital gains and 
losses 86, 102
Losses on sales or trades 74
(See also Capital gains and losses)
Amount calculation 66
Carryback election 57, 58
Mutual fund or REIT stock held 6 
months or less 83
Passive activities 37, 38, 45, 48
Related parties 73
Section 1244 (small business) 
stock 80
Small business investment 
company stock 81
Wash sales 93
M
Mark-to-market election 105
Mark-to-market rule 57, 111
Market discount bonds 18, 21, 22, 
47, 65, 77, 101, 111
Accrued market discount 22
Maximum rate of capital gains 
(Table 4-4) 104
Mechanics' and suppliers' liens 85
Missing children, photographs of 2
Mixed straddles 86, 94
Money market funds 30
Interest income 7
Mortgages:
Revenue bonds 17
Secondary liability on home 85
Seller-financed 26
Municipal bonds 16, 24, 76
(See also State or local government 
obligations)
Mutual fund, defined 112
Mutual funds 30, 45, 47, 51, 62, 67, 
83
Individual retirement arrangements 
(IRAs) 2
publicly offered 52
N
Net Investment Income Tax 4
New York Liberty bonds 18
NIIT 4
Nominee distributions:
Dividends 27, 34
Interest income 6, 11, 14, 27
Original issue discount 19
Nominee, defined 112
Nonbusiness bad debts 78, 84
Noncapital assets 75
Noncovered security, defined 112
Nondeductible investment 
expenses 50
Nondividend distributions 30
Nonequity options 56, 112
Nonqualified preferred stock 71
Nonresident aliens:
Backup withholding 5
Nontaxable return of capital 30
Nontaxable stock rights 83
Nontaxable trades 70, 82
Notes:
Individuals, bought at discount 77
U.S. T reasury (See U.S. T reasury 
bills, notes, and bonds)
O
Options 88
Calls and puts 89, 111
Cash settlement 56, 89
Dealer equity 57
Deep-in-the-money 92
Employee stock 2
Equity 57, 111
Gain or loss 88, 92
Holding period 83
Listed 57, 111
Nonequity 56, 112
Qualified covered call 92
116 Publication 550 (2024)

Page 117 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting requirements 89
Section 1256 contracts 56, 89
Wash sales 87
Options dealer 112
Ordinary gains and losses 75, 78
Original issue discount:
Nominee distributions 19
Original issue discount (OID) 16, 
18-21, 66, 112
Adjustment to 27
Reporting requirements 19
Rules 19
P
Pass-through entities:
Rollover of gain 98
Passive activities 112
Gains and losses 37, 38, 45, 48, 
100
Patronage dividends 33
Penalties:
Accuracy-related 6, 42
Backup withholding 5
Civil fraud 44
Early withdrawal 7, 27
Failure to pay tax 44
Failure to supply SSN 4
Substantial understatement 42
Section 199A deduction 42
Valuation misstatement 43
Political parties:
Debts owed by 85
Portfolio income 112
Preferred stock:
Nonqualified 71
Redeemable at a premium 32
Stripped 35, 112
Premiums on bonds 49, 65, 112
Private activity bonds 17, 112
Public utility stock reinvestment 63
Publications (See T ax help)
Puts and calls 89, 112
T able 4-390
Q
Qualified dividends 34
Qualified small business stock 65, 
83, 97
Gains on 97
R
Real estate investment trusts 
(REITs) 30, 62, 83
Real estate mortgage investment 
conduits (REMICs) 35, 51, 112
Regular interest 35
Residual interest 36, 88
Recordkeeping requirements:
Investment income 4
Small business stock 81
Redemption of stock 54
Redemption or retirement of 
bonds 54
Regulated futures contract 56, 112
Reinvestment rights 63
REITs (See Real estate investment 
trusts (REIT s))
Related party transactions 52, 73, 
74
Related persons 91
REMICs (See Real estate mortgage 
investment conduits (REMICs))
Reorganizations, corporate 71
Reporting requirements:
Bad debts 85
Bond premium amortization 50
Capital gains and losses 93, 98, 
100
Dividend income 33
Interest income 24
Interest on U.S. savings bonds 10, 
11
Investment interest expenses 51
Like-kind exchanges 70
Options 89
Original issue discount 19
S corporation income, deductions, 
and credits 37
Section 1256 contracts 58
State or local government 
obligations 17
Straddles 101
Substitute payments 86
T ax-exempt interest income24
T rades105
Repossession of real property 83
Restricted property 60
Restricted stock 33, 112
Retirement of debt instrument 77
Return of capital (See Nondividend 
distributions)
Rollover of gain from sale:
Securities 98
S
S corporations 37, 65
Sales and trades of investment 
property 52
Definition 53
Savings bonds (See U.S. savings 
bonds)
SBIC stock (See Small business 
investment company stock)
Scrip dividends 32
Section 1202 gain 99, 104
Section 1244 stock 80
Section 1250 gain 104
Section 1256 contracts 56, 83, 89, 
101, 112
Net gain on 58
Net loss on 58
Reporting requirements 58
Securities:
Holding period 81
Installment sales 100
Rollover of gain from sale 98
T raders in105
Worthless 54, 85
Securities futures 112
Securities futures contracts 57, 83, 
88
Self-employment income 59
Self-employment tax 105
Seller-financed mortgages 26
Short sales 85-87
Adjusted basis 65
Defined 112
Expenses of 50
Extraordinary dividends 87
Puts 89
Small business investment 
company stock 81
Short-term capital gains and 
losses 86, 101
Short-term obligations 22, 23, 66, 
76
Interest deduction, limit on 47
Sixty/forty (60/40) rule 57
Small business investment 
company stock 81, 99
Reporting requirements 81
Small business stock 65, 80, 83, 97
Social security number (SSN):
Custodial accounts 4
Joint accounts 4
Requirement to give 4
Specialized small business 
investment company stock 99
Spouses:
T ransfers between60, 73
(See also Related party 
transactions)
State or local government 
obligations 16-18
Market discount bonds (See Market 
discount bonds)
Private activity bonds 17, 112
Registration requirement 16
T ax-exempt interest16
T axable interest17
Stock:
Basis 30, 32, 62, 98
Capital asset 76
Constructive ownership 74
Convertible 71
Corporate 71
Dividends (See Dividends)
Fractional shares 32, 82
Identification 62
Installment sales 100
Nonqualified preferred stock 71
Options for employees 2
Public utility, reinvestment 63
Redemption of 54
Replacement stock 98
Restricted stock 33, 112
Publication 550 (2024) 117

Page 118 of 118  Fileid: … cation-550/2024/b/xml/cycle01/source 12:20 - 14-Feb-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rights 31, 64, 83
S corporations 65
Sales to ESOPs or cooperatives 96
Small business 65, 83
Splits 64
Straddles (See Straddles)
Stripped preferred stock 35, 112
Surrender of 54
T rades71
T rust instruments treated as56
Straddles 90-96
Defined 112
Holding period 94
Interest expense and carrying 
charges 51
Loss deferral rules 91
Mixed 86, 94, 95
Reporting requirements 101
Stripped bonds and coupons 16, 
20, 66
Stripped preferred stock 35, 112
Substitute payments 86
T
Tables:
Capital gains maximum rate 
(T able 4-4)104
Income tax treaties (T able 1-3)29
Investment income, reporting of 
(T able 1-1)6
Puts and calls (T able 4-3)90
U.S. savings bonds, person 
responsible for tax (T able 1-2)12
Tax credit bonds 17
Tax help 106
Tax rates:
Capital gain and losses 103
Tax refunds:
Interest on 8
Tax shelters 39-44
Penalties 42
Reporting requirements 41
Rules to curb abuse 40
Tax-exempt bonds 76
Tax-exempt income:
Expenses of 50
Interest 16, 24
Tax-exempt obligations 16, 21, 66
Taxable income, expenses of 50
Taxes:
State income 51
Term loans 9, 112
Trade or business 45
Traders in securities 105
Trades:
Insurance 72
Investment property 52
Like-kind 70, 73
Nontaxable 60, 70, 82
Reporting requirements 105
Stock 71
T axable60
U.S. T reasury notes or bonds73
Treasury bills, notes, and bonds 
(See U.S. T reasury bills, notes, and 
bonds)
Treasury inflation-indexed 
securities 20
Treasury inflation-protected 
securities (TIPS) 16, 20
Treaties, income tax (Table 1-3) 29
Trust income received by 
beneficiary 4
U
U.S. savings bonds 8, 10
Reporting interest on 8, 10
Retirement or profit-sharing plan, 
distributed from 13
Worksheet 26
T ax, responsible person 
(T able 1-2)12
U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and 
bonds 8, 15, 73, 82
Undistributed capital gains 34
Usurious interest 8
V
Veterans' insurance:
Dividends on 33
W
Warrants 87
Wash sales 87, 88, 112
Holding period 83
Loss deferral rules, straddles 93
Withholding, backup 4
Worksheets:
Capital loss carryover 102
Worthless securities 54, 85
118 Publication 550 (2024)