Userid: SD_PLKGB DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: ...ettings\plkgb\Desktop\My Forms\Publication 334\10P33412072010.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication
334Tax Guide for Catalog Number 11063P
Department Small Business
of the For use inTreasury
preparing(For Individuals Who UseInternal
Revenue
2010Service Schedule C or C-EZ)
Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet IRS.gov
www.irs.gov/efile
Jan 20, 2011

Page 2 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in addition to your regular job or business may be
self-employment.Contents
Independent contractor.  People such as doctors, den-Introduction ............................. . 2
tists, veterinarians, lawyers, accountants, contractors,
What's New for 2010 ....................... . 3 subcontractors, public stenographers, or auctioneers who
are in an independent trade, business, or profession inWhat's New for 2011 ....................... . 3 which they offer their services to the general public are
generally independent contractors. However, whether theyReminders ............................... . 4
are independent contractors or employees depends on the
Photographs of Missing Children ............ . 4 facts in each case. The general rule is that an individual is
an independent contractor if the payer has the right to1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes ........ . 5 control or to direct only the result of the work and not how it
will be done. The earnings of a person who is working as2. Accounting Periods and Methods ......... . 12
an independent contractor are subject to self-employment
3. Dispositions of Business Property ........ . 16 tax. For more information on determining whether you are
an employee or independent contractor, see Publication4. General Business Credits ............... . 18 15-A, Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide.
5. Business Income ...................... . 20 Statutory employee. A statutory employee has a
checkmark in box 13 of his or her Form W-2, Wage and6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold ........ . 27
Tax Statement. Statutory employees use Schedule C or
7. Figuring Gross Profit ................... . 29 C-EZ to report their wages and expenses.
8. Business Expenses .................... . 31 Limited liability company (LLC). A limited liability com-
pany (LLC) is an entity formed under state law by filing9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss .............. . 40 articles of organization. Generally, a single-member LLC is
disregarded as an entity separate from its owner and10. Self-Employment (SE) Tax ............... . 41
reports its income and deductions on its owner's federal
11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer .............. . 45 income tax return. An owner who is an individual may use
Schedule C or C-EZ.12. How To Get More Information ............ . 47
Husband and wife business. If you and your spouseIndex ................................... . 51 jointly own and operate an unincorporated business and
share in the profits and losses, you are partners in a
partnership, whether or not you have a formal partnership
Introduction agreement. Do not use Schedule C or C-EZ. Instead, file
Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership Income. For moreThe purpose of this publication is to provide general infor- information, see Publication 541, Partnerships.mation about the federal tax laws that apply to small ExceptionÐCommunity income.  If you and yourbusiness owners who are sole proprietors and to statutory spouse wholly own an unincorporated business as com-employees. This publication has information on business munity property under the community property laws of aincome, expenses, and tax credits that may help you file state, foreign country, or U.S. possession, you can treatyour income tax return. the business either as a sole proprietorship or a partner-
ship. The only states with community property laws areAre you self-employed? You are self-employed if you
Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mex-carry on a trade or business as a sole proprietor or an
ico, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin. A change in yourindependent contractor.
reporting position will be treated as a conversion of the
entity.Sole proprietor. A sole proprietor is someone who owns
ExceptionÐQualified joint venture.  If you and youran unincorporated business by himself or herself. How-
spouse each materially participate as the only members ofever, if you are the sole member of a domestic limited
a jointly owned and operated business, and you file a jointliability company (LLC), you are not a sole proprietor if you
return for the tax year, you can make a joint election to beelect to treat the LLC as a corporation.
treated as a qualified joint venture instead of a partnership
Trade or business.  A trade or business is generally an for the tax year. Making this election will allow you to avoid
activity carried on to make a profit. The facts and circum- the complexity of Form 1065 but still give each spouse
stances of each case determine whether or not an activity credit for social security earnings on which retirement
is a trade or business. You do not need to actually make a benefits are based. For an explanation of ``material partici-
profit to be in a trade or business as long as you have a pation,'' see the Instructions for Schedule C, line G.
profit motive. You do need to make ongoing efforts to To make this election, you must divide all items of
further the interests of your business. income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit attributable to the
You do not have to carry on regular full-time business business between you and your spouse in accordance with
activities to be self-employed. Having a part-time business your respective interests in the venture. Each of you must
Page 2 Publication 334 (2010)

Page 3 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
file a separate Schedule C or C-EZ and a separate Sched- Ordering forms and publications. Visit 
www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and publica-ule SE. For more information, see Qualified Joint Venture
tions, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the address belowin the Instructions for Schedule SE.
and receive a response within 10 days after your request is
received.This publication does not cover the topics listed in the
following table.
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613IF you need information about: THEN you should
see:
Corporations ................ . Publication 542 Tax questions. If you have a tax question, check the
Farming ................... . Publication 225 information available on IRS.gov or call 1-800-829-1040.
We cannot answer tax questions sent to either of theFishermen (Capital Construction
Fund) ..................... . Publication 595 above addresses.
Partnerships ................ . Publication 541
Passive activities ............. . Publication 925
Recordkeeping .............. . Publication 583
What's New for 2010Rental ..................... . Publication 527
S corporations ............... . Instructions for The following are some of the tax changes for 2010. ForForm 1120S information on other changes, go to 
www.irs.gov/formspubs, and click on Highlights of Recent
Tax Changes.
What you need to know. Table A (shown later) provides
Self-employment tax. The maximum neta list of questions you need to answer to help you meet
self-employment earnings subject to the social securityyour federal tax obligations. After each question is the
part of the self-employment tax remains $106,800 forlocation in this publication where you will find the related 2010.discussion.
Self-employed health insurance deduction. For tax
years beginning in 2010, you can deduct anyIRS mission. Provide America's taxpayers top quality
self-employed health insurance deduction you report onservice by helping them understand and meet their tax
Form 1040, line 29, from self-employment earnings. Seeresponsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity the Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).and fairness to all.
Section 179 deduction dollar limit. For tax years begin-
Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com- ning in 2010, the maximum section 179 expense deduction
ments about this publication and your suggestions for is $500,000 (higher limits apply to certain property). For
more information, see Depreciation in chapter 8.future editions.
You can write to us at the following address: Standard mileage rate. For 2010, the standard mileage
rate for the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel
Internal Revenue Service truck for business miles is 50 cents per mile. For more
information, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
New general business credits.  The following credits are1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
new for 2010.Washington, DC 20224
• Credit for small employer health insurance premiums
(Form 8941).
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
• New hire retention credit (Form 5884-B).would be helpful if you would include your daytime phone
number, including the area code, in your correspondence. For more information, see chapter 4.
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asterisk
must be included in the address.) Please put ªPublications
Commentº on the subject line. You can also send us What's New for 2011comments from www.irs.gov/formspubs, select ªComment
on Tax Forms and Publicationsº under ªInformation about.º The following are some of the tax changes for 2011. For
Although we cannot respond individually to each comment information on other changes, go to 
received, we do appreciate your feedback and will con- www.irs.gov/formspubs, and click on Highlights of Recent
sider your comments as we revise our tax products. Tax Changes.
Publication 334 (2010) Page 3

Page 4 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note. The following is a list of questions you may need to answer so you can fill out your federal income tax
return. Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication.)
 What must I know  Where to find the answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them? See chapter 1 (page 6).
What forms must I file? See chapter 1 (page 10).
What must I do if I have employees? See Employment Taxes in chapter 1
(page 9).
Do I have to start my tax year in January, or can I start it in any other See Accounting Periods in chapter 2
month? (page 12).
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses? See Accounting Methods in chapter 2
(page 12).
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return? See chapter 5 (page 20).
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return? See Business Expenses in chapter 8
(page 31).
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses? See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8 (page 40).
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it? See chapter 9 (page 40).
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year? See chapter 3 (page 16).
What are my rights as a taxpayer? See chapter 11 (page 45).
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters? See chapter 12 (page 47).
Self-employment tax. The maximum net 3. Transactions for which you have, or a related party
self-employment earnings subject to the social security has, contractual protection against disallowance of
part of the self-employment tax remains at $106,800 for the tax benefits,
2011. 4. Transactions that result in losses of at least $2 mil-
lion in any single tax year ($50,000 if from certainStandard mileage rate. For 2011, the standard mileage foreign currency transactions) or $4 million in anyrate for the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel combination of tax years, andtruck for business miles is 51 cents per mile. For more
information, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8. 5. Transactions the same or substantially similar to one
of the types of transactions the IRS has identified as
a transaction of interest.
Reminders For more information, see the Instructions for Form 8886.
Accounting methods. Certain small business taxpayers
may be eligible to adopt or change to the cash method of Photographs of Missing
accounting and may not be required to account for invento-
ries. For more information, see Inventories in chapter 2. Children
Reportable transactions. You must file Form 8886, Re- The Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
portable Transaction Disclosure Statement, to report cer- National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Photo-
tain transactions. You may have to pay a penalty if you are graphs of missing children selected by the Center may
required to file Form 8886 but do not do so. You may also appear in this publication on pages that would otherwise
have to pay interest and penalties on any reportable trans- be blank. You can help bring these children home by
action understatements. Reportable transactions include: looking at the photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.1. Transactions the same as or substantially similar to
tax avoidance transactions identified by the IRS,
2. Transactions offered to you under conditions of confi-
dentiality for which you paid an advisor a minimum
fee,
Page 4 Publication 334 (2010)

Page 5 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1-800-772-1213. It is also available from the SSA website
at www.socialsecurity.gov. 
1. Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). The
IRS will issue an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident
alien and you do not have and are not eligible to get anFiling and Paying SSN. In general, if you need to obtain an ITIN, you must
attach Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual TaxpayerBusiness Taxes Identification Number, with your signed, original, com-
pleted tax return and any other required documentation
and mail them to the following address.
Introduction
Internal Revenue ServiceThis chapter explains the business taxes you may have to
ITIN Operationpay and the forms you may have to file. It also discusses
P.O. Box 149342taxpayer identification numbers. Austin, TX 78714-9342Table 1-1 lists the benefits of filing electronically.
Table 1-2 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay, The exceptions are covered in detail in the instructionstheir due dates, and the forms you use to report them. for Form W-7. If you must include another person's SSN
Table 1-3 provides checklists that highlight the typical on your return and that person does not have and cannot
forms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out get an SSN, enter that person's ITIN. The application is
of business. also available in Spanish. The form is available at
IRS.gov or you can call 1-800-829-3676 to order theYou may want to get Publication 509, Tax Calen- form.dars. It has tax calendars that tell you when to file
returns and make tax payments. An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle the
TIP
holder to social security benefits or change the
holder's employment or immigration status.
CAUTION
!Useful Items
You may want to see: Employer identification number (EIN). You must also
have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number ifPublication you do either of the following.
❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax • Pay wages to one or more employees.
• File pension or excise tax returns.Form (and Instructions)
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSN
on your Schedule C or C-EZ.❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals
You can apply for an EIN:❏ Sch C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business
• Online by clicking on the EIN link at❏ Sch C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit From Business www.irs.gov/businesses/small. The EIN is issued im-
mediately once the application information is vali-❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment Tax
dated.See chapter 12  for information about getting publica-
• By telephone at 1-800-829-4933 from 7:00 a.m. totions and forms.
10:00 p.m. in your local time zone.
• By mailing or faxing Form SS-4, Application for Em-
ployer Identification Number.Identification Numbers
New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either theThis section explains three types of taxpayer identification
form or the ownership of your business changes. For morenumbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how to
information, see Publication 1635, Understanding Yourget them.
EIN.
Social security number (SSN). Generally, use your SSN When you need identification numbers of other per-
as your taxpayer identification number. You must put this sons. In operating your business, you will probably make
number on each of your individual income tax forms, such certain payments you must report on information returns.
as Form 1040 and its schedules. These payments are discussed under Information Re-
To apply for an SSN, use Form SS-5, Application for a turns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient of
Social Security Card. This form is available at Social Se- these payments (the payee) a statement showing the total
curity Administration (SSA) offices or by calling amount paid during the year. You must include the payee's
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 5

Page 6 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
identification number and your identification number on the IRS e-file (Electronic Filing)
returns and statements.
Employee. If you have employees, you must get an
SSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN of
each employee exactly as they are shown on the em-
ployee's social security card. If the employee's name is not You may be able to file your tax returns electronically using
correct as shown on the card, the employee should re- an IRS e-file option. Table 1-1 lists the benefits of IRS
quest a new card from the SSA. This may occur if the e-file. IRS e-file uses automation to replace most of the
employee's name was changed due to marriage or di- manual steps needed to process paper returns. As a re-
vorce. sult, the processing of e-file returns is faster and more
Form W-4, Employee's Withholding Allowance Certifi- accurate than the processing of paper returns. As with a
paper return, you are responsible for making sure yourcate, is completed by each employee so the correct federal
return contains accurate information and is filed on time.income tax can be withheld from their pay.
Using e-file does not affect your chances of an IRSIf your employee does not have an SSN, he or she
examination of your return.should file Form SS-5 with the SSA.
You can file most commonly used business forms usingOther payee. If you make payments to someone who is IRS e-file. For more information, visit IRS.gov.
not your employee and you must report the payments on
Electronic signatures. Paperless filing is easier than youan information return, get that person's SSN. If you must
think and it's available to most taxpayers who file electroni-report payments to an organization, such as a corporation
callyÐincluding those first-time filers who were 16 or olderor partnership, you must get its EIN.
at the end of 2010. If you file electronically using taxTo get the payee's SSN or EIN, use Form W-9, Request preparation software or a tax professional, you will partici-for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification. pate in the Self-Select PIN (personal identification number)A payee who does not provide you with an identification program. If you are married filing jointly, you and yournumber may be subject to backup withholding. For infor- spouse will each need to create a PIN and enter thesemation on backup withholding, see the Form W-9 instruc- PINs as your electronic signatures.tions and the General Instructions for Certain Information  To create a PIN, you must know your adjusted grossReturns (Forms 1097, 1098, 1099, 3921, 3922, 5498, and income (AGI) from your originally filed 2009 income taxW-2G). return (not from an amended return, Form 1040X, or any
math error notice from the IRS). You will also need to
provide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure your DOB is
accurate and matches the information on record with theIncome Tax
Social Security Administration before you e-file. To do this,
check your annual Social Security Statement.This part explains whether you have to file an income tax
With a Self-Select PIN, there is nothing to sign andreturn and when you file it. It also explains how you pay the
nothing to mail Ðnot even your Forms W-2. For moretax.
details on the Self-Select PIN program, visit IRS.gov.
Do I Have To File State returns. In most states, you can file an electronic
state return simultaneously with your federal return. Foran Income Tax Return?
more information, check with your local IRS office, state
tax agency, tax professional, or IRS.gov.You have to file an income tax return for 2010 if your net
earnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If your Refunds. You can have your refund check mailed to you,net earnings from self-employment were less than $400, or you can have your refund deposited directly to youryou still have to file an income tax return if you meet any checking or savings account.other filing requirement listed in the Form 1040 instruc- With e-file, your refund will be issued in half the time astions. when filing on paper. Most refunds are issued within 3
weeks. If you choose Direct Deposit, you can receive your
How Do I File? refund in as few as 10 days.
Offset against debts. As with a paper return, you mayFile your income tax return on Form 1040  and attach not get all of your refund if you owe certain past-dueSchedule C or Schedule C-EZ.  Enter the net profit or loss amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a student loan, orfrom Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ on page 1 of Form child support. You will be notified if the refund you claimed1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit or loss from has been offset against your debts.your business. If you operated more than one business as
a sole proprietorship, you must attach a separate Schedule Refund inquiries. You can check the status of your re-
C for each business. You can use the simpler Schedule fund if it has been at least 3 weeks from the date you filed
C-EZ if you operated only one business as a sole proprie- your return. Be sure to have a copy of your tax return
torship, you did not have a net loss, and you meet the other available because you will need to know the filing status,
requirements listed in Part I of the schedule. the first social security number shown on the return, and
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the exact whole-dollar amount of the refund. To check on computer, you can e-file your return from your home any
your refund, do one of the following. time of the day or night. Sign your return electronically
using a self-selected PIN to complete the process. There is• Go to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Refund. no signature form to submit or Forms W-2 to send in.
• Call 1-800-829-4477 for automated refund informa-
tion, and follow the recorded instructions. Free Internet filing options. More taxpayers can now
prepare and e-file their individual income tax returns free• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours shown in your using commercial tax preparation software accessibleform instructions. through IRS.gov or www.usa.gov. The IRS is partnering
with the tax software industry to offer free preparation and
Balance due. If you owe tax, you must pay it by April 18, filing services to a significant number of taxpayers. Secur-
2011, to avoid late-payment penalties and interest. You ity and privacy certificate programs will assure tax data is
can make your payment electronically by scheduling an safe and secure. To see if you qualify for these services,
electronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savings visit the Free Internet Filing Homepage at IRS.gov.
account or by credit card. If you cannot use the free services, you can buy tax
preparation software at various electronics stores or com-
puter and office supply stores. You can also downloadUsing an Authorized IRS e-file Provider software from the Internet or prepare and file your return
completely online by using tax preparation software avail-Many tax professionals can electronically file paperless
able on the Internet.returns for their clients. You have two options.
1. You can prepare your return, take it to an authorized
Filing Through Employers and FinancialIRS e-file provider, and have the provider transmit it
Institutionselectronically to the IRS.
2. You can have an authorized IRS e-file provider pre- Some businesses offer free e-file to their employees,
pare your return and transmit it for you electronically. members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask your
employer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as anYou will be asked to complete Form 8879, IRS e-file
employee, member, or customer benefit.Signature Authorization, to authorize the provider to enter
your self-selected PIN on your return.
Depending on the provider and the specific services Free Help With Your Returnrequested, a fee may be charged. To find an authorized
IRS e-file provider near you, go to IRS.gov or look for an Free help in preparing your return is available nationwide
ªAuthorized IRS e-file Providerº sign. from IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income Tax
Assistance (VITA) program is designed to help low-income
taxpayers, and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)Using Your Personal Computer program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 or older
with their tax returns. Some locations offer free electronicA computer with Internet access is all you need to file your
filing.tax return using IRS e-file. When you use your personal
Table 1-1. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is significantly reduced.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic signatures • Create your own personal identification number (PIN) and file a completely
paperless return through your tax preparation software or tax professional. There is
nothing to mail.
Proof of acceptance • You receive an electronic acknowledgment within 48 hours that the IRS has
accepted your return for processing.
Fast refunds • You get your refund faster with Direct DepositÐin as few as 10 days.
Free Internet filing options • Use IRS.gov to access commercial tax preparation and e-file services available at
no cost to eligible taxpayers.
Electronic payment • Convenient, safe, and secure electronic payment options are available. E-file and
options pay your taxes in a single step. Schedule an electronic funds withdrawal from your
checking or savings account (up to and including April 18, 2011) or pay by credit
card.
Federal/State filing • Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together and double the benefits
you get from e-file.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

Page 8 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalty for underpayment of tax. If you did not payWhen Is My Tax Return Due? enough income tax and self-employment tax for 2010 by
withholding or by making estimated tax payments, youForm 1040 for calendar year 2010 is due by April 18, 2011.
may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The IRSIf you use a fiscal year (explained in chapter 2), your return
will figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or youis due by the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of your
can use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax byfiscal year. If you file late, you may have to pay penalties
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to pay aand interest.
penalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more infor- If you cannot file your return on time, use Form 4868, mation, see Publication 505.Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S.
Individual Income Tax Return, to request an automatic
6-month extension. For calendar year taxpayers, this will
Self-Employment (SE) Taxextend the tax filing due date until October 17. Filing an
extension does not extend the time to pay your taxes, only
Self-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security andthe time to file the tax return. Medicare tax primarily for individuals who work for them-
selves. It is similar to the social security and MedicareHow Do I Pay Income Tax? taxes withheld from the pay of most wage earners.
Federal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You must pay it If you earned income as a statutory employee,
you do not pay SE tax on that income.as you earn or receive income during the year. An em-
ployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her pay.
CAUTION
!
If you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do not
pay enough tax that way, you might have to pay estimated
tax. You generally have to make estimated tax payments if Social security coverage. Social security benefits are
you expect to owe taxes, including self-employment tax available to self-employed persons just as they are to
(discussed later), of $1,000 or more when you file your wage earners. Your payments of SE tax contribute to your
return. Use Form 1040-ES to figure and pay the tax. If you coverage under the social security system. Social security
coverage provides you with retirement benefits, disabilitydo not have to make estimated tax payments, you can pay
benefits, survivor benefits, and hospital insurance (Medi-any tax due when you file your return. For more information
care) benefits.on estimated tax, see Publication 505, Tax Withholding
and Estimated Tax. By not reporting all of your self-employment in-
come, you could cause your social security bene-What are my payment options? You can pay your esti- fits to be lower when you retire.
CAUTION
!mated tax electronically using various options. If you pay
electronically, there is no need to mail in Form 1040-ES How to become insured under social security. You
payment vouchers. These options include: must be insured under the social security system before
you begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-1. Paying electronically through the Electronic Federal sured if you have the required number of credits (alsoTax Payment System (EFTPS). called quarters of coverage), discussed next.
2. Paying by authorizing an electronic funds withdrawal Earning credits in 2010 and 2011. For 2010 and 2011,when you file Form 1040 electronically. you received one credit, up to a maximum of four credits,
3. Paying by credit or debit card over the phone or by for each $1,120 of income subject to social security taxes.
Therefore, for 2010 or 2011, if you had incomeInternet.
(self-employment and wages) of $4,480 that was subject toOther options include crediting an overpayment from your social security taxes, you receive four credits ($4,480 ÷2010 return to your 2011 estimated tax, or mailing a check $1,120).or money order with a Form 1040-ES payment voucher. For an explanation of the number of credits you must
have to be insured and the benefits available to you andEFTPS your family under the social security program, consult your
nearest Social Security Administration (SSA) office.1. To enroll in EFTPS, go to www.eftps.gov or call
1-800-555-4477. Making false statements to get or to increase
social security benefits may subject you to penal-2. When you request a new EIN and you will have a tax ties.
CAUTION
!obligation, you are automatically enrolled in EFTPS.
3. Benefits of EFTPS: The Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit for
posting self-employment income. Generally, the SSAa. The chance of an error in making your payments will give you credit only for self-employment income re-is reduced. ported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3 months, and 15
b. You receive immediate confirmation of every days after the tax year you earned the income. If you file
transaction. your tax return or report a change in your self-employment
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income after this time limit, the SSA may change its rec- Supplemental Tax Guide. That publication has information
ords, but only to remove or reduce the amount. The SSA to help you determine whether an individual is an indepen-
will not change its records to increase your dent contractor or an employee.
self-employment income. If you incorrectly classify an employee as an
independent contractor, you may be held liableWho must pay self-employment tax. You must pay SE for employment taxes for that worker plus a pen-
CAUTION
!tax and file Schedule SE (Form 1040) if either of the alty.following applies. 
An independent contractor is someone who is
1. Your net earnings from self-employment (excluding self-employed. You do not generally have to withhold or
church employee income) were $400 or more. pay any taxes on payments to an independent contractor. 
2. You had church employee income of $108.28 or
more.
Excise Taxes
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are
This section identifies some of the excise taxes you mayand even if you are already receiving social se-
have to pay and the forms you have to file if you do any ofcurity or Medicare benefits.
CAUTION
!
the following.
• Manufacture or sell certain products.SE tax rate. The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax). • Operate certain kinds of businesses.
Maximum earnings subject to SE tax. Only the first • Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or prod-
$106,800 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings ucts.
in 2010 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social • Receive payment for certain services.security part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad
retirement (tier 1) tax. For more information on excise taxes, see Publication 510,
Excise Taxes.All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 2010
are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare part
Form 720. The federal excise taxes reported on Formof SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement (tier 1)
720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-tax.
eral broad categories of taxes, including the following.If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-
ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at • Environmental taxes on the sale or use of
least $106,800, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of ozone-depleting chemicals and imported products
the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must containing or manufactured with these chemicals.
pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net
• Communications and air transportation taxes.earnings.
• Fuel taxes.Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjustment
to income on line 27 of Form 1040. • Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,
TIP
and tractors.
• Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a varietyMore information. For information on methods of calcu- of different articles.lating SE tax, see Chapter 10, Self-Employment Tax.
Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on the use of
certain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high-
Employment Taxes ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable gross
weight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on FormIf you have employees, you will need to file forms to report 2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For moreemployment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow- information, see the Instructions for Form 2290.ing items.
Depositing excise taxes. If you have to file a quarterly• Social security and Medicare taxes. excise tax return on Form 720, you may have to deposit
your excise taxes before the return is due. For details on• Federal income tax withholding.
depositing excise taxes, see the Instructions for Form 720.• Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax.
For more information, see Publication 15 (Circular E),
Employer's Tax Guide. That publication explains your tax
responsibilities as an employer.
To help you determine whether the people working for
you are your employees, see Publication 15-A, Employer's
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

Page 10 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-2. Which Forms Must I File?
IF you are liable for: THEN use Form: DUE by:1
Income tax 1040 and Schedule C or C-EZ2 15th day of 4th month after end of 
tax year.
Self-employment tax Schedule SE File with Form 1040.
Estimated tax 1040-ES 15th day of 4th, 6th, and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year.
Social security and Medicare taxes 941 or 944 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
and income tax withholding January 313.
See Publication 15.
Providing information on social W-2 (to employee) January 313.
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding W-2 and W-3 (to the Social Security Last day of February (March 31 if
Administration) filing electronically)3.
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax 940 January 313.
April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability for
unpaid tax is more than $500.
Filing information returns for See Information Returns Forms 1099±to the recipient by
payments to nonemployees and January 31 and to the IRS by
transactions with other persons February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically).
Other formsÐsee the General
Instructions for Certain Information
Returns (Forms 1097, 1098, 1099,
3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2G).
Excise tax See Excise Taxes See the instructions to the forms.
1 If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, file by the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. For
more information, see Publication 509, Tax Calendars.
2 File a separate schedule for each business.
3 See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
• Payments of $600 or more for services performed
for your business by people not treated as your em-
ployees, such as fees to subcontractors, attorneys,Information Returns accountants, or directors.
If you make or receive payments in your business, you • Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rents
may have to report them to the IRS on information returns. paid to real estate agents.
The IRS compares the payments shown on the information • Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not forreturns with each person's income tax return to see if the services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows.payments were included in income. You must give a copy
of each information return you are required to file to the • Royalty payments of $10 or more.
recipient or payer. In addition to the forms described be- • Payments to certain crew members by operators oflow, you may have to use other returns to report certain fishing boats.kinds of payments or transactions. For more details on
information returns and when you have to file them, see You also use Form 1099-MISC to report your sales of
the General Instructions for Certain Information Returns $5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for resale
(Forms 1097, 1098, 1099, 3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2G). anywhere other than in a permanent retail establishment.
Form 1099-MISC. Use Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income, to report certain payments you make in your
business. These payments include the following items.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 11 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Going Out of Business Checklists
(Note. The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if you
ever go out of business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms.)
IF you are liable for: THEN you may need to:
Income tax M File Schedule C or C-EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go
out of business.
M File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or
exchange property used in your business or in which the business use of
certain section 179 or listed property drops to 50% or less.
M File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-employment tax M File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment taxes M File Form 941 (or Form 944) for the calendar quarter in which you make final
wage payments. Note. Do not forget to check the box and enter the date
final wages were paid on line 18 of Form 941 or line 17 of Form 944.
M File Form 940 for the calendar year in which final wages were paid. Note. Do
not forget to check box d, Final: Business closed or stopped paying wages,
under Type of Return.
Information returns M Provide Forms W-2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you
make final wage payments. Note. These forms are generally due by the due
date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
M File Form W-3 to file Forms W-2. Note. These forms are generally due within
1 month after the due date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
M Provide Forms 1099-MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least
$600 for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in
which you go out of business.
M File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099-MISC.
Form W-2. You must file Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- In addition, there is no penalty for failure to include all
ment, to report payments to your employees, such as required information, or for including incorrect information,
wages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income, on a de minimis (small) number of information returns if
social security, and Medicare taxes, and advance earned you correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returns
income credit payments. For more information on what to are due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater of
report on Form W-2, see the Instructions for Forms W-2 10 or 1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you are
and W-3. required to file for the year.)
Penalties. The law provides for the following penalties if Form 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of Cash
you do not file Form 1099-MISC or Form W-2 or do not Payments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business,
correctly report the information. For more information, see if you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac-
the General Instructions for Certain Information Returns tion, or two or more related business transactions. Cash
(Forms 1097, 1098, 1099, 3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2G). includes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in-
cludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier's and• Failure to file information returns. This penalty ap- traveler's checks and money orders. Cash does not in-plies if you do not file information returns by the due clude a check drawn on an individual's personal accountdate, do not include all required information, or re- (personal check). For more information, see Publicationport incorrect information. 1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Re-
• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. This ceived in a Trade or Business).
penalty applies if you do not furnish a required state- Penalties. There are civil and criminal penalties, includ-ment to a payee by the required date, do not include ing up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, filing (orall required information, or report incorrect informa- causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 8300, ortion. structuring a transaction to evade reporting requirements.
Waiver of penalties. These penalties will not apply if
you can show that the failure was due to reasonable cause
and not willful neglect.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 11

Page 12 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
change it without IRS approval. For more information, see
Change in tax year, later.
2. If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintain
your books and records and report your income and ex-
penses for the period from January 1 through December
Accounting Periods 31 of each year.
and Methods Fiscal tax year. A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutive
months ending on the last day of any month except De-
cember. A 52-53-week tax year is a fiscal tax year that
varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on theIntroduction
last day of a month.You must figure your taxable income and file an income tax If you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain yourreturn for an annual accounting period called a tax year. books and records and report your income and expensesAlso, you must consistently use an accounting method that using the same tax year.clearly shows your income and expenses for the tax year. For more information on a fiscal tax year, including a
52-53-week tax year, see Publication 538.
Useful Items
Change in tax year. Generally, you must file Form 1128,You may want to see:
Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax Year, to
request IRS approval to change your tax year. See thePublication
Instructions for Form 1128 for exceptions. If you qualify for❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods an automatic approval request, a user fee is not required. If
you do not qualify for automatic approval, a ruling must beSee chapter 12  for information about getting publica-
requested. See the instructions for Form 1128 for informa-tions and forms.
tion about user fees if you are requesting a ruling.
Accounting Periods Accounting Methods
When preparing a statement of income and expenses
An accounting method is a set of rules used to determine(generally your income tax return), you must use your
when and how income and expenses are reported. Yourbooks and records for a specific interval of time called an
accounting method includes not only the overall method ofaccounting period. The annual accounting period for your
accounting you use, but also the accounting treatment youincome tax return is called a tax year. You can use one of
use for any material item.the following tax years.
You choose an accounting method for your business• A calendar tax year. when you file your first income tax return that includes a
Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want to• A fiscal tax year.
change your accounting method, you must generally getUnless you have a required tax year, you adopt a tax year IRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.by filing your first income tax return using that tax year. A
required tax year is a tax year required under the Internal Kinds of methods. Generally, you can use any of the
Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regulations. following accounting methods.
• Cash method.Calendar tax year. A calendar tax year is 12 consecutive
months beginning January 1 and ending December 31. • An accrual method.
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the • Special methods of accounting for certain items offollowing apply. income and expenses.
• You do not keep books. • Combination method using elements of two or more
• You have no annual accounting period. of the above.
• Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscal You must use the same accounting method to figureyear. your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, you
• Your use of the calendar tax year is required under must use an accounting method that clearly shows your
the Internal Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regu- income.
lations.
Business and personal items. You can account for busi-
If you filed your first income tax return using the calendar ness and personal items under different accounting meth-
tax year and you later begin business as a sole proprietor, ods. For example, you can figure your business income
you must continue to use the calendar tax year unless you under an accrual method, even if you use the cash method
get IRS approval to change it or are otherwise allowed to to figure personal items.
Page 12 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 13 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Two or more businesses. If you have two or more sepa- Debts paid by another person or canceled. If your
debts are paid by another person or are canceled by yourrate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-
creditors, you may have to report part or all of this debtcounting method for each if the method clearly reflects the
relief as income. If you receive income in this way, youincome of each business. They are separate and distinct
constructively receive the income when the debt is can-only if you maintain complete and separate books and
celed or paid. For more information, see Canceled Debt records for each business.
under Kinds of Income in chapter 5.
Cash Method Repayment of income. If you include an amount in in-
come and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it,Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven- you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in whichtory use the cash method because they find it easier to you make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, akeep cash method records. However, if an inventory is special rule applies. For details about the special rule, seenecessary to account for your income, you must generally Repayments in chapter 11 of Publication 535, Businessuse an accrual method of accounting for sales and Expenses.
purchases. For more information, see Inventories, later.
ExpensesIncome
Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses in
Under the cash method, include in your gross income all the tax year in which you actually pay them. This includes
items of income you actually or constructively receive business expenses for which you contest liability. How-
during your tax year. If you receive property or services, ever, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid in
you must include their fair market value in income. advance or you may be required to capitalize certain costs,
as explained later under Uniform Capitalization Rules.
Example. On December 30, 2009, Mrs. Sycamore sent
Expenses paid in advance. You can deduct an expenseyou a check for interior decorating services you provided to
you pay in advance only in the year to which it applies.her. You received the check on January 2, 2010. You must
include the amount of the check in income for 2010.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and you
pay $1,000 in 2010 for a business insurance policy effec-Constructive receipt. You have constructive receipt of
tive for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 inincome when an amount is credited to your account or
2010 and $500 in 2011.made available to you without restriction. You do not need
to have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be
your agent and receive income for you, you are treated as Accrual Method
having received it when your agent received it.
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally
Example. Interest is credited to your bank account in report income in the year earned and deduct or capitalize
December 2010. You do not withdraw it or enter it into your expenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrual
passbook until 2011. You must include it in your gross method of accounting is to match income and expenses in
income for 2010. the correct year.
Delaying receipt of income. You cannot hold checks
or postpone taking possession of similar property from one IncomeÐGeneral Rule
tax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. You
must report the income in the year the property is received Under an accrual method, you generally include an
or made available to you without restriction. amount in your gross income for the tax year in which all
events that fix your right to receive the income have oc-
Example. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was en- curred and you can determine the amount with reasonable
titled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De- accuracy.
cember 2010. She was told in December that her payment
was available. At her request, she was not paid until Example. You are a calendar year accrual method tax-
January 2011. She must include this payment in her 2010 payer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2010. You
income because it was constructively received in 2010. billed the customer in the first week of January 2011, but
you did not receive payment until February 2011. You mustChecks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the tax include the amount received for the computer in your 2010year is constructive receipt of income in that year, even if income.you cannot cash or deposit the check until the following
year.
IncomeÐSpecial Rules
Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-
cember 31, 2010, from a patient. She could not deposit the The following are special rules that apply to advance pay-
check in her business account until January 2, 2011. She ments, estimating income, and changing a payment
must include this fee in her income for 2010. schedule for services.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 13

Page 14 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Estimated income. If you include a reasonably estimated to you, or for your use of property, economic performance
amount in gross income, and later determine the exact occurs as the property or services are provided or as the
amount is different, take the difference into account in the property is used. If your expense is for property or services
tax year in which you make the determination. you provide to others, economic performance occurs as
you provide the property or services. An exception allowsChange in payment schedule for services. If you per- certain recurring items to be treated as incurred during aform services for a basic rate specified in a contract, you tax year even though economic performance has not oc-must accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you agree curred. For more information on economic performance,to receive payments at a lower rate until you complete the see Economic Performance under Accrual Method in Pub-services and then receive the difference. lication 538.
Advance payments for services. Generally, you report Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use anan advance payment for services to be performed in a later accrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies intax year as income in the year you receive the payment. December 2010. You receive the supplies and the bill inHowever, if you receive an advance payment for services
December, but you pay the bill in January 2011. You canyou agree to perform by the end of the next tax year, you
deduct the expense in 2010 because all events that fix thecan elect to postpone including the advance payment in
fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liabilityincome until the next tax year. However, you cannot post-
could be reasonably determined, and economic perform-pone including any payment beyond that tax year.
ance occurred in that year.For more information, see Advance Payment for Serv-
Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring expense.ices under Accrual Method in Publication 538. That publi-
In that case, you can deduct them in 2010 even if thecation also explains special rules for reporting the following
supplies are not delivered until 2011 (when economictypes of income.
performance occurs).• Advance payments for service agreements.
Keeping inventories. When the production, purchase, or• Prepaid rent.
sale of merchandise is an income-producing factor in your
business, you must generally take inventories into accountAdvance payments for sales. Special rules apply to in- at the beginning and the end of your tax year. If you mustcluding income from advance payments on agreements for account for an inventory, you must generally use an ac-future sales or other dispositions of goods you hold prima- crual method of accounting for your purchases and sales.rily for sale to your customers in the ordinary course of your For more information, see Inventories, later.business. If the advance payments are for contracts involv-
ing both the sale and service of goods, it may be necessary Special rule for related persons. You cannot deductto treat them as two agreements. An agreement includes a business expenses and interest owed to a related persongift certificate that can be redeemed for goods. Treat who uses the cash method of accounting until you makeamounts that are due and payable as amounts you re- the payment and the corresponding amount is includible inceived. the related person's gross income. Determine the relation-You generally include an advance payment in income ship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for which thefor the tax year in which you receive it. However, you can
expense or interest would otherwise be deductible. If ause an alternative method. For information about the alter-
deduction is not allowed under this rule, the rule will con-native method, see Publication 538.
tinue to apply even if your relationship with the person
ends before the expense or interest is includible in the
Expenses gross income of that person.
Related persons include members of your immediateUnder an accrual method of accounting, you generally family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole ordeduct or capitalize a business expense when both the half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. Forfollowing apply. a list of other related persons, see section 267 of the
Internal Revenue Code.1. The all-events test has been met. The test has been
met when:
Combination Methoda. All events have occurred that fix the fact of liabil-
ity, and You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual,
and special methods of accounting if the combinationb. The liability can be determined with reasonable clearly shows your income and expenses and you use itaccuracy. consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.
2. Economic performance has occurred. • If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-
come, you must generally use an accrual method for
purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories, Economic performance. You generally cannot deduct or
later.) You can use the cash method for all othercapitalize a business expense until economic performance
items of income and expenses.occurs. If your expense is for property or services provided
Page 14 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 15 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• If you use the cash method for figuring your income, include the period of any predecessor. If your business has
not been in existence for the 3-tax-year period, base youryou must use the cash method for reporting your
average on the period it has existed including any short taxexpenses.
years, annualizing the short tax year's gross receipts.• If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex-
Materials and supplies that are not incidental. If youpenses, you must use an accrual method for figuring
account for inventoriable items as materials and suppliesyour income.
that are not incidental, you will deduct the cost of the items• If you use a combination method that includes the you would otherwise include in inventory in the year youcash method, treat that combination method as the sell the items, or the year you pay for them, whichever iscash method. later. If you are a producer, you can use any reasonable
method to estimate the raw material in your work in pro-
cess and finished goods on hand at the end of the year to
Inventories determine the raw material used to produce finished goods
that were sold during the year.
Generally, if you produce, purchase, or sell merchandise in
Changing accounting method. If you are a qualifyingyour business, you must keep an inventory and use the
taxpayer or qualifying small business taxpayer and want toaccrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise.
change to the cash method or to account for inventoriableHowever, the following taxpayers can use the cash method
items as non-incidental materials and supplies, you mustof accounting even if they produce, purchase, or sell mer-
file Form 3115 , Application for Change in Accountingchandise. These taxpayers can also account for inventori-
Method.able items as materials and supplies that are not incidental
(discussed later). More information.  For more information about the quali-
fying taxpayer exception, see Revenue Procedure1. A qualifying taxpayer under Revenue Procedure 2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. For more2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. information about the qualifying small business taxpayer
exception, see Revenue Procedure 2002-28 in Internal2. A qualifying small business taxpayer under Revenue
Revenue Bulletin 2002-18.Procedure 2002-28 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
2002-18. Items included in inventory. If you are required to ac-
count for inventories, include the following items when
accounting for your inventory.Qualifying taxpayer. You are a qualifying taxpayer if:
• Merchandise or stock in trade.• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior
tax year ending on or after December 17, 1998, is $1 • Raw materials.million or less. (Your average annual gross receipts
• Work in process.for a tax year is figured by adding the gross receipts
for that tax year and the 2 preceding tax years and • Finished products.dividing by 3.)
• Supplies that physically become a part of the item• Your business is not a tax shelter, as defined under intended for sale.section 448(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Valuing inventory. You must value your inventory at theQualifying small business taxpayer. You are a qualify- beginning and end of each tax year to determine your costing small business taxpayer if: of goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine the
value of your inventory, you need a method for identifying• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior
the items in your inventory and a method for valuing thesetax year ending on or after December 31, 2000, is
items.more than $1 million but not more than $10 million.
Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for all(Your average annual gross receipts for a tax year is
kinds of businesses. The method you use to value yourfigured by adding the gross receipts for that tax year
inventory must conform to generally accepted accountingand the 2 preceding tax years and dividing the total
principles for similar businesses and must clearly reflectby 3.)
income. Your inventory practices must be consistent from• You are not prohibited from using the cash method year to year.under section 448 of the Internal Revenue Code.
More information. For more information about invento-• Your principal business activity is an eligible busi- ries, see Publication 538.ness (described in Publication 538 and Revenue
Procedure 2002-28). Uniform Capitalization Rules
Business not owned or not in existence for 3 years. If Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalize
you did not own your business for all of the 3-tax-year the direct costs and part of the indirect costs for production
period used in figuring your average annual gross receipts, or resale activities. Include these costs in the basis of
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 15

Page 16 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property you produce or acquire for resale, rather than 2. Your treatment of any material item.
claiming them as a current deduction. You recover the To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application forcosts through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goods Change in Accounting Method. You can get IRS approvalsold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop- to change an accounting method under either the auto-erty. matic change procedures or the advance consent request
procedures. You may have to pay a user fee. For moreActivities subject to the uniform capitalization rules. information, see the form instructions. You may be subject to the uniform capitalization rules if
you do any of the following, unless the property is pro- Automatic change procedures. Certain taxpayers can
duced for your use other than in a business or an activity presume to have IRS approval to change their method of
carried on for profit. accounting. The approval is granted for the tax year for
which the taxpayer requests a change (year of change), if• Produce real or tangible personal property. For this the taxpayer complies with the provisions of the automaticpurpose, tangible personal property includes a film, change procedures. No user fee is required for an applica-sound recording, video tape, book, or similar prop- tion filed under an automatic change procedure generallyerty. covered in Revenue Procedure 2002-9.
Generally, you must use Form 3115 to request an auto-• Acquire property for resale.
matic change. For more information, see the Instructions
for Form 3115.Exceptions. These rules do not apply to the following
property.
1. Personal property you acquire for resale if your aver-
age annual gross receipts are $10 million or less.
2. Property you produce if you meet either of the follow- 3.ing conditions.
a. Your indirect costs of producing the property are Dispositions of $200,000 or less.
Business Propertyb. You use the cash method of accounting and do
not account for inventories. For more information,
see Inventories, earlier.
Introduction
If you dispose of business property, you may have a gain
Special Methods or loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in some
cases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a loss thatThere are special methods of accounting for certain items is not deductible. This chapter discusses whether you haveof income or expense. These include the following. a disposition, how to figure the gain or loss, and where to
report the gain or loss.• Amortization, discussed in chapter 8 of Publication
535, Business Expenses.
Useful Items• Bad debts, discussed in chapter 10 of Publication You may want to see:535.
• Depletion, discussed in chapter 9 of Publication 535. Publication
• Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How To ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Depreciate Property.
Form (and Instructions)• Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In-
stallment Sales. ❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property
❏ Sch D (Form 1040) Capital Gains and Losses
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica-Change in
tions and forms.Accounting Method
Once you have set up your accounting method, you must
generally get IRS approval before you can change to What Is a Disposition
another method. A change in your accounting method
of Property?includes a change in:
1. Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac- A disposition of property includes the following transac-
crual method, and tions.
Page 16 Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 17 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You sell property for cash or other property. Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060, to provide this
information. The buyer and seller should each attach Form• You exchange property for other property. 8594 to their federal income tax return for the year in which
• You receive money as a tenant for the cancellation the sale occurred. 
of a lease. For more information about the sale of a business, see
chapter 2 of Publication 544.• You receive money for granting the exclusive use of
a copyright throughout its life in a particular medium.
• You transfer property to satisfy a debt. How Do I Figure
• You abandon property. a Gain or Loss?• Your bank or other financial institution forecloses on
your mortgage or repossesses your property.
Table 3-1. How To Figure a Gain or Loss• Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, and
you receive property or money in payment. IF your... THEN you have a...
• Your property is condemned, or disposed of under Adjusted basis is more than thethe threat of condemnation, and you receive prop- amount realized Loss.erty or money in payment.
Amount realized is more thanFor details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property, the adjusted basis Gain.see Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. For
details about other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publica- Basis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair markettion 544. value, and amount recognized are defined next. You need
to know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.Nontaxable exchanges. Certain exchanges of property
are not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange is Basis. The cost or purchase price of property is usually itsnot recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your gain basis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or otheror loss will not be recognized until you sell or otherwise disposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift,dispose of the property you receive. inheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you must
Like-kind exchanges. A like-kind exchange is the ex- use a basis other than its cost. For more information about
change of property for the same kind of property. It is the basis, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets.
most common type of nontaxable exchange. To be a
like-kind exchange, the property traded and the property Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of property is yourreceived must be both of the following. original cost or other basis plus certain additions, and
minus certain deductions such as depreciation and casu-• Business or investment property.
alty losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of trans-• Like property. ferring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses,
are added to the adjusted basis of the property.Report the exchange of like-kind property on Form
8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information about Amount realized. The amount you realize from a disposi-like-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 in Publication 544. tion is the total of all money you receive plus the fair market
value of all property or services you receive. The amount
Installment sales. An installment sale is a sale of prop- you realize also includes any of your liabilities that were
erty where you receive at least one payment after the tax assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which the
year of the sale. If you finance the buyer's purchase of your property you transferred is subject, such as real estate
property, instead of having the buyer get a loan or mort- taxes or a mortgage.
gage from a third party, you probably have an installment
sale. Fair market value. Fair market value is the price at which
the property would change hands between a buyer and aFor more information about installment sales, see Publi-
seller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having rea-cation 537, Installment Sales.
sonable knowledge of all necessary facts.
Sale of a business. The sale of a business usually is not Amount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from aa sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the business disposition of property is usually a recognized gain or lossare sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is treated for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included inas being sold separately for determining the treatment of gross income. Recognized losses are deductible fromgain or loss. gross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer-
Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of a tain exchanges of property is not recognized. See 
business must report to the IRS the allocation of the sales Nontaxable exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a
price among the business assets. Use Form 8594, Asset loss from the disposition of property held for personal use.
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property Page 17

Page 18 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dispositions of business property and depreciableIs My Gain or Loss property. Use Form 4797. If you have taxable gain, youOrdinary or Capital? may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 
You must classify your gains and losses as either ordinary Like-kind exchanges. Use Form 8824 , Like-Kind Ex-or capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure your changes. You may also have to use Form 4797 andnet capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capital Schedule D (Form 1040). gain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the most
part, everything you own and use for personal purposes or Installment sales. Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-
investment is a capital asset. come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and Schedule
Certain property you use in your business is not a D (Form 1040). 
capital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this
Casualties and thefts. Use Form 4684, Casualties andproperty is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you held
Thefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. the property longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat
the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains and Condemned property. Use Form 4797 . You may alsolosses are called section 1231 gains and losses. have to use Schedule D (Form 1040).For more information about ordinary and capital gains
and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication 544.
Is My Capital Gain or Loss
Short Term or Long Term? 4.
If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determine
whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or loss General Businessis long or short term depends on how long you own the
property before you dispose of it. The time you own prop- Creditserty before disposing of it is called the holding period.
Table 3-2. Do I Have a Short-Term or IntroductionLong-Term Gain or Loss?
Your general business credit for the year consists of your
IF you hold the carryforward of business credits from prior years plus the
property... THEN you have a... total of your current year business credits. In addition, your
general business credit for the current year may be in-1 year or less Short-term capital gain or loss. creased later by the carryback of business credits from
More than 1 year Long-term capital gain or loss. later years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax.
For more information about short-term and long-term Useful Itemscapital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 544. You may want to see:
Form (and Instructions)
Where Do I Report ❏ 3800 General Business Credit
Gains and Losses? ❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐIndividuals
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica-Report gains and losses from the following dispositions on
tions and forms.the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explain
how to fill them out.
Business Credits
All of the following credits are part of the general business
credit. The form you use to figure each credit is shown in
parentheses. You will also have to complete Form 3800.
Agricultural chemicals security credit (Form 8931).
This credit applies to qualified agricultural chemical secur-
ity expenses paid or incurred by eligible agricultural busi-
nesses. For more information, see Form 8931.
Alcohol and cellulosic biofuel fuels credit (Form 6478).
This credit consists of the alcohol mixture credit, alcohol
Page 18 Chapter 4 General Business Credits

Page 19 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
credit, small ethanol producer credit, and cellulosic biofuel Credit for small employer pension plan startup costs
producer credit. For more information, see Form 6478. (Form 8881). This credit applies to pension plan startup
costs of a new qualified defined benefit or defined contribu-
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property credit (Form tion plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simpli-
8911). This credit applies to the cost of any qualified fuel fied employee pension. For more information, see
vehicle refueling property you placed in service. For more Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business
information, see Form 8911. (SEP, Simple, and Qualified Plans).
Alternative motor vehicle credit (Form 8910). This Disabled access credit (Form 8826). This credit is a
credit consists of the following credits for certain vehicles nonrefundable tax credit for an eligible small business that
you placed in service. For more information, see Form pays or incurs expenses to provide access to persons who
8910. have disabilities. You must pay or incur the expenses to
enable your business to comply with the Americans with• Qualified fuel cell motor vehicle credit. Disabilities Act of 1990. For more information, see Form
• Advanced lean burn technology motor vehicle credit. 8826.
• Qualified hybrid motor vehicle credit. Distilled spirits credit (Form 8906). This credit is avail-
able to distillers and importers of distilled spirits and eligi-• Qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle credit. 
ble wholesalers of distilled spirits. For more information,
• Qualified plug-in electric drive motor vehicle conver- see Form 8906.
sion credit.
Empowerment zone and renewal community employ-
ment credit (Form 8844). You may qualify for this credit ifBiodiesel and renewable diesel fuels credit (Form you have employees and are engaged in a business in an8864). This credit applies to certain fuel sold or used in empowerment zone for which the credit is available. Foryour business. For more information, see Form 8864. more information, see Form 8844.
Carbon dioxide sequestration credit (Form 8933). This Energy efficient appliance credit (Form 8909). This
credit is for carbon dioxide which is captured at a qualified credit is available for manufacturers of eligible appliances.
facility and disposed of in a secure geological storage or For more information, see Form 8909.
used in a qualified enhanced oil or natural gas recovery
Energy efficient home credit (Form 8908). This credit isproject. For more information, see Form 8933.
available for eligible contractors of certain homes sold for
Credit for employer social security and Medicare taxes use as a residence. For more information, see Form 8908.
paid on certain employee tips (Form 8846). This credit Indian employment credit (Form 8845). This credit ap-is generally equal to your (employer's) portion of social plies to qualified wages and health insurance costs yousecurity and Medicare taxes paid on tips received by em- paid or incurred for qualified employees. For more informa-ployees of your food and beverage establishment where tion, see Form 8845.tipping is customary. The credit applies regardless of
whether the food is consumed on or off your business Investment credit (Form 3468). The investment credit is
premises. For more information, see Form 8846. the total of the following credits. For more information, see
Form 3468.Credit for employer differential wage payments (Form
• Rehabilitation credit.8932). This credit provides certain small businesses with
an incentive to continue to pay wages to an employee • Energy credit.performing services on active duty in the uniformed serv-
• Qualifying advanced coal project credit.ices of the United States for a period of more than 30 days.
For more information, see Form 8932. • Qualifying gasification project credit.
Credit for employer-provided childcare facilities and • Qualifying advanced energy project credit.
services (Form 8882). This credit applies to the qualified
• Qualifying therapeutic discovery project credit.expenses you paid for employee childcare and qualified
expenses you paid for childcare resource and referral
services. For more information, see Form 8882. Low sulfur diesel fuel production credit (Form 8896).
This credit is for the production of low sulfur diesel fuel by aCredit for increasing research activities (Form 6765). qualified small business. For more information, see FormThis credit is designed to encourage businesses to in- 8896.crease the amounts they spend on research and experi-
mental activities, including energy research. For more Low-income housing credit (Form 8586). This credit
information, see Form 6765. generally applies to each new qualified low-income build-
ing placed in service after 1986. For more information, seeCredit for small employer health insurance premiums Form 8586.(Form 8941). This credit applies to the cost of certain
health insurance coverage you provide to certain employ- Mine rescue team training credit (Form 8923). This
ees. For more information, see Form 8941. credit applies to training program costs you pay or incur for
Chapter 4 General Business Credits Page 19

Page 20 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
certain mine rescue team employees. For more informa-
tion, see Form 8923.
5.
New hire retention credit (Form 5884-B). This credit
may apply if you hired an employee after February 3, 2010,
Business Incomeand before January 1, 2011, and the employee works for
you for at least 52 consecutive weeks. For more informa-
tion, see Form 5884-B.
Introduction
New markets credit (Form 8874). This credit is for quali- This chapter primarily explains business income and howfied equity investments made in qualified community de- to account for it on your tax return, what items are notvelopment entities. For more information, see Form 8874. considered income, and gives guidelines for selected oc-
cupations.Nonconventional source fuel credit (Form 8907). This If there is a connection between any income you receivecredit is for qualified coke and coke gas you produced and and your business, the income is business income. Asold to an unrelated person during the tax year. For more connection exists if it is clear that the payment of incomeinformation, see Form 8907. would not have been made if you did not have the busi-
ness.Orphan drug credit (Form 8820). This credit applies to You can have business income even if you are notqualified expenses incurred in testing certain drugs for rare involved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. Incomediseases and conditions. For more information, see Form from work you do on the side in addition to your regular job8820. can be business income.
You report most business income, such as income fromQualified plug-in electric drive motor vehicle credit
selling your products or services, on Schedule C or C-EZ.(Form 8936). This credit is for new qualified plug-in elec-
But you report the income from the sale of business as-tric drive motor vehicles placed in service during the tax
sets, such as land and office buildings, on other formsyear. For more information, including information on what
instead of Schedule C or C-EZ. For information on sellingis considered as a qualified plug-in electric drive motor
business assets, see chapter 3.vehicle, see Form 8936.
Nonemployee compensation. Business income
Qualified plug-in electric vehicle credit (Form 8834, includes amounts you received in your business
Part I only). This portion of the credit is for certain quali- that were properly shown on Forms 1099-MISC.
TIP
fied plug-in electric vehicles. See Form 8834 for more This includes amounts reported as nonemployee compen-
information, including information on what is considered as sation in box 7 of the form. You can find more information
a qualified plug-in electric vehicle. in the instructions on the back of the Form 1099-MISC you
received. Qualified railroad track maintenance credit (Form
8900). This credit applies with respect to qualified railroad
track maintenance expenditures paid or incurred during
Kinds of Incomethe tax year. For more information, see Form 8900.
You must report on your tax return all income you receiveRenewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coal
from your business unless it is excluded by law. In mostproduction credit (Form 8835). This credit is for the sale
cases, your business income will be in the form of cash,of electricity, refined coal, or Indian coal produced in the
checks, and credit card charges. But business income canUnited States or U.S. possessions from qualified energy
be in other forms, such as property or services. These andresources at a qualified facility. For more information, see
other types of income are explained next.Form 8835.
If you are a U.S. citizen who has business incomeWork opportunity credit (Form 5884). This credit pro- from sources outside the United States (foreignvides businesses with an incentive to hire individuals from income), you must report that income on your tax
CAUTION
!targeted groups that have a particularly high unemploy- return unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law. If youment rate or other special employment needs. For more live outside the United States, you may be able to excludeinformation, see Form 5884. part or all of your foreign-source business income. For
details, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens
and Resident Aliens Abroad.
How To Claim the Credit
To claim a general business credit, you will first have to get
the forms you need to claim your current year business
credits.
In addition to the credit form, you also need to file Form
3800.
Page 20 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 21 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Members contact each other directly and request serv-Bartering for Property or Services ices to be performed. You are not required to provide
services unless requested by another member, but youBartering is an exchange of property or services. You must
can use as many of the offered services as you wishinclude in your gross receipts, at the time received, the fair
without paying a fee.market value of property or services you receive in ex-
You must include the fair market value of any serviceschange for something else. If you exchange services with
you receive from club members in your gross receiptsanother person and you both have agreed ahead of time
when you receive them even if you have not provided anyon the value of the services, that value will be accepted as
services to club members.the fair market value unless the value can be shown to be
otherwise. Information returns. If you are involved in a bartering
transaction, you may have to file either of the followingExample 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You per- forms.form legal services for a client, a small corporation. In
• Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-payment for your services, you receive shares of stock in
change Transactions. the corporation. You must include the fair market value of
the shares in income. • Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. 
For information about these forms, see the General In-Example 2. You are an artist and create a work of art to
structions for Certain Information Returns (Forms 1097,compensate your landlord for the rent-free use of your
1098, 1099, 3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2G).apartment. You must include the fair rental value of the
apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in-
clude the fair market value of the work of art in his or her
Real Estate Rentsrental income.
If you are a real estate dealer who receives income fromExample 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Both renting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc.,you and a house painter are members of a barter club, an who provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests,organization that each year gives its members a directory report the rental income and expenses on Schedule C orof members and the services each member provides. C-EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer or the kind ofMembers get in touch with other members directly and owner described in the preceding sentence, report thebargain for the value of the services to be performed. rental income and expenses on Schedule E. For moreIn return for accounting services you provided for the information, see Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-house painter's business, the house painter painted your erty (Including Rental of Vacation Homes).home. You must include in gross receipts the fair market
value of the services you received from the house painter. Real estate dealer. You are a real estate dealer if you are
The house painter must include the fair market value of engaged in the business of selling real estate to customers
your accounting services in his or her gross receipts. with the purpose of making a profit from those sales. Rent
you receive from real estate held for sale to customers is
Example 4. You are a member of a barter club that subject to SE tax. However, rent you receive from real
uses credit units to credit or debit members' accounts for estate held for speculation or investment is not subject to
goods or services provided or received. As soon as units SE tax.
are credited to your account, you can use them to buy Trailer park owner. Rental income from a trailer park isgoods or services or sell or transfer the units to other subject to SE tax if you are a self-employed trailer parkmembers. owner who provides trailer lots and facilities and substan-You must include the value of credit units you received tial services for the convenience of your tenants.in your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units are  You generally are considered to provide substantialcredited to your account. services for tenants if they are primarily for the tenants'The dollar value of units received for services by an convenience and normally are not provided to maintain theemployee of the club, who can use the units in the same lots in a condition for occupancy. Services are substantial ifmanner as other members, must be included in the em- the compensation for the services makes up a materialployee's gross income for the tax year in which received. It part of the tenants' rental payments.is wages subject to social security and Medicare taxes Examples of services that are not normally provided for(FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), and income the tenants' convenience include supervising and main-tax withholding. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em- taining a recreational hall provided by the park, distributingployer's Tax Guide. a monthly newsletter to tenants, operating a laundry facil-
ity, and helping tenants buy or sell their trailers.Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and use Examples of services that are normally provided tothe cash method of accounting. You join a barter club and maintain the lots in a condition for tenant occupancy in-agree to provide plumbing services to any member for a clude city sewerage, electrical connections, and roadways.specified number of hours. Each member has access to a
directory that lists the members of the club and the serv- Hotels, boarding houses, and apartments. Rental in-
ices available. come you receive for the use or occupancy of hotels,
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

Page 22 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
boarding houses, or apartment houses is subject to SE tax interest accrued up to the time the loan became uncollecti-
if you provide services for the occupants. ble. If the accrued interest later becomes uncollectible, you
Generally, you are considered to provide services for may be able to take a bad debt deduction. See Bad Debts
the occupants if the services are primarily for their conve- in chapter 8.
nience and are not services normally provided with the Unstated interest. If little or no interest is charged onrental of rooms for occupancy only. An example of a an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of eachservice that is not normally provided for the convenience of payment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest andthe occupants is maid service. However, providing heat Original Issue Discount (OID)  in Publication 537, Install-and light, cleaning stairways and lobbies, and collecting ment Sales.trash are services normally provided for the occupants'
convenience. Dividends. Generally, dividends are business income to
dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu-Prepaid rent. Advance payments received under a lease
tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in-that does not put any restriction on their use or enjoyment
come. If you hold stock as a personal investmentare income in the year you receive them. This is true no
separately from your business activity, the dividends frommatter what accounting method or period you use.
the stock are nonbusiness income.
If you receive dividends from business insurance premi-Lease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee for
ums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all orgranting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in your
part of the dividend as business income on your return. Togross receipts in the year received.
find out how much you have to report, see 
Lease cancellation payments. Report payments you re- Recovery of items previously deducted  under Other In-
ceive from your lessee for canceling a lease in your gross come, later.
receipts in the year received.
Canceled DebtPayments to third parties. If your lessee makes pay-
ments to someone else under an agreement to pay your The following explains the general rule for including can-debts or obligations, include the payments in your gross celed debt in income and the exceptions to the generalreceipts when the lessee makes the payments. A common rule.example of this kind of income is a lessee's payment of
your property taxes on leased real property.
General RuleSettlement payments. Payments you receive in settle-
ment of a lessee's obligation to restore the leased property Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other than
to its original condition are income in the amount that the as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceled
payments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold im- amount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report the
provements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon- canceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurred
nected by the lessee. the debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt,
report the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.
Personal Property Rents
ExceptionsIf you are in the business of renting personal property
(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental The following discussion covers some exceptions to theamount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule C general rule for canceled debt.or C-EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments described in the
preceding Real Estate Rents discussion can also be re- Price reduced after purchase. If you owe a debt to theceived for renting personal property. If you receive any of seller for property you bought and the seller reduces thethose payments, include them in your gross receipts as amount you owe, you generally do not have income fromexplained in that discussion. the reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treat
the amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-
Interest and Dividend Income ment and reduce your basis in the property.
Interest and dividends may be considered business in- Deductible debt. You do not realize income from a can-come. celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt would
have led to a deduction.Interest. Interest received on notes receivable that you
have accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi- Example. You get accounting services for your busi-ness income. Interest received on loans is business in- ness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi-come if you are in the business of lending money. ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Your
Uncollectible loans. If a loan payable to you becomes accountant forgives part of the amount you owe for the
uncollectible during the tax year and you use an accrual accounting services. How you treat the canceled debt
method of accounting, you must include in gross income depends on your method of accounting.
Page 22 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 23 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Cash method Ð You do not include the canceled 3. It was incurred or assumed at either of the following
debt in income because payment of the debt would times.
have been deductible as a business expense.
a. Before January 1, 1993.
• Accrual method Ð You include the canceled debt in
b. After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumedincome because the expense was deductible when
to acquire, construct, or substantially improve theyou incurred the debt.
real property.
For information on the cash and accrual methods of
4. It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.accounting, see chapter 2.
Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-
ing of debt described in (3) earlier, but only to the extent itExclusions
does not exceed the debt being refinanced.
Do not include canceled debt in income in the following You cannot exclude more than either of the following
situations. However, you may be required to file Form 982, amounts.
Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of Indebted-
1. The excess (if any) of:ness. For more information, see Form 982.  
a. The outstanding principal of qualified real property1. The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy case
under title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank- business debt (immediately before the cancella-
ruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. tion), over
2. The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent. b. The fair market value (immediately before the
You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent you cancellation) of the business real property that is
are insolvent. See Publication 908. security for the debt, reduced by the outstanding
principal amount of any other qualified real prop-3. The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to a erty business debt secured by this property imme-qualified person. See chapter 3 in Publication 225,
diately before the cancellation.Farmer's Tax Guide.
4. The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi- 2. The total adjusted bases of depreciable real property
ness debt. This situation is explained later. held by you immediately before the cancellation.
These adjusted bases are determined after any basis5. The canceled debt is qualified principal residence
reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy, insol-indebtedness which is discharged after 2006 and
vency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take intobefore 2013. See Form 982.
account depreciable real property acquired in con-If a canceled debt is excluded from income because it templation of the cancellation.takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa-
tions 2 through 6 do not apply. If it takes place when you Election. To make this election, complete Form 982are insolvent, the exclusions in situations 3 and 4 do not and attach it to your income tax return for the tax year inapply to the extent you are insolvent. which the cancellation occurs. You must file your return by
the due date (including extensions). If you timely filed yourDebt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes any return for the year without making the election, you can stilldebt for which you are liable or which attaches to property
make the election by filing an amended return within 6you hold.
months of the due date of the return (excluding exten-
sions). For more information, see When To File in the formQualified real property business debt. You can elect to
instructions.exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of qualified
real property business debt. If you make the election, you
must reduce the basis of your depreciable real property by Other Income
the amount excluded. Make this reduction at the beginning
of your tax year following the tax year in which the cancel- The following discussion explains how to treat other types
lation occurs. However, if you dispose of the property of business income you may receive.
before that time, you must reduce its basis immediately
before the disposition. Restricted property. Restricted property is property that
Cancellation of qualified real property business has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receive
debt. Qualified real property business debt is debt (other restricted stock or other property for services performed,
than qualified farm debt) that meets all the following condi- the fair market value of the property in excess of your cost
tions. is included in your income on Schedule C or C-EZ when
the restriction is lifted. However, you can choose to be1. It was incurred or assumed in connection with real taxed in the year you receive the property. For moreproperty used in a trade or business. information on including restricted property in income, see
Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.2. It was secured by such real property.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 23

Page 24 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gains and losses. Do not report on Schedule C or C-EZ will not report as income any part of the $300 he may
a gain or loss from the disposition of property that is neither recover in any future year.
stock in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers. Exception for depreciation. This rule does not applyInstead, you must report these gains and losses on other to depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rulesforms. For more information, see chapter 3. explained next.
Promissory notes. Report promissory notes and other Recapture of depreciation. In the following situations,evidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange of you have to recapture the depreciation deduction. Thisproperty that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale to means you include in income part or all of the depreciationcustomers on Schedule C or C-EZ. In general, you report you deducted in previous years.them at their stated principal amount (minus any unstated
Listed property. If your business use of listed propertyinterest) when you receive them.
(explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50% or
Lost income payments. If you reduce or stop your busi- less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the property
ness activities, report on Schedule C or C-EZ any payment in service, you may have to recapture part of the deprecia-
you receive for the lost income of your business from tion deduction. You do this by including in income on
insurance or other sources. Report it on Schedule C or Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in previ-
C-EZ even if your business is inactive when you receive ous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of Business
the payment. Property, to figure the amount to include on Schedule C.
For more information, see What is the Business-Use Re-
Damages. You must include in gross income compensa- quirement? in chapter 5 of Publication 946, How To Depre-
tion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of the ciate Property. That chapter explains how to determine
following injuries connected with your business. whether property is used more than 50% in your business.
• Patent infringement. Section 179 property. If you take a section 179 deduc-
tion (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty.
asset and before the end of the asset's recovery period the
• Antitrust injury. percentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you must
recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do this by
Economic injury. You may be entitled to a deduction including in income on Schedule C part of the deduction
against the income if it compensates you for actual eco- you took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount to
nomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the following include on Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 to
amounts. find out when you recapture the deduction.
• The amount you receive or accrue for damages in Sale or exchange of depreciable property. If you sell
the tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incur or exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may have
in the tax year to recover that amount. to treat all or part of the gain due to depreciation as
ordinary income. You figure the income due to deprecia-• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de-
tion recapture in Part III of Form 4797. For more informa-ducted.
tion, see chapter 4 in Publication 544, Sales and Other
Dispositions of Assets.Punitive damages. You must also include punitive
damages in income.
Kickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them in Items That Are Not Income
your income on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, do not
include them if you properly treat them as a reduction of a In some cases the property or money you receive is not
related expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost of income.
goods sold.
Appreciation. Increases in value of your property are not
Recovery of items previously deducted. If you recover income until you realize the increases through a sale or
a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year, other taxable disposition.
include the recovery in income on Schedule C or C-EZ.
Consignments. Consignments of merchandise to othersHowever, if all or part of the deduction in earlier years did
to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandisenot reduce your tax, you can exclude the part that did not
remains with you, the consignor, even after the consigneereduce your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery from
possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goodsincome, you must include with your return a computation
on consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con-showing how you figured the exclusion.
signee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you have
Example. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross in- shipped out on consignment is included in your inventory
come of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and other until it is sold.
allowable deductions of $7,700. He also had 2 personal Do not include merchandise you receive on consign-
exemptions for a total of $7,300. He would not pay income ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commission
tax even if he did not deduct the bad debt. Therefore, he on merchandise consigned to you in your income when
Page 24 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 25 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit or
commission, depending upon the method of accounting Guidelines for Selected
you use.
OccupationsConstruction allowances. If you enter into a lease after
August 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con- This section provides information to determine whetherstruction allowance you receive (in cash or as a rent your earnings should be reported on Schedule C (Formreduction) from your landlord if you receive it under both 1040) or C-EZ (Form 1040).the following conditions.
• Under a short-term lease of retail space. Direct seller. You must report all income you receive as a
direct seller on Schedule C or C-EZ. This includes any of• For the purpose of constructing or improving quali-
the following.fied long-term real property for use in your business
at that retail space. • Income from salesÐpayments you receive from
customers for products they buy from you.
Amount you can exclude. You can exclude the con-
• Commissions, bonuses, or percentages you receivestruction allowance to the extent it does not exceed the
for sales and the sales of others who work underamount you spent for construction or improvements.
you.Short-term lease. A short-term lease is a lease (or
• Prizes, awards, and gifts you receive from your sell-other agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space for
ing business.15 years or less. The following rules apply in determining
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. You must report this income regardless of whether it is
reported to you on an information return.• Take into account options to renew when figuring
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do not You are a direct seller if you meet all the followingtake into account any option to renew at fair market conditions.value determined at the time of renewal.
1. You are engaged in one of the following trades or• Two or more successive leases that are part of the
businesses.same transaction (or a series of related transactions)
for the same or substantially similar retail space are a. Selling or soliciting the sale of consumer productstreated as one lease. either in a home or other place that is not a per-
manent retail establishment, or to any buyer on aRetail space. Retail space is real property leased, oc- buy-sell basis or a deposit-commission basis forcupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your resale in a home or other place of business that isbusiness of selling tangible personal property or services
not a permanent retail establishment.to the general public.
b. Delivering or distributing newspapers or shoppingQualified long-term real property. Qualified long-term
news (including any services directly related toreal property is nonresidential real property that is part of,
that trade or business).or otherwise present at, your retail space and that reverts
to the landlord when the lease ends.
2. Substantially all your pay (whether paid in cash or
Exchange of like-kind property. If you exchange your not) for services described above is directly related
business property or property you hold for investment to sales or other output (including performance of
solely for property of a like kind to be used in your business services) rather than to the number of hours worked.or to be held for investment, no gain or loss is recognized.
3. Your services are performed under a written contractThis means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is not
between you and the person for whom you performdeductible. A common type of nontaxable exchange is the
the services, and the contract provides that you willtrade-in of a business automobile for another business
not be treated as an employee for federal tax pur-automobile. For more information, see Form 8824.
poses.Leasehold improvements. If a tenant erects buildings or
makes improvements to your property, the increase in the
Executor or administrator. If you administer a deceasedvalue of the property due to the improvements is not
person's estate, your fees are reported on Schedule C orincome to you. However, if the facts indicate that the
improvements are a payment of rent to you, then the C-EZ if you are one of the following:
increase in value would be income.
1. A professional fiduciary.
Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is not
2. A nonprofessional fiduciary (personal representative)income.
and both of the following apply.
Sales tax. State and local sales taxes imposed on the
a. The estate includes an active trade or business inbuyer, which you were required to collect and pay over to
which you actively participate.state or local governments, are not income.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 25

Page 26 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. Your fees are related to the operation of that trade • Substantially all your pay for these services directly
or business. relates to your sales or other output rather than to
the number of hours you work.
3. A nonprofessional fiduciary of a single estate that • You perform the services under a written contractrequires extensive managerial activities on your part that says you will not be treated as an employee forfor a long period of time, provided these activities are federal tax purposes.enough to be considered a trade or business.
 If the fees do not meet the above requirements, report This rule applies whether or not you hire others to help
them on line 21 of Form 1040. you make deliveries. It also applies whether you buy the
papers from the publisher or are paid based on the number
Fishing crew member.  If you are a member of the crew of papers you deliver.
that catches fish or other water life, your earnings are
Newspaper or magazine vendor. If you are 18 or olderreported on Schedule C or C-EZ if you meet all the require-
and you sell newspapers or magazines, your earnings arements shown in chapter 10 under Fishing crew member.
reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all the following condi-
Insurance agent, former. Termination payments you re- tions apply.
ceive as a former self-employed insurance agent from an • You sell newspapers or magazines to ultimate con-insurance company because of services you performed for sumers.that company are not reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all
the following conditions are met. • You sell them at a fixed price.
• You received payments after your agreement to per- • Your earnings are based on the difference between
form services for the company ended. the sales price and your cost of goods sold.
• You did not perform any services for the company This rule applies whether or not you are guaranteed aafter your service agreement ended and before the minimum amount of earnings. It also applies whether orend of the year in which you received the payment. not you receive credit for unsold newspapers or magazines
• You entered into a covenant not to compete against you return to your supplier.
the company for at least a 1-year period beginning
Notary public. Fees you receive for services you performon the date your service agreement ended.
as a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ.• The amount of the payments depended primarily on These payments are not subject to self-employment taxpolicies sold by you or credited to your account dur- (see the instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).ing the last year of your service agreement or the
extent to which those policies remain in force for Public official. Public officials generally do not report
some period after your service agreement ended, or what they earn for serving in public office on Schedule C or
both. C-EZ. This rule applies to payments received by an elected
tax collector from state funds on the basis of a fixed• The amount of the payment did not depend to any
percentage of the taxes collected. Public office includesextent on length of service or overall earnings from
any elective or appointive office of the United States or itsservices performed for the company (regardless of
possessions, the District of Columbia, a state or its politicalwhether eligibility for the payments depended on
subdivisions, or a wholly owned instrumentality of any oflength of service).
these.
Public officials of state or local governments report their
Insurance agent, retired. Income paid by an insurance fees on Schedule C or C-EZ if they are paid solely on a fee
company to a retired self-employed insurance agent based basis and if their services are eligible for, but not covered
on a percentage of commissions received before retire- by, social security under a federal-state agreement.
ment is reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. Also, renewal
commissions and deferred commissions for sales made Real estate agent or direct seller. If you are a licensed
before retirement are generally reported on Schedule C or real estate agent or a direct seller, your earnings are
C-EZ. reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if both the following apply.
However, renewal commissions paid to the survivor of • Substantially all your pay for services as a real es-an insurance agent are not reported on Schedule C or tate agent or direct seller directly relates to yourC-EZ. sales or other output rather than to the number of
hours you work.Newspaper carrier or distributor. You are a direct seller
and your earnings are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if • You perform the services under a written contract
all the following conditions apply. that says you will not be treated as an employee for
federal tax purposes.• You are in the business of delivering or distributing
newspapers or shopping news (including directly re-
lated services such as soliciting customers and col- Securities dealer. If you are a dealer in options or com-
lecting receipts). modities, your gains and losses from dealing or trading in
Page 26 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 27 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
section 1256 contracts (regulated futures contracts, for- charged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on
eign currency contracts, nonequity options, dealer equity your books of account. Instead, use only the net amount as
options, and dealer securities futures contracts) or prop- the cost of the merchandise purchased. For more informa-
erty related to those contracts (such as stock used to tion, see Trade discounts in chapter 6.
hedge options) are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. For
Payment placed in escrow. If the buyer of your propertymore information, see sections 1256 and 1402(i).
places part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you do
Securities trader. You are a trader in securities if you are not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually or
engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for constructively receive it. However, upon completion of the
your own account. As a trader in securities, your gain or terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you will
loss from the disposition of securities is not reported on have taxable income, even if you do not accept the money
Schedule C or C-EZ. However, see Securities dealer , until the next year.
earlier, for an exception that applies to section 1256 con-
Sales returns and allowances. Credits you allow cus-tracts. For more information about securities traders, see
tomers for returned merchandise and any other al-Publication 550, Investment Income and Expenses.
lowances you make on sales are deductions from gross
sales in figuring net sales.
Accounting for Your Income Advance payments. Special rules dealing with an ac-
crual method of accounting for payments received in ad-Accounting for your income for income tax purposes differs vance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.at times from accounting for financial purposes. This sec-
tion discusses some of the more common differences that Insurance proceeds. If you receive insurance or anothermay affect business transactions. type of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you mustFigure your business income on the basis of a tax year subtract it from the loss when you figure your deduction.and according to your regular method of accounting (see You cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty orchapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income-producing theft loss.factor in your business, you usually have to use inventories For information on casualty or theft losses, see Publica-to clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate are not tion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.allowed to use inventories. For more information on inven-
tories, see chapter 2.
Income paid to a third party. All income you earn is
taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income
paid to a third party. 6.
Example. You rent out your property and the rental
agreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son. How To Figure
The amount paid to your son is gross income to you.
Cost of Goods SoldCash discounts. These are amounts the seller permits
you to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment.
For income tax purposes, you can use either of the follow- Introductioning two methods to account for cash discounts.
If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost of1. Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. How-36, Purchases Less Cost of Items Withdrawn for ever, to determine these costs, you must value your inven-Personal Use in chapter 6). tory at the beginning and end of each tax year.
This chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer,2. Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac-
wholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-count.
ness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income.You must use the chosen method every year for all your This chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-purchase discounts. ness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter,If you use the second method, the credit balance in the or painter. However, if you work in a personal serviceaccount at the end of your tax year is business income. business and also sell or charge for the materials andUnder this method, you do not reduce the cost of goods supplies normally used in your business, this chapter ap-sold by the cash discounts you received. When valuing plies to you.your closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice price
If you must account for an inventory in your busi-of merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year by the
ness, you must generally use an accrual methodaverage or estimated discounts received on the merchan-
of accounting for your purchases and sales. Fordise.
CAUTION
!
more information, see chapter 2.
Trade discounts. These are reductions from list or cata-
log prices and usually are not written into the invoice or
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 27

Page 28 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
value of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 2009Figuring Cost of Goods Sold properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisition of
the property, and in 2009, you properly deducted $50 ofon Schedule C, Lines 35 administrative and other expenses attributable to the prop-
erty as business expenses. The charitable contributionThrough 42
allowed for 2010 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is the
amount that would be ordinary income if you had sold theFigure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35 through
contributed inventory at fair market value on the date of the42 of Schedule C. These lines are reproduced below and
gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining grossare explained in the discussion that follows.
income for 2010 must not include the $400. You remove
35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last that amount from opening inventory for 2010.year's closing inventory, attach explanation ....... .
36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-use .................................. . uted property in 2010 at a cost of $400, you would include
37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goodsyourself ............................... . sold for 2010 and deduct the $50 of administrative and
38 Materials and supplies ..................... . other expenses attributable to the property for that year.
39 Other costs ............................. . You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-
duction for the contributed property.40 Add lines 35 through 39 .................... .
41 Inventory at end of year .................... .
Line 3642 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40.
Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4 ........ . Purchases Less Cost of Items
Withdrawn for Personal Use
Line 35 If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise youInventory at Beginning of Year bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, this
includes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased forIf you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost of manufacture into a finished product.merchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that you
will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro- Trade discounts. The differences between the statedducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work in prices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them areprocess, finished goods, and materials and supplies used called trade discounts. You must use the prices you payin manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2). (not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purchases.Opening inventory usually will be identical to the closing Do not show the discount amount separately as an item ininventory of the year before. You must explain any differ- gross income.ence in a schedule attached to your return. An automobile dealer must record the cost of a car in
inventory reduced by any manufacturer's rebate that rep-Donation of inventory. If you contribute inventory (prop- resents a trade discount.erty that you sell in the course of your business), the
amount you can claim as a contribution deduction is the Cash discounts. Cash discounts are amounts your sup-smaller of its fair market value on the day you contributed it pliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices foror its basis. The basis of donated inventory is any cost prompt payments. There are two methods of accountingincurred for the inventory in an earlier year that you would for cash discounts. You can either credit them to a sepa-otherwise include in your opening inventory for the year of rate discount account or deduct them from total purchasesthe contribution. You must remove the amount of your for the year. Whichever method you use, you must becontribution deduction from your opening inventory. It is consistent. If you want to change your method of figuringnot part of the cost of goods sold. inventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application for
If the cost of donated inventory is not included in your Change in Accounting Method. For more information, see
opening inventory, the inventory's basis is zero and you Change in Accounting Method in chapter 2.
cannot claim a charitable contribution deduction. Treat the If you credit cash discounts to a separate account, youinventory's cost as you would ordinarily treat it under your must include this credit balance in your business income atmethod of accounting. For example, include the purchase the end of the tax year. If you use this method, do notprice of inventory bought and donated in the same year in reduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts.the cost of goods sold for that year.
A special rule applies to certain donations of food inven- Purchase returns and allowances. You must deduct all
tory. See Food Inventory  in Publication 526, Charitable returns and allowances from your total purchases during
Contributions. the year.
Example 1. You are a calendar year taxpayer who uses Merchandise withdrawn from sale. If you withdraw mer-
an accrual method of accounting. In 2010 you contributed chandise for your personal or family use, you must exclude
property from inventory to a church. It had a fair market this cost from the total amount of merchandise you bought
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 29 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or sales ac- Containers. Containers and packages that are an integral
count with the cost of merchandise you withdraw for per- part of the product manufactured are a part of your cost of
sonal use. You must also charge the amount to your goods sold. If they are not an integral part of the manufac-
drawing account. tured product, their costs are shipping or selling expenses.
A drawing account is a separate account you should
Freight-in. Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on rawkeep to record the business income you withdraw to pay
materials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-for personal and family expenses. As stated above, you
dise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods sold.also use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per-
sonal or family use. This account is also known as a Overhead expenses. Overhead expenses include ex-ªwithdrawals accountº or ªpersonal account.º penses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-
ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. TheLine 37 overhead expenses you have as direct and necessary
Cost of Labor expenses of the manufacturing operation are included in
your cost of goods sold.
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold
only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer- Line 40chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do not
Add Lines 35 through 39have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of
goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs prop- The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of theerly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both the goods available for sale during the year.direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw material
into a finished, saleable product.
Line 41
Direct labor. Direct labor costs are the wages you pay to Inventory at End of Yearthose employees who spend all their time working directly
on the product being manufactured. They also include a Subtract the value of your closing inventory (including, aspart of the wages you pay to employees who work directly appropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materialson the product part time if you can determine that part of and supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) fromtheir wages. line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known as
closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory willIndirect labor. Indirect labor costs are the wages you pay usually become the beginning inventory of your next taxto employees who perform a general factory function that year.does not have any immediate or direct connection with
making the saleable product, but that is a necessary part of
the manufacturing process. Line 42
Cost of Goods SoldOther labor. Other labor costs not properly chargeable to
the cost of goods sold can be deducted as selling or When you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at theadministrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of labor end of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale,costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold are the remainder is your cost of goods sold during the taxthe direct or indirect labor costs and certain other costs year.treated as overhead expenses properly charged to the
manufacturing process, as discussed later under Line 39
Other Costs.
Line 38 7.Materials and Supplies
Materials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals, Figuring Gross Profitused in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of goods
sold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing process
are treated as deferred charges. You deduct them as a
Introductionbusiness expense when you use them. Business ex-
penses are discussed in chapter 8. After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-
ness (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold (chapter 6),
Line 39 you are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter-
mine gross profit before you can deduct any businessOther Costs
expenses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8.
If you are filing Schedule C-EZ, your gross profit is yourExamples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing or
gross receipts plus certain other amounts, explained latermining process that you charge to your cost of goods sold
under Additions to Gross Profit.are as follows.
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit Page 29

Page 30 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Businesses that sell products. If you are filing Schedule Inventory at beginning of year. Compare this figure with
C, figure your gross profit by first figuring your net receipts. last year's ending inventory. The two amounts should
Figure net receipts (line 3) on Schedule C by subtracting usually be the same.
any returns and allowances (line 2) from gross receipts
Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per-(line 1). Returns and allowances include cash or credit
sonal use (use them yourself, provide them to your family,refunds you make to customers, rebates, and other al-
or give them as personal gifts, etc.) be sure to removelowances off the actual sales price.
them from the cost of goods sold. For details on how toNext, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from net
adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise withdrawnreceipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from your
from sale in chapter 6.business.
Inventory at end of year. Check to make sure your pro-Businesses that sell services. You do not have to figure
cedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-the cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not an
dures should ensure all items have been included inincome-producing factor for your business. Your gross
inventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receipts
Use inventory forms and adding machine tapes as theminus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Most
only evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are avail-professions and businesses that sell services rather than
able at office supply stores. These forms have columns forproducts can figure gross profit directly from net receipts in
recording the description, quantity, unit price, and value ofthis way.
each inventory item. Each page has space to record who
made the physical count, who priced the items, who madeIllustration. This illustration of the gross profit section of
the extensions, and who proofread the calculations. Thesethe income statement of a retail business shows how gross
forms will help satisfy you that the total inventory is accu-profit is figured.
rate. They will also provide you with a permanent record to
Income Statement support its validity.
Year Ended December 31, 2010 Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.
Gross receipts .............................. . $400,000
Minus: Returns and allowances .................. . 14,940
Net receipts ............................... . $385,060 Testing GrossMinus: Cost of goods sold ...................... . 288,140
Gross profit ............................... . $96,920
Profit AccuracyThe cost of goods sold for this business is figured as
follows: If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can check
Inventory at beginning of year .................. . $37,845 the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide gross
Plus: Purchases ................... . $285,900 profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measures
Minus: Items withdrawn for personal use ... . 2,650 283,250 the average spread between the merchandise cost ofGoods available for sale ...................... . $321,095
goods sold and the selling price.Minus: Inventory at end of year ................. . 32,955
Cost of goods sold ......................... . $288,140 Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy.
Little or no difference between these two percentages
shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large
difference between these percentages may show that you
Items To Check did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, or
other items of cost. You should determine the reason for
Consider the following items before figuring your gross the difference.
profit. Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On the
average, he marks up his merchandise so that he willGross receipts. At the end of each business day, make
realize a gross profit of 331/3% on its sales. The net receiptssure your records balance with your actual cash and credit
(gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown onreceipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use cash
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold isregisters to keep track of receipts. You should also use a
$200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank account
($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year'sfor your business.
results, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receipts
($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per-Sales tax collected. Check to make sure your records
centage of 331/3%.show the correct sales tax collected.
If you collect state and local sales taxes imposed on you
as the seller of goods or services from the buyer, you must
include the amount collected in gross receipts. Additions to Gross Profit
If you are required to collect state and local taxes im-
posed on the buyer and turn them over to state or local If your business has income from a source other than its
governments, you generally do not include these amounts regular business operations, enter the income on line 6 of
in income. Schedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is gross
Page 30 Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit

Page 31 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business income. If you use Schedule C-EZ, include the 1. Created or acquired in your business.
income on line 1 of the schedule. Some examples include 2. Closely related to your business when it becameincome from an interest-bearing checking account, income partly or totally worthless.from scrap sales, and amounts recovered from bad debts.
A debt is closely related to your business if your primary
motive for incurring the debt is a business reason.
Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit sales
to customers. They can also be the result of loans to
suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and
8. services customers have not paid for are shown in your
books as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. If
you are unable to collect any part of these accounts orBusiness Expenses notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a business bad
debt.
You can take a bad debt deduction for theseIntroduction accounts and notes receivable only if the amount
You can deduct the costs of running your business. These you were owed was included in your gross in-
CAUTION
!
costs are known as business expenses. These are costs come either for the year the deduction is claimed or for a
you do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of goods prior year.
sold but can deduct in the current year.
Accrual method. If you use an accrual method of ac-To be deductible, a business expense must be both
counting, you normally report income as you earn it. Youordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that is
can take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiva-common and accepted in your field of business. A neces-
ble if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-sary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for your
come.business. An expense does not have to be indispensable
to be considered necessary. Cash method. If you use the cash method of account-
For more information about the general rules for deduct- ing, you normally report income when you receive pay-
ing business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publication 535, ment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amounts
Business Expenses. owed to you that you have not received and cannot collect
if you never included those amounts in income.If you have an expense that is partly for business
and partly personal, separate the personal part More information. For more information about businessfrom the business part. The personal part is not
CAUTION
! bad debts, see chapter 10 in Publication 535.deductible.
Nonbusiness bad debts. All other bad debts are non-
business bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-Useful Items tal losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For moreYou may want to see: information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Publication
550, Investment Income and Expenses.Publication
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses Car and Truck Expenses
❏ 535 Business Expenses
If you use your car or truck in your business, you may be❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining your
vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other costs of localSee chapter 12  for information about getting publica-
transportation and traveling away from home overnight ontions and forms.
business.
You may qualify for a tax credit for qualified
plug-in electric vehicles, qualified plug-in electricBad Debts
drive motor vehicles, and alternative motor vehi-
TIP
If someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have cles you place in service during the year. Alternative motor
a bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts, business bad vehicles include qualified fuel cell motor vehicles, ad-
debts and nonbusiness bad debts. vanced lean burn technology motor vehicles, qualified hy-
brid motor vehicles, and qualified alternative fuel motorA business bad debt is generally one that comes from
vehicles. See Form 8834 (Part I only), Form 8936, andoperating your trade or business. You may be able to
Form 8910 for more information. deduct business bad debts as an expense on your busi-
ness tax return.
Local transportation expenses. Local transportation ex-
Business bad debt. A business bad debt is a loss from penses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all the
the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the following. following.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Getting from one workplace to another in the course purposes. For 2010, the standard mileage rate is 50 cents
of your business or profession when you are travel- per mile.
ing within the city or general area that is your tax If you choose to use the standard mileage rate forhome. Tax home is defined later. a year, you cannot deduct your actual expenses
• Visiting clients or customers. for that year except for business-related parking
CAUTION
!
fees and tolls.• Going to a business meeting away from your regular
workplace. Choosing the standard mileage rate. If you want to
use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own,• Getting from your home to a temporary workplace
you must choose to use it in the first year the car iswhen you have one or more regular places of work.
available for use in your business. In later years, you canThese temporary workplaces can be either within the
choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actualarea of your tax home or outside that area.
expenses.
Local business transportation does not include expenses If you use the standard mileage rate for a car you lease,
you have while traveling away from home overnight. Those you must choose to use it for the entire lease period
expenses are deductible as travel expenses and are dis- (including renewals).
cussed later under Travel, Meals, and Entertainment.
Standard mileage rate not allowed. You cannot useHowever, if you use your car while traveling away from
the standard mileage rate if you:home overnight, use the rules in this section to figure your
car expense deduction. 1. Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi- 2. Operate five or more cars at the same time,ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.
It includes the entire city or general area in which your 3. Claimed a depreciation deduction using any method
business or work is located. other than straight line, for example, ACRS or
MACRS,
Example. You operate a printing business out of rented 4. Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,office space. You use your van to deliver completed jobs to
your customers. You can deduct the cost of round-trip 5. Claimed the special depreciation allowance on the
transportation between your customers and your print car,
shop. 6. Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased, or
You cannot deduct the costs of driving your car or 7. Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-truck between your home and your main or regu- bursement.lar workplace. These costs are personal commut-
CAUTION
!
ing expenses. Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using the stan-
dard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-relatedOffice in the home. Your workplace can be your home
parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park yourif you have an office in your home that qualifies as your
car at your place of work are nondeductible commutingprincipal place of business. For more information, see
expenses.)Business Use of Your Home, later.
Actual expenses. If you do not choose to use the stan-Example. You are a graphics designer. You operate dard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actualyour business out of your home. Your home qualifies as car or truck expenses.your principal place of business. You occasionally have to
drive to your clients to deliver your completed work. You If you qualify to use both methods, figure your
can deduct the cost of the round-trip transportation be- deduction both ways to see which gives you a
tween your home and your clients. larger deduction.
TIP
Actual car expenses include the costs of the following
Methods for Deducting items.
Car and Truck Expenses Depreciation Lease payments Registration
Garage rent Licenses RepairsFor local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck, Gas Oil Tires
you generally can use one of the following methods to Insurance Parking fees Tolls
figure your expenses. If you use your vehicle for both business and personal
• Standard mileage rate. purposes, you must divide your expenses between busi-
ness and personal use. You can divide your expenses• Actual expenses. based on the miles driven for each purpose.
Standard mileage rate. You may be able to use the Example. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop.
standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs of You drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000
operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for business miles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000
Page 32 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
miles were for personal use. You can claim only 80% Depreciation method. The method for depreciating most
(16,000 ÷  20,000) of the cost of operating your van as a business and investment property placed in service after
business expense. 1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
System (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in Publi-
cation 946.More information. For more information about the rules
for claiming car and truck expenses, see Publication 463. Section 179 deduction. You can elect to deduct a limited
amount of the cost of certain depreciable property in the
year you place the property in service. This deduction isReimbursing Your Employees
known as the ªsection 179 deduction.º The maximumfor Expenses amount you can elect to deduct during 2010 is generally
$500,000 (higher limits apply to certain property).You generally can deduct the amount you reimburse your This limit is generally reduced by the amount by whichemployees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse- the cost of the property placed in service during the taxment you deduct and the manner in which you deduct it year exceeds $2 million. The total amount of depreciationdepend in part on whether you reimburse the expenses (including the section 179 deduction) you can take for aunder an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. For passenger automobile you use in your business and firstdetails, see chapter 11 in Publication 535. That chapter place in service in 2010 is $3,060 ($11,060 if you take theexplains accountable and nonaccountable plans and tells special depreciation allowance for qualified passenger au-you whether to report the reimbursement on your em- tomobiles placed in service in 2010). Special rules apply toployee's Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. trucks and vans. For more information, see Publication
946. It explains what property qualifies for the deduction,
what limits apply to the deduction, and when and how to
Depreciation recapture the deduction.
Your section 179 election for the cost of any sportIf property you acquire to use in your business is expected
utility vehicle (SUV) and certain other vehicles isto last more than 1 year, you generally cannot deduct the
limited to $25,000. For more information, see theentire cost as a business expense in the year you acquire
CAUTION
!
Instructions for Form 4562 or Publication 946.it. You must spread the cost over more than 1 tax year and
deduct part of it each year on Schedule C. This method of Listed property. You must follow special rules and re-deducting the cost of business property is called deprecia- cordkeeping requirements when depreciating listed prop-tion. erty. Listed property is any of the following.The discussion here is brief. You will find more informa-
• Most passenger automobiles.tion about depreciation in Publication 946.
• Most other property used for transportation.
What property can be depreciated? You can depreciate • Any property of a type generally used for entertain-property if it meets all the following requirements. ment, recreation, or amusement.
• It must be property you own. • Certain computers and related peripheral equipment.
• It must be used in business or held to produce in-
come. You never can depreciate inventory (ex- For more information about listed property, see Publica-
plained in chapter 2) because it is not held for use in tion 946.
your business. Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-
• It must have a useful life that extends substantially tion, if you are claiming any of the following.
beyond the year it is placed in service. • Depreciation on property placed in service during the
• It must have a determinable useful life, which means current tax year.
that it must be something that wears out, decays, • A section 179 deduction.gets used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value
from natural causes. You never can depreciate the • Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of
cost of land because land does not wear out, be- when it was placed in service).
come obsolete, or get used up.
• It must not be excepted property. This includes prop- If you have to use Form 4562, you must file
erty placed in service and disposed of in the same Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ.
year.
CAUTION
!
Repairs.  You cannot depreciate repairs and replace-
ments that do not increase the value of your property,
make it more useful, or lengthen its useful life. You can
deduct these amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 of
Schedule C-EZ.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Accident and health plans.
Employees' Pay • Adoption assistance.
• Cafeteria plans.You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give
your employees for the services they perform for your • Dependent care assistance.
business. The pay may be in cash, property, or services. • Educational assistance.To be deductible, your employees' pay must be an
• Group-term life insurance coverage.ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or
incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet both • Welfare benefit funds.the following tests.
You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you• The pay must be reasonable.
provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost• The pay must be for services performed. falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car or
Chapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines these other property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease as a
requirements. rent or lease expense. If you own the property, include
your deduction for its cost or other basis as a section 179You cannot deduct your own salary or any personal
deduction or a depreciation deduction.withdrawals you make from your business. As a sole pro-
prietor, you are not an employee of the business. You may be able to exclude all or part of the fringe
benefits you provide from your employees'If you had employees during the year, you must
wages. For more information about fringe bene-
TIPuse Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ.
fits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication 15-B,
CAUTION
!
Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.
Kinds of pay. Some of the ways you may provide pay to
your employees are listed below. For an explanation of Insurance
each of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535.
You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the follow-• Awards. ing kinds of insurance related to your business. 
• Bonuses.
1. Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.• Education expenses.
2. Credit insurance that covers losses from business• Fringe benefits (discussed later). bad debts.
• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee 3. Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-to repay if they are for personal services actually ployees, including long-term care insurance.performed.
4. Liability insurance.• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for
5. Malpractice insurance that covers your personal lia-services.
bility for professional negligence resulting in injury or• Reimbursements for employee business expenses. damage to patients or clients.
• Sick pay. 6. Workers' compensation insurance set by state law
• Vacation pay. that covers any claims for bodily injuries or
job-related diseases suffered by employees in your
Fringe benefits. A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the business, regardless of fault.performance of services. The following are examples of
7. Contributions to a state unemployment insurancefringe benefits.
fund are deductible as taxes if they are considered• Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs. taxes under state law.
• Meals and lodging. 8. Overhead insurance that pays for business overhead
• The use of a car. expenses you have during long periods of disability
caused by your injury or sickness.• Flights on airplanes.
9. Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehicles• Discounts on property or services.
used in your business for liability, damages, and
• Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs. other losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for per-
sonal use, deduct only the part of the insurance pre-• Tickets to entertainment or sporting events.
mium that applies to the business use of the vehicle.
Employee benefit programs include the following. If you use the standard mileage rate to figure your
Page 34 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
car expenses, you cannot deduct any car insurance deduction. However, if any of the following apply, you must
premiums. use the worksheet in chapter 6 of Publication 535.
10. Life insurance covering your employees if you are • You have more than one source of income subject to
not directly or indirectly the beneficiary under the self-employment tax.
contract. • You file Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ (relating to
11. Business interruption insurance that pays for lost foreign earned income).
profits if your business is shut down due to a fire or • You are using amounts paid for qualified long-termother cause. care insurance to figure the deduction.
Nondeductible premiums. You cannot deduct premiums
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance,on the following kinds of insurance.
even if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to any
1. Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deduct expense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create an
amounts credited to a reserve set up for asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond the
self-insurance. This applies even if you cannot get end of the current tax year.
business insurance coverage for certain business
risks. However, your actual losses may be deducti- Example. In 2010, you signed a 3-year insurance con-
ble. For more information, see Publication 547, Cas- tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2010, 2011,
ualties, Disasters, and Thefts. and 2012 when you signed the contract, you can only
deduct the premium for 2010 on your 2010 tax return. You2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for a
can deduct in 2011 and 2012 the premium allocable topolicy that pays for your lost earnings due to sick-
those years.ness or disability. However, see item (8) in the previ-
ous list.
More information. For more information about deducting
3. Certain life insurance and annuities. insurance, see chapter 6 in Publication 535.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, you
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insurance
policy covering you, an employee, or any person Interest
with a financial interest in your business if you are
You can generally deduct as a business expense all inter-directly or indirectly a beneficiary of the policy.
est you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts relatedYou are included among possible beneficiaries of
to your business. Interest relates to your business if youthe policy if the policy owner is obligated to repay
a loan from you using the proceeds of the policy. use the proceeds of the loan for a business expense. It
A person has a financial interest in your business does not matter what type of property secures the loan.
if the person is an owner or part owner of the You can deduct interest on a debt only if you meet all of the
business or has lent money to the business. following requirements.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen- • You are legally liable for that debt.
erally cannot deduct the premiums on any life • Both you and the lender intend that the debt beinsurance policy, endowment contract, or annuity repaid.contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
ciary. The disallowance applies without regard to • You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-
whom the policy covers. tionship.
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policy You cannot deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the interest
on your life or on the life of another person with a you paid on personal loans. If a loan is part business and
financial interest in your business to get or protect a part personal, you must divide the interest between the
business loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as a personal part and the business part.
business expense. Nor can you deduct the premiums
as interest on business loans or as an expense of Example. In 2010, you paid $600 interest on a car loan.
financing loans. In the event of death, the proceeds During 2010, you used the car 60% for business and 40%
of the policy are not taxed as income even if they are for personal purposes. You are claiming actual expenses
used to liquidate the debt. on the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% ×  $600) for
2010 on Schedule C or C-EZ. The remaining interest of
$240 is a nondeductible personal expense.Self-employed health insurance deduction. You may
be able to deduct the amount you paid for medical and
More information. For more information about deductingdental insurance and qualified long-term care insurance
interest, see chapter 4 in Publication 535. That chapterfor you and your family.
explains the following items.How to figure the deduction. Generally, you can use
• Interest you can deduct.the worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure your
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Interest you cannot deduct. (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-
ployee pension.• How to allocate interest between personal and busi- Under certain plans, employees can have you contrib-ness use. ute limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan. These
• When to deduct interest. amounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax free
until your employees receive distributions from the plan.• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (This For more information on retirement plans for small busi-is generally a loan on which no interest is charged or ness, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Smallon which interest is charged at a rate below the Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).applicable federal rate.)
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs), discusses other tax favored ways
to save for retirement.
TIP
Legal and Professional Fees
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged by
accountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses Rent Expense
directly related to operating your business are deductible
Rent is any amount you pay for the use of property you doon Schedule C or C-EZ. However, you usually cannot
not own. In general, you can deduct rent as a businessdeduct legal fees you pay to acquire business assets. Add
expense only if the rent is for property you use in yourthem to the basis of the property.
business. If you have or will receive equity in or title to theIf the fees include payments for work of a personal
property, you cannot deduct the rent.nature (such as making a will), you can take a business
deduction only for the part of the fee related to your Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental deductionbusiness. The personal part of legal fees for producing or for unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-collecting taxable income, doing or keeping your job, or for bleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Renttax advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if paid to a related person is reasonable if it is the sameyou itemize deductions. For more information, see Publi- amount you would pay to a stranger for use of the samecation 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. property. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-
Tax preparation fees. You can deduct on Schedule C ured as a percentage of gross receipts.
or C-EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax return Related persons include members of your immediate
relating to your business as a sole proprietor or statutory family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
employee. You can deduct the remaining cost on Schedule half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For
A (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. a list of the other related persons, see section 267 of the
You can also deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the amount Internal Revenue Code.
you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficiencies for Rent on your home. If you rent your home and use part ofyour business as a sole proprietor or statutory employee. it as your place of business, you may be able to deduct the
rent you pay for that part. You must meet the requirements
for business use of your home. For more information, see
Pension Plans Business Use of Your Home, later.
Rent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid in your busi-You can set up and maintain the following small business
ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you payretirement plans for yourself and your employees.
rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount that• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans. applies to your use of the rented property during the tax
year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only over• SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ-
the period to which it applies.ees) plans.
• Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans). More information. For more information about rent, see
chapter 3 in Publication 535.
SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and your
employees a tax favored way to save for retirement. You
can deduct contributions you make to the plan for your Taxesemployees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a sole
proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make to the You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ various federal,plan for yourself on line 28 of Form 1040. You can also state, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable to yourdeduct trustees' fees if contributions to the plan do not business.cover them. Earnings on the contributions are generally tax
free until you or your employees receive distributions from Income taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ a
the plan. You may also be able to claim a tax credit of 50% state tax on gross income (as distinguished from net in-
of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs if you begin a come) directly attributable to your business. You can de-
new qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plan duct other state and local income taxes on Schedule A
Page 36 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 37 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deduct Do not deduct state and local sales taxes im-
posed on the buyer that you must collect and payfederal income tax.
over to the state or local government. Do not
CAUTION
!
include these taxes in gross receipts or sales.Employment taxes. You can deduct the social security,
Medicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes you
Excise taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ allpaid out of your own funds as an employer. Employment
excise taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses oftaxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can also
carrying on your business. Excise taxes are discusseddeduct payments you made as an employer to a state
briefly in chapter 1.unemployment compensation fund or to a state disability
benefit fund. Deduct these payments as taxes. Fuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and other
motor fuels you use in your business are usually includedSelf-employment tax. You can deduct one-half of your as part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes asself-employment tax on line 27 of Form 1040. a separate item.Self-employment tax is discussed in chapters 1 and 10. You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federal
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. ForPersonal property tax. You can deduct on Schedule C or more information, see Publication 510, Excise Taxes.C-EZ any tax imposed by a state or local government on
personal property used in your business.
You can also deduct registration fees for the right to use Travel, Meals,property within a state or local area.
and EntertainmentExample. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000
business miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had to This section briefly explains the kinds of travel and enter-
pay $25 for their annual state license tags and $20 for their tainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule C or
city registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city per- C-EZ.
sonal property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They are
claiming their actual car expenses. Because they used the Travel expenses. These are the ordinary and necessary
car 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of the $280, or expenses of traveling away from home for your business.
$196, as a business expense. You are traveling away from home if both the following
conditions are met.
Real estate taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or
1. Your duties require you to be away from the generalC-EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business
area of your tax home (defined later) substantiallyproperty. Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,
longer than an ordinary day's work.or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the general public
welfare. The taxing authority must base the taxes on the 2. You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demands
assessed value of the real estate and charge them uni- of your work while away from home.
formly against all property under its jurisdiction. Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-For more information about real estate taxes, see chap- ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.ter 5 in Publication 535. That chapter explains special rules It includes the entire city or general area in which yourfor deducting the following items. business is located. See Publication 463 for more informa-
tion.• Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks,
The following is a brief discussion of the expenses youstreets, water mains, and sewer lines.
can deduct.• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell property
Transportation. You can deduct the cost of travel byduring the year.
airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your• Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method of business destination.accounting and choose to accrue real estate tax
Taxi, commuter bus, and limousine. You can deductrelated to a definite period ratably over that period.
fares for these and other types of transportation between
the airport or station and your hotel, or between the hotel
Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or on and your work location away from home.
the purchase or use of property as part of the cost of the
Baggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost ofservice or property. If the service or the cost or use of the
sending baggage and sample or display material betweenproperty is a deductible business expense, you can deduct
your regular and temporary work locations.the tax as part of that service or cost. If the property is
merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of the Car or truck. You can deduct the costs of operating and
cost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, add maintaining your vehicle when traveling away from home
the sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For information on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stan-
on the basis of property, see Publication 551, Basis of dard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car and Truck
Assets. Expenses), as well as business-related tolls and parking. If
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 8-1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
(Note. The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details
about these rules, see Publication 463.) 
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client, customer, or employee
if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the associated test.
Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide entertainment,
amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a customer or client.
• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your field of business,
trade, or profession.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not necessarily
required, for your business.
Tests to be met Directly-related test
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment period, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other specific
business benefit.
Associated test
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business discussion.
Other rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if you are claiming
the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the circumstances.
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
you rent a car while away from home on business, you can • Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to business
customers or their families.deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules listedMeals and lodging. You can deduct the cost of meals
in Table 8-1. For details about these rules, see Publicationand lodging if your business trip is overnight or long
463.enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
perform your duties. In most cases, you can deduct only Reimbursing your employees for expenses. You gen-50% of your meal expenses. erally can deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-
Cleaning. You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning and ees for travel and entertainment expenses. The
reimbursement you deduct and the manner in which youlaundry while on your business trip.
deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse theTelephone. You can deduct the cost of business calls expenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccountablewhile on your business trip, including business communi- plan. For details, see chapter 11 in Publication 535. Thatcation by fax machine or other communication devices. chapter explains accountable and nonaccountable plans
and tells you whether to report the reimbursement on yourTips. You can deduct the tips you pay for any expense
employee's Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.in this list.
More information. For more information about travel
expenses, see Publication 463.
Business Use
Entertainment expenses. You may be able to deduct of Your Homebusiness-related entertainment expenses for entertaining
a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you can To deduct expenses related to the part of your home used
deduct only 50% of these expenses. for business, you must meet specific requirements. Even
The following are examples of entertainment expenses. then, your deduction may be limited.
• Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs, the- To qualify to claim expenses for business use of your
aters, or sporting events. home, you must meet the following tests.
Page 38 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 39 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Your use of the business part of your home must be: • You use it exclusively and regularly for administra-
tive or management activities of your business.
a. Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclusive
• You have no other fixed location where you conductuse , later),
substantial administrative or management activities
b. Regular, of your business.
c. For your business, and
Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively and regu-
larly for your business, but your home office does not2. The business part of your home must be one of the
qualify as your principal place of business based on thefollowing:
previous rules, you determine your principal place of busi-
a. Your principal place of business (defined later), ness based on the following factors.
b. A place where you meet or deal with patients, • The relative importance of the activities performed at
clients, or customers in the normal course of your each location.
business, or • If the relative importance factor does not determine
c. A separate structure (not attached to your home) your principal place of business, you can also con-
you use in connection with your business. sider the time spent at each location.
If, after considering your business locations, your home
Exclusive use. To qualify under the exclusive use test, cannot be identified as your principal place of business,
you must use a specific area of your home only for your you cannot deduct home office expenses. However, for
trade or business. The area used for business can be a other ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, see
room or other separately identifiable space. The space Publication 587.
does not need to be marked off by a permanent partition. Deduction limit. If your gross income from the businessYou do not meet the requirements of the exclusive use use of your home equals or exceeds your total businesstest if you use the area in question both for business and expenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all yourfor personal purposes. business expenses related to the use of your home. If your
gross income from the business use is less than your totalExample. You are an attorney and use a den in your business expenses, your deduction for certain expenseshome to write legal briefs and prepare clients' tax returns. for the business use of your home is limited.Your family also uses the den for recreation. The den is not Your deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses,used exclusively in your profession, so you cannot claim a such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depreci-business deduction for its use. ation taken last), allocable to the business is limited to the
Exceptions to exclusive use. You do not have to meet gross income from the business use of your home minus
the exclusive use test if you use part of your home in either the sum of the following.
of the following ways.
1. The business part of expenses you could deduct
1. For the storage of inventory or product samples. even if you did not use your home for business (such
as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualty2. As a daycare facility. and theft losses that are allowable as itemized de-
For an explanation of these exceptions, see Publication ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)).
587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use by Day- 2. The business expenses that relate to the businesscare Providers). activity in the home (for example, business phone,
supplies, and depreciation on equipment), but not toRegular use. To qualify under the regular use test, you the use of the home itself.must use a specific area of your home for business on a
continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your business Do not include in (2) above your deduction for one-half of
use of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if you your self-employment tax.
do not use that area for any other purpose. Use Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Your
Home, to figure your deduction. 
Principal place of business. You can have more than More information. For more information on deductingone business location, including your home, for a single expenses for the business use of your home, see Publica-trade or business. To qualify to deduct the expenses for tion 587.the business use of your home under the principal place of
business test, your home must be your principal place of
business for that business. To determine your principal
place of business, you must consider all the facts and
circumstances.
Your home office will qualify as your principal place of
business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet the
following requirements.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 39

Page 40 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other Expenses 9.You Can Deduct
Figuring Net ProfitYou may also be able to deduct the following expenses.
See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deduct or Lossthem.
• Advertising.
Introduction• Bank fees.
After figuring your business income and expenses, you are• Donations to business organizations.
ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your business.• Education expenses. You do this by subtracting business expenses from busi-
ness income. If your expenses are less than your income,• Energy efficient commercial buildings deduction ex-
the difference is net profit and becomes part of your in-penses.
come on page 1 of Form 1040. If your expenses are more• Environmental cleanup costs. than your income, the difference is a net loss. You usually
can deduct it from gross income on page 1 of Form 1040.• Impairment-related expenses.
But in some situations your loss is limited. This chapter• Interview expense allowances. briefly explains two of those situations. Other situations
that may limit your loss are explained in the Instructions for• Licenses and regulatory fees.
Schedule C, line G and line 32.• Moving machinery.
If you have more than one business, you must• Outplacement services. figure your net profit or loss for each business on
a separate Schedule C.• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance or
CAUTION
!
nonperformance of a contract.
• Repairs that keep your property in a normal efficient
operating condition. Net Operating Losses (NOLs)
• Repayments of income. If your deductions for the year are more than your income
• Subscriptions to trade or professional publications. for the year (line 41 of your Form 1040 is a negative
number), you may have a net operating loss (NOL). You• Supplies and materials. can use an NOL by deducting it from your income in
• Utilities. another year or years.
Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOL
include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from the
following.
Expenses You Cannot Deduct • Your trade or business.
You usually cannot deduct the following as business ex- • Your work as an employee (unreimbursed employee
penses. For more information, see Publication 535. business expenses).
• Bribes and kickbacks. • A casualty or theft.
• Charitable contributions. • Moving expenses.
• Demolition expenses or losses. • Rental property.
• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sport-
A loss from operating a business is the most commoning, airline, and hotel clubs. reason for an NOL.
• Lobbying expenses. For details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net Oper-
ating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts. It• Penalties and fines you pay to a governmental
explains how to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claimagency or instrumentality because you broke the
an NOL deduction, and how to figure an NOL carryover.law.
• Personal, living, and family expenses.
• Political contributions. Not-for-Profit Activities
• Repairs that add to the value of your property or If you do not carry on your business to make a profit, theresignificantly increase its life. is a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use a
Page 40 Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or Loss

Page 41 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loss from the activity to offset other income. Activities you U.S. citizens. Nonresident aliens are not subject to SE tax.
do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, come However, residents of the Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico,
under this limit. Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Is-
lands, or American Samoa are subject to self-employmentFor details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter 1
tax, as they are considered U.S. residents forin Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter ex-
self-employment tax purposes. For more information onplains how to determine whether your activity is carried on
aliens, see Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.to make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss you
can deduct.
Child employed by parent. You are not subject to SE tax
if you are under age 18 and you are working for your father
or mother.
Church employee.  If you work for a church or a qualified
church-controlled organization (other than as a minister or10.
member of a religious order) that elected an exemption
from social security and Medicare taxes, you are subject to
SE tax if you receive $108.28 or more in wages from theSelf-Employment (SE)
church or organization. For more information, see Publica-
Tax tion 517, Social Security and Other Information for Mem-
bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers.
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are Fishing crew member. If you are a member of the crewand even if you are already receiving social se- on a boat that catches fish or other water life, your earningscurity and Medicare benefits.
CAUTION
! are subject to SE tax if all the following conditions apply.
1. You do not get any pay for the work except your
share of the catch or a share of the proceeds from
Who Must Pay SE Tax? the sale of the catch, unless the pay meets all the
following conditions.Generally, you must pay SE tax and file Schedule SE
(Form 1040) if your net earnings from self-employment a. The pay is not more than $100 per trip.
were $400 or more. Use Schedule SE to figure net earn- b. The pay is received only if there is a minimumings from self-employment. catch.
Sole proprietor or independent contractor. If you are c. The pay is solely for additional duties (such as
self-employed as a sole proprietor or independent contrac- mate, engineer, or cook) for which additional cash
tor, you generally use Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040) to pay is traditional in the fishing industry.
figure your earnings subject to SE tax.
2. You get a share of the catch or a share of the pro-SE tax rate.  The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3% ceeds from the sale of the catch.(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
3. Your share depends on the amount of the catch.
Maximum earnings subject to self-employment tax. 4. The boat's operating crew normally numbers fewerOnly the first $106,800 of your combined wages, tips, and than 10 individuals. (An operating crew is considerednet earnings in 2010 is subject to any combination of the as normally made up of fewer than 10 if the average12.4% social security part of SE tax, social security tax, or size of the crew on trips made during the last fourrailroad retirement (tier 1) tax. calendar quarters is fewer than 10.)All of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in
2010 are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare
Notary public. Fees you receive for services you performpart of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement
as a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ but(tier 1) tax.
are not subject to self-employment tax (see the Instruc-If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-
tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at
least $106,800, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of
State or local government employee. You are subject tothe SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must
SE tax if you are an employee of a state or local govern-pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net
ment, are paid solely on a fee basis, and your services areearnings.
not covered under a federal-state social security agree-
ment.Special Rules and Exceptions
Foreign government or international organization em-
Aliens. Generally, resident aliens must pay ployee. You are subject to SE tax if both the following
self-employment tax under the same rules that apply to conditions are true.
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 41

Page 42 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. You are a U.S. citizen employed in the United States, receive the payment, it still relates to your business and is
Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Common- included in earnings subject to SE tax, even though your
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the Virgin business is temporarily inactive.
Islands by:
Figuring Earnings Subject to SE Taxa. A foreign government,
b. A wholly-owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-
Methods for Figuring Net Earningsernment, or
c. An international organization. There are three ways to figure your net earnings from
self-employment.
2. Your employer is not required to withhold social se-
1. The regular method.curity and Medicare taxes from your wages.
2. The nonfarm optional method.
U.S. citizen or resident alien residing abroad.  If you 3. The farm optional method.are a self-employed U.S. citizen or resident alien living
You must use the regular method unless you are eligibleoutside the United States, in most cases you must pay SE
tax. Do not reduce your foreign earnings from to use one or both of the optional methods.
self-employment by your foreign earned income exclusion.
Exception.  The United States has social security Why use an optional method?  You may want to use the
agreements with many countries to eliminate double taxa- optional methods (discussed later) when you have a loss
tion under two social security systems. Under these agree- or a small net profit and any one of the following applies.
ments, you generally must only pay social security and
• You want to receive credit for social security benefitMedicare taxes to the country in which you live. The coun-
coverage.try to which you must pay the tax will issue a certificate
which serves as proof of exemption from social security tax • You incurred child or dependent care expenses forin the other country. which you could claim a credit. (An optional method
For more information, see the Instructions for Schedule may increase your earned income, which could in-SE (Form 1040). crease your credit.)
• You are entitled to the earned income credit. (An
More Than One Business optional method may increase your earned income,
which could increase your credit.)If you have earnings subject to SE tax from more than one
trade, business, or profession, you must combine the net • You are entitled to the additional child tax credit. (An
profit (or loss) from each to determine your total earnings optional method may increase your earned income,
subject to SE tax. A loss from one business reduces your which could increase your credit.)
profit from another business.
Effects of using an optional method. Using an optional
Community Property Income method could increase your SE tax. Paying more SE tax
could result in your getting higher benefits when you retire.If any of the income from a trade or business, other than a
If you use either or both optional methods, you mustpartnership, is community property income under state
figure and pay the SE tax due under these methods even iflaw, it is included in the earnings subject to SE tax of the
spouse carrying on the trade or business. you would have had a smaller tax or no tax using the
regular method.
The optional methods may be used only to figure yourGain or Loss
SE tax. To figure your income tax, include your actual
Do not include in earnings subject to SE tax a gain or loss earnings in gross income, regardless of which method you
from the disposition of property that is neither stock in trade use to determine SE tax.
nor held primarily for sale to customers. It does not matter
whether the disposition is a sale, exchange, or an involun-
Regular Methodtary conversion.
Multiply your total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35%
Lost Income Payments (.9235) to get your net earnings under the regular method.
See Short Schedule SE, line 4, or Long Schedule SE, lineIf you are self-employed and reduce or stop your business 4a.activities, any payment you receive from insurance or other
Net earnings figured using the regular method are alsosources for the lost business income is included in earn-
called actual net earnings.ings subject to SE tax. If you are not working when you
Page 42 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 43 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Actual net earnings. Your actual net earnings areNonfarm Optional Method
92.35% of your total earnings subject to SE tax (that is,
Use the nonfarm optional method only for earnings that do multiply total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% (.9235)
not come from farming. You may use this method if you to get actual net earnings). Actual net earnings are
meet all the following tests. equivalent to net earnings figured using the regular
method.1. You are self-employed on a regular basis. This
means that your actual net earnings from Optional net earnings less than actual net earnings.
self-employment were $400 or more in at least 2 of You cannot use this method to report an amount less than
the 3 tax years before the one for which you use this your actual net earnings from self-employment.
method. The net earnings can be from either farm or
Gross nonfarm income of $6,720 or less. The followingnonfarm earnings or both.
examples illustrate how to figure net earnings when gross
2. You have used this method less than 5 years. (There nonfarm income is $6,720 or less.
is a 5-year lifetime limit.) The years do not have to be
one after another. Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,851 and
less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. Ann3. Your net nonfarm profits were:
Green runs a craft business. Her actual net earnings from
self-employment were $800 in 2008 and $900 in 2009. Shea. Less than $4,851, and
meets the test for being self-employed on a regular basis.b. Less than 72.189% of your gross nonfarm in- She has used the nonfarm optional method less than 5come. years. Her gross income and net profit in 2010 are as
follows:
Net nonfarm profits. Net nonfarm profit generally is the Gross nonfarm income .................. . $5,400total of the amounts from: Net nonfarm profit ...................... . $1,200
• Line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040), Ann's actual net earnings for 2010 are $1,108 ($1,200 ×
.9235). Because her net profit is less than $4,851 and less• Line 3, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040),
than 72.189% of her gross income, she can use the non-• Box 14, code A, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from farm optional method to figure net earnings of $3,600 (2/3 ×nonfarm partnerships), and $5,400). Because these net earnings are higher than her
actual net earnings, she can report net earnings of $3,600• Box 9, code J1, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B).
for 2010.
However, you may need to adjust the amount reported
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,851 buton Schedule K-1 if you are a general partner or if it is a loss.
not less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. As-
sume that in Example 1 Ann's gross income is $1,000 andGross nonfarm income. Your gross nonfarm income
her net profit is $800. She must use the regular method togenerally is the total of the amounts from:
figure her net earnings. She cannot use the nonfarm op-
• Line 7, Schedule C (Form 1040), tional method because her net profit is not less than
72.189% of her gross income.• Line 1, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040),
• Box 14, code C, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business. As-
nonfarm partnerships), and sume that in Example 1 Ann has a net loss of $700. She
can use the nonfarm optional method and report $3,600 (2/3• Box 9, code J2, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B).
×  $5,400) as her net earnings.
Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings Example 4. Nonfarm net earnings less than $400.
Assume that in Example 1 Ann has gross income of $525If you meet the three tests explained earlier, use the and a net profit of $175. In this situation, she would not pay
following table to figure your net earnings from any SE tax under either the regular method or the nonfarm
self-employment under the nonfarm optional method. optional method because her net earnings under both
methods are less than $400.
Table 10-1. Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings
Gross nonfarm income of more than $6,720. The fol-
IF your gross nonfarm THEN your net earnings lowing examples illustrate how to figure net earnings when
income is ... are equal to ... gross nonfarm income is more than $6,720.
$6,720 or less Two-thirds of your gross Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,851 andnonfarm income. less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. John
More than $6,720 $4,480 White runs an appliance repair shop. His actual net earn-
ings from self-employment were $10,500 in 2008 and
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 43

Page 44 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$9,500 in 2009. He meets the test for being self-employed Table 10-2. ExampleÐFarm and Nonfarm
on a regular basis. He has used the nonfarm optional Earnings
method less than 5 years. His gross income and net profit
Income andin 2010 are as follows:
Earnings Farm Nonfarm
Gross nonfarm income .................. . $12,000 Gross income $3,000 $6,000Net nonfarm profit ...................... . $1,200
Actual net earnings  $900  $500
John's actual net earnings for 2010 are $1,108 ($1,200 Optional net×  .9235). Because his net profit is less than $4,851 and earnings (2/3 of gross
less than 72.189% of his gross income, he can use the income)  $2,000 $4,000
nonfarm optional method to figure net earnings of $4,480.
Because these net earnings are higher than his actual net
Table 10-3 shows four methods or combinations ofearnings, he can report net earnings of $4,480 for 2010.
methods you can use to figure net earnings from
self-employment using the farm and nonfarm gross in-Example 2. Net nonfarm profit not less than $4,851.
come and actual net earnings shown in Table 10-2.Assume that in Example 1 John's net profit is $5,400. He
must use the regular method. He cannot use the nonfarm • Method 1. Using the regular method for both farm
optional method because his net nonfarm profit is not less and nonfarm income.
than $4,851. • Method 2. Using the optional method for farm in-
come and the regular method for nonfarm income.Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business. As-
• Method 3. Using the regular method for farm incomesume that in Example 1 John has a net loss of $700. He
and the optional method for nonfarm income.can use the nonfarm optional method and report $4,480 as
his net earnings from self-employment. • Method 4. Using the optional method for both farm
and nonfarm income.
Farm Optional Method Note. Actual net earnings is the same as net earnings
figured using the regular method.Use the farm optional method only for earnings from a
farming business. See Publication 225 for information Table 10-3. ExampleÐNet Earningsabout this method.
NetUsing Both Optional Methods Earnings 1 2 3 4
If you have both farm and nonfarm earnings, you may be
Actualable to use both optional methods to determine your net  farm $ 900 $ 900earnings from self-employment.
 To figure your net earnings using both optional meth- Optional
ods, you must:  farm $ 2,000 $ 2,000
• Figure your farm and nonfarm net earnings sepa- Actualrately under each method. Do not combine farm nonfarm $ 500 $ 500earnings with nonfarm earnings to figure your net
earnings under either method. Optional
nonfarm $4,000 $4,000• Add the net earnings figured under each method to
arrive at your total net earnings from Amountself-employment. you can
report: $1,400 $2,500 $4,900 $4,480*You can report less than your total actual farm and non-
farm net earnings but not less than actual nonfarm net
*Limited to $4,480 because you used both optional methods.earnings. If you use both optional methods, you can report
no more than $4,480 as your combined net earnings from
self-employment. Fiscal Year Filer
Example. You are a self-employed farmer. You also If you use a tax year other than the calendar year, you must
operate a retail grocery store. Your gross income, actual use the tax rate and maximum earnings limit in effect at the
net earnings from self-employment, and optional farm and beginning of your tax year. Even if the tax rate or maximum
optional nonfarm net earnings from self-employment are earnings limit changes during your tax year, continue to
shown in Table 10-2. use the same rate and limit throughout your tax year.
Page 44 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 45 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting Self-Employment Declaration of
Tax Taxpayer Rights
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure and report your SE Protection of your rights. IRS employees will explaintax. Then enter the SE tax on line 56 of Form 1040 and and protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout yourattach Schedule SE to Form 1040. contact with us.Most taxpayers can use Section AÐShort Schedule SE
to figure their SE tax. However, certain taxpayers must use Privacy and confidentiality. The IRS will not disclose toSection BÐLong Schedule SE. anyone the information you give us, except as authorized
If you have to pay SE tax, you must file Form by law. You have the right to know why we are asking you
1040 (with Schedule SE attached) even if you do for information, how we will use it, and what happens if you
not otherwise have to file a federal income tax do not provide requested information.
CAUTION
!
return.
Professional and courteous service. If you believe that
Joint return. Even if you file a joint return, you cannot file an IRS employee has not treated you in a professional,
a joint Schedule SE. This is true whether one spouse or fair, and courteous manner, you should tell that em-
both spouses have earnings subject to SE tax. If both of ployee's supervisor. If the supervisor's response is not
you have earnings subject to SE tax, each of you must satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for your
complete a separate Schedule SE. However, if one spouse area or the center where you file your return.
uses the Short Schedule SE and the other spouse has to
Representation. You can either represent yourself or,use the Long Schedule SE, both can use the same form.
with proper written authorization, have someone else rep-Attach both schedules to the joint return.
resent you in your place. Your representative must be aMore than one business. If you have more than one person allowed to practice before the IRS, such as antrade or business, you must combine the net profit (or loss) attorney, certified public accountant, or enrolled agent. Iffrom each business to figure your SE tax. A loss from one you are in an interview and ask to consult such a person,business will reduce your profit from another business. File then we must stop and reschedule the interview in mostone Schedule SE showing the earnings from cases.self-employment, but file a separate Schedule C, C-EZ, or You can have someone accompany you at an interview.F for each business. You can make sound recordings of any meetings with our
examination, appeal, or collection personnel, provided youExample. You are the sole proprietor of two separate tell us in writing 10 days before the meeting.businesses. You operate a restaurant that made a net
profit of $25,000. You also have a cabinetmaking business Payment of only the correct amount of tax. You arethat had a net loss of $500. You must file a Schedule C for responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax duethe restaurant showing your net profit of $25,000 and under the law Ðno more, no less. If you cannot pay all ofanother Schedule C for the cabinetmaking business show- your tax when it is due, you may be able to make monthlying your net loss of $500. You file Schedule SE showing installment payments.total earnings subject to SE tax of $24,500.
Help with unresolved tax problems. The Taxpayer Ad-
vocate Service can help you if you have tried unsuccess-
fully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your local Taxpayer
Advocate can offer you special help if you have a signifi-
cant hardship as a result of a tax problem. For more11. information, call toll free 1-877-777-4778 (1-800-829-4059
for TTY/TDD) or write to the Taxpayer Advocate at the IRS
office that last contacted you.Your Rights
Appeals and judicial review. If you disagree with usas a Taxpayer
about the amount of your tax liability or certain collection
actions, you have the right to ask the Appeals Office toThe first part of this chapter explains some of your most review your case. You can also ask a court to review yourimportant rights as a taxpayer. The second part explains case.the examination, appeal, collection, and refund processes.
Relief from certain penalties and interest. The IRS will
waive penalties when allowed by law if you can show you
acted reasonably and in good faith or relied on the incor-
rect advice of an IRS employee. We will waive interest that
is the result of certain errors or delays caused by an IRS
employee.
Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Page 45

Page 46 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
Rights, and Claims for Refund.Examinations, Appeals,
If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagree
Collections, and Refunds with its findings, you may be able to take your case to the
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S.
District Court where you live. If you take your case to court,Examinations (audits). We accept most taxpayers' re-
the IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if youturns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it for
kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper-examination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest.
ated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If theThe inquiry or examination may or may not result in more
court agrees with you on most issues in your case andtax. We may close your case without change; or, you may
finds that our position was largely unjustified, you may bereceive a refund.
able to recover some of your administrative and litigationThe process of selecting a return for examination usu-
costs. You will not be eligible to recover these costs unlessally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computer
you tried to resolve your case administratively, includingprograms to identify returns that may have incorrect
going through the appeals system, and you gave us theamounts. These programs may be based on information
information necessary to resolve the case.returns, such as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies of past
examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli-
Collections. Publication 594, The IRS Collection Pro-ance projects. Second, we use information from outside
cess, explains your rights and responsibilities regardingsources that indicates that a return may have incorrect
payment of federal taxes. It describes:amounts. These sources may include newspapers, public
records, and individuals. If we determine that the informa- • What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what to
tion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a do if you get a tax bill and what to do if you think
return for examination. your bill is wrong. It also covers making installment
Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal payments, delaying collection action, and submitting
Rights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and an offer in compromise.
procedures that we follow in examinations. The following
• IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing asections give an overview of how we conduct examina-
lien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, andtions.
release of property.
By mail. We handle many examinations and inquiries
by mail. We will send you a letter with either a request for Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail in
more information or a reason why we believe a change to Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
your return may be needed. You can respond by mail or
you can request a personal interview with an examiner. If Innocent spouse relief. Generally, both you and your
you mail us the requested information or provide an expla- spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for paying
nation, we may or may not agree with you, and we will the full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on your
explain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi- joint return. To seek relief from any liability related to your
tate to write to us about anything you do not understand. spouse (or former spouse), you must file a claim on Form
8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief. Form 8857By interview. If we notify you that we will conduct your
generally must be filed within 2 years from the IRS's firstexamination through a personal interview, or you request
attempt to collect the tax from you after July 22, 1998, suchsuch an interview, you have the right to ask that the
as by applying your refund from one year to the jointexamination take place at a reasonable time and place that
liability. For more information, see Publication 971, Inno-is convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examiner
cent Spouse Relief, Form 8857, and the Instructions forproposes any changes to your return, he or she will explain
Form 8857. the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with these
changes, you can meet with the examiner's supervisor.
Refunds. You can file a claim for refund if you think youRepeat examinations. If we examined your return for paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim withinthe same items in either of the 2 previous years and 3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact us years from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.as soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinue The law generally provides for interest on your refund if it isthe examination. not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return or
claim for refund. Publication 556, Examination of Returns,Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner's pro-
Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, has more informa-posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals Office
tion on refunds.of the IRS. Most differences can be settled without expen-
If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, yousive and time-consuming court trials. Your appeal rights
must file within 3 years from the date the return was dueare explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your Appeal
(including extensions) to get that refund.Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don't Agree,
Page 46 Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer

Page 47 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You can learn about your rights and responsibilities
as a taxpayer by visiting our online tax toolkit at 
www.taxtoolkit.irs.gov. You can get updates on hot12.
tax topics by visiting our YouTube channel at
www.youtube.com/tasnta and our Facebook page at 
www.facebook.com/YourVoiceAtIRS, or by followingHow To Get 
our tweets at www.twitter.com/YourVoiceAtIRS.
More Information
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). The Low In-
come Taxpayer Clinic program serves individuals whoThis section describes the help the IRS and other federal
have a problem with the IRS and whose income is below aagencies offer to taxpayers who operate their own busi-
certain level. LITCs are independent from the IRS. Mostnesses.
LITCs can provide representation before the IRS or in
court on audits, tax collection disputes, and other issues
for free or a small fee. If an individual's native language is
Internal Revenue Service not English, some clinics can provide multilingual informa-
tion about taxpayer rights and responsibilities. For more
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free information, see Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer
publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa- Clinic List. This publication is available at IRS.gov, by
tion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method calling 1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or at your lo-
that is best for you, you will have quick and easy access to cal IRS office.
tax help.
Small business workshops. Small business workshops
are designed to help the small business owner understandContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The Taxpayer
and fulfill their federal tax responsibilities. Workshops areAdvocate Service (TAS) is an independent organization
sponsored and presented by IRS partners who are federalwithin the IRS. We help taxpayers who are experiencing
tax specialists. Workshop topics vary from a general over-economic harm, such as not being able to provide necessi- view of taxes to more specific topics such as recordkeep-ties like housing, transportation, or food; taxpayers who ing and retirement plans. Although most are free, someare seeking help in resolving tax problems with the IRS; workshops have fees associated with them. Any feesand those who believe that an IRS system or procedure is charged for a workshop are paid to the sponsoring organi-not working as it should. Here are seven things every zation, not the IRS.taxpayer should know about TAS: For more information, visit www.irs.gov/businesses/
• The Taxpayer Advocate Service is your voice at the small.
IRS.
Subscribe to e-news for small businesses. Join the
• Our service is free, confidential, and tailored to meet e-News for Small Businesses mailing list to receive up-
your needs. dates, reminders, and other information useful to small
business owners and self-employed individuals. Visit the• You may be eligible for our help if you have tried to website at www.irs.gov/businesses/small and click onresolve your tax problem through normal IRS chan- ªSubscribe to e-News.ºnels and have gotten nowhere, or you believe an
IRS procedure just isn't working as it should. Free tax services. Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free
Tax Services, is your guide to IRS services and resources.• We help taxpayers whose problems are causing fi-
Learn about free tax information from the IRS, includingnancial difficulty or significant cost, including the cost
publications, services, and education and assistance pro-of professional representation. This includes busi-
grams. The publication also has an index of over 100nesses as well as individuals. TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) you can listen to
• Our employees know the IRS and how to navigate it. on the telephone. The majority of the information and
If you qualify for our help, we'll assign your case to services listed in this publication are available to you free
an advocate who will listen to your problem, help you of charge. If there is a fee associated with a resource or
understand what needs to be done to resolve it, and service, it is listed in the publication.
stay with you every step of the way until your prob- Accessible versions of IRS published products are
lem is resolved available on request in a variety of alternative formats for
people with disabilities.• We have at least one local taxpayer advocate in
every state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Free help with your return. Free help in preparing your
Rico. You can call your local advocate, whose num- return is available nationwide from IRS-trained volunteers.
ber is in your phone book, in Pub. 1546, Taxpayer The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program is
Advocate ServiceÐYour Voice at the IRS, and on designed to help low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun-
our website at www.irs.gov/advocate. You can also seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed to assist
call our toll-free line at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD taxpayers age 60 and older with their tax returns. Many
1-800-829-4059. VITA sites offer free electronic filing and all volunteers will
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 47

Page 48 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
let you know about credits and deductions you may be • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax
questions at 1-800-829-1040.entitled to claim. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, call
1-800-829-1040. • Solving problems. You can get face-to-face helpAs part of the TCE program, AARP offers the Tax-Aide solving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax-counseling program. To find the nearest AARP Tax-Aide payer Assistance Centers. An employee can explainsite, call 1-888-227-7669 or visit AARP's website at IRS letters, request adjustments to your account, or
www.aarp.org/money/taxaide. help you set up a payment plan. Call your local
For more information on these programs, go to IRS.gov Taxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. To
and enter keyword ªVITAº in the upper right-hand corner. find the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or
look in the phone book under United States Govern-Internet. You can access the IRS website at ment, Internal Revenue Service.IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to:
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/
TDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax
• E-file your return. Find out about commercial tax questions or to order forms and publications.
preparation and e-file services available free to eligi- • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen toble taxpayers. pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.
• Check the status of your 2010 refund. Go to IRS.gov • Refund information. To check the status of yourand click on Where's My Refund. Wait at least 72 2010 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 or 1-800-829-4477hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt of your (automated refund information 24 hours a day, 7e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper days a week). Wait at least 72 hours after the IRSreturn. If you filed Form 8379 with your return, wait acknowledges receipt of your e-filed return, or 3 to 414 weeks (11 weeks if you filed electronically). Have weeks after mailing a paper return. If you filed Formyour 2010 tax return available so you can provide 8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks ifyour social security number, your filing status, and you filed electronically). Have your 2010 tax returnthe exact whole dollar amount of your refund. available so you can provide your social security
• Download forms, including talking tax forms, instruc- number, your filing status, and the exact whole dollar
tions, and publications. amount of your refund. If you check the status of
your refund and are not given the date it will be• Order IRS products online. issued, please wait until the next week before check-
• Research your tax questions online. ing back.
• Use the online Internal Revenue Code, regulations, • Other refund information.To check the status of a
or other official guidance. prior year refund or amended return refund, call
1-800-829-1040.• Search publications online by topic or keyword.
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published in Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. Tothe last few years. ensure IRS representatives give accurate, courteous, and
• Figure your withholding allowances using the with- professional answers, we use several methods to evaluate
holding calculator online at www.irs.gov/individuals. the quality of our telephone services. One method is for a
second IRS representative to listen in on or record random• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by using our telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to completeAlternative Minimum Tax (AMT) Assistant. a short survey at the end of the call.
• Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
email. Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-
able on a walk-in basis.• Get information on starting and operating a small
business.
• Products. You can walk in to many post offices,
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,
Phone. Many services are available by phone. instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li-
braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county
government offices, credit unions, and office supply
stores have a collection of products available to print
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call from a CD or photocopy from reproducible proofs.
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676) to order cur- Also, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter-
rent-year forms, instructions, and publications, and nal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue
prior-year forms and instructions. You should receive Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re-
your order within 10 days. search purposes.
Page 48 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 49 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer Purchase the DVD from National Technical Information
Assistance Center every business day for personal, Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no han-
face-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRS dling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD
letters, request adjustments to your tax account, or for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee).
help you set up a payment plan. If you need to
resolve a tax problem, have questions about how the
tax law applies to your individual tax return, or you
Small Business Administrationare more comfortable talking with someone in per-
son, visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Center The Small Business Administration (SBA) offers trainingwhere you can spread out your records and talk with and educational programs, counseling services, financialan IRS representative face-to-face. No appointment programs, and contract assistance for small business own-is necessaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you can call ers. The SBA also has publications and videos on a varietyyour local Center and leave a message requesting of business topics. The following briefly describes assis-an appointment to resolve a tax account issue. A tance provided by the SBA.representative will call you back within 2 business
days to schedule an in-person appointment at your
Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs).convenience. If you have an ongoing, complex tax
SBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical serv-account problem or a special need, such as a disa-
ices to current and prospective small business owners whobility, an appointment can be requested. All other
cannot afford the services of a private consultant. Help isissues will be handled without an appointment. To
available when beginning, improving, or expanding a smallfind the number of your local office, go to
business.www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phone book
under United States Government, Internal Revenue
Business Information Centers (BICs). BICs offer aService.
small business reference library, management video
tapes, and computer technology to help plan a business.Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc- BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individuals whotions, and publications to the address below. You are in business or are interested in starting a business canshould receive a response within 10 days after
 use BICs as often as they wish at no charge.your request is received.
Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE).Internal Revenue Service
SCORE provides small business counseling and training1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
to current and prospective small business owners. SCOREBloomington, IL 61705-6613
is made up of current and former business people who
DVD for tax products. You can order Publication offer their expertise and knowledge to help people start,
1796, IRS Tax Products DVD, and obtain: manage, and expand a small business. SCORE also offers
a variety of small business workshops.
Internet. You can visit the SBA website at• Current-year forms, instructions, and publications. www.sba.gov. While visiting the SBA website,
• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications. you can find a variety of information of interest to
small business owners.• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.
Phone.  Call the SBA Answer Desk at• Tax law frequently asked questions.
1-800-U-ASK-SBA (1-800-827-5722) for general
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys- information about programs available to assist
tem. small business owners.
• Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the U.S. Code. Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small Business
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms. Development Center or Business Information
Center to request assistance with your small
• Internal Revenue Bulletins. business. To find the location nearest you, visit the SBA
• Toll-free and email technical support. website or call the SBA Answer Desk.
• Two releases during the year.
± The first release will ship the beginning of January
2011. Other Federal Agencies
± The final release will ship the beginning of March
2011. Other federal agencies also publish publications and pam-
phlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-
able from the Superintendent of Documents at the
Government Printing Office. You can get information and
order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 49

Page 50 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internet. You can visit the GPO website at Phone. Call the GPO toll-free at 1-866-512-1800
www.access.gpo.gov. or at 202-512-1800 from the Washington, DC,
area.
Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.
Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Office
P.O. Box 979050
St. Louis, MO 63917-9000
Page 50 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 51 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Charitable contributions ....... . 40 Qualified plug-in electric driveA
motor vehicle ............ . 19, 20Child employed by parent ...... . 41Accounting method:
Qualified plug-in electricClaim for refund ................ . 46Accrual .................... . 13, 31
vehicle ...................... . 20Automatic procedures ......... . 16 Collection of tax ................ . 46
Qualified railroad trackCash ....................... . 13, 31 Combination method of maintenance ................ . 20Change in ..................... . 16 accounting .................... . 14 Refined coal ................... . 20Combination ................... . 14 Comments on publication ....... . 3 Renewable electricity .......... . 20Special ........................ . 16 Condemned property ........... . 18 Research activities ............ . 19Accounting periods ............ . 12 Consignments .................. . 24 Small employer health insuranceAccrual method: Construction allowances ....... . 25 premiums ................... . 19Income - general rule .......... . 13 Cost of goods sold ............. . 27 Small employer pension planIncome - special rules ......... . 13 Credit: startup costs ................ . 19Of accounting .................. . 13 Advanced lean burn technology Taxes paid on certain employeeAdjusted basis .................. . 17 motor vehicle ................ . 19 tips .......................... . 19Administrator ................... . 25 Agricultural chemicals Work opportunity .............. . 20Agricultural chemicals security security ...................... . 18credit .......................... . 18 Alcohol and cellulosic biofuel DAlcohol and cellulosic biofuel fuels fuels ......................... . 18
credit .......................... . 18 Damages ........................ . 24Alternative fuel vehicle refueling
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling Debt:property ..................... . 19
property credit ................ . 19 Bad ............................ . 31Alternative motor vehicle ...... . 19
Canceled ...................... . 22Alternative motor vehicle Biodiesel fuels ................. . 19
Qualified real propertycredit .......................... . 19 Carbon dioxide business .................... . 23Appeal rights ................... . 46 sequestration ................ . 19 Refund offset against ........... . 6Appreciation .................... . 24 Diesel fuels, renewable ........ . 19
Deduction limit................... . 3Audits ........................... . 46 Disabled access ............... . 19
Definitions:Automobile  (See Car expenses) Distilled spirits ................. . 19 Accounting methods ........... . 12Employer differential wage Accounting periods ............ . 12payments .................... . 19B Barter .......................... . 21Employer-providedBad debts ....................... . 31 Basis .......................... . 17childcare .................... . 19Barter income ................... . 21 Business bad debt ............. . 31Empowerment zoneBasis of property ............... . 17 Calendar tax year .............. . 12employment ................. . 19Biodiesel and renewable diesel Cash discount ............. . 27, 28Energy efficient appliance ..... . 19fuels credit .................... . 19 Disposition of property ......... . 16Energy efficient home ......... . 19Bribes ........................... . 40 Drawing account ............... . 29How to claim ................... . 20Business expenses ............. . 31 Entertainment expenses ....... . 38Indian coal ..................... . 20Business income ............... . 20 Fair market value .............. . 17Indian employment ............ . 19 Fiscal tax year ................. . 12Business use of your home .... . 38 Investment ..................... . 19 Fringe benefit .................. . 34Low sulfur diesel fuel Local transportationC production ................... . 19 expenses .................... . 31Canceled debt .................. . 22 Low-income housing ........... . 19 Necessary expense............ . 31Cancellation of qualified real Mine rescue team training ..... . 19 Net operating loss ............. . 40property business debt ...... . 23 New hire retention ............. . 20 Nonbusiness bad debt ......... . 31Capital gain or loss ............. . 18 New markets .................. . 20 Ordinary expense .............. . 31Car expenses ............... . 31, 32 Nonconventional source Principal place of business .... . 39
Carbon dioxide sequestration fuel .......................... . 20 Qualified long-term real
credit .......................... . 19 Orphan drug ................... . 20 property ..................... . 25
Cash discount .............. . 27, 28 Qualified alternative fuel motor Qualified real property business
Cash method: vehicle ...................... . 19 debt ......................... . 23
Expenses ...................... . 13 Qualified fuel cell motor Rent ........................... . 36
Income ........................ . 13 vehicle ...................... . 19 Restricted property ............ . 23
Retail space ................... . 25Changing accounting Qualified hybrid motor
Self-employment (SE) tax ...... . 8method ........................ . 15 vehicle ...................... . 19
Publication 334 (2010) Page 51

Page 52 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Definitions: (Cont.) Legal and professional fees ... . 36 8826 (disabled access
Sole proprietor .................. . 2 credit) ....................... . 19Meals .......................... . 37
Tax home ...................... . 32 8829 (business in home) ...... . 39Nondeductible ................. . 40
Trade discount ............. . 27, 28 8834 (qualified plug-in electricOther .......................... . 40
Travel expenses ............... . 37 vehicle) ...................... . 20Pension plans ................. . 36
8835 (renewable electricity, coalDepreciation: Rent ........................... . 36
credit) ....................... . 20Deduction...................... . 33 Taxes .......................... . 36
8844 (empowerment zoneListed property ................. . 33 Travel .......................... . 37
credit) ....................... . 19Depreciation, recapture ........ . 24 Truck .......................... . 31
8845 (Indian employment) ..... . 19Direct seller ................. . 25, 26
8846 (credit for social security onDisabled access credit ......... . 19 F tip income) .................. . 19Disposition of property: Fair market value ............... . 17 8857 (innocent spouse) ........ . 46Business property ............. . 16 8864 (biodiesel/renewable dieselFiling business taxes ............ . 5Installment sale ............ . 17, 18 credit) ....................... . 19Fishing crew member ...... . 26, 41Like-kind exchange .... . 17, 18, 25 8874 (new markets credit) ..... . 20Form:Nontaxable exchange ......... . 17 8879 (self-selected PIN) ........ . 7720 (excise tax return) .......... . 9Sale of a business ............. . 17 8881 (pension plan startup costs940 (unemployment tax) ....... . 10Distilled spirits credit ........... . 19 credit) ....................... . 19941 (quarterly employmentDividend income ................ . 22 8882 (employer-provided childcaretax) .......................... . 10Donation of inventory .......... . 28 credit) ....................... . 19944 (annual employmentDrawing account ................ . 29 8886 (transaction statement) ... . 4tax) .......................... . 10Due date of return ............... . 8 8896 (low sulfur diesel fuel982 (discharge of production credit) ............ . 19indebtedness) ............... . 23 8900 (railroad track maintenance1040 (tax return) ............ . 6, 10E credit) ....................... . 201040-ES (estimated tax) .... . 8, 10Economic injury ................ . 24 8906 (distilled spirits credit) .... . 191040-V (voucher) ............... . 7e-file .............................. . 6 8907 (nonconventional fuel1099-B (barter) ................ . 21EFTPS ............................ . 8 credit) ....................... . 201099-MISCElectronic filing .................. . 6 8908 (energy efficient home(miscellaneous) ......... . 10, 21Employee ........................ . 6 credit) ....................... . 191128 (change tax year) ........ . 12Employee benefit programs .... . 34 8909 (appliance credit) ........ . 192210 (underpayment of estimatedEmployees' pay ................. . 34 8910 (alternative vehicletax) ........................... . 8 credit) ................... . 19, 31Employer identification number 2290 (excise tax for heavy 8911 (alternative fuel refueling(EIN) ............................ . 5 trucks) ........................ . 9 property credit) .............. . 19Employment taxes: 3115 (change accounting 8923 (mine rescue teamAbout ........................... . 9 method) ..................... . 16 training) ..................... . 19Deduction for .................. . 37 3468 (investment credit) ....... . 19 8931 (agricultural chemicalsEmpowerment zone employment 3800 (general business security) ..................... . 18credit .......................... . 19 credit) ....................... . 18 8932 (employer differential wageEnergy efficient appliance 4562 (depreciation) ............ . 33 payments) ................... . 19credit .......................... . 19 4684 (casualty and theft) ...... . 18 8933 (carbon dioxide sequestrationEnergy efficient home credit ... . 19 4797 (sale of business credit) ....................... . 19Entertainment expenses  (See property) ................ . 18, 24 8936 (qualified plug-in electric driveTravel expenses) 4868 (extension) ................ . 8 motor vehicle) ............... . 20Escrow, payments placed in ... . 27 5884 (work opportunity 8941 (small employer healthEstimated tax .................... . 8 credit) ....................... . 20 insurance premiums) ........ . 19
Examinations (audits) .......... . 46 5884-B (new hire retention) .... . 20 Final ........................... . 11
6251 (alternative minimumExcise taxes: Information returns ............ . 10
tax) .......................... . 18About ........................... . 9 Schedule C (sole proprietor) .... . 6,
6252 (installment sale) ......... . 18Deduction for .................. . 37 10
6478 (alcohol and cellulosic biofuelExecutor ........................ . 25 Schedule C-EZ (sole
fuels) ........................ . 18Expenses ....................... . 31 proprietor) .................... . 6
6765 (research credit) ......... . 19Bad debts...................... . 31 Schedule SE (self-employment
8300 (cash payments overCar ............................ . 31 tax) ....................... . 9, 10
$10,000) .................... . 11Depreciation ................... . 33 SS-4 (application for EIN) ....... . 5
8586 (low-income housing) .... . 19Employees' pay ................ . 34 SS-5 (application for SSN) ...... . 5
8594 (asset acquisition) ....... . 17Entertainment.................. . 37 W-2 (report wages) ........ . 10, 11
8820 (orphan drug credit) ...... . 20Home, business use ........... . 38 W-3 (transmittal of W-2) ....... . 10
8824 (like-kind exchange) .... . 17,Insurance ...................... . 34 W-4 (employee withholding) .... . 6
18Interest ........................ . 35 W-7 (application for ITIN) ....... . 5
Page 52 Publication 334 (2010)

Page 53 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form: (Cont.) Information, How to get Newspaper or magazine
W-9 (request for TIN) ........... . 6 more .......................... . 47 vendor ........................ . 26
When to file .................... . 10 Innocent spouse relief .......... . 46 Nonbusiness bad debt ......... . 31
Which to file ................... . 10 Installment sales ................ . 17 Nonconventional source fuel
Fringe benefits .................. . 34 credit .......................... . 20Insurance:
Fuel taxes ....................... . 37 Expense ....................... . 34 Nondeductible insurance
Nondeductible premiums ...... . 35 premiums ..................... . 35
Prepayment ................... . 35 NonemployeeG Proceeds ...................... . 27 compensation ................ . 20Gains and losses ............... . 24 Self-employed health .......... . 35 Nontaxable exchanges ......... . 17General business credits ....... . 18 Insurance agent: Not income:Gross profit: Former......................... . 26 Appreciation ................... . 24Accuracy ...................... . 30 Retired......................... . 26 Consignments ................. . 24Additions to .................... . 30 Interest: Constructions allowances ...... . 25
Guidelines for selected Expenses ...................... . 35 Exchange of like-kind
occupations  (See also Income ........................ . 22 property ..................... . 25
Occupations, selected) ........ . 25 Inventories ...................... . 15 Leasehold improvements ...... . 25
Loans .......................... . 25Investment credit ............... . 19
Sales tax ...................... . 25H
Notary public ............... . 26, 41KHealth insurance, deduction for
Not-for-profit activities ......... . 40self-employed ................ . 35 Kickbacks ................... . 24, 40
Home, business use of ......... . 38
Hotels, boarding houses, and OL
apartments ................... . 21 Occupations, selected:Lease bonus .................... . 22
Husband and wife business ..... . 2 Administrator .................. . 25Lease cancellation
Direct seller ................ . 25, 26payments ..................... . 22
Executor ....................... . 25Legal fees ....................... . 36I Fishing crew member .......... . 26Like-kind exchanges ....... . 17, 25Identification numbers .......... . 5 Insurance agent, former ....... . 26Limited liability company ....... . 2Income  (See also Not Insurance agent, retired ....... . 26Listed property ................. . 24income) ........................ . 24 Newspaper carrier orLobbying expense .............. . 40Accounting for your ............ . 27 distributor ................... . 26Local transportationBarter .......................... . 21 Newspaper or magazineexpenses ..................... . 31Business ....................... . 20 vendor ....................... . 26Damages ...................... . 24 Lodging ......................... . 38 Notary public .................. . 26Gains and losses .............. . 24 Long-term capital gain or Public official .................. . 26Kickbacks...................... . 24 loss ........................... . 18 Real estate agent .............. . 26
Kinds of income ............... . 20 Lost income payments ......... . 24 Securities dealer ............... . 26
Lost income payments ......... . 24 Low sulfur diesel fuel production Securities trader ............... . 27
Other .......................... . 23 credit .......................... . 19 Office in the home  (See also
Paid to a third party ............ . 27 Low-income housing credit .... . 19 Business use of your home) ... . 32
Personal property rent ......... . 22 Optional methods, usingPromissory notes .............. . 24 both ........................... . 44MRecapture of depreciation ..... . 24 Ordinary gain or loss ........... . 18Meals  (See Travel expenses)Recovery of items previously Orphan drug credit ............. . 20Methods for figuring netdeducted .................... . 24 earnings ...................... . 42Rental ..................... . 21, 22 Mileage rate for vehicles ....... . 32Restricted property ............ . 23 P
Mine rescue team trainingIncome tax: Parking fees .................... . 32credit .......................... . 19About ........................... . 6 Partners, husband and wife ..... . 2Motor vehicle, alternativeDeduction for .................. . 36 Pay, kinds of .................... . 34credit .......................... . 19How to pay ..................... . 8 Paying:
Underpayment penalty .......... . 8 Business taxes ................. . 5
NIncome tax return, who must Income tax ...................... . 8
file .............................. . 6 Net operating losses ........... . 40 Payments to third parties ...... . 22
Independent contractor ... . 2, 9, 41 Net profit or loss ................ . 40 Penalties and fines ............. . 40
Indian employment credit ...... . 19 New hire retention credit ....... . 20 Penalty:
Individual taxpayer identification New markets credit ............. . 20 Failure to file Form 8300 ....... . 11
number (ITIN) .................. . 5 Failure to file informationNewspaper carrier or
Information returns ............. . 10 returns ...................... . 11distributor .................... . 26
Publication 334 (2010) Page 53

Page 54 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalty: (Cont.) Sale of property  (See also Signature, electronic ............ . 6
Failure to furnish correct payee Disposition of property) ........ . 16 Small Business
statements .................. . 11 Sales of assets ................. . 16 Administration ................ . 49
Underpayment of tax ........... . 8 Sales tax ........................ . 37 Small employer health insurance
premiums credit .............. . 19Schedule C ....................... . 6Waiver of ...................... . 11
Social security coverage ........ . 8Schedule C-EZ ................... . 6Pension plans ................... . 36
Social security number (SSN) ... . 5Schedule SE (Form 1040) ....... . 9Personal property tax .......... . 37
Sole proprietor ............... . 2, 41Schedule SE, filingPrepaid expense:
requirement ................... . 45 Sport utility vehicle ............. . 33Extends useful life ............. . 35
SE tax: Standard mileage rate .......... . 32Rent ........................... . 36
About ........................... . 8 For 2010 ........................ . 3Professional fees ............... . 36
Aliens .......................... . 41 For 2011 ........................ . 4Promissory notes ............... . 24
Child employed by parent ...... . 41 Statutory employee .............. . 2Public official ................... . 26 Church employee .............. . 41 Suggestions for publication .... . 3Punitive damages............... . 24 Community property income ... . 42 SUV .............................. . 33
Deduction for .................. . 37
Earning credits ................. . 8Q TEffects of using an optionalQualified plug-in electric drive
Tax home ................... . 32, 37method ...................... . 42motor vehicle credit .......... . 20
Tax preparation fees............ . 36Farm optional method ......... . 44Qualified plug-in electric vehicle
Fiscal year filer ................ . 44 Tax refund:credit .......................... . 20
Fishing crew member .......... . 41 Claim for ....................... . 46Qualified railroad track
Gain or loss .................... . 42 Offset against debts ............ . 6maintenance credit ........... . 20
Government employee ........ . 41 Tax return:Qualified real property business
Joint return .................... . 45debt ........................... . 23 How to file ...................... . 6Lost income payments ......... . 42 Who must file ................... . 6Maximum earnings: Tax year ......................... . 12For 2010 ................... . 3, 9R Calendar ....................... . 12For 2011 ..................... . 4Real estate: Change in ..................... . 12Subject to ................... . 41Agent .......................... . 26 Fiscal .......................... . 12Methods for figuring netDealer ......................... . 21 Taxes:earnings ..................... . 42Rent ........................... . 21 Deduction for .................. . 36More than one business ... . 42, 45Taxes .......................... . 37 Employment ................ . 9, 37Nonfarm optional method ...... . 43Recovery of items previously Excise ...................... . 9, 37Notary public .................. . 41deducted ...................... . 24 Optional methods: Fuel............................ . 37Refund: Farm ........................ . 44 Income ..................... . 6, 36Inquiries ........................ . 6 Nonfarm ..................... . 43 Paid on certain employeeOffsets against debts ........... . 6 Rate ........................... . 41 tips .......................... . 19
Related persons: Regular method ............... . 42 Personal property .............. . 37
Unreasonable rent ............. . 36 Residing abroad ............... . 42 Real estate .................... . 37
Special rules andRenewable electricity, refined coal, Sales .......................... . 37exceptions ................... . 41and Indian coal production Self-employment............ . 8, 37Tax rate ........................ . 9credit .......................... . 20 Taxpayer rights ................. . 45Time limit for posting income ... . 8Rent expense ................... . 36 Third parties, Payments to ..... . 22Who must pay ................. . 41Rental income .................. . 21 Tolls ............................. . 32Why use an optionalRepayment of income .......... . 13 Trade discount .............. . 27, 28method ...................... . 42Reportable transaction disclosure Trade or business ............... . 2Section 179 ...................... . 3statement ...................... . 4 Trailer park owner .............. . 21Deduction...................... . 33Reporting self-employment Transportation expenses ....... . 31Property ....................... . 24tax ............................. . 45 Travel expenses ................ . 37Securities:Research credit ................. . 19
Dealer ......................... . 26Restricted property ............. . 23
Trader ......................... . 27Retirement plans  (See Pension USelf-employed health insuranceplans) Underpayment of tax penalty ... . 8deduction ..................... . 35 Uniform capitalization rules .... . 15Self-employment tax  (See SE tax)
S Settlement payments ........... . 22
WSalaries ......................... . 34 Short-term capital gain or
Wages ........................... . 34Sale of a business .............. . 17 loss ........................... . 18
Page 54 Publication 334 (2010)

Page 55 of 55 of Publication 334 15:37 - 20-JAN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Work opportunity credit ........ . 20
■
Publication 334 (2010) Page 55