Userid: CXBOHA00 DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: ...ocuments\Pub 17--2008\Completed Chapters\Corrections\P17_flat.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17
Your Federal Catalog Number 10311G
Income Tax
Department For use inFor Individualsof the
Treasury preparing
Internal
2008Revenue
Service Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet www.irs.gov
Feb 12, 2009

Page 2 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Federal
Income Tax
Department For Individualsof the
Treasury
Internal
ContentsRevenue
Service
What's New for 2008 ................... . 1 Part Five. Standard Deduction and Itemized
Deductions
What's New for 2009 ................... . 2 20 Standard Deduction ............... . 138
21 Medical and Dental Expenses ........ . 141
Reminders .......................... . 2 22 Taxes ........................ . 146
23 Interest Expense ................. . 151Introduction ......................... . 4 24 Contributions ................... . 158
25 Nonbusiness Casualty and TheftPart One. The Income Tax Return Losses ....................... . 1661 Filing Information ................... . 5 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee2 Filing Status ..................... . 20 Business Expenses .............. . 1743 Personal Exemptions and Dependents ... . 25 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax ..... . 35 Education ..................... . 193
28 Miscellaneous Deductions .......... . 197Part Two. Income
29 Limit on Itemized Deductions ........ . 2035 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings .... . 44
6 Tip Income ...................... . 52 Part Six. Figuring Your Taxes and Credits7 Interest Income ................... . 54 30 How To Figure Your Tax ........... . 2058 Dividends and Other Corporate 31 Tax on Investment Income of CertainDistributions ................... . 62 Children ...................... . 2089 Rental Income and Expenses ......... . 66 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit ...... . 21610 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled ... . 225Annuities ..................... . 73 34 Child Tax Credit ................. . 22911 Social Security and Equivalent 35 Education Credits ................ . 233Railroad Retirement Benefits ........ . 80 36 Earned Income Credit ............. . 23812 Other Income .................... . 83 37 Other Credits ................... . 252
Part Three. Gains and Losses 2008 Tax Table ....................... . 25813 Basis of Property ................. . 93
14 Sale of Property .................. . 97 2008 Tax Computation Worksheet ......... . 27015 Selling Your Home ............... . 104
16 Reporting Gains and Losses ......... . 110 2008 Tax Rate Schedules ............... . 271
Part Four. Adjustments to Income Your Rights as a Taxpayer .............. . 272
17 Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) ....................... . 118 How To Get Tax Help .................. . 273
18 Alimony ....................... . 130
19 Education-Related Adjustments ....... . 133 Index .............................. . 274
Order Form 
(Inside back cover)
All material in this The explanations and examples in this publication reflect This publication covers some subjects on which a
publication may be the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) court may have made a decision more favorable to tax-
reprinted freely. A of: payers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until thesecitation to Your Federal differing interpretations are resolved by higher court deci-Income Tax (2008) • Tax laws enacted by Congress, sions or in some other way, this publication will continuewould be appropriate. • Treasury regulations, and to present the interpretations by the IRS.
All taxpayers have important rights when working with• Court decisions. the IRS. These rights are described in Your Rights as a
Taxpayer in the back of this publication.However, the information given does not cover every
situation and is not intended to replace the law or change
its meaning.

Page 3 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What's New for 2008
car for medical reasons is 19 cents income that was more than gross income is more thanThis section summarizes important per mile (27 cents per mile after half of the child's support, or $159,950 ($79,975 if you are mar-tax changes that took effect in June 30, 2008). See chapter 21. ried filing separately). See chapter3. Was over age 18 and under2008. Most of these changes are 29.For 2008, the standard mileage age 24 at the end of 2008 anddiscussed in more detail through- Tax benefits for adoption.rate for the cost of operating your was a full-time student andout this publication. The adoption credit and the maxi-car for determining moving ex- did not have earned incomeChanges are also discussed in mum exclusion from income ofpenses is 19 cents per mile (27 that was more than half of thePublication 553, Highlights of 2008 benefits under an employer's adop-cents per mile after June 30, 2008). child's support.Tax Changes, and at www.irs.gov, tion assistance program are in-See Publication 521, Moving Ex-click on More Forms and Publica- See chapter 31. creased to $11,650. See Adoptionpenses.tions, and then on What's Hot in The election to report a child's Credit in chapter 37.forms and publications. Alternative minimum tax (AMT) investment income on a parent's Hope or lifetime learning
exemption amount increased. return (see chapter 31 ) and the credit income limits increased.Economic stimulus payment. The AMT exemption amount is in- special rule for when a child must The amount of income you canAny economic stimulus payment creased to $46,200 ($69,950 if file Form 6251, Alternative Mini- have and still receive a Hope oryou received is not taxable but married filing jointly or a qualifying mum Tax ÐIndividuals, also now lifetime learning credit has in-reduces your recovery rebate widow(er); $34,975 if married filing apply to the children listed above. creased. See chapter 35.credit. separately). Social security and MedicareCapital gain tax rate reduced. taxes. The maximum wages sub-Recovery rebate credit. If you Retirement savings plans.  The The 5% capital gain tax rate is re- ject to social security tax (6.2%)did not receive the full economic following paragraphs highlight duced to zero. increased to $102,000. All wagesstimulus payment, you may be able changes that affect individual re- are subject to Medicare taxto claim the recovery rebate credit. Tax relief for Kansas disastertirement arrangements (IRAs) and (1.45%).See chapter 37. area. Temporary tax relief waspension plans.
enacted as a result of the May 4,IRA deduction increased. You Extended tax provisions. TheWithdrawal of economic stimu- 2007, storms and tornadoes affect-and your spouse, if filing jointly, following tax provisions that werelus payment from certain ac- ing the Kansas disaster area. Seeeach may be able to deduct an IRA scheduled to expire at the end ofcounts. If your economic Publication 4492-A, Information forcontribution of up to $5,000 2007 have been extended.stimulus payment was directly de- Taxpayers Affected by the May 4,($6,000 if age 50 or older at the endposited to a tax-favored account • The deduction for educator2007, Kansas Storms and Torna-of 2008).and you withdraw the payment by expenses in figuring adjusteddoes, for more details.Traditional IRA income limits.the due date (including extensions) gross income.You may be able to take an IRAof your 2008 tax return, the amount Tax relief for Midwestern disas-deduction if you were covered by a • The deduction for qualified tu-withdrawn will not be taxed and no ter areas. Temporary tax reliefretirement plan and your modified ition and fees.additional tax or penalty will apply. was enacted as a result of the se-adjusted gross income is less than vere storms, tornadoes, and flood- • The exclusion from income of$63,000 ($105,000, if you are mar-First-time homebuyer credit. If ing affecting the Midwestern qualified charitable distribu-ried filing jointly or a qualifyingyou bought your main home after disaster areas. See Publication tions.widow(er)). See chapter 17.April 8, 2008, and are a first-time 4492-B, Information for Affected • The District of ColumbiaRoth IRA income limit.  Youhomebuyer, you may be able to Taxpayers in the Midwestern Dis- first-time homebuyer credit.may be able to make a Roth IRAclaim this credit. See chapter 37. aster Areas, for more details.contribution if your modified ad- • The itemized deduction forAdditional standard deduction justed gross income is less than Certain amounts increased. state and local general salesfor real estate taxes. If you do $116,000 ($169,000, if you are Some tax items that are indexed for taxes.not itemize your deductions, you married filing jointly or a qualifying inflation increased for 2008.can claim an additional standard widow(er)). Earned income credit (EIC). Credit for nonbusiness energydeduction for real estate taxes you Rollovers to Roth IRAs.  You The maximum amount of income property. The credit for nonbusi-paid. See chapter 20. can roll over distributions from a you can earn and still get EIC in- ness energy property has expiredqualified retirement plan into a creased. The amount depends onAdditional standard deduction and does not apply for 2008.Roth IRA. The rollover is not your filing status and number offor net disaster loss. If you do tax-free. See Publication 590, Indi- children. The maximum amount of Mailing your return. If you arenot itemize your deductions, you vidual Retirement Arrangements investment income you can have filing a paper return, you may becan claim an additional standard (IRAs). and still be eligible for the credit mailing your return to a differentdeduction for any net disaster loss increased to $2,950. See chapterRetirement savings contribu- address because the IRS hasfrom a federally declared disaster. 36.tions credit.  The adjusted gross changed the filing location for sev-See chapter 20. Standard deduction.  Theincome limit for claiming this credit eral areas. If you received an en-
standard deduction for taxpayersis increased to $26,500 ($39,750 ifCombat pay election. The elec- velope with your tax package,
who do not itemize deductions onhead of household; $53,000 if mar-tion to include nontaxable combat please use it. Otherwise, see
Schedule A (Form 1040) has in-ried filing jointly). See chapter 37.pay in earned income for figuring Where To File near the end of this
creased. The amount depends onthe earned income credit has been publication for a list of IRS ad-Child's investment income. your filing status. See chapter 20.made permanent. dresses.You must use Form 8615, Tax on Exemption amount.  You are
Certain Children Who Have Invest-Standard mileage rates. For allowed a $3,500 deduction for
ment Income of More Than $1,800,2008, the standard mileage rate for each exemption to which you are
to figure the tax on a child that:the cost of operating your car for entitled. However, your exemption
business use is 50.5 cents per mile amount could be phased out if you1. Was under age 18 at the end(58.5 cents per mile after June 30, have high income. See chapter 3.of 2008,2008). See chapter 26. Limit on itemized deductions.
For 2008, the standard mileage 2. Was age 18 at the end of Some of your itemized deductions
rate for the cost of operating your 2008 and did not have earned may be limited if your adjusted
■
Publication 17 (2008) Page 1

Page 4 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What's New for 2009
This section summarizes the im- plug-in electric drive motor vehicle the definition of a qualifying child • Your child is a qualifying child
apply to years after 2008. for purposes of the child taxportant changes that take effect in in service in 2009.
credit only if you can and do2009 that could affect your esti- • Your qualifying child must beCredit for nonbusiness energy claim an exemption for him ormated tax payments for 2009. younger than you.property. You may be able to her.More information on these and • A child cannot be your quali-take this credit for qualifying energyother changes can be found in Pub- fying child if he or she files asavings items for your home placed Personal casualty and theft losslication 553. joint return, unless the return limit. Generally, a personal casu-in service in 2009. was filed only as a claim forIRA income limits.  You may be alty or theft loss must exceed $500refund.Alternative minimum tax (AMT) to be allowed for 2009. This is inable to take an IRA deduction if you
exemption amount decreased. addition to the 10% of AGI limit thatwere covered by a retirement plan • If the parents of a child canThe AMT exemption amount will generally applies to the net loss.and your 2009 modified adjusted claim the child as a qualifying
decrease to $33,750 ($45,000 ifgross income is less than $65,000 child but no parent so claims
married filing jointly or a qualifying the child, no one else can($109,000 if you are married filing
claim the child as a qualifyingwidow(er); $22,500 if married filingjointly or a qualifying widow(er)).
child unless that person's ad-separately).Credit for plug-in electric drive justed gross income (AGI) is
Qualifying child definition re-motor vehicle. You may be able higher than the highest AGI of
to take a credit if you place a vised. The following changes to any parent of the child.
■
Reminders
Listed below are important remind- lost or stolen purse or wallet, ques- 1-800-366-4484. You can forward Publication 590, Individual Retire-
ers and other items that may help tionable credit card activity or credit ment Arrangements (IRAs), forsuspicious emails to the Federal
you file your 2008 tax return. Many report, etc., contact the IRS Identity more information.Trade Commission at: spam@uce.
of these items are explained in Theft Hotline at 1-800-908-4490. gov or contact them at www.ftc. Mortgage insurance premiums.more detail later in this publication. For more information, see Pub- gov/idtheft  or 1-877-IDTHEFT You may be able to treat mortgagelication 4535, Identity Theft Pre- (1-877-438-4338).Write in your social security insurance premiums paid in con-vention and Victim Assistance. Visit the IRS website at www.number. To protect your privacy, nection with home acquisition debt Victims of identity theft who are irs.gov to learn more about identitysocial security numbers (SSNs) are as home mortgage interest. Seeexperiencing economic harm or a theft and how to reduce your risk.not printed on the peel-off label that chapter 23.systemic problem, or are seeking
comes in the mail with your tax in- help in resolving tax problems that Taxpayer identification num- Qualified joint venture. A quali-struction booklet. This means you have not been resolved through bers. You must provide the tax- fied joint venture conducted by youmust enter your SSN in the space normal channels, may be eligible payer identification number forprovided on your tax form. If you and your spouse may not befor Taxpayer Advocate Service each person for whom you claimfiled a joint return for 2007 and are treated as a partnership if you file a(TAS) assistance. You can reach certain tax benefits. This appliesfiling a joint return for 2008 with the joint return for the tax year. SeeTAS by calling the TAS toll-free even if the person was born insame spouse, enter your names chapter 12.case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 2008. Generally, this number is theand SSNs in the same order as on or TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059. New recordkeeping require-person's social security numberyour 2007 return. See chapter 1. Protect yourself from suspi- ments for cash contributions.(SSN). See chapter 1.cious emails or phishingSecure your tax records from You cannot deduct a cash contribu-schemes. Phishing is the creation Individual retirement arrange-identity theft. Identity theft oc- tion, regardless of the amount, un-and use of email and websites de-curs when someone uses your per- ments (IRAs). The following less you keep as a record of thesigned to mimic legitimate busi-sonal information such as your paragraphs highlight information contribution a bank record (such asness emails and websites. Thename, social security number that affects IRAs. a canceled check, a blank copy of amost common form is the act of(SSN), or other identifying informa- Combat pay.  For purposes of canceled check, or a bank state-sending an email to a user falselytion, without your permission, to taking an IRA deduction, earned ment containing the name of theclaiming to be an established legiti-commit fraud or other crimes. An income includes any nontaxable charity, the date, and amount) or amate enterprise in an attempt toidentity thief may use your SSN to combat pay received by a member written communication from thescam the user into surrenderingget a job or may file a tax return charity. The written communicationof the U.S. Armed Forces.private information that will be usedusing your SSN to receive a refund. must include the name of the char-for identity theft. Catch-up contributions inTo reduce your risk: ity, date of the contribution, andThe IRS does not initiate con- certain employer bankruptcies.
amount of the contribution. See• Protect your SSN, tacts with taxpayers via emails. You may be able to deduct up to an
Also, the IRS does not request de- chapter 24.additional $3,000 contributed to• Ensure your employer is pro- tailed personal information through your IRA if you were a participant intecting your SSN, and Foreign source income. If youemail or ask taxpayers for the PIN a 401(k) plan and your employer are a U.S. citizen with income from• Be careful when choosing a numbers, passwords, or similar se- was in bankruptcy in an earlier sources outside the United Statestax preparer. cret access information for their year. See Publication 590, Individ- (foreign income), you must reportcredit card, bank, or other financial ual Retirement Arrangements all such income on your tax returnIf your tax records are affected accounts. (IRAs). unless it is exempt by U.S. law.by identity theft and you receive a If you receive an unsolicited
Qualified charitable distribu- This is true whether you reside in-notice from the IRS, respond right email claiming to be from the IRS,
tions. If you have reached age side or outside the United Statesaway to the name and phone num- forward the message to: phish-
701/2, you can make a qualified and whether or not you receive aber printed on the IRS notice or ing@irs.gov. You may also report
charitable distribution directly from Form W-2 or 1099 from the foreignletter. misuse of the IRS name, logo,
your IRA to a qualified organiza- payer. This applies to earned in-If your tax records are not cur- forms or other IRS property to the
tion. You do not include the distri- come (such as wages and tips) asrently affected by identity theft but Treasury Inspector General for Tax
bution in your income. Seeyou think you are at risk due to a Administration toll-free at well as unearned income (such as
Page 2 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 5 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
interest, dividends, capital gains, Include your phone number on notify the IRS. See Change of Ad- it, how it will be used, what could
dress, under What Happens After Ipensions, rents and royalties). your return. To promptly resolve happen if we do not receive it, and
File, in chapter 1.any questions we have in process-If you reside outside the United whether your response is volun-
ing your tax return, we would like toStates, you may be able to exclude tary, required to obtain a benefit, orPrivate delivery services. Yoube able to call you. Please enterpart or all of your foreign source mandatory under the law. A com-may be able to use a designatedyour daytime telephone number onearned income. For details, see plete statement on this subject canprivate delivery service to mail youryour tax form next to your signa-Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. be found in your tax form instruc-tax returns and payments. Seeture.Citizens and Resident Aliens chapter 1. tion booklet.
Abroad. Third party designee. You can Refund on a late filed return. If Customer service for taxpayers.
check the ªYesº box in the ªThirdAutomatic six month extension you were due a refund but you did The Internal Revenue Service hasParty Designeeº area of your returnto file tax return. You can use not file a return, you generally must expanded customer service for tax-to authorize the IRS to discuss yourForm 4868, Application for Auto- file your return within 3 years from payers. You can set up a personalmatic Extension of Time To File return with a friend, family member, the date the return was due (includ- appointment at the most conve-U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, or any other person you choose. ing extensions) to get that refund. nient Taxpayer Assistance Center,to obtain an automatic 6-month ex- This allows the IRS to call the per- See chapter 1. on the most convenient businesstension of time to file your tax re- son you identified as your designee
day. See How To Get Tax Help  inSplit refunds. If you choose di-turn. See chapter 1. to answer any questions that may
rect deposit of your refund, you the back of this publication.arise during the processing of your may be able to split the refund intoAdvance earned income credit. return. It also allows your designee Treasury Inspector General fortwo or three accounts. See chapterIf a qualifying child lives with you to perform certain actions. See Tax Administration. If you want1.and you expect to qualify for the chapter 1. to confidentially report misconduct,earned income credit in 2009, you Frivolous tax submissions. waste, fraud, or abuse by an IRSmay be able to get part of the credit Payment of taxes. Make your The IRS has published a list of po- employee, you can callpaid to you in advance throughout check or money order payable to sitions that are identified as frivo-the year (by your employer) instead 1-800-366-4484 (1-800-877-8339ªUnited States Treasury.º You can lous. The penalty for filing aof waiting until you file your tax re- for TTY/TDD users). You can re-pay your taxes by credit card, using frivolous tax return is $5,000. Also,turn. See chapter 36. main anonymous.the Electronic Federal Tax Pay- the $5,000 penalty will apply to
ment System (EFTPS), or, if you other specified frivolous submis-Tax Computation Worksheet. If Photographs of missing chil-file electronically, by electronic sions. See chapter 1.your taxable income is $100,000 or dren. The Internal Revenuefunds withdrawal. See chapter 1.more, figure your tax using the Tax Service is a proud partner with theFiling erroneous claim for refundComputation Worksheet. The Tax Faster ways to file your return. National Center for Missing andor credit. You may have to pay aComputation Worksheet is found The IRS offers fast, accurate ways penalty if you file an erroneous Exploited Children. Photographs ofnear the end of this publication im- to file your tax return information claim for refund or credit. See missing children selected by themediately following the Tax Tables. chapter 1.without filing a paper tax return. Center may appear in this publica-
You can use IRS e-file (electronic tion on pages that would otherwiseJoint return responsibility. Privacy Act and paperwork re-filing). See chapter 1. be blank. You can help bring theseGenerally, both spouses are re- duction information. The IRS
sponsible for the tax and any inter- children home by looking at theRestructuring and Reform Act ofFree electronic filing.  You may
est or penalties on a joint tax return. photographs and calling1998, the Privacy Act of 1974, andbe able to file your 2008 taxes on-
In some cases, one spouse may be the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1-800-THE-LOSTline for free thanks to an electronic
relieved of that responsibility for 1980 require that when we ask you (1-800-843-5678) if you recognizefiling agreement. See chapter 1.
items of the other spouse that were for information we must first tell you a child.
incorrectly reported on the joint re- Change of address. If you what our legal right is to ask for the
turn. See chapter 2. change your address, you should information, why we are asking for ■
Publication 17 (2008) Page 3

Page 6 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Introduction
This publication covers the general explain the standard deduction, the If you operate your own business the area code, in your correspond-
rules for filing a federal income tax ence.or have other self-employment in-kinds of expenses you may be able
return. It supplements the informa- You can email us atcome, such as from babysitting orto deduct, and the various kinds of
tion contained in your tax form in- *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asteriskselling crafts, see the followingcredits you may be able to take to
struction booklet. It explains the tax must be included in the address.)publications for more information.reduce your tax.law to make sure you pay only the Please put ªPublications Com-• Publication 334, Tax GuideThroughout the publication aretax you owe and no more. mentº on the subject line. Althoughfor Small Business (For Indi-examples showing how the tax law we cannot respond individually to
viduals Who Use Schedule C each email, we do appreciate yourapplies in typical situations. Sam-How this publication is ar- or C-EZ). feedback and will consider yourple forms and schedules show youranged. This publication closely
comments as we revise our tax• Publication 535, Business Ex-follows Form 1040, U.S. Individual how to report certain items on your
products.penses.Income Tax Return. It is divided return. Also throughout the publica-
into six parts which cover different tion are flowcharts and tables that Ordering forms and publica-• Publication 587, Businesssections of Form 1040. Each part is tions. Visit www.irs.gov/form-present tax information in an Use of Your Home (Includingfurther divided into chapters which spubs to download forms andeasy-to-understand manner. Use by Daycare Providers).generally discuss one line of the publications, call 1-800-829-3676,Many of the subjects discussedform. Do not worry if you file Form or write to the address below and
in this publication are discussed in1040A or Form 1040EZ. Anything Help from the IRS. There are receive a response within 10 days
included on a line of either of these many ways you can get help fromgreater detail in other IRS publica- after your request is received.
forms is also included on Form the IRS. These are explainedtions. References to those other
1040. under How To Get Tax Help in thepublications are provided for your Internal Revenue Serviceback of this publication.information.The table of contents inside the 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayfront cover and the index in the Bloomington, IL 61705-6613Icons. Small graphic symbols, Comments and suggestions.back of the publication are useful or icons, are used to draw your We welcome your comments abouttools to help you find the informa- attention to special information. Tax questions. If you have athis publication and your sugges-tion you need.
See Table 1, Legend of Icons, be- tax question, check the informationtions for future editions.
low, for an explanation of each icon available on www.irs.gov or callYou can write to us at the fol-What is in this publication. The 1-800-829-1040. We cannot an-used in this publication. lowing address:publication begins with the rules for swer tax questions sent to either offiling a tax return. It explains: the above addresses.
Internal Revenue ServiceWhat is not covered in this publi-1. Who must file a return, IRS mission. Provide America'sIndividual Forms andcation. Some material that you taxpayers top quality service by2. Which tax form to use, Publications Branchmay find helpful is not included in helping them understand and meetSE:W:CAR:MP:T:I3. When the return is due, this publication but can be found in their tax responsibilities and by ap-1111 Constitution Ave. NW,your tax form instruction booklet. plying the tax law with integrity and4. How to e-file your return, and IR-6526This includes lists of: fairness to all.Washington, DC 202245. Other general information.
• Where to report certain items
It will help you identify which filing shown on information docu- We respond to many letters bystatus you qualify for, whether you ments, and telephone. Therefore, it would becan claim any dependents, and
• Recorded tax information top- helpful if you would include yourwhether the income you receive is
daytime phone number, includingics (TeleTax).taxable. The publication goes on to
Table 1. Legend of Icons
Icon Explanation
Items that may cause you particular problems, or an alert about pending legislation that may be enacted after
CAUTION
!
this publication goes to print.
An Internet site or an email address.
An address you may need.
Items you should keep in your personal records.
RECORDS
Items you may need to figure or a worksheet you may need to complete.
An important phone number.
Helpful information you may need.
TIP
■
Page 4 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 7 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part One.
The four chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax system.The Income Tax They take you through the first steps of filling out a tax returnÐ such as
deciding what your filing status is, how many exemptions you can take, andReturn what form to file. They also discuss recordkeeping requirements, IRS e-file
(electronic filing), certain penalties, and the two methods used to pay tax
during the year: withholding and estimated tax.
Deposit under Refunds, later. If you choose di- Adoption taxpayer identification number. If
rect deposit of your refund, you may be able to a child has been placed in your home for pur-
split the refund among two or three accounts. poses of legal adoption and you will not be able
1. to get a social security number for the child in
Alternative payment methods. If you owe time to file your return, you may be able to get an
additional tax, you may be able to pay electroni- adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN).
cally. See How To Pay, later. For more information, see Social Security Num-
ber, later.Filing Installment agreement. If you cannot pay the
full amount due with your return, you may ask to Taxpayer identification number for aliens.
make monthly installment payments. See In- If you or your dependent is a nonresident orInformation stallment Agreement, later, under Amount You resident alien who does not have and is not
Owe. You may be able to apply online for a eligible to get a social security number, file Form
payment agreement if you owe federal tax, inter- W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer
est, and penalties. Identification Number, with the IRS. For moreWhat's New information, see Social Security Number, later.Automatic 6-month extension. You can get
an automatic 6-month extension to file your tax Frivolous tax submissions. The IRS hasWho must file. Generally, the amount of in-
return if, no later than the date your return is due, published a list of positions that are identified ascome you can receive before you must file a
you file Form 4868, Application for Automatic frivolous. The penalty for filing a frivolous taxreturn has been increased. See Table 1-1, Table Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual In- return is $5,000. Also, the $5,000 penalty will1-2, and Table 1-3 for the specific amounts. come Tax Return. See Automatic Extension , apply to other specified frivolous submissions.
later.Filing late. If you file your return more than 60 For more information, see Civil Penalties, later.
days after the due date or extended due date, Service in combat zone. You are allowed ex-the minimum penalty is the smaller of $135 (in- tra time to take care of your tax matters if you arecreased from $100) or 100% of the unpaid tax. a member of the Armed Forces who served in aSee Civil Penalties, later. Introductioncombat zone, or if you served in the combat
zone in support of the Armed Forces. See Indi-Mailing your return. You may be mailing your This chapter discusses the following topics.viduals Serving in Combat Zone , later, underreturn to a different address this year because
When Do I Have To File. • Whether you have to file a return.the IRS has changed the filing location for sev-
eral areas. If you received an envelope with your
Table 1-1. 2008 Filing Requirements for Most Taxpayerstax package, please use it. Otherwise, see
Where Do I File, later in this chapter. THEN file a return if 
AND at the end of 2008 you your gross income 
IF your filing status is... were...* was at least...**
single under 65 $ 8,950
Reminders 65 or older $10,300
married filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $17,900Alternative filing methods. Rather than filing
a return on paper, you may be able to file elec- 65 or older (one spouse) $18,950tronically using IRS e-file. Create your own per-
sonal identification number (PIN) and file a 65 or older (both spouses) $20,000
completely paperless tax return. For more infor- married filing separately any age $ 3,500mation, see Does My Return Have To Be on
Paper, later. head of household under 65 $11,500
Change of address. If you change your ad- 65 or older $12,850
dress, you should notify the IRS. See Change of qualifying widow(er) with under 65 $14,400Address, later, under What Happens After I File.
dependent child 65 or older $15,450Enter your social security number. You
* If you were born on January 1, 1944, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2008.must enter your social security number (SSN) in
** Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and services that is notthe spaces provided on your tax return. If you file exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United States (even if you may exclude parta joint return, enter the SSNs in the same order or all of it). Do not include any social security benefits unless (a) you are married filing a separate return and
as the names. you lived with your spouse at any time during 2008 or (b) one-half of your social security benefits plus your
other gross income is more than $25,000 ($32,000 if married filing jointly). If (a) or (b) applies, see the
Direct deposit of refund. Instead of getting a instructions for Form 1040 or 1040A or Publication 915 to figure the taxable part of social security benefits
you must include in gross income.paper check, you may be able to have your
*** If you did not live with your spouse at the end of 2008 (or on the date your spouse died) and your grossrefund deposited directly into your account at a
income was at least $3,500, you must file a return regardless of your age.bank or other financial institution. See Direct
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 5

Page 8 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Which form to use. includes income from sources outside the U.S. Citizens and Residents Living
United States (even if you can exclude all or part Outside the United States• How to file electronically. of it). Include part of your social security benefits
• When, how, and where to file your return. if: If you are a U.S. citizen or resident living outside
the United States, you must file a return if you• What happens if you pay too little or too 1. You were married, filing a separate return, meet the filing requirements. For information onmuch tax. and you lived with your spouse at any time special tax rules that may apply to you, seeduring 2008; or• What records you should keep and how Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
long you should keep them. Resident Aliens Abroad. It is available at most2. Half of your social security benefits plus
U.S. embassies and consulates. Also see Howyour other gross income is more than• How you can change a return you have
To Get Tax Help in the back of this publication.$25,000 ($32,000 if married filing jointly).already filed.
If either (1) or (2) applies, see the instructions for
Form 1040 or 1040A, or Publication 915, Social Residents of Puerto RicoSecurity and Equivalent Railroad Retirement
Benefits, to figure the social security benefits Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a resi-Do I Have To you must include in gross income. dent of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. income
Common types of income are discussed in tax return if you meet the filing requirements.File a Return? Part Two of this publication. This is in addition to any legal requirement you
may have to file an income tax return for PuertoYou must file a federal income tax return if you Community income. If you are married and Rico.are a citizen or resident of the United States or a your permanent home is in a community prop-
If you are a resident of Puerto Rico for theresident of Puerto Rico and you meet the filing erty state, half of any income described by state
entire year, gross income does not include in-requirements for any of the following categories law as community income may be considered
come from sources within Puerto Rico, exceptthat apply to you. yours. This affects your federal taxes, including
for amounts received as an employee of thewhether you must file if you do not file a joint1. Individuals in general. (There are special United States or a U.S. agency. If you receivereturn with your spouse. See Publication 555,rules for surviving spouses, executors, ad- income from Puerto Rican sources that is notCommunity Property, for more information.ministrators, legal representatives, U.S. cit- subject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your stan-
izens and residents living outside the Self-employed individuals. If you are dard deduction. As a result, the amount of in-
United States, residents of Puerto Rico, self-employed, your gross income includes the come you must have before you are required to
and individuals with income from U.S. pos- amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040), file a U.S. income tax return is lower than thesessions.) Profit or Loss From Business; line 1 of Schedule applicable amount in Table 1-1 or Table 1-2. For
C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Business; more information, see Publication 570, Tax2. Dependents. and line 11 of Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or Guide for Individuals With Income From U.S.3. Certain children under age 19 or full-time Loss From Farming. See Self-Employed Per- Possessions.students. sons, later, for more information about your filing
requirements.4. Self-employed persons.
Individuals With Income From If you do not report all of your5. Aliens. U.S. Possessionsself-employment income, your social
The filing requirements for each category are security benefits may be lower when
CAUTION
!
If you had income from Guam, the Common-explained in this chapter. you retire.
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri-The filing requirements apply even if you do
can Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, specialnot owe tax. Filing status. Your filing status depends on rules may apply when determining whether youwhether you are single or married and on yourEven if you do not have to file a return, must file a U.S. federal income tax return. Init may be to your advantage to do so. family situation. Your filing status is determined addition, you may have to file a return with theSee Who Should File, later. on the last day of your tax year, which is Decem-
TIP individual island government. See Publicationber 31 for most taxpayers. See chapter 2 for an 570 for more information.File only one federal income tax return explanation of each filing status.
for the year regardless of how many
Dependentsjobs you had, how many Forms W-2 Age. If you are 65 or older at the end of the
CAUTION
!
you received, or how many states you lived in year, you generally can have a higher amount of If you are a dependent (one who meets theduring the year. Do not file more than one origi- gross income than other taxpayers before you dependency tests in chapter 3), see Table 1-2 tonal return for the same year, even if you have must file. See Table 1-1. You are considered 65 find whether you must file a return. You alsonot gotten your refund or have not heard from on the day before your 65th birthday. For exam- must file if your situation is described in Tablethe IRS since you filed. ple, if your 65th birthday is on January 1, 2009, 1-3.you are considered 65 for 2008.
IndividualsÐIn General Responsibility of parent. Generally, a child
is responsible for filing his or her own tax returnSurviving Spouses, If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether you and for paying any tax on the return. But if amust file a return depends on three factors: Executors, Administrators, dependent child who must file an income tax
and Legal Representatives return cannot file it for any reason, such as age,1. Your gross income,
then a parent, guardian, or other legally respon-You must file a final return for a decedent (a2. Your filing status, and sible person must file it for the child. If the childperson who died) if both of the following are true. cannot sign the return, the parent or guardian3. Your age.
must sign the child's name followed by the• You are the surviving spouse, executor,To find out whether you must file, see Table words ªBy (your signature), parent for minoradministrator, or legal representative.1-1, Table 1-2, and Table 1-3. Even if no table child.º• The decedent met the filing requirementsshows that you must file, you may need to file to
Child's earnings. Amounts a child earns byat the date of death.get money back. (See Who Should File, later.)
performing services are his or her gross income.
For more information on rules for filing a dece- This is true even if under local law the child'sGross income. This includes all income you
dent's final return, see Publication 559, Survi- parents have the right to the earnings and mayreceive in the form of money, goods, property,
vors, Executors, and Administrators. actually have received them. If the child does notand services that is not exempt from tax. It also
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 9 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure yourTable 1-2. 2008 Filing Requirements for Dependents
self-employment tax. Self-employment tax isSee chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim you as a dependent. comparable to the social security and Medicare
tax withheld from an employee's wages. ForIf your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, and any of the situations more information about this tax, see Publicationbelow apply to you, you must file a return. (See Table 1-3 for other situations when you must 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.file.)
In this table, earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, and professional fees. It also Employees of foreign governments or in-
includes taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. (See Scholarships and fellowships in ternational organizations. If you are a U.S.
chapter 12.) Unearned income includes investment-type income such as taxable interest, citizen who works in the United States for an
ordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. It also includes unemployment compensation, international organization, a foreign govern-
taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, cancellation of debt, and distributions of ment, or a wholly owned instrumentality of aunearned income from a trust. Gross income is the total of your earned and unearned income. foreign government, and your employer is not
required to withhold social security and Medi-
care taxes from your wages, you must includeSingle dependentsÐWere you either age 65 or older or blind?
your earnings from services performed in the
M No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. United States when figuring your net earnings
• Your unearned income was more than $900. from self-employment.
• Your earned income was more than $5,450. Ministers. You must include income from• Your gross income was more than the larger of: services you performed as a minister when fig-• $900, or uring your net earnings from self-employment,• Your earned income (up to $5,150) plus $300. unless you have an exemption from
M Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. self-employment tax. This also applies to Chris-
• Your unearned income was more than $2,250 ($3,600 if 65 or older and blind). tian Science practitioners and members of a
religious order who have not taken a vow of• Your earned income was more than $6,800 ($8,150 if 65 or older and blind).
poverty. For more information, see Publication• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
517, Social Security and Other Information for• $2,250 ($3,600 if 65 or older and blind), or
Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers.• Your earned income (up to $5,150) plus $1,650 ($3,000 if 65 or older and blind).
Married dependentsÐWere you either age 65 or older or blind?
Aliens
M No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Your unearned income was more than $900. Your status as an alienÐresident, nonresident,
• Your earned income was more than $5,450. or dual-status Ðdetermines whether and how
• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and you must file an income tax return.
itemizes deductions. The rules used to determine your alien status
• Your gross income was more than the larger of: are discussed in Publication 519, U.S. Tax
• $900, or Guide for Aliens.
• Your earned income (up to $5,150) plus $300. Resident alien. If you are a resident alien for
M Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. the entire year, you must file a tax return follow-
• Your unearned income was more than $1,950 ($3,000 if 65 or older and blind). ing the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens.
• Your earned income was more than $6,500 ($7,550 if 65 or older and blind). Use the forms discussed in this publication.
• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and Nonresident alien. If you are a nonresidentitemizes deductions.
alien, the rules and tax forms that apply to you• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
are different from those that apply to U.S. citi-• $1,950 ($3,000 if 65 or older and blind), or zens and resident aliens. See Publication 519 to• Your earned income (up to $5,150) plus $1,350 ($2,400 if 65 or older and blind). find out if U.S. income tax laws apply to you and
which forms you should file.
pay the tax due on this income, the parent is • Carry on a trade or business as a sole Dual-status taxpayer. If you are a resident
proprietor,liable for the tax. alien for part of the tax year and a nonresident
alien for the rest of the year, you are a• Are an independent contractor, dual-status taxpayer. Different rules apply forCertain Children Under • Are a member of a partnership, or each part of the year. For information on
Age 19 or Full-Time dual-status taxpayers, see Publication 519.• Are in business for yourself in any other
way.Students Who Should File
Self-employment can include work in additionIf a child's only income is interest and dividends
to your regular full-time business activities, such Even if you do not have to file, you should file a(including capital gain distributions and Alaska
as certain part-time work you do at home or in federal income tax return to get money back ifPermanent Fund dividends), the child was under
addition to your regular job. any of the following conditions apply.age 19 at the end of 2008 or was a full-time
 You must file a return if your gross income isstudent under age 24 at the end of 2008, and 1. You had federal income tax withheld fromat least as much as the filing requirementcertain other conditions are met, a parent can your pay or made estimated tax payments.amount for your filing status and age (shown inelect to include the child's income on the par- Table 1-1). Also, you must file Form 1040 and 2. You qualify for the earned income credit.ent's return. If this election is made, the child Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-Employment See chapter 36 for more information. does not have to file a return. See Parent's Tax, if:
3. You qualify for the additional child taxElection To Report Child's Interest and Divi-
1. Your net earnings from self-employment credit. See chapter 34 for more informa-dends in chapter 31.
(excluding church employee income) were tion.
$400 or more, or 4. You qualify for the health coverage taxSelf-Employed Persons
2. You had church employee income of credit. See chapter 37 for more informa-
You are self-employed if you: $108.28 or more. (See Table 1-3.) tion.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 7

Page 10 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2008 Return
If any of the four conditions listed below apply, you must file a return, even if your income is less than the amount shown in Table 1-1 or Table 1-2.
1. You owe any special taxes, including any of the following.
• Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Social security or Medicare tax on wages you received from an employer who did not withhold these taxes.
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you reported to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on your group-term life insurance. This amount should be shown in
box 12 of your Form W-2.
• Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter 30.)
• Additional tax on a qualified retirement plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA). (See chapter 17.)
• Additional tax on an Archer MSA or health savings account. (See Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans.)
• Additional tax on a Coverdell ESA or qualified tuition program. (See Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Education.)
• Recapture of an investment credit or a low-income housing credit. (See the Instructions for Form 4255, Recapture of Investment
Credit, or Form 8611, Recapture of Low-Income Housing Credit.)
• Recapture tax on the disposition of a home purchased with a federally subsidized mortgage. (See chapter 15.)
• Recapture of the qualified electric vehicle credit. (See chapter 37.)
• Recapture of an education credit. (See chapter 35.)
• Recapture of the Indian employment credit. (See the Instructions for Form 8845, Indian Employment Credit.)
• Recapture of the new markets credit. (See Form 8874, New Markets Credit.)
• Recapture of alternative motor vehicle credit. (See Form 8910, Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit.)
• Household employment taxes. (See Schedule H (Form 1040), Household Employment Taxes.)
2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your employer. This amount should be shown in box 9 of your Form
W-2. (See chapter 36.)
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Self-Employed Persons earlier in this chapter.)
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer social security and
Medicare taxes. (See Publication 334.)
5. You qualify for the refundable credit for 5. Your income is only from wages, salaries, dividends), capital gain distributions, and
tips, unemployment compensation, Alaskaprior year minimum tax. unemployment compensation.
Permanent Fund dividends, taxable schol-6. You qualify for the recovery rebate credit. 2. Your taxable income is less thanarship and fellowship grants, and taxableSee chapter 37 for more information. $100,000.interest of $1,500 or less.
3. Your adjustments to income are for only6. You did not receive any advance earned
the following items.income credit (EIC) payments.
7. You do not claim any adjustments to in- a. Educator expenses. Which Form come, such as a deduction for IRA contri- b. IRA deduction. butions or student loan interest.Should I Use? c. Student loan interest deduction. 8. You do not claim any credits other than the
earned income credit or the recovery re- d. Tuition and fees deduction.You must use one of three forms to file your
bate credit.return: Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form
4. You do not itemize your deductions. 1040. (But also see Does My Return Have To Be 9. You do not owe any household employ-on Paper, later.) ment taxes on wages you paid to a house- 5. Your taxes are from only the following
hold employee. items.See the discussion under Form 1040
for when you must use that form. 10. You are not claiming the additional stan- a. Tax Table.
TIPdard deduction for real estate taxes or dis-
b. Alternative minimum tax. (See chapteraster losses.
30.) You must meet all of these requirements to
c. Advance earned income credit (EIC)use Form 1040EZ. If you do not, you must useForm 1040EZ
Form 1040A or Form 1040. payments, if you received any. (See
Form 1040EZ is the simplest form to use. chapter 36.) 
Figuring tax. On Form 1040EZ, you can use
d. Recapture of an education credit. (Seeonly the tax table to figure your tax. You cannotYou can use Form 1040EZ if all of the follow- chapter 35.) use Form 1040EZ to report any other tax.ing apply.
e. Form 8615, Tax for Certain Children1. Your filing status is single or married filing Who Have Investment Income of MoreForm 1040Ajointly. If you were a nonresident alien at Than $1,800. any time in 2008, your filing status must be If you do not qualify to use Form 1040EZ, youmarried filing jointly. f. Qualified Dividends and Capital Gainmay be able to use Form 1040A.
Tax Worksheet. 2. You (and your spouse if married filing a You can use Form 1040A if all of the follow-joint return) were under age 65 and not 6. You claim only the following tax credits.ing apply.blind at the end of 2008. If you were born
on January 1, 1944, you are considered to a. The credit for child and dependent care1. Your income is only from wages, salaries,be age 65 at the end of 2008. expenses. (See chapter 32.) tips, IRA distributions, pensions and annui-
ties, taxable social security and railroad re-3. You do not claim any dependents. b. The credit for the elderly or the dis-tirement benefits, taxable scholarship and abled. (See chapter 33.) 4. Your taxable income is less than fellowship grants, interest, ordinary divi-
$100,000. dends (including Alaska Permanent Fund c. The child tax credit. (See chapter 34.) 
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 11 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
d. The additional child tax credit. (See 8. You claim any credits other than the cred- Electronic return signatures. To file your re-
its listed earlier under Form 1040A. turn electronically, you must sign the return elec-chapter 34.)
tronically using a personal identification numbere. The education credits. (See chapter 9. You owe the excise tax on insider stock (PIN). If you are filing online using software, you35.) compensation from an expatriated corpo- must use a Self-Select PIN. If you are filingration. electronically using a tax practitioner, you canf. The retirement savings contributions
use a Self-Select PIN or a Practitioner PIN.credit. (See chapter 37.) 10. Your Form W-2 shows an amount in box
12 with a code Z.g. The earned income credit. (See chapter Self-Select PIN. The Self-Select PIN method
11. You had a qualified health savings account36.) allows you to create your own PIN. If you are
funding distribution from your IRA. married filing jointly, you and your spouse willh. The recovery rebate credit.
each need to create a PIN and enter these PINs12. You are an employee and your employer
as your electronic signatures.7. You did not have an alternative minimum did not withhold social security and Medi-
A PIN is any combination of five digits youcare tax.tax adjustment on stock you acquired from
choose except five zeros. If you use a PIN, therethe exercise of an incentive stock option. 13. You have to file other forms with your re- is nothing to sign and nothing to mailÐnot even(See Publication 525, Taxable and Nontax- turn to report certain exclusions, taxes, or your Forms W-2.able Income.) transactions. To verify your identity, you will be prompted
You must meet all of the above requirements to enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) from14. You are a debtor in a bankruptcy case filedto use Form 1040A. If you do not, you must use your originally filed 2007 federal income tax re-after October 16, 2005.Form 1040. turn, if applicable. Do not use your AGI from an
15. You have a net disaster loss attributable toIf you meet the above requirements, you can amended return (Form 1040X) or a math error
a federally declared disaster, even if youuse Form 1040A even if you received em- correction made by the IRS. AGI is the amount
are claiming the standard deduction.ployer-provided dependent care benefits or shown on your 2007 Form 1040, line 38; Form
claim the additional standard deduction for real 1040A, line 22; or Form 1040EZ, line 4. If you do
not have your 2007 income tax return, call theestate taxes paid.
IRS at 1-800-829-1040 to get a free transcript ofIf you receive a capital gain distribution your return. (If you filed electronically last year,that includes unrecaptured section Does My Return Have you may use your prior year PIN to verify your1250 gain, section 1202 gain, or col-
CAUTION
! identity instead of your prior year AGI. The priorlectibles (28%) gain, you cannot use Form To Be on Paper? year PIN is the five digit PIN you used to elec-1040A. You must use Form 1040. tronically sign your 2007 return.) You will also beYou may be able to file a paperless return using prompted to enter your date of birth (DOB).IRS e-file (electronic filing). If your 2008 ad- Make sure your DOB is accurate and matchesForm 1040 justed gross income (AGI) is $56,000 or less, the information on record with the Social Secur-you are eligible for Free File. If you do not qualify ity Administration by checking your annual so-If you cannot use Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, for Free File, then you should check out the cial security statement.you must use Form 1040. You can use Form Partners Page on www.irs.gov for low-cost e-file1040 to report all types of income, deductions, You cannot use the Self-Select PINoptions.and credits. method if you are a first-time filer under
You may have received Form 1040A or Form age 16 at the end of 2008.
CAUTION
!IRS e-file1040EZ in the mail because of the return you
filed last year. If your situation has changed this Practitioner PIN. The Practitioner PINyear, it may be to your advantage to file Form Table 1-4 lists the benefits method allows you to authorize your tax practi-1040 instead. You may pay less tax by filing
 of IRS e-file . IRS e-file tioner to enter or generate your PIN. The practi-Form 1040 because you can take itemized de- uses automation to replace most of the manual tioner can provide you with details.ductions, some adjustments to income, and steps needed to process paper returns. As a
credits you cannot take on Form 1040A or Form result, the processing of e-file returns is faster Form 8453. You must send in a paper Form
1040EZ. and more accurate than the processing of paper 8453 if you are attaching or filing Form 1098-C,
returns. However, as with a paper return, you 2848 (for an electronic return signed by an
are responsible for making sure your return con- agent), 3115, 3468 (if attachments are re-You must use Form 1040 if any of the follow-
tains accurate information and is filed on time. quired), 4136 (if certificate or statement re-ing apply.
Using e-file does not affect your chances of an quired), 5713, 8283 (if a statement is required
1. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more. IRS examination of your return. for Section A or if Section B is completed), 8332
2. You itemize your deductions. Table 1-4 Benefits of IRS e-file
3. You had income that cannot be reported
on Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, including • Free File allows qualified taxpayers to prepare and e-file their own tax returns for free.
tax-exempt interest from private activity
• Free File is available in English and Spanish.bonds issued after August 7, 1986.
• Free File is available online 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.4. You claim any adjustments to gross in-
come other than the adjustments listed • Get your refund faster than paper filers do, in as little as 10 days with Direct Deposit.
earlier under Form 1040A. • Sign electronically with a secure self-selected PIN number and file a completely paperless
return.5. Your Form W-2, box 12, shows uncol-
lected employee tax (social security and • Receive an e-mailed proof of receipt within 48 hours after the IRS receives your return.Medicare tax) on tips (see chapter 6) or
• If you owe, you can e-file and authorize an electronic funds withdrawal or pay by credit card.group-term life insurance (see chapter 5).
You can also file a return early and pay the amount you owe later.
6. You received $20 or more in tips in any 1 • Save time by preparing and e-filing federal and state returns together.month and did not report all of them to
your employer. (See chapter 6.) • IRS computers quickly and automatically check for errors or other missing information.
• Help the environment, use less paper, and save taxpayer money Ðit costs less to process7. You were a bona fide resident of Puerto
an e-filed return than a paper return.Rico and exclude income from sources in
Puerto Rico.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 9

Page 12 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(or certain pages from a post-1984 decree or the receipt is the postmark date. The post-Free Help With Your Return
agreement), 8858, 8864 (if certification or state- marked certified mail receipt is evidence that the
Free help in preparing your return is availablement required), 8885, Schedule D-1 (Form return was delivered.
nationwide from IRS-trained volunteers. The1040) (if you elect not to include your transac- Private delivery services. If you use a pri-Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) pro-tions on the electronic STCGL or LTCGL rec- vate delivery service designated by the IRS togram is designed to help low to moderate in-ords), or Worksheets 1 through 4 from Pub. 517 send your return, the postmark date generally iscome taxpayers and the Tax Counseling for the(or other statement showing the required infor- the date the private delivery service records inElderly (TCE) program is designed to assist tax-mation and computations). its database or marks on the mailing label. Thepayers age 60 or older with their tax returns.For more details, visit www.irs.gov/efile and private delivery service can tell you how to getMany VITA sites offer free electronic filing andclick on ªIndividual Taxpayers.º written proof of this date.all volunteers will let you know about the credits The following are designated private deliveryPower of attorney. If an agent is signing your and deductions you may be entitled to claim. To services.return for you, a power of attorney (POA) must find a site near you, call 1-800-829-1040. Or to
be filed. Attach the POA to Form 8453 and file it find the nearest AARP TaxAide site, visit • DHL Express (DHL): DHL Same Day
using that form's instructions. See Signatures, AARP's website at www.aarp.org/taxaide or call Service, DHL Next Day 10:30 am, DHL
later for more information on POAs. 1-888-227-7669. For more information on these Next Day 12:00 pm, DHL Next Day 3:00
programs, go to www.irs.gov and enter keyword pm, and DHL 2nd Day Service.
State returns. In most states, you can file an ªVITAº in the upper right-hand corner. • Federal Express (FedEx): FedEx Priorityelectronic state return simultaneously with your
Overnight, FedEx Standard Overnight,federal return. For more information, check with
FedEx 2Day, FedEx International Priority,your local IRS office, state tax agency, tax pro- Using a Tax Professional and FedEx International First.fessional, or the IRS website at 
Many tax professionals electronically file tax re-www.irs.gov/efile. • United Parcel Service (UPS): UPS Next
turns for their clients. You may personally enter Day Air, UPS Next Day Air Saver, UPSRefunds. You can have a refund check mailed your PIN or complete Form 8879, IRS e-file 2nd Day Air, UPS 2nd Day Air A.M., UPSto you, or you can have your refund deposited Signature Authorization, to authorize the tax Worldwide Express Plus, and UPS World-directly to your checking or savings account or professional to enter your PIN on your return. wide Express.split among two or three accounts. With e-file,
your refund will be issued faster than if you filed Note. Tax professionals may charge a fee
Private delivery services cannot deliveron paper. for IRS e-file. Fees can vary depending on the
items to P.O. boxes. You must use theAs with a paper return, you may not get all of professional and the specific services rendered.
U.S. Postal Service to mail any item toyour refund if you owe certain past-due
CAUTION
!
an IRS P.O. box address.amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a stu-
dent loan, or child support. See Offset against
Electronically filed returns. If you use IRSdebts under Refunds, later. When Do I e-file, your return is considered filed on time if
Refund inquiries. You can go online to check the authorized electronic return transmitter post-Have To File?the status of your refund 72 hours after the IRS marks the transmission by the due date. An
acknowledges receipt of your e-filed return, see authorized electronic return transmitter is a par-April 15, 2009, is the due date for filing yourRefund Information, later. ticipant in the IRS e-file program that transmits2008 income tax return if you use the calendar electronic tax return information directly to theyear. For a quick view of due dates for filing aAmount you owe. To avoid late-payment IRS.return with or without an extension of time to filepenalties and interest, pay your taxes in full by The electronic postmark is a record of when(discussed later), see Table 1-5.April 15, 2009. You can make your payment the authorized electronic return transmitter re-
electronically by credit card or by scheduling an If you use a fiscal year (a year ending on the ceived the transmission of your electronically
electronic funds withdrawal from your checking last day of any month except December, or a filed return on its host system. The date and time
or savings account. 52-53-week year), your income tax return is due in your time zone controls whether your elec-
See How To Pay , later, for information on by the 15th day of the 4th month after the close tronically filed return is timely.
how to pay the amount you owe. of your fiscal year.
Filing late. If you do not file your return by theWhen the due date for doing any act for tax
due date, you may have to pay a failure-to-filepurposesÐfiling a return, paying taxes, etc. Ð
Using Your Personal Computer penalty and interest. For more information, seefalls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the
Penalties, later. Also see Interest under Amountdue date is delayed until the next business day.
You Owe.You can file your tax return in a fast,
Filing on time. Your paper return is filed on If you were due a refund but you did not file aeasy, and convenient way using your
time if it is mailed in an envelope that is properly return, you generally must file within 3 yearspersonal computer. A computer with
addressed, has enough postage, and is post- from the date the return was due (including ex-Internet access and tax preparation software are
marked by the due date. If you send your return tensions) to get that refund.all you need. Best of all, you can e-file from the
by registered mail, the date of the registration iscomfort of your home 24 hours a day, 7 days a
the postmark date. The registration is evidence Nonresident alien.  If you are a nonresidentweek.
that the return was delivered. If you send a alien and earn wages subject to U.S. income taxIRS approved tax preparation software is return by certified mail and have your receipt withholding, your 2008 U.S. income tax returnavailable for online use on the Internet, for postmarked by a postal employee, the date on (Form 1040NR or Form 1040NR-EZ) is due by:download from the Internet, and in retail stores.
For information, visit our website at 
Table 1-5.  When To File Your 2008 Returnwww.irs.gov/efile.
For U.S. citizens and residents who file returns on a calendar year.
For Certain TaxpayersThrough Employers and Financial
For Most Taxpayers Outside the U.S.Institutions
No extension requested April 15, 2009 June 15, 2009Some businesses offer free e-file to their em-
ployees, members, or customers. Others offer it Automatic extension October 15, 2009 October 15, 2009
Form 4868 filed, or credit for a fee. Ask your employer or financial institu-
card payment madetion if they offer IRS e-file as an employee,
member, or customer benefit.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 13 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• April 15, 2009, if you use a calendar year, E-file and pay by credit card. You can get months. File Form 4868 and check the box on
an extension by paying part or all of your esti- line 8.or
mate of tax due by using a credit card. You can This additional 4-month extension of time to• The 15th day of the 4th month after the do this by phone or over the Internet. You do not file is not a further extension of time to pay. Youend of your fiscal year if you use a fiscal file Form 4868. See Credit card, under How To can use a credit card to pay your estimate of taxyear. Pay, later in this chapter. due. See How To Pay, later in this chapter.
If you do not earn wages subject to U.S. in- Filing a paper Form 4868. You can get an
No further extension. An extension of morecome tax withholding, your return is due by: extension of time to file by filing a paper Form
than 6 months will generally not be granted.4868. Mail it to the address shown in the form• June 15, 2009, if you use a calendar year, However, if you are outside the United Statesinstructions.or and meet certain tests, you may be granted aIf you want to make a payment with the form,
longer extension. For more information, see Fur-make your check or money order payable to the• The 15th day of the 6th month after the
ther extensions under When To File and Pay inªUnited States Treasury.º Write your SSN, day-end of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscal
Publication 54.time phone number, and ª2008 Form 4868º onyear.
your check or money order.See Publication 519 for more filing information.
When to file. You must request the automatic Individuals Serving in 
Filing for a decedent. If you must file a final extension by the due date for your return. You Combat Zonecan file your return any time before the 6-monthincome tax return for a taxpayer who died during
extension period ends.the year (a decedent), the return is due by the The deadline for filing your tax return, paying
15th day of the 4th month after the end of the any tax you may owe, and filing a claim forWhen you file your return. Enter any pay-decedent's normal tax year. See Publication refund is automatically extended if you serve in ament you made related to the extension of time559. combat zone. This applies to members of theto file on Form 1040, line 67. If you file Form Armed Forces, as well as merchant marines1040EZ or Form 1040A, include that payment in serving aboard vessels under the operationalyour total payments on Form 1040EZ, line 10, orExtensions of Time To File control of the Department of Defense, RedForm 1040A, line 43. Also enter ªForm 4868º Cross personnel, accredited correspondents,You may be able to get an extension of time to and the amount paid in the space to the left of and civilians under the direction of the Armedfile your return. Special rules apply for those who line 10 or line 43. Forces in support of the Armed Forces.were:
• Outside the United States, or Combat zone. For purposes of the automaticIndividuals Outside the 
extension, the term ªcombat zoneº includes the• Serving in a combat zone. United States following areas. 
You are allowed an automatic 2-month exten- 1. The Persian Gulf area, effective JanuaryAutomatic Extension sion (until June 15, 2009, if you use the calendar 17, 1991.year) to file your 2008 return and pay any federalIf you cannot file your 2008 return by the due income tax due if: 2. The qualified hazardous duty area of thedate, you may be able to get an automatic
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia/6-month extension of time to file. 1. You are a U.S. citizen or resident, and Montenegro), Albania, the Adriatic Sea,
and the Ionian Sea north of the 39th paral-2. On the due date of your return:Example. If your return is due on April 15,
lel, effective March 24, 1999.2009, you will have until October 15, 2009, to a. You are living outside the United Statesfile. 3. Afghanistan, effective September 19,and Puerto Rico, and your main place 2001.of business or post of duty is outsideIf you do not pay the tax due by the
the United States and Puerto Rico, orregular due date (generally, April 15), See Publication 3, Armed Forces' Tax
you will owe interest. You may also be Guide, for information about other tax benefits
CAUTION
!b. You are in military or naval service oncharged penalties, discussed later. available to military personnel serving in a com-duty outside the United States and 
bat zone.Puerto Rico.
How to get the automatic extension. You
Extension period. The deadline for filing yourcan get the automatic extension by: However, if you pay the tax due after the
return, paying any tax due, and filing a claim forregular due date (generally, April 15), interest1. Using IRS e-file (electronic filing), or refund is extended for at least 180 days after thewill be charged from that date until the date the
later of:tax is paid.2. Filing a paper form. If you served in a combat zone or qualified 1. The last day you are in a combat zone orhazardous duty area, you may be eligible for a the last day the area qualifies as a combatE-file options. There are two ways you can longer extension of time to file. See Individuals zone, oruse e-file to get an extension of time to file. Serving in Combat Zone, later, for special rules
Complete Form 4868, Application for Automatic that apply to you. 2. The last day of any continuous qualified
Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual In- hospitalization for injury from service in theMarried taxpayers. If you file a joint return,come Tax Return, to use as a worksheet. If you combat zone.only one spouse has to qualify for this automaticthink you may owe tax when you file your return, In addition to the 180 days, your deadline isextension. If you and your spouse file separateuse Part II of the form to estimate your balance also extended by the number of days you hadreturns, this automatic extension applies only todue. If you e-file Form 4868 to the IRS, do not left to take action with the IRS when you enteredthe spouse who qualifies.also send a paper Form 4868. the combat zone. For example, you have 3 1/2
How to get the extension. To use this auto- months (January 1 ± April 15) to file your taxE-file using your personal computer or a matic extension, you must attach a statement to return. Any days left in this period when youtax professional.  You can use a tax software your return explaining what situation qualified entered the combat zone (or the entire 3 1/2package with your personal computer or a tax you for the extension. (See the situations listed months if you entered it before the beginning ofprofessional to file Form 4868 electronically. under (2), earlier.) the year) are added to the 180 days. See Exten-You will need to provide certain information from
sion of Deadlines in Publication 3 for more infor-your tax return for 2007. If you wish to make a Extensions beyond 2 months. If you cannot
mation.payment by electronic funds withdrawal, see file your return within the automatic 2-month
Electronic payment options, under How To Pay, The above rules on the extension for filingextension period, you may be able to get an
your return also apply when you are deployedlater in this chapter. additional 4-month extension, for a total of 6
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 11

Page 14 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
outside the United States (away from your per- Form 1099. If you received certain types of are attached or garnisheed, the full amount is
manent duty station) while participating in a des- income, you may receive a Form 1099. For constructively received by you. You must in-
ignated contingency operation. example, if you received taxable interest of $10 clude these wages in income for the year you
or more, the payer is required to provide or send would have received them.
Form 1099 to you no later than February 2, Debts paid for you. If another person2009. If it is mailed, you should allow adequate
cancels or pays your debts (but not as a gift ortime to receive it before contacting the payer. IfHow Do I Prepare loan), you have constructively received theyou still do not get the form by February 15, call
amount and generally must include it in yourthe IRS for help.My Return? gross income for the year. See Canceled Debts
in chapter 12 for more information.This section explains how to get ready to fill in When Do I Report My 
your tax return and when to report your income Payment to third party. If a third party isIncome and Expenses?and expenses. It also explains how to complete paid income from property you own, you have
certain sections of the form. You may find Table constructively received the income. It is theYou must figure your taxable income on the1-6 helpful when you prepare your return. same as if you had actually received the incomebasis of a tax year. A ªtax yearº is an annualIn most cases, based on the paper return you and paid it to the third party.accounting period used for keeping records andfiled last year, the IRS will mail you Form 1040, reporting income and expenses. You must ac- Payment to an agent. Income an agent re-Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ with related in- count for your income and expenses in a way ceives for you is income you constructively re-structions. Before you fill in the form, look at the that clearly shows your taxable income. The way ceived in the year the agent receives it. If youform instructions to see if you need, or would you do this is called an accounting method. This indicate in a contract that your income is to bebenefit from filing, a different form this year. Also section explains which accounting periods and paid to another person, you must include thesee if you need any additional forms or sched- methods you can use.ules. You may also want to read Does My Re- amount in your gross income when the other
turn Have To Be on Paper, earlier. person receives it.
If you do not receive a tax return package in Accounting Periods Check received or available. A valid checkthe mail, or if you need other forms, you can that was made available to you before the end oforder them or print them from the Internet. See Most individual tax returns cover a calendar the tax year is constructively received by you inHow To Get Tax Help in the back of this publica- yearÐthe 12 months from January 1 through that year. A check that was ªmade available totion. December 31. If you do not use a calendar year, youº includes a check you have already re-your accounting period is a fiscal year. A regularTable 1-6. Six Steps for Preparing ceived, but not cashed or deposited. It also in-fiscal year is a 12-month period that ends on theYour Return cludes, for example, your last paycheck of thelast day of any month except December. A year that your employer made available for you52-53-week fiscal year varies from 52 to 531 Ð Get your records together for income to pick up at the office before the end of the year.weeks and always ends on the same day of theand expenses. It is constructively received by you in that yearweek.
whether or not you pick it up before the end of2 Ð Get the forms, schedules, and You choose your accounting period (tax
the year or wait to receive it by mail after the endpublications you need. year) when you file your first income tax return. It
of the year.cannot be longer than 12 months.3 Ð Fill in your return.
No constructive receipt. There may be4 Ð Check your return to make sure it is More information. For more information on facts to show that you did not constructivelycorrect. accounting periods, including how to change receive income.
your accounting period, see Publication 538,5 Ð Sign and date your return.
Accounting Periods and Methods. Example. Alice Johnson, a teacher, agreed6 Ð Attach all required forms and to her school board's condition that, in her ab-schedules.
sence, she would receive only the difference
Accounting Methods between her regular salary and the salary of a
substitute teacher hired by the school board.Your accounting method is the way you accountSubstitute tax forms. You cannot use your Therefore, Alice did not constructively receivefor your income and expenses. Most taxpayersown version of a tax form unless it meets the the amount by which her salary was reduced touse either the cash method or an accrualrequirements explained in Publication 1167, pay the substitute teacher.method. You choose a method when you fileGeneral Rules and Specifications for Substitute
your first income tax return. If you want toForms and Schedules.
Accrual method. If you use an accrualchange your accounting method after that, you
method, you generally report income when yougenerally must get IRS approval.Form W-2. If you are an employee, you should earn it, rather than when you receive it. Youreceive Form W-2 from your employer. You will generally deduct your expenses when you incurCash method. If you use this method, reportneed the information from this form to prepare them, rather than when you pay them.all items of income in the year in which youyour return. See Form W-2  under Credit for
actually or constructively receive them. Gener-Withholding and Estimated Tax in chapter 4. Income paid in advance. An advance pay-
ally, you deduct all expenses in the year youYour employer is required to provide or send ment of income is generally included in gross
actually pay them. This is the method most indi-Form W-2 to you no later than February 2, 2009. income in the year you receive it. Your method
vidual taxpayers use.If it is mailed, you should allow adequate time to of accounting does not matter as long as the
receive it before contacting your employer. If income is available to you. An advance paymentConstructive receipt. Generally, you con-you still do not get the form by February 15, the may include rent or interest you receive in ad-structively receive income when it is credited toIRS can help you by requesting the form from vance and pay for services you will performyour account or set apart in any way that makesyour employer. When you request IRS help, be later.it available to you. You do not need to haveprepared to provide the following information. physical possession of it. For example, interest A limited deferral until the next tax year may
credited to your bank account on December 31,• Your name, address (including ZIP code), be allowed for certain advance payments. See
2008, is taxable income to you in 2008 if youand phone number. Publication 538 for specific information.
could have withdrawn it in 2008 (even if the• Your SSN. amount is not entered in your passbook or with- Additional information. For more information• Your dates of employment. drawn until 2009). on accounting methods, including how to
change your accounting method, see Publica-• Your employer's name, address (including Garnisheed wages. If your employer uses
tion 538.ZIP code), and phone number. your wages to pay your debts, or if your wages
Page 12 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 15 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
attempt to get it from the birth parents, theSocial Security Number Computationsplacement agency, and other persons.
You must enter your social security number The following information on entering numbers• You cannot get an SSN for the child from
(SSN) in the space provided on your return. Be on your tax return may be useful in making thethe SSA because, for example, the adop-
sure the SSN on your return is the same as the return easier to complete.tion is not final.
SSN on your social security card. If you are Rounding off dollars. You may round off• You are eligible to claim the child as amarried, enter the SSNs for both you and your cents to whole dollars on your return and sched-dependent on your tax return.spouse, whether you file jointly or separately. ules. If you do round to whole dollars, you mustIf you are filing a joint return, write the SSNs After the adoption is final, you must apply for an round all amounts. To round, drop amountsin the same order as the names. Use this same SSN for the child. You cannot continue using the under 50 cents and increase amounts from 50 toorder in submitting other forms and documents ATIN. 99 cents to the next dollar. For example, $1.39to the IRS. becomes $1 and $2.50 becomes $3.See Form W-7A for more information.
If you have to add two or more amounts toName change. If you changed your name be-
figure the amount to enter on a line, includecause of marriage, divorce, etc., be sure to re- Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse is
cents when adding the amounts and round offport the change to your local Social Security a nonresident alien, your spouse must have only the total.Administration (SSA) office before filing your either an SSN or an ITIN if:
return. This prevents delays in processing your • You file a joint return, Example. You receive two Forms W-2: onereturn and issuing refunds. It also safeguards
showing wages of $5,000.55 and one showingyour future social security benefits. • You file a separate return and claim an wages of $18,500.73. On Form 1040, line 7, youexemption for your spouse, or would enter $23,501 ($5,000.55 + $18,500.73 =Dependent's social security number. You
• Your spouse is filing a separate return. $23,501.28), not $23,502 ($5,001 + $18,501).must provide the SSN of each dependent you
claim, regardless of the dependent's age. This If your spouse is not eligible for an SSN, see the Equal amounts. If you are asked to enter therequirement applies to all dependents (not just next discussion. smaller or larger of two equal amounts, enteryour children) claimed on your tax return. that amount.
Individual taxpayer identification numberException. If your child was born and died
(ITIN). The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you are Example. Line 1 is $500. Line 3 is $500.in 2008 and you do not have an SSN for the
a nonresident or resident alien and you do not Line 5 asks you to enter the smaller of line 1 or 3.child, enter ªDIEDº in column (2) of line 6c (Form
have and are not eligible to get an SSN. This Enter $500 on line 5.1040 or 1040A) and attach a copy of the child's
also applies to an alien spouse or dependent. Tobirth certificate, death certificate, or hospital rec- Negative amounts. If you need to enter aapply for an ITIN, file Form W-7 with the IRS. Itords. negative amount, put the amount in parenthesesusually takes about 6 weeks to get an ITIN. rather than using a minus sign. To combineNo social security number. File Form SS-5, Enter the ITIN on your tax return wherever an positive and negative amounts, add all the posi-Application for a Social Security Card, with your SSN is requested. tive amounts together and then subtract thelocal SSA office to get an SSN for yourself or If you are applying for an ITIN for your- negative amounts.your dependent. It usually takes about 2 weeks self, your spouse, or a dependent into get an SSN. If you or your dependent is not order to file your tax return, attach your
TIPeligible for an SSN, see Individual taxpayer Attachmentscompleted tax return to your Form W-7. See theidentification number (ITIN), later. Form W-7 instructions for how and where to file. Depending on the form you file and the itemsIf you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, you
reported on your return, you may have to com-must show proof of age, identity, and citizenship An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not
plete additional schedules and forms and attachor alien status with your Form SS-5. If you are 12 entitle you or your dependent to social
them to your return.or older and have never been assigned an SSN, security benefits or change the em-
CAUTION
!
you must appear in person with this proof at an ployment or immigration status of either of you You may be able to file a paperlessSSA office. under U.S. law. return using IRS e-file. There's nothingForm SS-5 is available at any SSA office, on to sign, attach, or mail, not even your
TIPthe Internet at www.socialsecurity.gov, or by Forms W-2.Penalty for not providing social securitycalling 1-800-772-1213. If you have any ques- number. If you do not include your SSN or thetions about which documents you can use as Form W-2. Form W-2 is a statement from yourSSN of your spouse or dependent as required,proof of age, identity, or citizenship, contact your employer of wages and other compensationyou may have to pay a penalty. See the discus-SSA office. paid to you and taxes withheld from your pay.sion on Penalties, later, for more information.If your dependent does not have an SSN by You should have a Form W-2 from each em-
the time your return is due, you may want to ask ployer. Be sure to attach a copy of Form W-2 inSSN on correspondence. If you write to thefor an extension of time to file, as explained the place indicated on the front page of yourIRS about your tax account, be sure to includeearlier under When Do I Have To File. return. Attach it only to the front page of youryour SSN (and the name and SSN of yourIf you do not provide a required SSN or if you return, not to any attachments. For more infor-spouse, if you filed a joint return) in your corre-provide an incorrect SSN, your tax may be in- mation, see Form W-2 in chapter 4.spondence. Because your SSN is used to iden-creased and any refund may be reduced. If you received a Form 1099-R, Distributionstify your account, this helps the IRS respond to From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement orAdoption taxpayer identification number your correspondence promptly. Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-(ATIN). If you are in the process of adopting a tracts, etc., showing federal income tax with-child who is a U.S. citizen or resident and cannot held, attach a copy of that form in the placePresidential Election get an SSN for the child until the adoption is indicated on the front page of your return.final, you can apply for an ATIN to use instead of Campaign Fund
Form 1040EZ. There are no additional sched-an SSN.
This fund helps pay for Presidential election ules to file with Form 1040EZ.File Form W-7A, Application for Taxpayer
campaigns. The fund reduces candidates' de-Identification Number for Pending U.S. Adop- Form 1040A. Attach the additional schedulespendence on large contributions from individu-tions, with the IRS to get an ATIN if all of the and forms that you had to complete behind theals and groups and places candidates on anfollowing are true. Form 1040A in order by number. If you are filingequal financial footing in the general election. If Schedule EIC, put it last. Do not attach items• You have a child living with you who was you want $3 to go to this fund, check the box. If unless required to do so.placed in your home for legal adoption. you are filing a joint return, your spouse can also
have $3 go to the fund. If you check a box, your• You cannot get the child's existing SSN Form 1040. Attach any forms and schedules
even though you have made a reasonable tax or refund will not change. behind Form 1040 in order of the ªAttachment
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 13

Page 16 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sequence Numberº shown in the upper right 2. Absent from the United States for a contin- applied to your 2009 estimated tax if you file
corner of the form or schedule. Then arrange all uous period of at least 60 days before the Form 1040EZ.
other statements or attachments in the same due date for filing your return, or If you choose to have a 2008 overpay-order as the forms and schedules they relate to 3. Given permission to do so by the IRS of- ment applied to your 2009 estimatedand attach them last. Do not attach items unless fice in your area. tax, you cannot change your mind and
CAUTION
!required to do so. have any of it refunded to you after the due date
Power of attorney. A return signed by an (without extensions) of your 2008 return.
Third Party Designee agent in any of these cases must have a power Follow the form instructions to complete the
of attorney (POA) attached that authorizes the entries to claim your refund and/or to apply yourYou can authorize the IRS to discuss your return agent to sign for you. You can use a POA that overpayment to your 2009 estimated tax.with a friend, family member, or any other per- states that the agent is granted authority to sign
If your refund for 2008 is large, youson you choose. If you check the ªYesº box in the return, or you can use Form 2848, Power of
may want to decrease the amount ofthe Third party designee area of your 2008 tax Attorney and Declaration of Representative.
income tax withheld from your pay inreturn and provide the information required, you
TIP Part I of Form 2848 must state that the agent is
2009. See chapter 4 for more information.are authorizing: granted authority to sign the return.
Instead of getting a pa-Unable to sign. If the taxpayer is mentally1. The IRS to call the designee to answer any
Simple. Safe. Secure.
DIRECT DEPOSIT
per check, you may beincompetent and cannot sign the return, it mustquestions that arise during the processing
able to have your refund deposited directly intobe signed by a court-appointed representativeof your return, and
your checking or savings account, including anwho can act for the taxpayer.2. The designee to individual retirement arrangement. Follow theIf the taxpayer is mentally competent but
form instructions to request direct deposit.physically unable to sign the return or POA, aa. Give information that is missing from If the direct deposit cannot be done, the IRSvalid ªsignatureº is defined under state law. Ityour return to the IRS, will send a check instead.can be anything that clearly indicates the tax-
b. Call the IRS for information about the payer's intent to sign. For example, the tax- Split refunds. If you choose direct deposit,processing of your return or the status payer's ªXº with the signatures of two witnesses you may be able to split the refund and have itof your refund or payments, might be considered a valid signature under a deposited among two or three accounts. If youstate's law.c. Receive copies of notices or transcripts want to split your refund, check the box on the
related to your return, upon request, line for the amount you want refunded to you.Spouse unable to sign. If your spouse is una-and Then, complete Form 8888, Direct Deposit ofble to sign for any reason, see Signing a joint
Refund to More Than One Account, and attach itreturn in chapter 2.d. Respond to certain IRS notices about
to your return.math errors, offsets (see Refunds, Child's return. If a child has to file a tax returnlater), and return preparation. Overpayment less than one dollar. If yourbut cannot sign the return, the child's parent, overpayment is less than one dollar, you will notguardian, or another legally responsible personThe authorization will automatically end no get a refund unless you ask for it in writing.must sign the child's name, followed by thelater than the due date (without any extensions) words ªBy (your signature), parent for minor Cashing your refund check. Cash your taxfor filing your 2009 tax return. This is April 15, child.º refund check soon after you receive it. Checks2010 for most people.
not cashed within 12 months of the date they areSee your form instructions for more informa-
issued will be canceled and the proceeds re-tion. Paid Preparer turned to the IRS.
If you want to allow the paid preparer If your check has been canceled, you canGenerally, anyone you pay to prepare, assist inwho signed your return to discuss it apply to the IRS to have it reissued.preparing, or review your tax return must sign itwith the IRS, just enter ªPreparerº in
TIP and fill in the other blanks in the paid preparer's Refund more or less than expected. If youthe space for the designee's name. area of your return. receive a check for a refund you are not entitledA paid preparer can sign the return manually to, or for an overpayment that should have beenor use a rubber stamp, mechanical device, orSignatures credited to estimated tax, do not cash the check.computer software program. The preparer is Call the IRS.personally responsible for affixing his or her sig-You must sign and date your return. If you file a If you receive a check for more than thenature to the return.joint return, both you and your spouse must sign refund you claimed, do not cash the check untilIf the preparer is self-employed (that is, notthe return, even if only one of you had income. you receive a notice explaining the difference.employed by any person or business to prepare If your refund check is for less than youIf you file a joint return, both spouses the return), he or she should check the claimed, it should be accompanied by a noticeare generally liable for the tax, and the self-employed box in the Paid Preparer's Use explaining the difference. Cashing the checkentire tax liability may be assessed
CAUTION
! Only space on the return. does not stop you from claiming an additionalagainst either spouse. See chapter 2. The preparer must give you a copy of your amount of refund.return in addition to the copy filed with the IRS. If you did not receive a notice and you haveIf you e-file your return, you can use an If you prepare your own return, leave this any questions about the amount of your refund,electronic signature to sign your return. area blank. If another person prepares your re- you should wait 2 weeks. If you still have notSee Does My Return Have To Be on
TIP turn and does not charge you, that person received a notice, call the IRS.Paper, earlier. should not sign your return.If you are due a refund, it cannot be issued Offset against debts. If you are due a refundIf you have questions about whether aunless you have signed your return. but have not paid certain amounts you owe, allpreparer must sign your return, contact any IRSEnter your occupation in the space provided or part of your refund may be used to pay all oroffice.in the signature section. If you file a joint return, part of the past-due amount. This includes
enter both your occupation and your spouse's past-due federal income tax, other federal debtsRefundsoccupation. Entering your daytime phone num- (such as student loans), state income tax, and
ber may help speed the processing of your re- child and spousal support payments. You will beWhen you complete your return, you will deter-turn. notified if the refund you claimed has been offsetmine if you paid more income tax than you against your debts.owed. If so, you can get a refund of the amountWhen someone can sign for you. You can
you overpaid or, if you file Form 1040 or Form Joint return and injured spouse. When aappoint an agent to sign your return if you are:
1040A, you can choose to apply all or part of the joint return is filed and only one spouse owes a
1. Unable to sign the return because of dis- overpayment to your next year's (2009) esti- past-due amount, the other spouse can be con-
ease or injury, mated tax. You cannot have your overpayment sidered an injured spouse. An injured spouse
Page 14 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 17 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
should file Form 8379, Injured Spouse Alloca- Service ProvidersHow To Pay
tion, if both of the following apply and the spouse
If you have an amount due on your tax return, Official Payments Corporationwants a refund of his or her share of the over-
you can pay by check, money order, or creditpayment shown on the joint return.
To make acard. If you filed electronically, you also may be payment, call ... . 1-800-2PAY-TAXSM
1. You are not legally obligated to pay the able to make your payment electronically. or .......... . 1-800-272-9829past-due amount. You do not have to pay if the amount For Customer2. You made and reported tax payments you owe is less than $1. Service ....... . 1-877-754-4413(such as federal income tax withheld from
TIP
Web Address ... . www.officialpayments.comyour wages or estimated tax payments), or
claimed a refundable tax credit (see the
credits listed under Who Should File, ear- Link2Gov CorporationCheck or money order. If you pay by check orlier).
money order, make it out to the ªUnited States To make a
Treasury.º Show your correct name, address, payment, call ... . 1-888-PAY-1040SM
Note. If the injured spouse's residence was SSN, daytime phone number, and the tax year or .......... . 1-888-729-1040in a community property state at any time during and form number on the front of your check or For Customerthe tax year, then the injured spouse must only money order. If you are filing a joint return, enter Service ....... . 1-888-658-5465meet (1) above. the SSN shown first on your tax return. If you have not filed your joint return and you Web Address ... . www.PAY1040.comFor example, if you file Form 1040 for 2008know that your joint refund will be offset, file and you owe additional tax, show your name,Form 8379 with your return. You should receive You can e-file and pay in a single step byaddress, SSN, daytime phone number, andyour refund within 14 weeks from the date the authorizing a credit card payment. This option isª2008 Form 1040º on the front of your check orpaper return is filed or within 11 weeks from the available through some tax software packagesmoney order. If you file an amended returndate the return is filed electronically. and tax professionals. You can also pay by(Form 1040X) for 2007 and you owe tax, show credit card using the telephone or the Internet.If you filed your joint return and your joint your name, address, SSN, daytime phone num-refund was offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When Electronic funds withdrawal. You canber, and ª2007 Form 1040Xº on the front of yourfiled after offset, it can take up to 8 weeks to e-file and pay in a single step by authorizing ancheck or money order. receive your refund. Do not attach the previously electronic funds withdrawal from your checkingEnclose your payment with your return, butfiled tax return, but do include copies of all or savings account. If you select this paymentdo not attach it to the form. If you filed FormForms W-2 and W-2G for both spouses and any option, you will need to have your account num-Forms 1099 that show income tax withheld. The 1040, complete Form 1040-V, Payment ber, your financial institution's routing transitprocessing of Form 8379 may be delayed if Voucher, and enclose it with your payment and number, and account type (checking or sav-these forms are not attached, or if the form is return. Form 1040-V will help us process your ings). You can schedule the payment for anyincomplete when filed. payment more accurately and efficiently. Follow future date up to and including the return due
A separate Form 8379 must be filed for each the instructions that come with the form. date.
tax year to be considered. Do not mail cash with your return. If you pay Be sure to check with your financialcash at an IRS office, keep the receipt as part ofAn injured spouse claim is different institution to make sure that an elec-your records.from an innocent spouse relief request. tronic funds withdrawal is allowed and
CAUTION
!
An injured spouse uses Form 8379 to to get the correct routing and account numbers.
CAUTION
!Payment not honored. If your check or
request the division of the tax overpayment at- money order is not honored by your bank (or Electronic Federal Tax Payment Systemtributed to each spouse. An innocent spouse other financial institution) and the IRS does not (EFTPS). EFTPS is a free tax payment systemuses Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse receive the funds, you still owe the tax. In addi- that all individual and business taxpayers canRelief, to request relief from joint liability for tax, tion, you may be subject to a dishonored check use. You can make payments online or byinterest, and penalties on a joint return for items penalty. phone.of the other spouse (or former spouse) that were
Here are just a few of the benefits of thisincorrectly reported on the joint return. For infor- Electronic payment options. Electronic pay- easy-to-use system.mation on innocent spouses, see Relief from ment options are convenient, safe, and securejoint liability under Filing a Joint Return in chap- • Convenient and flexible. You can use it tomethods for paying individual income taxes.ter 2. schedule payments in advance. For exam-There's no check to write, money order to buy,
ple, you can schedule estimated tax pay-or voucher to mail. Payments can be made 24 ments (Form 1040-ES) or installmentAmount You Owe hours a day, 7 days a week. agreement payments weekly, monthly, or
Credit card. You can use your American quarterly.When you complete your return, you will deter-
Express  Card, Discover  Card, MasterCardmine if you have paid the full amount of tax that • Fast and accurate. You can make a taxcard, or Visa  card.you owe. If you owe additional tax, you should payment in minutes. Because there arepay it with your return. To pay by credit card, call a service provider verification steps along the way, you can
and follow the recorded instructions. You canIf the IRS figures your tax for you, you will check and review your information before
also pay by credit card over the Internet using areceive a bill for any tax that is due. You should sending it.
service provider's website. pay this bill within 30 days (or by the due date of • Safe and secure. It offers the highestyour return, if later). See Tax Figured by IRS in The service providers charge a convenience available levels of security. Every transac-chapter 30. fee based on the amount you are paying. Fees tion receives an immediate confirmation.may vary between the providers. You will be toldIf you do not pay your tax when due,
what the fee is during the transaction and willyou may have to pay a failure-to-pay For more information or details on enrolling,have the option to continue or end the transac-penalty. See Penalties, later. For more visit www.eftps.gov or call EFTPS Customer
CAUTION
!tion. You may also obtain the convenience feeinformation about your balance due, see Publi- Service at 1-800-316-6541 (individual) or
by calling the service provider's automated cus-cation 594, The IRS Collection Process. 1-800-555-4477 (business). TTY/TDD help is
tomer service telephone number or visiting the available by calling 1-800-733-4829.If the amount you owe for 2008 is large, provider's website.
you may want to increase the amount Estimated tax payments. Do not include any
Do not add the convenience fee to yourof income tax withheld from your pay or 2009 estimated tax payment in the payment for
TIP
tax payment.make estimated tax payments for 2009. See your 2008 income tax return. See chapter 4 for
CAUTION
!
chapter 4 for more information. information on how to pay estimated tax.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 15

Page 18 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
within 30 days. But if you file your return afterInterest
March 31, it may take longer for a reply. Bureau of the Public Debt
Interest is charged on tax you do not pay by the In addition to paying by check or money Department G
due date of your return. Interest is charged even order, you can use a credit card or EFTPS to P.O. Box 2188
if you get an extension of time for filing. make installment agreement payments. See Parkersburg, WV 26106-2188.
Credit card and Electronic Federal Tax PaymentIf the IRS figures your tax for you, inter- System (EFTPS), under How To Pay, earlier.est cannot start earlier than the 31st Or, enclose your separate check in the
day after the IRS sends you a bill. For envelope with your income tax return. Do not
TIPGuaranteed availability of installment agree-information, see Tax Figured by IRS in chapter add this gift to any tax you owe. ment. The IRS must agree to accept the full30. You can deduct this gift as a charitable con-payment of your tax liability in installments if, as
tribution on next year's tax return if you itemizeof the date you offer to enter into the agreement:
your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).Interest on penalties. Interest is charged on
1. Your total taxes (not counting interest,the failure-to-file penalty, the accuracy-related
penalties, additions to the tax, or additionalpenalty, and the fraud penalty from the due date Peel-Off Address Labelamounts) do not exceed $10,000,of the return (including extensions) to the date of
payment. Interest on other penalties starts on After you have completed your return, peel off2. In the last 5 years, you (and your spouse if
the date of notice and demand, but is not the label with your name and address from thethe liability relates to a joint return) have
charged on penalties paid within 21 calendar back of your tax return package and place it innot:
days from the date of the notice (or within 10 the appropriate area of the Form 1040, Form
a. Failed to file any required income taxbusiness days if the notice is for $100,000 or 1040A, or Form 1040EZ you send to the IRS. If
return,more). you have someone prepare your return, give
that person your label to use on your tax return.b. Failed to pay any tax shown on any
If you file electronically and you are requiredInterest due to IRS error or delay. All or part such return, or
to attach or file certain forms or worksheets useof any interest you were charged can be forgiven c. Entered into an installment agreement the label on Form 8453. (More information onif the interest is due to an unreasonable error or for the payment of any income tax, electronic filing is found earlier in this chapter.)delay by an officer or employee of the IRS in
The label helps the IRS to correctly identifyperforming a ministerial or managerial act. 3. You show you cannot pay your income tax your account. It also saves processing costs andA ministerial act is a procedural or mechani- in full when due, speeds up processing so that refunds can becal act that occurs during the processing of your
issued sooner.4. The tax will be paid in full in 3 years orcase. A managerial act includes personnel
less, andtransfers and extended personnel training. A You must write your SSN in the spaces
decision concerning the proper application of provided on your tax return.5. You agree to comply with the tax laws
federal tax law is not a ministerial or managerial while your agreement is in effect.
CAUTION
!
act.
The interest can be forgiven only if you are Online payment agreement (OPA) applica-not responsible in any important way for the Correcting the label. Make necessary nametion. You may be able to apply online for aerror or delay and the IRS has notified you in and address changes on the label. If you havepayment agreement if you owe federal tax, inter-writing of the deficiency or payment. For more an apartment number that is not shown on theest, and penalties. If you have received a bal-information, see Publication 556, Examination label, please write it in. If you changed yourance due notice from the IRS and you cannotof Returns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Re- name, see the discussion under Social Securitypay in full, you may request a payment agree-fund. Number, earlier.ment. The OPA application allows you, or your
Interest and certain penalties may also be authorized representative, to self-qualify for and
No label. If you did not receive a tax returnsuspended for a limited period if you filed your apply for a payment agreement, receive notifica-
package with a label, print or type your namereturn by the due date (including extensions) tion of approval, and arrange a payment sched-
and address in the spaces provided at the top ofand the IRS does not provide you with a notice ule.
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you are marriedspecifically stating your liability and the basis for To use the OPA application, you must have
filing a separate return, do not enter yourit before the close of the 36-month period begin- filed all required tax returns. You should also
spouse's name in the space at the top. Instead,ning on the later of: have the following information available:
enter his or her name in the space provided on• The date the return is filed, or • Balance due notice from the IRS. line 3.
If you file Form 1040EZ and you do not have• The due date of the return without regard • Social security number or individual tax-
a label, print or type this information in theto extensions. payer identification number.
spaces provided.For more information, see Publication 556. • Personal identification number, which can
be established online using the caller iden- P.O. box. If your post office does not deliver
tification number from the balance due no-Installment Agreement mail to your street address and you have a P.O.
tice. box, print your P.O. box number on the line forIf you cannot pay the full amount due with your your present home address instead of your
return, you can ask to make monthly installment  For more information and to access the OPA street address.
payments for the full or a partial amount. How- application, go to www.irs.gov , use the
ever, you will be charged interest and may be pull-down menu under ªI need to...º and select Foreign address. If your address is outside
charged a late payment penalty on the tax not ªSet Up a Payment Plan.º the United States or its possessions or territo-
paid by the date your return is due, even if your ries, enter the information on the line for ªCity,
request to pay in installments is granted. If your town or post office, state, and ZIP codeº in theGift To Reduce Debt request is granted, you must also pay a fee. To following order:
Held by the Publiclimit the interest and penalty charges, pay as
1. City,much of the tax as possible with your return. But
before requesting an installment agreement, You can make a contribution (gift) to 2. Province or state, and
you should consider other less costly alterna- reduce debt held by the public. If you 3. Name of foreign country. (Do not abbrevi-tives, such as a bank loan. wish to do so, make a separate check
 ate the name of the country.)To ask for an installment agreement, use payable to ªBureau of the Public Debt.º
Form 9465, Installment Agreement Request. Send your check to: Follow the country's practice for entering the
You should receive a response to your request postal code.
Page 16 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 19 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
dispose of it, for the period of limitations that the return, and the exact whole-dollar amount of
applies to you. See chapter 13 for information on the refund. To check on your refund, do one ofWhere Do I File? basis. the following.
• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on ªWhere'sAfter you complete your return, you must send it Note.  If you receive a Form W-2, keep Copy My Refund.ºto the IRS. You can mail it or you may be able to C until you begin receiving social security bene-file it electronically. See Does My Return Have fits. This will help protect your benefits in case • Call 1-800-829-4477 24 hours a day, 7To Be on Paper, earlier. there is a question about your work record or days a week for automated refund infor-
earnings in a particular year. Review the infor- mation.
mation shown on your annual (for workers overMailing your return. If an addressed envel- • Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hoursage 25) Social Security Statement.ope came with your tax forms package, you shown in your form instructions.should mail your return in that envelope.
If you do not have an addressed envelope or Copies of returns. You should keep copies of
if you moved during the year, mail your return to tax returns you have filed and the tax forms Interest on Refunds
the address shown at the end of this publication package as part of your records. They may be
for the area where you now live. helpful in amending filed returns or preparing If you are due a refund, you may get interest on
future ones. it. The interest rates are adjusted quarterly.
If the refund is made within 45 days after theIf you need a copy of a prior year tax return,
you can get it from the IRS. Use Form 4506, due date of your return, no interest will be paid. If
Request for Copy of Tax Return. There is a you file your return after the due date (includingWhat Happens After 
charge for a copy of a return, which you must extensions), no interest will be paid if the refund
pay with Form 4506. It may take up to 60 calen- is made within 45 days after the date you filed. IfI File?
dar days to process your request. the refund is not made within this 45-day period,
After you send your return to the IRS, you may interest will be paid from the due date of theIf your main home, principal place ofhave some questions. This section discusses return or from the date you filed, whichever isbusiness, or tax records are located inconcerns you may have about recordkeeping, later. a federally declared disaster area, the
TIPyour refund, and what to do if you move. charge will be waived. Accepting a refund check does not change
your right to claim an additional refund and inter-
What Records Should est. File your claim within the period of time thatTranscript of tax return. If you just need in- applies. See Amended Returns and Claims forI Keep? formation from your return, you can order a Refund, later. If you do not accept a refundtranscript by calling 1-800-829-1040, or using check, no more interest will be paid on the over-Form 4506-T, Request for Transcript of Tax Re-You must keep records so that you can payment included in the check.turn. There is no fee for a transcript.prepare a complete and accurate in-
come tax return. The law does not re-
RECORDS You can request the following items.
Interest on erroneous refund. All or part ofquire any special form of records. However, you
Return transcript. This includes most ofshould keep all receipts, canceled checks or any interest you were charged on an erroneous
the line items of a tax return as filed with the IRS.other proof of payment, and any other records to refund generally will be forgiven. Any interest
Return transcripts are available for the currentsupport any deductions or credits you claim. charged for the period before demand for repay-year and returns processed during the prior 3 ment was made will be forgiven unless:If you file a claim for refund, you must be able processing years. Most requests will beto prove by your records that you have overpaid processed within 10 business days. 1. You, or a person related to you, causedyour tax. the erroneous refund in any way, orAccount transcript. This contains informa-
tion on the financial status of the account, such 2. The refund is more than $50,000.How long to keep records. You must keep as payments made on the account, penalty as-your records for as long as they are important for For example, if you claimed a refund of $100sessments, and adjustments made by you or thethe federal tax law. on your return, but the IRS made an error andIRS after the return was filed. Return information
sent you $1,000, you would not be chargedKeep records that support an item of income is limited to items such as tax liability and esti-
interest for the time you held the $900 differ-or a deduction appearing on a return until the mated tax payments. Account transcripts are
ence. You must, however, repay the $900 whenperiod of limitations for the return runs out. (A available for most returns. Most requests will be
period of limitations is the period of time after the IRS asks.processed within 30 calendar days.
which no legal action can be brought.) For as- Record of account. This is a combinationsessment of tax you owe, this generally is 3 Change of Addressof line item information and later adjustments toyears from the date you filed the return. For filing the account. This information is available for thea claim for credit or refund, this generally is 3 If you have moved, file your return using yourcurrent year and 3 prior tax years. Most requestsyears from the date you filed the original return, new address.will be processed within 30 calendar days.or 2 years from the date you paid the tax, which-
If you move after you filed your return, youever is later. Returns filed before the due date
should give the IRS clear and concise writtenare treated as filed on the due date. More information. For more information on notification of your change of address. Send therecordkeeping, see Publication 552, Record-If you did not report income that you should notification to the Internal Revenue Servicekeeping for Individuals.have reported on your return, and it is more than Center serving your old address. You can use25% of the income shown on the return, the Form 8822, Change of Address. If you are ex-period of limitations does not run out until 6 Refund Information pecting a refund, also notify the post office serv-years after you filed the return. If a return is false
ing your old address. This will help in forwardingor fraudulent with intent to evade tax, or if no You can go online to check the status of your your check to your new address (unless youreturn is filed, an action can generally be brought 2008 refund 72 hours after IRS acknowledges chose direct deposit of your refund). If you areat any time. receipt of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks affected by a federally declared disaster, youYou may need to keep records relating to the after you mail a paper return. If you filed Form may be able to change your address with thebasis of property longer than the period of limita- 8379 with your return, allow 14 weeks (11 weeks IRS orally.tions. Keep those records as long as they are if you filed electronically) before checking your
Be sure to include your SSN (and the nameimportant in figuring the basis of the original or refund status. Be sure to have a copy of your
and SSN of your spouse, if you filed a jointreplacement property. Generally, this means for 2008 tax return available because you will need
return) in any correspondence with the IRS.as long as you own the property and, after you to know the filing status, the first SSN shown on
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 17

Page 20 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Time for filing a claim for refund. Generally, Example 2. The situation is the same as in
you must file your claim for a credit or refund Example 1, except you filed your return on Octo-What If I Made within 3 years after the date you filed your origi- ber 30, 2006, 2 weeks after the extension period
nal return or within 2 years after the date you ended. You paid an additional $200 on that date.a Mistake? paid the tax, whichever is later. Returns filed On October 29, 2009, you filed an amended
before the due date (without regard to exten- return and claimed a refund of $700. AlthoughErrors may delay your refund or result in notices sions) are considered filed on the due date you filed your claim within 3 years from the datebeing sent to you. If you discover an error, you (even if the due date was a Saturday, Sunday, or you filed your original return, the refund wascan file an amended return or claim for refund. legal holiday). These time periods are sus- limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3 years
pended while you are financially disabled, dis- plus the 6-month extension period immediately
Amended Returns and cussed later. before you filed the claim. The estimated tax of
If the last day for claiming a credit or refund is $500 paid before that period cannot be refundedClaims for Refund a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, you can or credited.
file the claim on the next business day.You should correct your return if, after you have If you do not file a claim within this period, If you file a claim more than 3 years afterfiled it, you find that: you may not be entitled to a credit or a refund. you file your return, the credit or refund cannot
be more than the tax you paid within the 2 years1. You did not report some income, Protective claim for refund. Generally, a immediately before you file the claim.protective claim is a formal claim or amended2. You claimed deductions or credits you
return for credit or refund normally based onshould not have claimed, Example. You filed your 2005 tax return oncurrent litigation or expected changes in tax law April 17, 2006. You paid taxes of $500. On3. You did not claim deductions or credits you or other legislation. You file a protective claim November 5, 2007, after an examination of yourcould have claimed, or when your right to a refund is contingent on 2005 return, you had to pay an additional tax offuture events and may not be determinable until4. You should have claimed a different filing $200. On May 12, 2009, you file a claim for aafter the statute of limitations expires. A validstatus. (Once you file a joint return, you refund of $300. However, because you filed yourprotective claim does not have to list a particularcannot choose to file separate returns for claim more than 3 years after you filed yourdollar amount or demand an immediate refund.that year after the due date of the return. return, your refund will be limited to the $200 youHowever, a valid protective claim must:However, an executor may be able to paid during the 2 years immediately before you
make this change for a deceased spouse.) filed your claim.• Be in writing and signed,
If you need a copy of your return, see Copies of • Include your name, address, SSN or ITIN, Financially disabled. The time periods for
returns under What Records Should I Keep , and other contact information, claiming a refund are suspended for the period
earlier in this chapter. in which you are financially disabled. For a joint• Identify and describe the contingencies af- income tax return, only one spouse has to befecting the claim,Form 1040X. Use Form 1040X, Amended financially disabled for the time period to be
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to correct a • Clearly alert the IRS to the essential na- suspended. You are financially disabled if you
return you have already filed. An amended tax ture of the claim, and are unable to manage your financial affairs be-
return cannot be filed electronically under the cause of a medically determinable physical or• Identify the specific year(s) for which a re-e-file system. mental impairment which can be expected tofund is sought. result in death or which has lasted or can beCompleting Form 1040X. On Form 1040X, Mail your protective claim for refund to the ad- expected to last for a continuous period of notenter your income, deductions, and credits as dress listed in the instructions for Form 1040X, less than 12 months. However, you are notyou originally reported them on your return, the under Where To File. treated as financially disabled during any periodchanges you are making, and the corrected
your spouse or any other person is authorized toamounts. Then figure the tax on the corrected Generally, the IRS will delay action on the act on your behalf in financial matters.amount of taxable income and the amount you protective claim until the contingency is re- To claim that you are financially disabled,owe or your refund. solved. you must send in the following written state-If you owe tax, pay the full amount with Form Limit on amount of refund. If you file your ments with your claim for refund.1040X. The tax owed will not be subtracted from claim within 3 years after the date you filed yourany amount you had credited to your estimated 1. A statement from your qualified physicianreturn, the credit or refund cannot be more thantax. that includes:the part of the tax paid within the 3-year periodIf you cannot pay the full amount due with (plus any extension of time for filing your return) a. The name and a description of youryour return, you can ask to make monthly install- immediately before you filed the claim. This time physical or mental impairment,ment payments. See Installment Agreement , period is suspended while you are financiallyearlier. disabled, discussed later. b. The physician's medical opinion that the
If you overpaid tax, you can have all or part of impairment prevented you from manag-Tax paid. Payments, including estimatedthe overpayment refunded to you, or you can ing your financial affairs,tax payments, made before the due date (with-apply all or part of it to your estimated tax. If you out regard to extensions) of the original return c. The physician's medical opinion that thechoose to get a refund, it will be sent separately are considered paid on the due date. For exam- impairment was or can be expected tofrom any refund shown on your original return. ple, income tax withheld during the year is con- result in death, or that its duration has
Filing Form 1040X. After you finish your sidered paid on the due date of the return, April lasted, or can be expected to last, at
Form 1040X, check it to be sure that it is com- 15 for most taxpayers. least 12 months,
plete. Do not forget to show the year of your d. The specific time period (to the best oforiginal return and explain all changes you Example 1. You made estimated tax pay- the physician's knowledge), andmade. Be sure to attach any forms or schedules ments of $500 and got an automatic extension of
needed to explain your changes. Mail your Form time to October 16, 2006, to file your 2005 in- e. The following certification signed by the
1040X to the Internal Revenue Service Center come tax return. When you filed your return on physician: ªI hereby certify that, to the
serving the area where you now live (as shown that date, you paid an additional $200 tax. On best of my knowledge and belief, the
in the instructions to the form). However, if you October 15, 2009, you filed an amended return above representations are true, correct,
are filing Form 1040X in response to a notice and claimed a refund of $700. Because you filed and complete.º
you received from the IRS, mail it to the address your claim within 3 years after you filed your
shown on the notice. Do not use the addresses original return, you can get a refund of up to 2. A statement made by the person signing
listed at the end of this publication. $700, the tax paid within the 3 years plus the the claim for credit or refund that no per-
File a separate form for each tax year in- 6-month extension period immediately before son, including your spouse, was author-
volved. you filed the claim. ized to act on your behalf in financial
Page 18 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 21 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
matters during the period of disability (or Reduced refund. Your refund may be re- notice is issued. If a notice and demand for
the exact dates that a person was author- duced by an additional tax liability that has been immediate payment is issued, the rate will in-
ized to act for you). assessed against you. crease to 1% at the start of the first month
Also, your refund may be reduced by beginning after the day that the notice and de-
amounts you owe for past-due child support, mand is issued.Exceptions for special types of refunds. If debts to another federal agency, or for state This penalty cannot be more than 25% ofyou file a claim for one of the items listed below, income tax. If your spouse owes these debts, your unpaid tax. You will not have to pay thethe dates and limits discussed earlier may not see Offset against debts , under Refunds, ear- penalty if you can show that you had a goodapply. These items, and where to get more infor- lier, for the correct refund procedures to follow. reason for not paying your tax on time.mation, are as follows.
Effect on state tax liability. If your return is• Bad debt. (See Nonbusiness Bad Debts in Combined penalties. If both the failure-to-filechanged for any reason, it may affect your statechapter 14.) penalty and the failure-to-pay penalty (dis-income tax liability. This includes changes made• Worthless security. (See Worthless securi- cussed earlier) apply in any month, the 5% (oras a result of an examination of your return byties in chapter 14.) 15%) failure-to-file penalty is reduced by thethe IRS. Contact your state tax agency for more
failure-to-pay penalty. However, if you file yourinformation.• Foreign tax paid or accrued. (See Publica- return more than 60 days after the due date ortion 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Individu- extended due date, the minimum penalty is theals.) Penalties smaller of $135 or 100% of the unpaid tax.
• Net operating loss carryback. (See Publi-
The law provides penalties for failure to file re-cation 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs) Accuracy-related penalty. You may have toturns or pay taxes as required.for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.) pay an accuracy-related penalty if you underpay
your tax because:• Carryback of certain business tax credits.
(See Form 3800, General Business Civil Penalties 1. You show negligence or disregard of theCredit.) rules or regulations, orIf you do not file your return and pay your tax by• Claim based on an agreement with the the due date, you may have to pay a penalty. 2. You substantially understate your incomeIRS extending the period for assessment You may also have to pay a penalty if you tax.of tax. substantially understate your tax, understate a The penalty is equal to 20% of the underpay-reportable transaction, file an erroneous claim ment. The penalty will not be figured on any partProcessing claims for refund. Claims are for refund or credit, file a frivolous tax submis- of an underpayment on which the fraud penaltyusually processed 8-12 weeks after they are sion, or fail to supply your SSN or individual (discussed later) is charged.filed. Your claim may be accepted as filed, disal- taxpayer identification number. If you provide
lowed, or subject to examination. If a claim is fraudulent information on your return, you may Negligence or disregard. The term ªnegli-
examined, the procedures are the same as in have to pay a civil fraud penalty. genceº includes a failure to make a reasonable
the examination of a tax return. attempt to comply with the tax law or to exerciseFiling late. If you do not file your return by theIf your claim is disallowed, you will receive an ordinary and reasonable care in preparing adue date (including extensions), you may haveexplanation of why it was disallowed. return. Negligence also includes failure to keepto pay a failure-to-file penalty. The penalty is adequate books and records. You will not haveusually 5% for each month or part of a monthTaking your claim to court. You can sue for a to pay a negligence penalty if you have a rea-that a return is late, but not more than 25%. Therefund in court, but you must first file a timely sonable basis for a position you took.penalty is based on the tax not paid by the dueclaim with the IRS. If the IRS disallows your The term ªdisregardº includes any careless,date (without regard to extensions).claim or does not act on your claim within 6 reckless, or intentional disregard.months after you file it, you can then take your Fraud. If your failure to file is due to fraud, Adequate disclosure. You can avoid theclaim to court. For information on the burden of the penalty is 15% for each month or part of a penalty for disregard of rules or regulations ifproof in a court proceeding, see Publication 556. month that your return is late, up to a maximum you adequately disclose on your return a posi-The IRS provides a direct method to move of 75%. tion that has at least a reasonable basis. Seeyour claim to court if:
Return over 60 days late. If you file your Disclosure statement, later.• You are filing a claim for a credit or refund return more than 60 days after the due date or This exception will not apply to an item that isbased solely on contested income tax or extended due date, the minimum penalty is the attributable to a tax shelter. In addition, it will noton estate tax or gift tax issues considered smaller of $135 or 100% of the unpaid tax. apply if you fail to keep adequate books andin your previously examined returns, and records, or substantiate items properly.Exception. You will not have to pay the
• You want to take your case to court in- penalty if you show that you failed to file on time Substantial understatement of income tax.stead of appealing it within the IRS. because of reasonable cause and not because You understate your tax if the tax shown on yourof willful neglect. return is less than the correct tax. The under-When you file your claim with the IRS, you get statement is substantial if it is more than thethe direct method by requesting in writing that Paying tax late. You will have to pay a fail- larger of 10% of the correct tax or $5,000. How-your claim be immediately rejected. A notice of ure-to-pay penalty of 1/2 of 1% (.50%) of your ever, the amount of the understatement may beclaim disallowance will be sent to you. unpaid taxes for each month, or part of a month, reduced to the extent the understatement is dueafter the due date that the tax is not paid. ThisYou have 2 years from the date of mailing of to:penalty does not apply during the automaticthe notice of claim disallowance to file a refund
6-month extension of time to file period if yousuit in the United States District Court having 1. Substantial authority, orpaid at least 90% of your actual tax liability on orjurisdiction or in the United States Court of Fed-
2. Adequate disclosure and a reasonable ba-before the due date of your return and pay theeral Claims.
sis.balance when you file the return.
Interest on refund. If you receive a refund The monthly rate of the failure-to-pay penalty If an item on your return is attributable to a taxbecause of your amended return, interest will be is half the usual rate (.25% instead of .50%) if an shelter, there is no reduction for an adequatepaid on it from the due date of your original installment agreement is in effect for that month. disclosure. However, there is a reduction for areturn or the date you filed your original return, You must have filed your return by the due date position with substantial authority, but only if youwhichever is later, to the date you filed the (including extensions) to qualify for this reduced reasonably believed that your tax treatment wasamended return. However, if the refund is not penalty. more likely than not the proper treatment.made within 45 days after you file the amended If a notice of intent to levy is issued, the rate
Substantial authority. Whether there is orreturn, interest will be paid up to the date the will increase to 1% at the start of the first month
was substantial authority for the tax treatment ofrefund is paid. beginning at least 10 days after the day that the
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 19

Page 22 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
an item depends on the facts and circum- required on a return, statement, or other docu-
stances. Some of the items that may be consid- ment. Marital Statusered are court opinions, Treasury regulations, For example, if you have a bank account that
revenue rulings, revenue procedures, and no- earns interest, you must give your SSN to the In general, your filing status depends ontices and announcements issued by the IRS and bank. The number must be shown on the Form whether you are considered unmarried or mar-published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin that 1099-INT or other statement the bank sends ried. For federal tax purposes, a marriageinvolve the same or similar circumstances as you. If you do not give the bank your SSN, you means only a legal union between a man and ayours. will be subject to the $50 penalty. (You also may woman as husband and wife.be subject to ªbackupº withholding of incomeDisclosure statement. To adequately dis- tax. See chapter 4.)close the relevant facts about your tax treatment Unmarried persons. You are considered un-You will not have to pay the penalty if you areof an item, use Form 8275, Disclosure State- married for the whole year if, on the last day ofable to show that the failure was due to reasona-ment. You must also have a reasonable basis your tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa-ble cause and not willful neglect.for treating the item the way you did. rated from your spouse under a divorce or sepa-In cases of substantial understatement only, rate maintenance decree. State law governsitems that meet the requirements of Revenue whether you are married or legally separatedCriminal PenaltiesProcedure 2008-14 (or later update) are consid- under a divorce or separate maintenance de-ered adequately disclosed on your return with- cree.You may be subject to criminal prosecutionout filing Form 8275. (brought to trial) for actions such as: Divorced persons. If you are divorcedUse Form 8275-R, Regulation Disclosure
Statement, to disclose items or positions con- under a final decree by the last day of the year,1. Tax evasion,
trary to regulations. you are considered unmarried for the whole
2. Willful failure to file a return, supply infor- year.Reasonable cause. You will not have to mation, or pay any tax due,pay a penalty if you show a good reason (rea- Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a
sonable cause) for the way you treated an item. 3. Fraud and false statements, or divorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing
You must also show that you acted in good faith. tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the4. Preparing and filing a fraudulent return. time of divorce you intended to and did remarryFiling erroneous claim for refund or credit. each other in the next tax year, you and yourYou may have to pay a penalty if you file an spouse must file as married individuals.erroneous claim for refund or credit. The penalty
is equal to 20% of the disallowed amount of the Annulled marriages. If you obtain a court
claim, unless you can show a reasonable basis decree of annulment, which holds that no valid
for the way you treated an item. The penalty will marriage ever existed, you are considered un-
not be figured on any part of the disallowed married even if you filed joint returns for earlier2.amount of the claim that relates to the earned years. You must file Form 1040X, Amended
income credit or on which the accuracy-related U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, claiming sin-
or fraud penalties are charged. gle or head of household status for each tax year
affected by the annulment that is not closed byFrivolous tax submission. You may have to Filing Status the statute of limitations for filing a tax return.pay a penalty of $5,000 if you file a frivolous tax
The statute of limitations generally does not ex-return or other frivolous submissions. A frivolous
pire until 3 years after your original return wastax return is one that does not include enough
filed.Introductioninformation to figure the correct tax or that con-
tains information clearly showing that the tax Head of household or qualifying widow(er)This chapter helps you determine which filingyou reported is substantially incorrect. For more with dependent child. If you are consideredstatus to use. There are five filing statuses.information on frivolous returns, frivolous sub- unmarried, you may be able to file as a head of• Single.missions, and a list of positions that are identi- household or as a qualifying widow(er) with afied as frivolous, see Notice 2008-14, 2008-4 dependent child. See Head of Household and• Married Filing Jointly.I.R.B. 310, available at www.irs.gov/irb/ Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child  to• Married Filing Separately.2008-04_IRB/ar01.html. see if you qualify.You will have to pay the penalty if you filed • Head of Household.this kind of return or submission based on a Married persons. If you are considered mar-• Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependentfrivolous position or a desire to delay or interfere ried for the whole year, you and your spouse canChild.with the administration of federal tax laws. This file a joint return, or you can file separate re-includes altering or striking out the preprinted turns.language above the space provided for your If more than one filing status applies tosignature. Considered married. You are consideredyou, choose the one that will give youThis penalty is added to any other penalty married for the whole year if on the last day ofthe lowest tax.
TIPprovided by law. your tax year you and your spouse meet any one
You must determine your filing status before of the following tests.Fraud. If there is any underpayment of tax on you can determine your filing requirements
your return due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of the (chapter 1), standard deduction (chapter 20), 1. You are married and living together as
underpayment due to fraud will be added to your and correct tax (chapter 30). You also use your husband and wife.
tax. filing status in determining whether you are eligi- 2. You are living together in a common lawble to claim certain deductions and credits.Joint return. The fraud penalty on a joint marriage that is recognized in the state
return does not apply to a spouse unless some where you now live or in the state wherepart of the underpayment is due to the fraud of Useful Items the common law marriage began.that spouse. You may want to see:
3. You are married and living apart, but notFailure to supply social security number. If legally separated under a decree of di-Publicationyou do not include your SSN or the SSN of vorce or separate maintenance.another person where required on a return, ❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction,
4. You are separated under an interlocutorystatement, or other document, you will be sub- and Filing Information
(not final) decree of divorce. For purposesject to a penalty of $50 for each failure. You will ❏ 519 U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens of filing a joint return, you are not consid-also be subject to a penalty of $50 if you do not
ered divorced.give your SSN to another person when it is ❏ 555 Community Property
Page 20 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 23 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Spouse died. If your spouse died during the If you and your spouse each have in- Signing a joint return. For a return to be
come, you may want to figure your taxyear, you are considered married for the whole considered a joint return, both husband and wife
both on a joint return and on separateyear for filing status purposes. generally must sign the return.
TIP
returns (using the filing status of married filingIf you did not remarry before the end of the Spouse died before signing. If yourseparately). Choose the method that gives thetax year, you can file a joint return for yourself spouse died before signing the return, the exec-two of you the lower combined tax.    and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 utor or administrator must sign the return foryears, you may be entitled to the special benefits your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else hasHow to file. If you file as married filing jointly,described later under Qualifying Widow(er) With yet been appointed as executor or administrator,you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youDependent Child. you can sign the return for your spouse andhave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,If you remarried before the end of the tax and meet other requirements, you can file Form enter ªFiling as surviving spouseº in the areayear, you can file a joint return with your new 1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A, where you sign the return.spouse. Your deceased spouse's filing status is show this filing status by checking the box onmarried filing separately for that year. Spouse away from home. If your spouse isline 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of the
away from home, you should prepare the return,Tax Table or Section B of the Tax ComputationMarried persons living apart. If you live
sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so thatWorksheet to figure your tax.apart from your spouse and meet certain tests,
it can be filed on time.you may be considered unmarried. If this applies Spouse died during the year. If your spouseto you, you can file as head of household even Injury or disease prevents signing. If yourdied during the year, you are considered mar-though you are not divorced or legally sepa- spouse cannot sign because of disease or injuryried for the whole year and can choose marriedrated. If you qualify to file as head of household and tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse'sfiling jointly as your filing status. See Spouseinstead of as married filing separately, your name in the proper space on the return followeddied, earlier, for more information.standard deduction will be higher. Also, your tax by the words ªBy (your name), Husband (or
may be lower, and you may be able to claim the Divorced persons. If you are divorced under Wife).º Be sure to also sign in the space pro-earned income credit. See Head of Household, a final decree by the last day of the year, you are vided for your signature. Attach a dated state-later. considered unmarried for the whole year and ment, signed by you, to the return. The
you cannot choose married filing jointly as your statement should include the form number of thefiling status. return you are filing, the tax year, the reason
your spouse cannot sign, and that your spouse
Single Filing a Joint Return has agreed to your signing for him or her.
Signing as guardian of spouse. If you areYour filing status is single if, on the last day of Both you and your spouse must include all of
the guardian of your spouse who is mentallyyour income, exemptions, and deductions onthe year, you are unmarried or legally separated
incompetent, you can sign the return for youryour joint return.from your spouse under a divorce or separate
spouse as guardian.maintenance decree, and you do not qualify for
Accounting period. Both of you must use theanother filing status. To determine your marital Spouse in combat zone. If your spouse issame accounting period, but you can use differ-status on the last day of the year, see Marital unable to sign the return because he or she isent accounting methods. See Accounting Peri-Status, earlier. serving in a combat zone (such as the Persianods and Accounting Methods in chapter 1.
Gulf Area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), or aWidow(er). Your filing status may be single if Joint responsibility. Both of you may be held qualified hazardous duty area (Bosnia and Her-you were widowed before January 1, 2008, and responsible, jointly and individually, for the tax zegovina, Croatia, and Macedonia), and you dodid not remarry before the end of 2008. How- and any interest or penalty due on your joint not have a power of attorney or other statement,ever, you might be able to use another filing return. One spouse may be held responsible for you can sign for your spouse. Attach a signedstatus that will give you a lower tax. See Head of all the tax due even if all the income was earned statement to your return that explains that yourHousehold and Qualifying Widow(er) With De- by the other spouse. spouse is serving in a combat zone. For morependent Child, later, to see if you qualify.       
Divorced taxpayer. You may be held jointly information on special tax rules for persons who
and individually responsible for any tax, interest, are serving in a combat zone, or who are inHow to file. You can file Form 1040EZ (if you and penalties due on a joint return filed before missing status as a result of serving in a combathave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind, your divorce. This responsibility may apply even zone, see Publication 3, Armed Forces' Taxand meet other requirements), Form 1040A, or if your divorce decree states that your former Guide.Form 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Form spouse will be responsible for any amounts due1040, show your filing status as single by check- Other reasons spouse cannot sign.  Ifon previously filed joint returns.ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column of your spouse cannot sign the joint return for anyRelief from joint liability. In some cases,the Tax Table or Section A of the Tax Computa- other reason, you can sign for your spouse onlyone spouse may be relieved of joint liability fortion Worksheet to figure your tax. if you are given a valid power of attorney (a legaltax, interest, and penalties on a joint return for document giving you permission to act for youritems of the other spouse that were incorrectly
spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copyreported on the joint return. You can ask for
of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848,relief no matter how small the liability.Married Filing Jointly Power of Attorney and Declaration of Represen-There are three types of relief available.
tative.
You can choose married filing jointly as your 1. Innocent spouse relief.
filing status if you are married and both you and 2. Separation of liability, which applies to joint Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. Ayour spouse agree to file a joint return. On a joint filers who are divorced, widowed, legally joint return generally cannot be filed if eitherreturn, you report your combined income and separated, or have not lived together for spouse is a nonresident alien at any time duringdeduct your combined allowable expenses. You the 12 months ending on the date election the tax year. However, if one spouse was acan file a joint return even if one of you had no of this relief is filed. nonresident alien or dual-status alien who wasincome or deductions.
3. Equitable relief. married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at theIf you and your spouse decide to file a joint
end of the year, the spouses can choose to file areturn, your tax may be lower than your com-  You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-
joint return. If you do file a joint return, you andbined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your cent Spouse Relief, to request any of these
your spouse are both treated as U.S. residentsstandard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc- kinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spouse
for the entire tax year. For information on thistions) may be higher, and you may qualify for tax Relief, explains these kinds of relief and who
benefits that do not apply to other filing statuses. choice, see chapter 1 of Publication 519.may qualify for them.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 21

Page 24 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al- Rental activity losses. If you actively partici-
ternative minimum tax will be half that al- pated in a passive rental real estate activity thatMarried Filing lowed to a joint return filer. produced a loss, you generally can deduct the
loss from your nonpassive income, up toSeparately 3. You cannot take the credit for child and $25,000. This is called a special allowance.dependent care expenses in most cases, However, married persons filing separate re-You can choose married filing separately as and the amount that you can exclude from turns who lived together at any time during theyour filing status if you are married. This filing income under an employer's dependent year cannot claim this special allowance. Mar-status may benefit you if you want to be respon- care assistance program is limited to ried persons filing separate returns who livedsible only for your own tax or if it results in less $2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed a joint apart at all times during the year are each al-tax than filing a joint return. return). For more information about these lowed a $12,500 maximum special allowanceIf you and your spouse do not agree to file a expenses, the credit, and the exclusion, for losses from passive real estate activities.joint return, you may have to use this filing status see chapter 32. See Limits on Rental Losses in chapter 9.unless you qualify for head of household status, 4. You cannot take the earned income credit.discussed next. Community property states. If you live in Ari-You may be able to choose head of house- 5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit for zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,hold filing status if you live apart from your adoption expenses in most cases. New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsinspouse, meet certain tests, and are considered and file separately, your income may be consid-6. You cannot take the education credits (theunmarried (explained later, under Head of ered separate income or community income forHope credit and the lifetime learningHousehold). This can apply to you even if you income tax purposes. See Publication 555.credit), the deduction for student loan inter-are not divorced or legally separated. If you est, or the tuition and fees deduction.qualify to file as head of household, instead of as
married filing separately, your tax may be lower, 7. You cannot exclude any interest income Joint Return Afteryou may be able to claim the earned income from qualified U.S. savings bonds that you Separate Returnscredit and certain other credits, and your stan- used for higher education expenses.
dard deduction will be higher. The head of You can change your filing status by filing an8. If you lived with your spouse at any timehousehold filing status allows you to choose the amended return using Form 1040X.during the tax year:standard deduction even if your spouse chooses If you or your spouse (or both of you) file ato itemize deductions. See Head of Household, a. You cannot claim the credit for the eld- separate return, you generally can change to alater, for more information. erly or the disabled, joint return any time within 3 years from the due
Unless you are required to file sepa- date of the separate return or returns. This doesb. You will have to include in income morerately, you should figure your tax both not include any extensions. A separate return(up to 85%) of any social security orways (on a joint return and on separate includes a return filed by you or your spouse
TIPequivalent railroad retirement benefitsreturns). This way you can make sure you are claiming married filing separately, single, oryou received, andusing the filing status that results in the lowest head of household filing status.
c. You cannot roll over amounts from acombined tax. However, you will generally pay
traditional IRA into a Roth IRA.more combined tax on separate returns than
you would on a joint return for the reasons listed Separate Returns After
9. The following deductions and credits areunder Special Rules, later. Joint Returnreduced at income levels that are half
those for a joint return:How to file. If you file a separate return, you Once you file a joint return, you cannot choose
generally report only your own income, exemp- to file separate returns for that year after the duea. The child tax credit,tions, credits, and deductions on your individual date of the return.
return. You can claim an exemption for your b. The retirement savings contributions
Exception. A personal representative for aspouse if your spouse had no gross income and credit,
decedent can change from a joint return electedwas not the dependent of another person. How- c. Itemized deductions, and by the surviving spouse to a separate return forever, if your spouse had any gross income or
the decedent. The personal representative haswas the dependent of someone else, you cannot d. The deduction for personal exemptions.
1 year from the due date of the return (includingclaim an exemption for him or her on your sepa-
extensions) to make the change. See Publica-rate return. 10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500
tion 559, Survivors, Executors, and Administra- If you file as married filing separately, you (instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re-
tors, for more information on filing a return for acan use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select this turn).
decedent.filing status by checking the box on line 3 of 11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, youeither form. You also must enter your spouse's cannot claim the standard deduction. If youfull name in the space provided and must enter can claim the standard deduction, your ba-your spouse's SSN or ITIN in the space provided sic standard deduction is half the amountunless your spouse does not have and is not Head of Householdallowed on a joint return.required to have an SSN or ITIN. Use the Mar-
ried filing separately column of the Tax Table or 12. Your first-time homebuyer credit is limited You may be able to file as head of household ifSection C of the Tax Computation Worksheet to to $3,750 (instead of $7,500 if you filed a you meet all the following requirements.figure your tax. joint return).
1. You are unmarried or ªconsidered unmar-
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). riedº on the last day of the year.Special Rules You may not be able to deduct all or part of your 2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-contributions to a traditional IRA if you or yourIf you choose married filing separately as your ing up a home for the year.spouse were covered by an employee retire-filing status, the following special rules apply.
ment plan at work during the year. Your deduc- 3. A ªqualifying personº lived with you in theBecause of these special rules, you will usually
tion is reduced or eliminated if your income is home for more than half the year (exceptpay more tax on a separate return than if you
more than a certain amount. This amount is for temporary absences, such as school).used another filing status that you qualify for.
much lower for married individuals who file sep- However, if the ªqualifying personº is your
arately and lived together at any time during the dependent parent, he or she does not
1. Your tax rate generally will be higher than year. For more information, see How Much Can have to live with you. See Special rule for
it would be on a joint return. You Deduct in chapter 17. parent, later, under Qualifying Person.
Page 22 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 25 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you qualify to file as head of house- 4. Your home was the main home of yourConsidered Unmarriedhold, your tax rate usually will be lower child, stepchild, or foster child for more
than the rates for single or married fil- than half the year. (See Home of qualifying
TIPTo qualify for head of household status, youing separately. You will also receive a higher person, under Qualifying Person, later, formust be either unmarried or considered unmar-standard deduction than if you file as single or ried on the last day of the year. You are consid- rules applying to a child's birth, death, ormarried filing separately. ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if temporary absence during the year.)
you meet all the following tests.
5. You must be able to claim an exemptionKidnapped child. A child may qualify you to
1. You file a separate return, defined earlier for the child. However, you meet this test iffile as head of household even if the child has
under Joint Return After Separate Returns.been kidnapped. For more information, see you cannot claim the exemption only be-
Publication 501. cause the noncustodial parent can claim2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-
the child using the rules described in Chil-ing up your home for the tax year.How to file. If you file as head of household, dren of divorced or separated parentsyou can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040. 3. Your spouse did not live in your home dur- under Qualifying Child in chapter 3, or inIndicate your choice of this filing status by ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Your
Support Test for Children of Divorced orchecking the box on line 4 of either form. Use the spouse is considered to live in your home
Separated Parents under Qualifying Rela-Head of household column of the Tax Table or even if he or she is temporarily absent due
tive in chapter 3. The general rules forSection D of the Tax Computation Worksheet to to special circumstances. See Temporary
figure your tax. absences, under Qualifying Person, later. claiming an exemption for a dependent are
Table 2-1. Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this chapter for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing
status. 
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether orqualifying child (such as a son,
not you can claim an exemptiondaughter, or grandchild who lived with
for the person.you more than half the year and meets
certain other tests)2
he or she is married and you can claim an a qualifying person.
exemption for him or her
he or she is married and you cannot claim not a qualifying person.3
an exemption for him or her
you can claim an exemption for him or her5 a qualifying person.6qualifying relative4 who is your father or
mother you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
he or she lived with you more than half the a qualifying person.qualifying relative4 other than your father
year, and he or she is related to you in oneor mother (such as a grandparent,
of the ways listed under Relatives who dobrother, or sister who meets certain
not have to live with you in chapter 3 andtests)
you can claim an exemption for him or her5
he or she did not live with you more than half not a qualifying person.
the year
he or she is not related to you in one of the not a qualifying person.
ways listed under Relatives who do not have
to live with you in chapter 3 and is your
qualifying relative only because he or she
lived with you all year as a member of your
household
you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2The term ªqualifying childº is defined in chapter 3. Note. If you are a noncustodial parent, the term ªqualifying childº for head of household filing
status does not include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described under Children of divorced
or separated parents under Qualifying Child in chapter 3. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child generally is your qualifying
child for head of household filing status even though the child is not a qualifying child for whom you can claim an exemption.
3This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you cannot claim the exemption is that you can be claimed as a dependent on someone
else's return.
4The term ªqualifying relativeº is defined in chapter 3.
5If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person is not a qualifying person. See Multiple
Support Agreement in chapter 3.
6See Special rule for parent for an additional requirement.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 23

Page 26 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
explained under Exemptions for Depen- real estate taxes, insurance on the home, re- exemption for her, you can file as a head of
dents in chapter 3. pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home. household.
If you used payments you received under
If you were considered married for part Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
of the year and lived in a community (TANF) or other public assistance programs to
property state (listed earlier under Mar- pay part of the cost of keeping up your home,
CAUTION
! Qualifying Widow(er)ried Filing Separately), special rules may apply you cannot count them as money you paid.
in determining your income and expenses. See However, you must include them in the total cost With Dependent ChildPublication 555 for more information. of keeping up your home to figure if you paid
over half the cost. If your spouse died in 2008, you can use marriedNonresident alien spouse. You are consid- filing jointly as your filing status for 2008 if youCosts you do not include. Do not include inered unmarried for head of household purposes otherwise qualify to use that status. The year ofthe cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any death is the last year for which you can file jointlyeducation, medical treatment, vacations, life in-time during the year and you do not choose to with your deceased spouse. See Married Filingsurance, or transportation. Also, do not includetreat your nonresident spouse as a resident Jointly, earlier.the rental value of a home you own or the valuealien. However, your spouse is not a qualifying You may be eligible to use qualifyingof your services or those of a member of yourperson for head of household purposes. You widow(er) with dependent child as your filinghousehold.must have another qualifying person and meet status for 2 years following the year your spouseAlso do not include any government or chari-the other tests to be eligible to file as a head of died. For example, if your spouse died in 2007,table assistance you received because of yourhousehold. and you have not remarried, you may be able totemporary relocation due to the storms, torna-Earned income credit. Even if you are con- use this filing status for 2008 and 2009.does, or flooding in a Midwestern disaster area.sidered unmarried for head of household pur- This filing status entitles you to use joint
poses because you are married to a nonresident return tax rates and the highest standard deduc-
Qualifying Personalien, you are still considered married for pur- tion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).
poses of the earned income credit (unless you This status does not entitle you to file a jointSee Table 2-1 to see who is a qualifying person.meet the five tests listed earlier). You are not return.Any person not described in Table 2-1 is notentitled to the credit unless you file a joint return
a qualifying person. How to file. If you file as qualifying widow(er)with your spouse and meet other qualifications.
with dependent child, you can use either FormSee chapter 36 for more information. Home of qualifying person. Generally, the 1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing statusqualifying person must live with you for moreChoice to treat spouse as resident. You by checking the box on line 5 of either form. Usethan half of the year.are considered married if you choose to treat the Married filing jointly column of the Tax Table
your spouse as a resident alien. or Section B of the Tax Computation WorksheetSpecial rule for parent. If your qualifying
to figure your tax.person is your father or mother, you may be
eligible to file as head of household even if yourKeeping Up a Home Eligibility rules. You are eligible to file yourfather or mother does not live with you. How- 2008 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-To qualify for head of household status, you ever, you must be able to claim an exemption for pendent child if you meet all of the followingmust pay more than half of the cost of keeping your father or mother. Also, you must pay more tests.up a home for the year. You can determine than half the cost of keeping up a home that was
whether you paid more than half of the cost of the main home for the entire year for your father • You were entitled to file a joint return with
keeping up a home by using the worksheet or mother. You are keeping up a main home for your spouse for the year your spouse
shown on this page. your father or mother if you pay more than half died. It does not matter whether you actu-
the cost of keeping your parent in a rest home or ally filed a joint return.Cost of Keeping Up a Home home for the elderly. • Your spouse died in 2006 or 2007 and you
Temporary absences. You and your quali- did not remarry before the end of 2008.Keep for Your Records
 fying person are considered to live together • You have a child or stepchild for whomeven if one or both of you are temporarily absent you can claim an exemption. This doesfrom your home due to special circumstances not include a foster child.Amount such as illness, education, business, vacation,You Total or military service. It must be reasonable to • This child lived in your home all year, ex-Paid Cost assume that the absent person will return to the cept for temporary absences. See Tempo-
Property taxes $ $ home after the temporary absence. You must rary absences, earlier, under Head of
continue to keep up the home during the ab- Household. There are also exceptions, de-Mortgage interest expense
sence. scribed later, for a child who was born orRent
died during the year, and for a kidnappedUtility charges Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as child.Upkeep and repairs head of household if the individual who qualifiesProperty insurance you for this filing status is born or dies during the • You paid more than half the cost of keep-Food consumed year. You must have provided more than half of ing up a home for the year. See Keepingon the premises the cost of keeping up a home that was the Up a Home, earlier, under Head of House-Other household expenses individual's main home for more than half the hold.
Totals $ $ year or, if less, the period during which the
individual lived. As mentioned earlier, this filing statusMinus total amount you ( )
is available for only 2 years followingpaid Example. You are unmarried. Your mother, the year your spouse died.
CAUTION
!for whom you can claim an exemption, lived in
Amount others paid $ an apartment by herself. She died on Septem-
ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartment Example.  John Reed's wife died in 2006.
for the year until her death was $6,000. You paid John has not remarried. During 2007 and 2008,
If the total amount you paid is more than the amount $4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your he continued to keep up a home for himself andothers paid, you meet the requirement of paying more brother made no other payments toward your his child, who lives with him and for whom hethan half the cost of keeping up the home.
mother's support. Your mother had no income. can claim an exemption. For 2006 he was enti-
Because you paid more than half the cost of tled to file a joint return for himself and his
Costs you include. Include in the cost of up- keeping up your mother's apartment from Janu- deceased wife. For 2007 and 2008, he can file
keep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest, ary 1 until her death, and you can claim an as qualifying widower with a dependent child.
Page 24 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 27 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
After 2008 he can file as head of household if he • Social security number (SSN) requirement Your Spouse's Exemption
qualifies. for dependents Ð You must list the social
Your spouse is never considered your depen-security number of any dependent for
dent.Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as a whom you claim an exemption.
qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if the
Joint return. On a joint return you can claimchild who qualifies you for this filing status is
Deduction. Exemptions reduce your taxable one exemption for yourself and one for yourborn or dies during the year. You must have
income. Generally, you can deduct $3,500 for spouse.provided more than half of the cost of keeping up
a home that was the child's main home during each exemption you claim in 2008. But, you may
Separate return. If you file a separate return,the entire part of the year he or she was alive. lose part of the dollar amount of your exemp-
you can claim the exemption for your spousetions if your adjusted gross income is above a
only if your spouse had no gross income, is notcertain amount. See Phaseout of Exemptions , filing a return, and was not the dependent oflater. another taxpayer. This is true even if the other
taxpayer does not actually claim your spouse as
How to claim exemptions.  How you claim an a dependent. This is also true if your spouse is a
nonresident alien.exemption on your tax return depends on which3.
form you file.
Death of spouse. If your spouse died duringIf you file Form 1040EZ, the exemption the year, you generally can claim your spouse'samount is combined with the standard deduction exemption under the rules just explained underPersonal amount and entered on line 5. Joint return. If you file a separate return for the
year, you may be able to claim your spouse's If you file Form 1040A or Form 1040, follow
exemption under the rules just described in Sep-Exemptions and the instructions for the form. The total number of
arate return.exemptions you can claim is the total in the box
If you remarried during the year, you cannoton line 6d. Also complete line 26 (Form 1040A)Dependents take an exemption for your deceased spouse.or line 42 (Form 1040).
If you are a surviving spouse without gross
income and you remarry in the year your spouseUseful Items
died, you can be claimed as an exemption onWhat's New You may want to see: both the final separate return of your deceased
spouse and the separate return of your newExemption amount. The amount you can de- Publication spouse for that year. If you file a joint return withduct for each exemption has increased from your new spouse, you can be claimed as an❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction,$3,400 in 2007 to $3,500 in 2008. exemption only on that return.and Filing Information
Exemption phaseout. You lose part of the
Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-Form (and Instructions)benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted gross
tained a final decree of divorce or separateincome is above a certain amount. For 2008, this ❏ 2120 Multiple Support Declaration maintenance by the end of the year, you cannotphaseout begins at $119,975 for married per-
take your former spouse's exemption. This rule❏ 8332 Release/Revocation of Release ofsons filing separately; $159,950 for single indi-
applies even if you provided all of your formerviduals; $199,950 for heads of household; and Claim to Exemption for Child by
spouse's support.$239,950 for married persons filing jointly or Custodial Parent
qualifying widow(er)s. However, in 2008, you ❏ 8914 Exemption Amount for Taxpayerscan lose no more than 1/3 of the amount of your
Housing Midwestern Displacedexemptions. In other words, each exemption
Individualscannot be reduced to less than $2,333. Exemptions for
Exemption for individual displaced by a Mid- Dependentswestern disaster. You may be able to claim a
$500 exemption if you provided housing to a You are allowed one exemption for each personperson displaced by a Midwestern disaster. For Exemptions you can claim as a dependent. You can claim anmore information, see Form 8914. exemption for a dependent even if your depen-There are two types of exemptions: personal dent files a return.
exemptions and exemptions for dependents. The term ªdependentº means:While each is worth the same amount ($3,500
• A qualifying child, orIntroduction for 2008), different rules apply to each type.
• A qualifying relative.This chapter discusses exemptions. The follow-
Personal Exemptionsing topics will be explained.
The terms ªqualifying childº and ªqualifying
• Personal exemptions Ð You generally relativeº are defined later.You are generally allowed one exemption forcan take one for yourself and, if you are yourself and, if you are married, one exemption You can claim an exemption for a qualifyingmarried, one for your spouse. child or qualifying relative only if these threefor your spouse. These are called personal ex-
• Exemptions for dependents Ð You gener- tests are met.emptions.
ally can take an exemption for each of
1. Dependent taxpayer test.your dependents. A dependent is your
qualifying child or qualifying relative. If you Your Own Exemption 2. Joint return test.
are entitled to claim an exemption for a
3. Citizen or resident test.You can take one exemption for yourself unlessdependent, that dependent cannot claim a
personal exemption on his or her own tax you can be claimed as a dependent by another These three tests are explained in detail
return. taxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claim later.
you as a dependent, you cannot take an exemp-• Phaseout of exemptions Ð You get less All the requirements for claiming an exemp-
tion for yourself even if the other taxpayer doesof a deduction when your adjusted gross tion for a dependent are summarized in Table
not actually claim you as a dependent.income goes above a certain amount. 3-1.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 25

Page 28 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3-1. Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this chapter.
• You cannot claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
• You cannot claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is only a claim for refund
and there would be no tax liability for either spouse on separate returns. 
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a
resident of Canada or Mexico, for some part of the year.1
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 1. The person cannot be your qualifying child or the
child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, qualifying child of any other taxpayer.
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year, ways listed under Relatives who do not have to live with
(b) under age 24 at the end of the year and a full-time you, or (b) must live with you all year as a member of your
student, or (c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. household2 (and your relationship must not violate local
law).
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of 3. The person's gross income for the year must be less than
the year.2 $3,500.3
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or 4. You must provide more than half of the person's total
her own support for the year. support for the year.4
5. If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more
than one person, you must be the person entitled to claim
the child as a qualifying child.
1There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents, and
 kidnapped children.
3There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents, and kidnapped children.
Dependent not allowed a personal If you are filing a joint return and your spouse joint return test applies, so you are not disquali-
exemption. If you can claim an ex- fied from claiming their exemptions just becausecould be claimed as a dependent by someone
emption for your dependent, the de- they filed a joint return. You can claim theirelse, you and your spouse cannot claim any
CAUTION
!
pendent cannot claim his or her own exemption exemptions if you meet all the other require-dependents on your joint return.
ments to do so.on his or her own tax return. This is true even if
you do not claim the dependent's exemption on
your return or if the exemption will be reduced Joint Return Test
under the phaseout rule described under Citizen or Resident Test
You generally cannot claim a married person asPhaseout of Exemptions, later.
You cannot claim a person as a dependent un-a dependent if he or she files a joint return.
less that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. residentHousekeepers, maids, or servants. If these alien, U.S. national, or a resident of Canada orExample. You supported your 18-year-oldpeople work for you, you cannot claim exemp- Mexico, for some part of the year. However,daughter, and she lived with you all year whiletions for them. there is an exception for certain adopted chil-her husband was in the Armed Forces. The
dren, as explained next.couple files a joint return. Even though yourChild tax credit. You may be entitled to a child daughter is your qualifying child, you cannottax credit for each qualifying child who was Adopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen ortake an exemption for her.under age 17 at the end of the year. For more U.S. national who has legally adopted a child
information, see chapter 34. who is not a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, orException. The joint return test does not apply U.S. national, this test is met if the child livedif a joint return is filed by the dependent and his with you as a member of your household allor her spouse merely as a claim for refund and year. This also applies if the child was lawfullyno tax liability would exist for either spouse on placed with you for legal adoption.separate returns.Dependent Taxpayer Test
Child's place of residence. Children usually
Example. Your son and his wife each hadIf you could be claimed as a dependent by an- are citizens or residents of the country of their
less than $3,000 of wages and no unearnedother person, you cannot claim anyone else as a parents.
income. Neither is required to file a tax return.dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child or If you were a U.S. citizen when your child
qualifying relative, you cannot claim that person Taxes were taken out of their pay, so they filed a was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen even if
as a dependent. joint return to get a refund. The exception to the the other parent was a nonresident alien and the
Page 26 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 29 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
child was born in a foreign country. If so, this test the age test because, at the end of the year, he Death or birth of child. A child who was born
is met. was not under age 19. or died during the year is treated as having lived
with you all year if your home was the child's
home the entire time he or she was alive duringFull-time student. A full-time student is a stu-Foreign students' place of residence. For-
the year. The same is true if the child lived withdent who is enrolled for the number of hours oreign students brought to this country under a
you all year except for any required hospital staycourses the school considers to be full-time at-qualified international education exchange pro-
following birth.tendance.gram and placed in American homes for a tem-
porary period generally are not U.S. residents Child born alive. You may be able to claimStudent defined. To qualify as a student,and do not meet this test. You cannot claim an an exemption for a child who was born aliveyour child must be, during some part of each ofexemption for them. However, if you provided a during the year, even if the child lived only for aany 5 calendar months of the year:home for a foreign student, you may be able to moment. State or local law must treat the childtake a charitable contribution deduction. See 1. A full-time student at a school that has a as having been born alive. There must be proofExpenses Paid for Student Living With You  in regular teaching staff, course of study, and of a live birth shown by an official document,chapter 24. a regularly enrolled student body at the such as a birth certificate. The child must be
school, or your qualifying child or qualifying relative, and all
U.S. national. A U.S. national is an individual the other tests to claim an exemption for a de-2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or her pendent must be met.ing course given by a school described inallegiance to the United States. U.S. nationals (1), or by a state, county, or local govern- Stillborn child. You cannot claim an ex-include American Samoans and Northern Mari- ment agency. emption for a stillborn child.ana Islanders who chose to become U.S. na-
tionals instead of U.S. citizens. The 5 calendar months do not have to be con- Kidnapped child. You can treat your child assecutive. meeting the residency test even if the child has
Qualifying Child been kidnapped, but both of the following state-Special rules may apply for people who
ments must be true.had to relocate because of the storms,
There are five tests that must be met for a child tornadoes, or flooding in the Midwest-
TIP 1. The child is presumed by law enforcementto be your qualifying child. The five tests are: ern disaster areas. For details, see Publication authorities to have been kidnapped by4492-B.1. Relationship, someone who is not a member of your
family or the child's family.School defined. A school can be an ele-2. Age,
mentary school, junior and senior high school, 2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the3. Residency, college, university, or technical, trade, or child lived with you for more than half ofmechanical school. However, an on-the-job4. Support, and the part of the year before the date of thetraining course, correspondence school, or kidnapping.5. Special test for qualifying child of more school offering courses only through the Internet
than one person. This treatment applies for all years until thedoes not count as a school.
child is returned. However, the last year thisThese tests are explained next. Vocational high school students. Stu- treatment can apply is the earlier of:dents who work on ªco-opº jobs in private indus-
try as a part of a school's regular course of 1. The year there is a determination that theRelationship Test classroom and practical training are considered child is dead, or
full-time students.To meet this test, a child must be: 2. The year the child would have reached
age 18.• Your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, Permanently and totally disabled. Your
or a descendant (for example, your child is permanently and totally disabled if both
Children of divorced or separated parents.grandchild) of any of them, or of the following apply.
In most cases, because of the residency test, a
• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis- • He or she cannot engage in any substan- child of divorced or separated parents is the
ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descen- tial gainful activity because of a physical or qualifying child of the custodial parent. However,
dant (for example, your niece or nephew) mental condition. the child will be treated as the qualifying child of
of any of them. the noncustodial parent if all four of the following• A doctor determines the condition has
statements are true.lasted or can be expected to last continu-
Adopted child. An adopted child is always ously for at least a year or can lead to 1. The parents:treated as your own child. The term ªadopted death.
childº includes a child who was lawfully placed a. Are divorced or legally separated under
with you for legal adoption. a decree of divorce or separate mainte-Residency Test nance,
Foster child. A foster child is an individual To meet this test, your child must have lived with b. Are separated under a written separa-who is placed with you by an authorized place- you for more than half of the year. There are tion agreement, orment agency or by judgment, decree, or other exceptions for temporary absences, childrenorder of any court of competent jurisdiction. c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6who were born or died during the year, kid-
months of the year.napped children, and children of divorced or
Age Test separated parents.
2. The child received over half of his or her
To meet this test, a child must be: support for the year from the parents.Temporary absences. Your child is consid-
• Under age 19 at the end of the year, ered to have lived with you during periods of 3. The child is in the custody of one or both
time when one of you, or both, are temporarily parents for more than half of the year.• A full-time student under age 24 at the end absent due to special circumstances such as:of the year, or 4. Either of the following statements is true.
• Illness,• Permanently and totally disabled at any a. The custodial parent signs a writtentime during the year, regardless of age. • Education, declaration, discussed later, that he or
she will not claim the child as a depen-• Business,
Example. Your son turned 19 on December dent for the year, and the noncustodial• Vacation, or10. Unless he was permanently and totally dis- parent attaches this written declaration
abled or a full-time student, he does not meet • Military service. to his or her return. (If the decree or
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 27

Page 30 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
agreement went into effect after 1984, The noncustodial parent must attach If a child is treated as the qualifying
see Divorce decree or separation the required information even if it was child of the noncustodial parent under
agreement made after 1984, later.) filed with a return in an earlier year. the rules for children of divorced or
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
separated parents described earlier, see Apply-b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa- Beginning with 2009 tax returns, the ing this special test to divorced or separatedrate maintenance or written separation noncustodial parent will no longer be parents, later.agreement that applies to 2008 states able to attach pages from the decree or
CAUTION
! Sometimes, a child meets the relationship,that the noncustodial parent can claim agreement instead of Form 8332 if the decree or age, residency, and support tests to be a qualify-the child as a dependent, the decree or agreement was made after 2008. The noncus- ing child of more than one person. Although theagreement was not changed after 1984 todial parent will have to attach Form 8332 or a child is a qualifying child of each of these per-to say the noncustodial parent cannot similar statement signed by the custodial parent sons, only one person can actually treat the childclaim the child as a dependent, and the and whose only purpose is to release a claim to as a qualifying child. To meet this special test,noncustodial parent provides at least exemption. you must be the person who can treat the child$600 for the child's support during the
as a qualifying child.year. Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup- If you and another person have the sameport provided by your new spouse is treated as qualifying child, you and the other person(s) canprovided by you.Custodial parent and noncustodial parent. decide which of you will treat the child as aThe custodial parent is the parent with whom the Parents who never married. This special qualifying child. That person can take all of thechild lived for the greater part of the year. The rule for divorced or separated parents also ap- following tax benefits (provided the person isother parent is the noncustodial parent. plies to parents who never married. eligible for each benefit) based on the qualifying
If the parents divorced or separated during child.
the year and the child lived with both parents
• The exemption for the child.before the separation, the custodial parent is the Support Test (To Be a Qualifying
one with whom the child lived for the greater part • The child tax credit.Child)
of the rest of the year.
• Head of household filing status.To meet this test, the child cannot have provided
Example. Your child lived with you for 10 more than half of his or her own support for the • The credit for child and dependent care
months of the year. The child lived with your year. expenses.
former spouse for the other 2 months. You are This test is different from the support test to • The exclusion from income for dependentconsidered the custodial parent. be a qualifying relative, which is described later. care benefits.However, to see what is or is not support, seeWritten declaration.  The custodial parent Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative) , • The earned income credit.may use either Form 8332 or a similar statement later. If you are not sure whether a child provided(containing the same information required by the more than half of his or her own support, you The other person cannot take any of theseform) to make the written declaration to release may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful. benefits based on this qualifying child. In otherthe exemption to the noncustodial parent. The
words, you and the other person cannot agree tononcustodial parent must attach the form or Scholarships. A scholarship received by a divide these tax benefits between you.statement to his or her tax return. child who is a full-time student is not taken into If you and the other person(s) cannot agreeThe exemption can be released for 1 year, account in determining whether the child pro- on who will claim the child and more than onefor a number of specified years (for example, vided more than half of his or her own support. person files a return claiming the same child, thealternate years), or for all future years, as speci- IRS will disallow all but one of the claims usingfied in the declaration. If the exemption is re- the tie-breaker rule in Table 3-2.leased for more than 1 year, the original release Special Test for Qualifying Child ofmust be attached to the return of the noncus- More Than One Person Example 1 Ðchild lived with parent andtodial parent for the first year, and a copy must
grandparent. You and your 3-year-old daugh-be attached for each later year.
If your qualifying child is not a qualify- ter, Jane, lived with your mother all year. You
Divorce decree or separation agreement ing child for anyone else, this test does are 25 years old and earned $9,000 for the year.
made after 1984. If the divorce decree or sep- not apply to you and you do not need to Your mother is not your dependent. Jane is a
TIP
aration agreement went into effect after 1984, read about it. This is also true if your qualifying qualifying child of both you and your mother
the noncustodial parent can attach certain child is not a qualifying child for anyone else because she meets the relationship, age, resi-
pages from the decree or agreement instead of except your spouse with whom you file a joint dency, and support tests for both you and your
Form 8332. The decree or agreement must return. mother. However, only one of you can claim her.
state all three of the following.
Table 3-2. When More Than One Person Files a Return Claiming the1. The noncustodial parent can claim the
Same Qualifying Child (Tie-Breaker Rule)child as a dependent without regard to any
condition, such as payment of support. Caution. If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent
under the rules for children of divorced or separated parents, see Applying this2. The custodial parent will not claim the child
special test to divorced or separated parents.as a dependent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial par- IF more than one person files a return claiming THEN the child will be treated asent, rather than the custodial parent, can the same qualifying child and . . . the qualifying child of the. . .claim the child as a dependent.
only one of the persons is the child's parent, parent.The noncustodial parent must attach all of
the following pages of the decree or agreement parent with whom the child livedtwo of the persons are parents of the child and theyto his or her tax return. for the longer period of timedo not file a joint return together, during the year.• The cover page (write the other parent's
social security number on this page). two of the persons are parents of the child, they do
not file a joint return together, and the child lived parent with the higher adjusted• The pages that include all of the informa-
with each parent the same amount of time during gross income (AGI).tion identified in items (1) through (3)
the year,above.
none of the persons are the child's parent, person with the highest AGI.• The signature page with the other parent's
signature and the date of the agreement.
Page 28 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 31 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You agree to let your mother claim Jane. This credit or the credit for child and dependent care niece as a qualifying child. In this case, only your
means your mother can claim Jane as a depen- expenses. mother will be allowed to treat your niece as a
dent and can claim her as a qualifying child for qualifying child. This is because your mother's
the child tax credit, head of household filing Example 6 Ð separated parents claim AGI, $15,000, is more than your AGI, $9,300. If
status, credit for child and dependent care ex- same child. The facts are the same as in you claimed an exemption, the child tax credit,
penses, exclusion for dependent care benefits, Example 5 except that you and your husband head of household filing status, credit for child
and the earned income credit, if she qualifies for both claim your son as a qualifying child. In this and dependent care expenses, exclusion for
each of those tax benefits (and if you do not case, only your husband will be allowed to treat dependent care benefits, or the earned income
claim Jane as a dependent or as a qualifying your son as a qualifying child. This is because, credit for your niece, the IRS will disallow your
child for any of those tax benefits). during 2008, the boy lived with him longer than claim to all these tax benefits.
with you. If you claimed an exemption, the child
Example 2 Ð two persons claim same tax credit, head of household filing status, credit Applying this special test to divorced or sep-child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 for child and dependent care expenses, exclu- arated parents. If a child is treated as theexcept that you and your mother both claim Jane sion for dependent care benefits, or the earned qualifying child of the noncustodial parent underas a dependent and claim her as a qualifying income credit for your son, the IRS will disallow the rules for children of divorced or separatedchild for the child tax credit and earned income your claim to all these tax benefits. In addition, parents described earlier, only the noncustodialcredit. In this case, you as the child's parent will because you and your husband did not live apart parent can claim an exemption and the child taxbe the only one allowed to claim Jane as a the last 6 months of the year, your husband credit for the child. However, the noncustodialdependent and as a qualifying child. The IRS will cannot claim head of household filing status. As parent cannot claim the child as a qualifyingdisallow your mother's claim to these tax bene- a result, his filing status is married filing sepa- child for head of household filing status, thefits unless she has another qualifying child. rately, so he cannot claim the earned income credit for child and dependent care expenses,
credit or the credit for child and dependent care the exclusion for dependent care benefits, andExample 3 Ðqualifying children split be- expenses the earned income credit. Only the custodialtween two persons. The facts are the same parent or another eligible parent can claim theas in Example 1 except that you also have two Example 7 Ð unmarried parents. You, child as a qualifying child for these four taxother young children who are qualifying children your 5-year-old son, and your son's father lived benefits. If you and another eligible taxpayerof both you and your mother. Only one of you together all year. You and your son's father are both claim the child as a qualifying child forcan claim each child as a dependent. However, not married. Your son is a qualifying child of both purposes of these four benefits, the IRS willyou and your mother can split the three qualify- you and his father because he meets the rela- disallow all but one of the claims using theing children between you. For example, you can tionship, age, residency, and support tests for tie-breaker rule in Table 3-2.claim one child as a dependent and your mother both you and his father. Your adjusted grosscan claim the other two. income (AGI) is $12,000 and your son's father's Example 1. You and your 5-year-old son
lived all year with your mother, who paid theAGI is $14,000. Your son's father agrees to letExample 4 Ðtaxpayer who is a qualifying entire cost of keeping up the home. Under theyou treat the child as a qualifying child. Thischild. The facts are the same as in Example 1 rules for children of divorced or separated par-means you can claim him as a dependent andexcept that you are only 18 years old and did not ents, your son is the qualifying child of yourtreat him as a qualifying child for the child taxprovide more than half of your own support for ex-husband, who can claim an exemption andcredit, head of household filing status, credit forthe year. This means you are your mother's the child tax credit for the child if he meets all thechild and dependent care expenses, exclusionqualifying child and she could claim you as a requirements to do so. Because of this, youfor dependent care benefits, and the earneddependent. Because of the Dependent Tax- cannot claim an exemption or the child tax creditincome credit, if you qualify for each of those taxpayer Test  explained earlier, you cannot treat for your son. However, your ex-husband cannotbenefits (and if your son's father does not claimyour daughter as a qualifying child and cannot
claim the boy as a qualifying child for head ofyour son as a dependent or as a qualifying childclaim her as a dependent. Only your mother can
household filing status, the credit for child andfor any of those tax benefits).treat your daughter as a qualifying child.
dependent care expenses, the exclusion for de-
pendent care benefits, and the earned incomeExample 8 Ð unmarried parents claimExample 5 Ð separated parents. You,
credit. You and your mother did not have anysame child. The facts are the same as inyour husband, and your 10-year-old son lived
child care expenses or dependent care benefits,Example 7 except that you and your son's fathertogether until August 1, 2008, when your hus-
but the boy is a qualifying child of both you andboth claim your son as a qualifying child. In thisband moved out of the household. In August and
your mother for head of household filing statuscase, only your son's father will be allowed toSeptember, your son lived with you. For the rest
and the earned income credit because he meetstreat your son as a qualifying child. This is be-of the year, your son lived with your husband,
the relationship, age, residency, and supportcause his AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI,the boy's father. Your son is a qualifying child of
tests for both you and your mother. (Note: The$12,000. If you claimed an exemption, the childboth you and your husband because your son
support test does not apply for the earned in-tax credit, head of household filing status, creditlived with each of you for more than half the year
come credit.) However, you agree to let yourfor child and dependent care expenses, exclu-and because he met the relationship, age, and
mother claim your son. This means she cansion for dependent care benefits, or the earnedsupport tests for both of you. At the end of the
claim him for head of household filing status andincome credit for your son, the IRS will disallowyear, you and your husband still were not di-
the earned income credit if she qualifies for eachyour claim to all these tax benefits.vorced, legally separated, or separated under a
and if you do not claim him as a child for thewritten separation agreement, so the special
earned income credit. (You cannot claim head ofExample 9 Ðchild did not live with a par-rule for divorced or separated parents does not
household filing status because your motherent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your sis-apply.
paid the entire cost of keeping up the home.)ter's child, lived with your mother all year. YouYou and your husband will file separate re-
are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Yourturns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your
Example 2. The facts are the same as inmother's AGI is $15,000. Your niece is a qualify-son as a qualifying child. This means, if your
Example 1 except that you and your mother bothing child of both you and your mother becausehusband does not claim your son as a qualifying
claim your son as a qualifying child for theshe meets the relationship, age, residency, andchild, you can claim your son as a dependent
earned income credit. Your mother also claimssupport tests for both you and your mother.and treat him as a qualifying child for the child
him as a qualifying child for head of householdHowever, only one of you can treat her as atax credit and exclusion for dependent care ben-
filing status. You as the child's parent will be thequalifying child. Your mother agrees to let youefits, if you qualify for each of those tax benefits.
only one allowed to claim your son as a qualify-treat the child as a qualifying child.However, you cannot claim head of household
ing child for the earned income credit. The IRSfiling status because you and your husband did
will disallow your mother's claim to the earnedExample 10Ðchild did not live with a par-not live apart the last 6 months of the year. As a
income credit and head of household filing sta-ent. The facts are the same as in Example 9result, your filing status is married filing sepa-
tus unless she has another qualifying child.rately, so you cannot claim the earned income except that you and your mother both claim your
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 29

Page 32 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not required to file an income tax return and Member of Household orQualifying Relative either: Relationship Test
There are four tests that must be met for a • Does not file an income tax return, or To meet this test, a person must either:person to be your qualifying relative. The four • Files a return only to get a refund of in-tests are: 1. Live with you all year as a member of yourcome tax withheld.
household, or1. Not a qualifying child test,
2. Be related to you in one of the ways listedExample 1 Ðreturn not required. You2. Member of household or relationship test,
under Relatives who do not have to livesupport an unrelated friend and her 3-year-old3. Gross income test, and with you.child, who lived with you all year in your home.
Your friend has no gross income, is not required4. Support test. If at any time during the year the person wasto file a 2008 tax return, and does not file a 2008 your spouse, that person cannot be your qualify-tax return. Both your friend and her child areAge. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rel- ing relative. However, see Personal Exemp-your qualifying relatives if the member of house-ative can be any age. There is no age test for a tions, earlier.hold or relationship test, gross income test, andqualifying relative.
Relatives who do not have to live with you.support test are met.
Kidnapped child. You can treat a child as A person related to you in any of the following
your qualifying relative even if the child has been ways does not have to live with you all year as aExample 2 Ðreturn filed to claim refund.
kidnapped, but both of the following statements member of your household to meet this test.The facts are the same as in Example 1 except
must be true. your friend had wages of $1,500 during the year • Your child, stepchild, foster child, or a de-and had income tax withheld from her wages. scendant of any of them (for example,1. The child is presumed by law enforcement She files a return only to get a refund of the your grandchild). (A legally adopted childauthorities to have been kidnapped by income tax withheld and does not claim the is considered your child.)someone who is not a member of your earned income credit or any other tax credits orfamily or the child's family. • Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-deductions. Both your friend and her child are
ter, stepbrother, or stepsister.2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the your qualifying relatives if the member of house-
child met the tests to be your qualifying hold or relationship test, gross income test, and • Your father, mother, grandparent, or otherrelative for the part of the year before the support test are met. direct ancestor, but not foster parent.date of the kidnapping.
• Your stepfather or stepmother.Example 3 Ð earned income creditThis treatment applies for all years until the claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam- • A son or daughter of your brother or sister.child is returned. However, the last year this ple 2 except your friend had wages of $8,000treatment can apply is the earlier of: • A brother or sister of your father orduring the year and claimed the earned income
mother.credit on her return. Your friend's child is the1. The year there is a determination that the
qualifying child of another taxpayer (your friend),child is dead, or • Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa-so you cannot claim your friend's child as your ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law,2. The year the child would have reached qualifying relative. or sister-in-law.age 18.
Child in Canada or Mexico. A child who lives Any of these relationships that were established
in Canada or Mexico may be your qualifying by marriage are not ended by death or divorce.
relative, and you may be able to claim the childNot a Qualifying Child Test as a dependent. If the child does not live with Example. You and your wife began sup-
you, the child does not meet the residency test porting your wife's father, a widower, in 2002.A child is not your qualifying relative if the child is to be your qualifying child. If the persons the Your wife died in 2007. In spite of your wife'syour qualifying child or the qualifying child of any child does live with are not U.S. citizens and death, your father-in-law continues to meet thisother taxpayer. have no U.S. gross income, those persons are test, even if he does not live with you. You can
not ªtaxpayers,º so the child is not the qualifying claim him as a dependent if all other tests areExample 1. Your 22-year-old daughter, who child of any other taxpayer. If the child is not your met, including the gross income test and supportis a full-time student, lives with you and meets all qualifying child or the qualifying child of any test.the tests to be your qualifying child. She is not other taxpayer, the child is your qualifying rela-your qualifying relative. Foster child. A foster child is an individualtive if the gross income test and the support test
who is placed with you by an authorized place-are met.Example 2. Your 2-year-old son lives with ment agency or by judgment, decree, or otherYou cannot claim as a dependent a child whoyour parents and meets all the tests to be their order of any court of competent jurisdiction.lives in a foreign country other than Canada orqualifying child. He is not your qualifying rela- Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S. Joint return. If you file a joint return, the per-tive. resident alien, or U.S. national for some part of son can be related to either you or your spouse.the year. There is an exception for certain Also, the person does not need to be related toExample 3. Your son lives with you but is adopted children who lived with you all year. See the spouse who provides support.not your qualifying child because he is 30 years Citizen or Resident Test, earlier. For example, your spouse's uncle who re-old and does not meet the age test. He may be
ceives more than half of his support from youyour qualifying relative if the gross income test Example. You provide all the support of may be your qualifying relative, even though heand the support test are met. your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in does not live with you. However, if you and yourMexico with your mother and have no income. spouse file separate returns, your spouse's un-Example 4. Your 13-year-old grandson You are single and live in the United States. cle can be your qualifying relative only if he liveslived with his mother for 3 months, with his uncle Your mother is not a U.S. citizen and has no with you all year as a member of your house-for 4 months, and with you for 5 months during U.S. income, so she is not a ªtaxpayer.º Your hold.the year. He is not your qualifying child because children are not your qualifying children becausehe does not meet the residency test. He may be they do not meet the residency test. Also, they Temporary absences. A person is consid-your qualifying relative if the gross income test are not the qualifying children of any other tax- ered to live with you as a member of your house-and the support test are met. payer, so they are your qualifying relatives and hold during periods of time when one of you, or
Child of person not required to file a return. you can claim them as dependents if all the tests both, are temporarily absent due to special cir-
A child is not the qualifying child of any other are met. You may also be able to claim your cumstances such as:
taxpayer and so may qualify as your qualifying mother as a dependent if all the tests are met, • Illness,relative if the child's parent (or other person for including the gross income test and the support
whom the child is defined as a qualifying child) is test. • Education,
Page 30 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 33 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Business, supplies, books, and equipment required for child with the child's own wages, even if you paid
particular courses may not be included in gross the wages.• Vacation, or income. For more information about scholar- Year support is provided. The year you pro-• Military service. ships, see chapter 12. vide the support is the year you pay for it, even ifTax-exempt income, such as certain social you do so with borrowed money that you repayIf the person is placed in a nursing home for security benefits, is not included in gross in- in a later year.an indefinite period of time to receive constant come. If you use a fiscal year to report your income,medical care, the absence may be considered Disabled dependent working at sheltered you must provide more than half of the depen-temporary. workshop. For purposes of this test (the gross dent's support for the calendar year in which
income test), the gross income of an individual your fiscal year begins.Death or birth. A person who died during the
who is permanently and totally disabled at anyyear, but lived with you as a member of your Armed Forces dependency allotments. Thetime during the year does not include income forhousehold until death, will meet this test. The part of the allotment contributed by the govern-services the individual performs at a shelteredsame is true for a child who was born during the ment and the part taken out of your military payworkshop. The availability of medical care at theyear and lived with you as a member of your are both considered provided by you in figuringworkshop must be the main reason for the indi-household for the rest of the year. The test is whether you provide more than half of the sup-vidual's presence there. Also, the income mustalso met if a child lived with you as a member of port. If your allotment is used to support personscome solely from activities at the workshop thatyour household except for any required hospital other than those you name, you can take theare incident to this medical care.stay following birth. exemptions for them if they otherwise qualify.A ªsheltered workshopº is a school that:If your dependent died during the year and
you otherwise qualified to claim an exemption • Provides special instruction or training de- Example. You are in the Armed Forces.for the dependent, you can still claim the exemp- signed to alleviate the disability of the indi- You authorize an allotment for your widowedtion. vidual, and mother that she uses to support herself and her
sister. If the allotment provides more than half of• Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-Example. Your dependent mother died on each person's support, you can take an exemp-zations, or by a state, a U.S. possession,January 15. She met the tests to be your qualify- tion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify,a political subdivision of a state or posses-ing relative. The other tests to claim an exemp- even though you authorize the allotment only forsion, the United States, or the District oftion for a dependent were also met. You can your mother.Columbia.claim an exemption for her on your return.
Tax-exempt military quarters allowances.
Local law violated. A person does not meet ªPermanently and totally disabledº has the These allowances are treated the same way as
this test if at any time during the year the rela- same meaning here as under Qualifying child, dependency allotments in figuring support. The
tionship between you and that person violates earlier. allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow-
local law. ance for quarters are both considered as pro-
vided by you for support.
Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person'smember of your household all year. However, Relative) total support, include tax-exempt income, sav-your relationship with her violated the laws of the
ings, and borrowed amounts used to supportstate where you live, because she was married To meet this test, you generally must provide that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer-to someone else. Therefore, she does not meet more than half of a person's total support during tain social security benefits, welfare benefits,this test and you cannot claim her as a depen- the calendar year. nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armeddent. However, if two or more persons provide Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions,support, but no one person provides more thanAdopted child. An adopted child is always and tax-exempt interest.half of a person's total support, see Multipletreated as your own child. The term ªadopted Support Agreement, later.childº includes a child who was lawfully placed Example 1. You provide $4,000 toward
with you for legal adoption. your mother's support during the year. She hasHow to determine if support test is met.
earned income of $600, nontaxable social se-You figure whether you have provided moreCousin. Your cousin meets this test only if he curity benefits of $4,800, and tax-exempt inter-than half of a person's total support by compar-or she lives with you all year as a member of est of $200. She uses all these for her support.ing the amount you contributed to that person'syour household. A cousin is a descendant of a You cannot claim an exemption for your mothersupport with the entire amount of support thatbrother or sister of your father or mother. because the $4,000 you provide is not moreperson received from all sources. This includes
than half of her total support of $9,600.support the person provided from his or her own
funds.Gross Income Test Example 2. Your brother's daughter takesYou may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful in figur-
out a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to paying whether you provided more than half of aTo meet this test, a person's gross income for her college tuition. She is personally responsibleperson's support.the year must be less than $3,500. for the loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total
Gross income defined. Gross income is all support. You cannot claim an exemption for herPerson's own funds not used for support.
income in the form of money, property, and because you provide less than half of her sup-A person's own funds are not support unless
services that is not exempt from tax. port.they are actually spent for support.
In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min- Social security benefits. If a husband anding business, gross income is the total net sales Example. Your mother received $2,400 in wife each receive benefits that are paid by oneminus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella- social security benefits and $300 in interest. She check made out to both of them, half of the totalneous income from the business. paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation. paid is considered to be for the support of eachGross receipts from rental property are gross She put $300 in a savings account. spouse, unless they can show otherwise.income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., to Even though your mother received a total of If a child receives social security benefits anddetermine the gross income from rental prop- $2,700 ($2,400 + $300), she spent only $2,400 uses them toward his or her own support, theerty. ($2,000 + $400) for her own support. If you benefits are considered as provided by the child.Gross income includes a partner's share of spent more than $2,400 for her support and no
the gross (not a share of the net) partnership Support provided by the state (welfare,other support was received, you have provided
income. food stamps, housing, etc.). Benefits pro-more than half of her support.
Gross income also includes all unemploy- vided by the state to a needy person generally
ment compensation and certain scholarship and Child's wages used for own support. You are considered support provided by the state.
fellowship grants. Scholarships received by de- cannot include in your contribution to your However, payments based on the needs of the
gree candidates that are used for tuition, fees, child's support any support that is paid for by the recipient will not be considered as used entirely
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 31

Page 34 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for that person's support if it is shown that part of rooming facilities. Figure Grace's total support rental value of the entire dwelling if the person
the payments were not used for that purpose. as follows: has use of your entire home. If you do not pro-
vide the total lodging, the total fair rental valueFoster care payments and expenses. Pay- must be divided depending on how much of theFair rental value of lodging ..... . $ 1,800ments you receive for the support of a foster total lodging you provide. If you provide only achild from a child placement agency are consid- Clothing, transportation, and part and the person supplies the rest, the fairered support provided by the agency. Similarly, recreation ................. . 2,400 rental value must be divided between both ofpayments you receive for the support of a foster Medical expenses ........... . 1,200 you according to the amount each provides.child from a state or county are considered sup-
port provided by the state or county. Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) .... . 1,040 Example. Your parents live rent free in aIf you are not in the trade or business of Total support .............. . $6,440 house you own. It has a fair rental value ofproviding foster care and your unreimbursed $5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fairout-of-pocket expenses in caring for a foster
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800child were mainly to benefit an organization The support Frank and Mary provide ($1,800 for the furniture. This does not include heat andqualified to receive deductible charitable contri- lodging + $1,200 medical expenses + $1,040 utilities. The house is completely furnished withbutions, the expenses are deductible as charita- food = $4,040) is more than half of Grace's furniture belonging to your parents. You payble contributions but are not considered support $6,440 total support. $600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usuallyyou provided. For more information about the
included in rent for houses in the area wherededuction for charitable contributions, see chap- Example 2. Your parents live with you, your your parents live. Therefore, you consider theter 24. If your unreimbursed expenses are not spouse, and your two children in a house you total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000deductible as charitable contributions, they are own. The fair rental value of your parents' share ($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnishedconsidered support you provided. of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each), house, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro-If you are in the trade or business of provid- which includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa- vided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities)ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses ther receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200, of which you are considered to provide $4,200are not considered support provided by you. which he spends equally between your mother ($3,600 + $600).and himself for items of support such as cloth-Example.  Lauren, a foster child, lived with Person living in his or her own home. Theing, transportation, and recreation. Your totalMr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3 months of the total fair rental value of a person's home that hefood expense for the household is $6,000. Youryear. The Smiths cared for Lauren because they or she owns is considered support contributedheat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Yourwanted to adopt her (although she had not been by that person.mother has hospital and medical expenses ofplaced with them for adoption). They did not $600, which you pay during the year. Figurecare for her as a trade or business or to benefit Living with someone rent free. If you liveyour parents' total support as follows:the agency that placed her in their home. The with a person rent free in his or her home, you
Smiths' unreimbursed expenses are not deduct- must reduce the amount you provide for support
Support provided Father Motherible as charitable contributions but are consid- of that person by the fair rental value of lodging
ered support they provided for Lauren. he or she provides you.Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000
Home for the aged. If you make a lump-sum Pension spent for their Property. Property provided as support isadvance payment to a home for the aged to take support ............ . 2,100 2,100 measured by its fair market value. Fair marketcare of your relative for life and the payment is Share of food (1/6 of value is the price that property would sell for onbased on that person's life expectancy, the $6,000) ............ . 1,000 1,000 the open market. It is the price that would beamount of support you provide each year is the agreed upon between a willing buyer and aMedical expenses forlump-sum payment divided by the relative's life
willing seller, with neither being required to act,mother ............. . 600expectancy. The amount of support you provide
and both having reasonable knowledge of thealso includes any other amounts you provided Parents' total support .. . $4,100 $4,700 relevant facts.during the year.
You must apply the support test separately Capital expenses. Capital items, such as
to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000 furniture, appliances, and cars, that are bought
Total Support lodging, $1,000 food) of your father's total sup- for a person during the year can be included in
port of $4,100 ± less than half. You provide total support under certain circumstances.To figure if you provided more than half of a $2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000 The following examples show when a capitalperson's support, you must first determine the food, $600 medical) ± more than half of her total item is or is not support.total support provided for that person. Total sup- support of $4,700. You meet the support test forport includes amounts spent to provide food, your mother, but not your father. Heat and utility Example 1. You buy a $200 power lawnlodging, clothing, education, medical and dental costs are included in the fair rental value of the mower for your 13-year-old child. The child iscare, recreation, transportation, and similar ne- lodging, so these are not considered separately. given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed.cessities.
Because the lawn mower benefits all membersGenerally, the amount of an item of support Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging, of the household, you cannot include the cost ofis the amount of the expense incurred in provid- you are considered to provide support equal to the lawn mower in the support of your child.ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support the fair rental value of the room, apartment,
is the fair rental value of the lodging. house, or other shelter in which the person lives. Example 2. You buy a $150 television setExpenses that are not directly related to any Fair rental value includes a reasonable allow- as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child.one member of a household, such as the cost of ance for the use of furniture and appliances, and The television set is placed in your child's bed-food for the household, must be divided among for heat and other utilities that are provided. room. You can include the cost of the televisionthe members of the household.
Fair rental value defined. This is the set in the support of your child.
amount you could reasonably expect to receiveExample 1. Grace Brown, mother of Mary
from a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It is Example 3. You pay $5,000 for a car andMiller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and their
used instead of actual expenses such as taxes, register it in your name. You and yourtwo children. Grace gets social security benefits
interest, depreciation, paint, insurance, utilities, 17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-
cost of furniture and appliances, etc. In some cause you own the car and do not give it to yourportation, and recreation. Grace has no other
cases, fair rental value may be equal to the rent daughter but merely let her use it, you cannotincome. Frank and Mary's total food expense for
paid. include the cost of the car in your daughter'sthe household is $5,200. They pay Grace's
total support. However, you can include in yourmedical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fair If you provide the total lodging, the amount of
daughter's support your out-of-pocket expensesrental value of the lodging provided for Grace is support you provide is the fair rental value of the
of operating the car for her benefit.$1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar room the person uses, or a share of the fair
Page 32 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 35 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 3-1. Worksheet for Determining Support Keep for Your Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year .......................................... . 1.
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support ..................... . 2.
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ......................... . 3.
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ..... . 4.
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ............................ . 5.
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
 6a. Enter the total rent paid ................................................ . 6a.
 6b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, 
also include this amount in line 21. .......................................... . 6b.
7. Enter the total food expenses ............................................... . 7.
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b) ........ . 8.
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ........................ . 9.
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Do not include expenses of maintaining the home, such as
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance. ............................... . 10.
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses ..................... . 11.
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ........................... . 12.
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............ . 13.
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses ...................................... . 14.
15. Enter the person's total education expenses ..................................... . 15.
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by insurance . . 16.
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses ............................. . 17.
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses .................................... . 18.
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year .......... . 19.
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (.50) ................................................ . 20.
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned 
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support .............. . 21.
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
 No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a
qualifying child, stop here; do not complete lines 23±26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to
determine if this person is your qualifying relative. 
 Yes. You do not meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state,
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. . . 23.
24. Add lines 21 and 23 ...................................................... . 24.
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ....... . 25.
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
 Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 No. You do not meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You cannot claim an exemption for
this person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or
separated parents, or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement, Support Test for Children
of Divorced or Separated Parents, or Kidnapped Child under Qualifying Relative.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 33

Page 36 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, using A child will be treated as being the qualifyingMultiple Support Agreement
personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro- relative of his or her noncustodial parent if all
Sometimes no one provides more than half ofvide all the rest of your son's support ± $4,000. four of the following statements are true.
the support of a person. Instead, two or moreSince the car is bought and owned by your son,
persons, each of whom would be able to take 1. The parents:the car's fair market value ($4,500) must be
the exemption but for the support test, togetherincluded in his support. Your son has provided
a. Are divorced or legally separated underprovide more than half of the person's support.more than half of his own total support of $8,500
a decree of divorce or separate mainte-($4,500 + $4,000), so he is not your qualifying When this happens, you can agree that any nance,child. You did not provide more than half of his one of you who individually provides more thantotal support, so he is not your qualifying rela- b. Are separated under a written separa-10% of the person's support, but only one, cantive. You cannot claim an exemption for your tion agreement, orclaim an exemption for that person as a qualify-son. ing relative. Each of the others must sign a c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6statement agreeing not to claim the exemption months of the year.Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur- for that year. The person who claims the exemp-
ance premiums you pay, including premiums for tion must keep these signed statements for his 2. The child received over half of his or hersupplementary Medicare coverage, are in- or her records. A multiple support declaration support for the year from the parents.cluded in the support you provide. identifying each of the others who agreed not to
3. The child is in the custody of one or bothclaim the exemption must be attached to theMedical insurance benefits. Medical in-
return of the person claiming the exemption. parents for more than half of the year.surance benefits, including basic and supple-
Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, canmentary Medicare benefits, are not part of 4. Either of the following statements is true.be used for this purpose.support.
a. The custodial parent signs a writtenYou can claim an exemption under a multiple
declaration, discussed later, that he orsupport agreement for someone related to youTuition payments and allowances under the
she will not claim the child as a depen-or for someone who lived with you all year as aGI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under the
dent for the year, and the noncustodialmember of your household.GI Bill for tuition payments and allowances while
parent attaches this written declarationthey attend school are included in total support.
to his or her return. (If the decree orExample 1. You, your sister, and your two
Example. During the year, your son re- agreement went into effect after 1984,brothers provide the entire support of your
ceives $2,200 from the government under the GI see Divorce decree or separationmother for the year. You provide 45%, your
Bill. He uses this amount for his education. You agreement made after 1984, later.)sister 35%, and your two brothers each provide
provide the rest of his support ± $2,000. Be- 10%. Either you or your sister can claim an b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-cause GI benefits are included in total support, exemption for your mother. The other must sign rate maintenance or written separationyour son's total support is $4,200 ($2,200 + a statement agreeing not to take an exemption agreement that applies to 2008 states$2,000). You have not provided more than half for your mother. The one who claims the exemp- that the noncustodial parent can claimof his support. tion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara- the child as a dependent, the decree ortion, to his or her return and must keep the agreement was not changed after 1984statement signed by the other for his or herChild care expenses. If you pay someone to to say the noncustodial parent cannotrecords. Because neither brother provides moreprovide child or dependent care, you can include claim the child as a dependent, and thethan 10% of the support, neither can take thethese payments in the amount you provided for
noncustodial parent provides at leastexemption and neither has to sign a statement.the support of your child or disabled dependent,
$600 for the child's support during theeven if you claim a credit for the payments. For
year.Example 2. You and your brother each pro-information on the credit, see chapter 32.
vide 20% of your mother's support for the year.
The remaining 60% of her support is providedOther support items. Other items may be Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.equally by two persons who are not related toconsidered as support depending on the facts in The custodial parent is the parent with whom theher. She does not live with them. Because moreeach case. child lived for the greater part of the year. Thethan half of her support is provided by persons other parent is the noncustodial parent.who cannot claim an exemption for her, no one If the parents divorced or separated duringcan take the exemption.Do Not Include the year and the child lived with both parents
in Total Support before the separation, the custodial parent is theExample 3. Your father lives with you and
one with whom the child lived for the greater partreceives 25% of his support from social security,The following items are not included in total of the rest of the year.40% from you, 24% from his brother (your un-support.
cle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or your
Example. Your child lived with you for 10uncle can take the exemption for your father if1. Federal, state, and local income taxes paid
months of the year. The child lived with yourthe other signs a statement agreeing not to. Theby persons from their own income. 
former spouse for the other 2 months. You areone who takes the exemption must attach Form2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid by considered the custodial parent.2120, or a similar declaration, to his return andpersons from their own income. must keep for his records the signed statement Written declaration.  The custodial parentfrom the one agreeing not to take the exemption.3. Life insurance premiums. may use either Form 8332 or a similar statement
(containing the same information required by the4. Funeral expenses. 
form) to make the written declaration to release5. Scholarships received by your child if your Support Test for Children of the exemption to the noncustodial parent. Thechild is a full-time student. Divorced or Separated Parents noncustodial parent must attach the form or
6. Survivors' and Dependents' Educational statement to his or her tax return.In most cases, a child of divorced or separatedAssistance payments used for the support The exemption can be released for 1 year,parents will be a qualifying child of one of theof the child who receives them. for a number of specified years (for example,parents. See Children of divorced or separated
alternate years), or for all future years, as speci-Government or charitable assistance you re- parents under Qualifying Child , earlier. How-
fied in the declaration. If the exemption is re-ceived because of your temporary relocation ever, if the child does not meet the requirements
leased for more than 1 year, the original releasedue to the storms, tornadoes, or flooding in a to be a qualifying child of either parent, the child
must be attached to the return of the noncus-Midwestern disaster area is not included in total may be a qualifying relative of one of the par-
todial parent for the first year, and a copy mustsupport. Disregard these amounts in determin- ents. In that case, the following rules must be
be attached for each later year.ing who provided a person's support. used in applying the support test.
Page 34 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 37 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Divorce decree or separation agreement agreement, this special support test for divorced child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos-
or separated parents does not apply. pital records instead. The document must showmade after 1984. If the divorce decree or sep-
the child was born alive. If you do this, enteraration agreement went into effect after 1984,
ªDIEDº in column (2) of line 6c of your Formthe noncustodial parent can attach certain
1040 or Form 1040A.   pages from the decree or agreement instead of
Form 8332. The decree or agreement must Phaseout of Alien or adoptee with no SSN. If your depen-state all three of the following. dent does not have and cannot get an SSN, youExemptions must list the individual taxpayer identification1. The noncustodial parent can claim the
number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identifica-child as a dependent without regard to any The amount you can claim as a deduction for tion number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.condition, such as payment of support. exemptions is reduced once your adjusted gross
Taxpayer identification numbers forincome (AGI) goes above a certain level for your2. The custodial parent will not claim the child
aliens. If your dependent is a resident or non-filing status. These levels are as follows:as a dependent for the year.
resident alien who does not have and is not
3. The years for which the noncustodial par- AGI Level eligible to get an SSN, your dependent must
ent, rather than the custodial parent, can That apply for an individual taxpayer identification
claim the child as a dependent. Reduces number (ITIN). Write the number in column (2) of
Exemption line 6c of your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. ToThe noncustodial parent must attach all of Filing Status Amount apply for an ITIN, use Form W-7, Application forthe following pages of the decree or agreement
IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Number.to his or her tax return. Married filing separately ..... . $ 119,975
Taxpayer identification numbers forSingle ................. .  159,950• The cover page (write the other parent's
adoptees. If you have a child who was placedHead of household ......... .  199,950social security number on this page). with you by an authorized placement agency,Married filing jointly ........ .  239,950• The pages that include all of the informa- you may be able to claim an exemption for theQualifying widow(er) ........ .  239,950
tion identified in items (1) through (3) child. However, if you cannot get an SSN or anYou must reduce the dollar amount of yourabove. ITIN for the child, you must get an adoptionexemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part of taxpayer identification number (ATIN) for the• The signature page with the other parent's $2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa- child from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Applicationsignature and the date of the agreement. rately), that your AGI exceeds the amount for Taxpayer Identification Number for Pendingshown above for your filing status. However, you U.S. Adoptions, for details.can lose no more than 1/3 of the dollar amount ofThe noncustodial parent must attach
your exemptions. In other words, each exemp-the required information even if it was
tion cannot be reduced to less than $2,333.filed with a return in an earlier year.
CAUTION
!
If your AGI exceeds the level for your filing
status, use the Deduction for Exemptions Work-Beginning with 2009 tax returns, the
sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Formnoncustodial parent will no longer be
1040A to figure the amount of your deduction forable to attach pages from the decree or 4.
CAUTION
!exemptions. However, if you are claiming aagreement instead of Form 8332 if the decree or
$500 exemption for housing a Midwestern dis-agreement was made after 2008. The noncus-
placed individual, use Form 8914 instead. todial parent will have to attach Form 8332 or a
Tax Withholdingsimilar statement signed by the custodial parent
and whose only purpose is to release a claim to
exemption. and EstimatedSocial Security
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-
port provided by your new spouse is treated as TaxNumbers for
provided by you.
Dependents
Child support under pre-1985 agreement.
What's New for 2009All child support payments actually received You must list the social security number (SSN)
from the noncustodial parent under a pre-1985 of any dependent for whom you claim an exemp-
Tax law changes for 2009. When you figuretion in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 oragreement are considered used for the support
how much income tax you want withheld fromForm 1040A.of the child.
your pay and when you figure your estimatedIf you do not list the dependent's SSN tax, consider tax law changes effective in 2009.Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, the when required or if you list an incorrect See What's New for 2009 in the front of thisnoncustodial parent provides $1,200 for the SSN, the exemption may be disal-
CAUTION
! publication, or get Publication 553, Highlights ofchild's support. This amount is considered sup- lowed. 2008 Tax Changes.port provided by the noncustodial parent even if
the $1,200 was actually spent on things other No SSN. If a person for whom you expect tothan support. claim an exemption on your return does not
have an SSN, either you or that person shouldAlimony. Payments to a spouse that are Remindersapply for an SSN as soon as possible by filingincludible in the spouse's gross income as either
Form SS-5, Application for a Social Securityalimony, separate maintenance payments, or
Estimated tax safe harbor for higher incomeCard, with the Social Security Administrationsimilar payments from an estate or trust, are not taxpayers. If your adjusted gross income was(SSA). You can get Form SS-5 online at www.treated as a payment for the support of a depen- more than $150,000 ($75,000 if you are marriedsocialsecurity.gov or at your local SSA office.dent. filing a separate return), you will have to deposit It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an
the smaller of 90% of your expected tax for 2009SSN. If you do not have a required SSN by theParents who never married. This special rule or 110% of the tax shown on your 2008 return tofiling due date, you can file Form 4868 for anfor divorced or separated parents also applies to avoid an estimated tax penalty.extension of time to file.parents who never married.
Born and died in 2008.   If your child was Payment of estimated tax electronically.
Multiple support agreement. If the support of born and died in 2008, and you do not have an You may be able to pay your estimated tax by
the child is determined under a multiple support SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the electronic means. For more information, see
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 35

Page 38 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How To Pay Estimated Tax in chapter 2 of Publi- ❏ 2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Determining Amount of Tax
Individuals, Estates, and Trustscation 505. Withheld Using Form W-4
The amount of income tax your employer with-
holds from your regular pay depends on two
things.Introduction Withholding • The amount you earn.This chapter discusses how to pay your tax as
This section discusses income tax withholding • The information you give your employeryou earn or receive income during the year. In
on: on Form W-4.general, the federal income tax is a
pay-as-you-go tax. There are two ways to pay as • Salaries and wages, Form W-4 includes three types of informationyou go. • Tips, that your employer will use to figure your with-
• Withholding. If you are an employee, holding.• Taxable fringe benefits,your employer probably withholds income
• Whether to withhold at the single rate or attax from your pay. Tax also may be with- • Sick pay, the lower married rate.held from certain other income, including • Pensions and annuities,pensions, bonuses, commissions, and • How many withholding allowances you
• Gambling winnings,gambling winnings. In each case, the claim. (Each allowance reduces the
amount withheld is paid to the IRS in your amount withheld.)• Unemployment compensation, andname. • Whether you want an additional amount• Certain federal payments, such as social• Estimated tax. If you do not pay your tax withheld.security.
through withholding, or do not pay enough
This section explains in detail the rules for with-tax that way, you might have to pay esti-
holding tax from each of these types of income. Note. You must specify a filing status and amated tax. People who are in business for
number of withholding allowances on Form W-4.themselves generally will have to pay their This section also covers backup withholding
You cannot specify only a dollar amount of with-tax this way. You may have to pay esti- on interest, dividends, and other payments.
holding.mated tax if you receive income such as
dividends, interest, capital gains, rent, and Salaries and Wagesroyalties. Estimated tax is used to pay not
New Jobonly income tax, but self-employment tax Income tax is withheld from the pay of most
and alternative minimum tax as well. employees. Your pay includes your regular pay, When you start a new job, you must fill out Form
bonuses, commissions, and vacation al- W-4 and give it to your employer. Your employerThis chapter explains these methods. In addi- lowances. It also includes reimbursements and should have copies of the form. If you need totion, it also explains the following. other expense allowances paid under a nonac- change the information later, you must fill out a
countable plan. See Supplemental Wages, new form.• Credit for withholding and estimated
later, for more information about reimburse- If you work only part of the year (for example,tax. When you file your 2008 income tax ments and allowances paid under a nonac- you start working after the beginning of thereturn, take credit for all the income tax countable plan. year), too much tax may be withheld. You maywithheld from your salary, wages, pen- If your income is low enough that you will not be able to avoid overwithholding if your em-sions, etc., and for the estimated tax you have to pay income tax for the year, you may be ployer agrees to use the part-year method. Seepaid for 2008. exempt from withholding. This is explained Part-Year Method in chapter 1 of Publication
• Underpayment penalty. If you did not under Exemption From Withholding, later. 505 for more information.
pay enough tax during the year, either
Military retirees. Military retirement pay is Employee also receiving pension income.through withholding or by making esti-
treated in the same manner as regular pay for If you receive pension or annuity income andmated tax payments, you may have to pay
income tax withholding purposes, even though it begin a new job, you will need to file Form W-4a penalty. In most cases, the IRS can fig-
is treated as a pension or annuity for other tax with your new employer. However, you canure this penalty for you. See Underpay-
purposes. choose to split your withholding allowances be-ment Penalty at the end of this chapter. 
tween your pension and job in any manner. See
Household workers. If you are a household Publication 919 for more information.
worker, you can ask your employer to withholdUseful Items
income tax from your pay.You may want to see:
Tax is withheld only if you want it withheld Changing Your Withholding
and your employer agrees to withhold it. If youPublication Events during the year may change your maritaldo not have enough income tax withheld, you
status or the exemptions, adjustments, deduc-may have to pay estimated tax, as discussed❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
tions, or credits you expect to claim on your taxlater under Estimated Tax.❏ 553 Highlights of 2008 Tax Changes return. When this happens, you may need to
Farmworkers. Income tax generally is with- give your employer a new Form W-4 to change❏ 919 How Do I Adjust My Tax
held from your cash wages for work on a farm your withholding status or number of al-Withholding?
unless your employer both: lowances.
If the event changes your withholding statusForm (and Instructions) • Pays you cash wages of less than $150 or the number of allowances you are claiming,during the year, and❏ W-4 Employee's Withholding Allowance you must give your employer a new Form W-4
Certificate • Has expenditures for agricultural labor to- within 10 days after either of the following.
taling less than $2,500 during the year.❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for Pension • Your divorce, if you have been claiming
or Annuity Payments married status.You can ask your employer to withhold in-
❏ W-4S Request for Federal Income Tax come tax from noncash wages and other wages • Any event that decreases the number of
Withholding From Sick Pay not subject to withholding. If your employer does withholding allowances you can claim.
not agree to withhold tax, or if not enough is❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, as Generally, you can submit a new Form W-4
❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals discussed later under Estimated Tax. whenever you wish to change the number of
Page 36 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 39 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your withholding allowances for any other rea- complete this worksheet when you have compare the total tax to be withheld during the
son. changes to these items to see if you need to year with the tax you can expect to figure on
change your withholding. your return. It also will help you determine howChanging your withholding for 2010. If much additional withholding, if any, is neededThe Deductions and Adjustments Worksheetevents in 2009 will decrease the number of your each payday to avoid owing tax when you fileis on page 2 of Form W-4. Chapter 1 of Publica-withholding allowances for 2010, you must give your return. If you do not have enough tax with-tion 505 explains this worksheet.your employer a new Form W-4 by December 1, held, you may have to pay estimated tax, as2009. If the event occurs in December 2009, explained under Estimated Tax, later.Two-Earners/Multiple Jobs Worksheet.submit a new Form W-4 within 10 days. You may need to complete this worksheet if you
have more than one job or a working spouse.
Rules Your Employer Must FollowYou also can add to the amount, if any, on line 8Checking Your Withholding of this worksheet any additional withholding nec-
It may be helpful for you to know some of theessary to cover any amount you expect to oweAfter you have given your employer a Form W-4, withholding rules your employer must follow.other than income tax, such as self-employmentyou can check to see whether the amount of tax These rules can affect how to fill out your Formtax.withheld from your pay is too little or too much. W-4 and how to handle problems that may arise.See Publication 919,  later. If too much or too
little tax is being withheld, you should give your New Form W-4. When you start a new job,Getting the Right Amount of Taxemployer a new Form W-4 to change your with- your employer should give you a Form W-4 to fillWithheldholding. out. Beginning with your first payday, your em-
ployer will use the information you give on theIn most situations, the tax withheld from yourNote. You cannot give your employer a pay- form to figure your withholding.pay will be close to the tax you figure on yourment to cover withholding for past pay periods or
return if you follow these two rules. If you later fill out a new Form W-4, youra payment for estimated tax.
employer can put it into effect as soon as possi-• You accurately complete all the Form W-4 ble. The deadline for putting it into effect is theworksheets that apply to you. start of the first payroll period ending 30 or moreCompleting Form W-4 and • You give your employer a new Form W-4 days after you turn it in.Worksheets when changes occur.
No Form W-4. If you do not give your em-Form W-4 has worksheets to help you figure But because the worksheets and withholding ployer a completed Form W-4, your employerhow many withholding allowances you can methods do not account for all possible situa- must withhold at the highest rate, as if you wereclaim. The worksheets are for your own records. tions, you may not be getting the right amount single and claimed no withholding allowances.Do not give them to your employer. withheld. This is most likely to happen in the
following situations.Multiple jobs. If you have income from more Repaying withheld tax. If you find you arethan one job at the same time, complete only • You are married and both you and your having too much tax withheld because you didone set of Form W-4 worksheets. Then split your spouse work. not claim all the withholding allowances you areallowances between the Forms W-4 for each entitled to, you should give your employer a new• You have more than one job at a time.job. You cannot claim the same allowances with Form W-4. Your employer cannot repay any ofmore than one employer at the same time. You • You have nonwage income, such as inter- the tax previously withheld. Instead, claim thecan claim all your allowances with one employer est, dividends, alimony, unemployment full amount withheld when you file your tax re-and none with the other(s), or divide them any compensation, or self-employment in- turn.other way. come. However, if your employer has withheld
Married individuals. If both you and your more than the correct amount of tax for the Form• You will owe additional amounts with your
spouse are employed and expect to file a joint W-4 you have in effect, you do not have to fill outreturn, such as self-employment tax.
return, figure your withholding allowances using a new Form W-4 to have your withholding low-• Your withholding is based on obsoleteyour combined income, adjustments, deduc- ered to the correct amount. Your employer canForm W-4 information for a substantialtions, exemptions, and credits. Use only one set repay the amount that was withheld incorrectly.part of the year.of worksheets. You can divide your total al- If you are not repaid, your Form W-2 will reflect
lowances any way, but you cannot claim an • Your earnings are more than $130,000 if the full amount actually withheld.
allowance that your spouse also claims. you are single or $180,000 if you are mar-
If you and your spouse expect to file sepa- ried.
rate returns, figure your allowances using sepa- Exemption From Withholding• You work only part of the year.rate worksheets based on your own individual
If you claim exemption from withholding, yourincome, adjustments, deductions, exemptions, • You change the number of your withhold-
employer will not withhold federal income taxand credits. ing allowances during the year.
from your wages. The exemption applies only toAlternative method of figuring withholding income tax, not to social security or Medicareallowances. You do not have to use the Form Cumulative wage method. If you change the tax.W-4 worksheets if you use a more accurate number of your withholding allowances during You can claim exemption from withholdingmethod of figuring the number of withholding the year, too much or too little tax may have for 2009 only if both of the following situationsallowances. For more information, see Alterna- been withheld for the period before you made apply.tive method of figuring withholding allowances the change. You may be able to compensate for
under Completing Form W-4 and Worksheets in this if your employer agrees to use the cumula- • For 2008 you had a right to a refund of all
Publication 505, chapter 1. tive wage withholding method for the rest of the federal income tax withheld because you
year. You must ask your employer in writing to had no tax liability.Personal Allowances Worksheet. Use the use this method.Personal Allowances Worksheet on page 1 of • For 2009 you expect a refund of all federal
To be eligible, you must have been paid forForm W-4 to figure your withholding allowances income tax withheld because you expect
the same kind of payroll period (weekly, bi-based on exemptions and any special al- to have no tax liability.
weekly, etc.) since the beginning of the year.lowances that apply.
Students. If you are a student, you are notDeductions and Adjustments Worksheet.
automatically exempt. See chapter 1  to seeUse this worksheet if you plan to itemize your Publication 919
whether you must file a return. If you work onlydeductions, claim certain credits, or claim ad-
part time or only during the summer, you mayjustments to the income on your 2009 tax return To make sure you are getting the right amount of
qualify for exemption from withholding.and you want to reduce your withholding. Also, tax withheld, get Publication 919. It will help you
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 37

Page 40 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Age 65 or older or blind. If you are 65 or older of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to 1 year, For more information on withholding on tax-
or blind, use one of the worksheets in chapter 1 or both. able fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of Publication
of Publication 505, under Exemption From With- 505.These penalties will apply if you deliberately
holding, to help you decide whether you can and knowingly falsify your Form W-4 in an at-
claim exemption from withholding. Do not use tempt to reduce or eliminate the proper withhold- Sick Payeither worksheet if you will itemize deductions, ing of taxes. A simple error or an honest mistake
claim exemptions for dependents, or claim tax will not result in one of these penalties. For Sick pay is a payment to you to replace yourcredits on your 2009 return. Instead, see Itemiz- example, a person who has tried to figure the regular wages while you are temporarily absenting deductions or claiming exemptions or credits number of withholding allowances correctly, but from work due to sickness or personal injury. Toin chapter 1 of Publication 505. claims seven when the proper number is six, will qualify as sick pay, it must be paid under a plannot be charged a W-4 penalty. to which your employer is a party.Claiming exemption from withholding. To If you receive sick pay from your employer orclaim exemption, you must give your employer a an agent of your employer, income tax must beTipsForm W-4. Do not complete lines 5 and 6. Enter withheld. An agent who does not pay regularªExemptº on line 7. The tips you receive while working on your job wages to you may choose to withhold incomeIf you claim exemption, but later your situa- are considered part of your pay. You must in- tax at a flat rate.tion changes so that you will have to pay income clude your tips on your tax return on the same However, if you receive sick pay from a thirdtax after all, you must file a new Form W-4 within line as your regular pay. However, tax is not party who is not acting as an agent of your10 days after the change. If you claim exemption withheld directly from tip income, as it is from employer, income tax will be withheld only if youin 2009, but you expect to owe income tax for your regular pay. Nevertheless, your employer choose to have it withheld. See Form W-4S,2010, you must file a new Form W-4 by Decem- will take into account the tips you report when below.ber 1, 2009. figuring how much to withhold from your regular If you receive payments under a plan inYour claim of exempt status may be re- pay. which your employer does not participate (suchviewed by the IRS. See chapter 6  for information on reporting as an accident or health plan where you paid all
your tips to your employer. For more informationAn exemption is good for only 1 year. the premiums), the payments are not sick pay
on the withholding rules for tip income, see Pub-You must give your employer a new Form W-4 and usually are not taxable.
lication 531, Reporting Tip Income.by February 15 each year to continue your ex-
Union agreements. If you receive sick payemption.
How employer figures amount to withhold. under a collective bargaining agreement be-
The tips you report to your employer are counted tween your union and your employer, the agree-
as part of your income for the month you report ment may determine the amount of income taxSupplemental Wages
them. Your employer can figure your withholding withholding. See your union representative or
Supplemental wages include bonuses, commis- in either of two ways. your employer for more information.
sions, overtime pay, vacation allowances, cer- • By withholding at the regular rate on thetain sick pay, and expense allowances under Form W-4S. If you choose to have income taxsum of your pay plus your reported tips.certain plans. The payer can figure withholding withheld from sick pay paid by a third party, such
• By withholding at the regular rate on youron supplemental wages using the same method as an insurance company, you must fill out Form
pay plus a percentage of your reportedused for your regular wages. However, if these W-4S. Its instructions contain a worksheet you
tips.payments are identified separately from your can use to figure the amount you want withheld.
regular wages, your employer or other payer of They also explain restrictions that may apply.
supplemental wages can withhold income tax Give the completed form to the payer of yourNot enough pay to cover taxes. If your regu-from these wages at a flat rate. sick pay. The payer must withhold according tolar pay is not enough for your employer to with- your directions on the form.hold all the tax (including income tax, socialExpense allowances. Reimbursements or security tax, Medicare tax, or railroad retirementother expense allowances paid by your em- Estimated tax. If you do not request withhold-tax) due on your pay plus your tips, you can giveployer under a nonaccountable plan are treated ing on Form W-4S, or if you do not have enoughyour employer money to cover the shortage.as supplemental wages. tax withheld, you may have to make estimatedSee Giving your employer money for taxes inReimbursements or other expense al- tax payments. If you do not pay enough tax,chapter 6.lowances paid under an accountable plan that either through estimated tax or withholding, or a
are more than your proven expenses are treated combination of both, you may have to pay aAllocated tips. Your employer should notas paid under a nonaccountable plan if you do penalty. See Underpayment Penalty at the endwithhold income tax, social security tax, Medi-not return the excess payments within a reason- of this chapter.care tax, or railroad retirement tax on any allo-able period of time. cated tips. Withholding is based only on yourFor more information about accountable and pay plus your reported tips. Your employer Pensions and Annuitiesnonaccountable expense allowance plans, see should refund to you any incorrectly withheldReimbursements in chapter 26. Income tax usually will be withheld from yourtax. See Allocated Tips in chapter 6 for more
pension or annuity distributions unless youinformation.
choose not to have it withheld. This rule applies
Penalties to distributions from:Taxable Fringe Benefits
You may have to pay a penalty of $500 if both of • A traditional individual retirement arrange-
The value of certain noncash fringe benefits youthe following apply. ment (IRA),
receive from your employer is considered part of• You make statements or claim withholding • A life insurance company under an en-your pay. Your employer generally must with-allowances on your Form W-4 that reduce dowment, annuity, or life insurance con-hold income tax on these benefits from yourthe amount of tax withheld. tract,regular pay.
For information on fringe benefits, see Fringe• You have no reasonable basis for those • A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing plan,
Benefits under Employee Compensation instatements or allowances at the time you • A stock bonus plan, andchapter 5.prepare your Form W-4.
Although the value of your personal use of an • Any other plan that defers the time you
There is also a criminal penalty for willfully employer-provided car, truck, or other highway receive compensation.
supplying false or fraudulent information on your motor vehicle is taxable, your employer can
Form W-4 or for willfully failing to supply informa- choose not to withhold income tax on that The amount withheld depends on whether
tion that would increase the amount withheld. amount. Your employer must notify you if this you receive payments spread out over more
The penalty upon conviction can be either a fine choice is made. than 1 year (periodic payments), within 1 year
Page 38 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 41 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(nonperiodic payments), or as an eligible rollo- See Backup Withholding in chapter 1 of Publi-Federal Payments cation 505 for more information.ver distribution (ERD). You cannot choose not to
have income tax withheld from an ERD. You can choose to have income tax withheld Penalties. There are civil and criminal penal-
from certain federal payments you receive. ties for giving false information to avoid backup
These payments are: withholding. The civil penalty is $500. The crimi-More information. For more information on
nal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of up totaxation of annuities and distributions (including 1. Social security benefits, $1,000 or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or both.ERDs) from qualified retirement plans, see
2. Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits,chapter 10. For information on IRAs, see chap-
ter 17. For more information on withholding on 3. Commodity credit loans you choose to in-pensions and annuities, including a discussion clude in your gross income, and Estimated Taxof Form W-4P, see Pensions and Annuities in
4. Payments under the Agricultural Act ofchapter 1 of Publication 505.
Estimated tax is the method used to pay tax on1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et. seq.), or title II of
income that is not subject to withholding. Thisthe Disaster Assistance Act of 1988, asGambling Winnings includes income from self-employment, interest,amended, that are treated as insurance
dividends, alimony, rent, gains from the sale ofproceeds and that you receive because:Income tax is withheld at a flat 25% rate from assets, prizes, and awards. You also may havecertain kinds of gambling winnings. a. Your crops were destroyed or damaged to pay estimated tax if the amount of income tax
by drought, flood, or any other naturalGambling winnings of more than $5,000 from being withheld from your salary, pension, or
disaster, orthe following sources are subject to income tax other income is not enough.
Estimated tax is used to pay both income taxwithholding. b. You were unable to plant crops be- and self-employment tax, as well as other taxescause of a natural disaster described in• Any sweepstakes; wagering pool, includ- and amounts reported on your tax return. If you(a).ing payments made to winners of poker do not pay enough tax, either through withhold-tournaments; or lottery. ing or estimated tax, or a combination of both,To make this choice, you will have to fill out
you may have to pay a penalty. If you do not pay• Any other wager, if the proceeds are at Form W-4V (or a similar form provided by the
enough by the due date of each payment periodleast 300 times the amount of the bet. payer) and give it to the payer.
(see When To Pay Estimated Tax, later), youIf you do not choose to have income taxIt does not matter whether your winnings are may be charged a penalty even if you are due awithheld, you may have to pay estimated tax.paid in cash, in property, or as an annuity. Win- refund when you file your tax return. For infor-See Estimated Tax, later.nings not paid in cash are taken into account at mation on when the penalty applies, see Un-If you do not pay enough tax, either throughtheir fair market value. derpayment Penalty, at the end of this chapter.withholding or estimated tax, or a combination of
Exception. Gambling winnings from bingo, both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un-
keno, and slot machines generally are not sub- Who Does Not Have Toderpayment Penalty, at the end of this chapter,
ject to income tax withholding. However, you for information. Pay Estimated Taxmay need to provide the payer with a social
security number to avoid withholding. See More information. For more information If you receive salaries or wages, you can avoid
about the tax treatment of social security andBackup withholding on gambling winnings in having to pay estimated tax by asking your em-
railroad retirement benefits, see chapter 11. Getchapter 1 of Publication 505. If you receive gam- ployer to take more tax out of your earnings. To
Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide, for infor-bling winnings not subject to withholding, you do this, give a new Form W-4 to your employer.
mation about the tax treatment of commoditymay need to pay estimated tax. See Estimated See chapter 1 of Publication 505.
credit loans or crop disaster payments.Tax, later. Estimated tax not required. You do not have
If you do not pay enough tax, either through to pay estimated tax for 2009 if you meet allBackup Withholdingwithholding or estimated tax, or a combination of three of the following conditions.
both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un- • You had no tax liability for 2008.Banks or other businesses that pay you certainderpayment Penalty, later. kinds of income must file an information return • You were a U.S. citizen or resident for the(Form 1099) with the IRS. The information re- whole year.Form W-2G. If a payer withholds income tax turn shows how much you were paid during the
• Your 2008 tax year covered a 12-monthfrom your gambling winnings, you should re- year. It also includes your name and taxpayer
period.identification number (TIN). TINs are explainedceive a Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Win-
in chapter 1 under Social Security Number.nings, showing the amount you won and the
You had no tax liability for 2008 if your total taxThese payments generally are not subject toamount withheld. Report the tax withheld on line
was zero or you did not have to file an incomewithholding. However, ªbackupº withholding is62 of Form 1040.
tax return.required in certain situations. Backup withhold-
ing can apply to most kinds of payments that areUnemployment reported on Form 1099. Who Must Pay EstimatedCompensation The payer must withhold at a flat 28% rate in Taxthe following situations.
You can choose to have income tax withheld
If you had a tax liability for 2008, you may have• You do not give the payer your TIN in thefrom unemployment compensation. To make to pay estimated tax for 2009.required manner.this choice, you will have to fill out Form W-4V
(or a similar form provided by the payer) and • The IRS notifies the payer that the TIN General rule. You must pay estimated tax for
give it to the payer. you gave is incorrect. 2009 if both of the following apply.
Unemployment compensation is taxable. So, • You are required, but fail, to certify that 1. You expect to owe at least $1,000 in taxif you do not have income tax withheld, you may you are not subject to backup withholding. for 2009, after subtracting your withholdinghave to pay estimated tax. See Estimated Tax, and credits.• The IRS notifies the payer to start with-later. holding on interest or dividends because 2. You expect your withholding and credits toIf you do not pay enough tax, either through you have underreported interest or divi- be less than the smaller of:withholding or estimated tax, or a combination of dends on your income tax return. The IRS
both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un- will do this only after it has mailed you four a. 90% of the tax to be shown on your
derpayment Penalty, later, for information. notices over at least a 210-day period. 2009 tax return, or
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 39

Page 42 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 4-A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax?
Will you owe $1,000 or more
for 2009 after subtracting
income tax withholding and
credits from your total tax?
(Do not subtract any
estimated tax payments.)
You MUST make estimated
tax payment(s) by the
required due date(s).
Start Here
No
/H17075
Yes
Yes
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 100%* of the tax shown
on your 2008 tax return?
/H17075
No
/H17075
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 90% (66
2⁄3 % for farmers
and fishermen) of the tax
shown on your 2009 tax
return? Note: Your 2008 return must
have covered a 12-month
period.
You are NOT required to pay
estimated tax.
See When To Pay
Estimated Tax.
No
Yes
* 110% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2008 and 2009 is from farming or fishing and your 2008 adjusted gross income was more than
$150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2009 is married filing a separate return).
/H17074
/H17076
/H17076
The tax you would have paidb. 100% of the tax shown on your 2008 • You are legally separated under a decree
had you filed a separate returntax return. Your 2008 tax return must of divorce or separate maintenance,
cover all 12 months. The total tax you and your• You and your spouse have different tax
spouse would have paid hadyears, or you filed separate returnsSpecial rules for farmers, fishermen, and • Either spouse is a nonresident alien (un-higher income taxpayers. There are excep- less that spouse elected to be treated as a Example. Joe and Heather filed a joint re-tions to the general rule for farmers, fishermen, resident alien (see chapter 1 of Publication turn for 2008 showing taxable income ofand certain higher income taxpayers. See Fig- $48,500 and a tax of $6,476. Of the $48,500519)).ure 4-A  and chapter 2 of Publication 505 for taxable income, $40,100 was Joe's and the restmore information. was Heather's. For 2009, they plan to file mar-Whether you and your spouse make joint esti-
ried filing separately. Joe figures his share of theAliens. Resident and nonresident aliens mated tax payments or separate payments will
tax on the 2008 joint return as follows.also may have to pay estimated tax. Resident not affect your choice of filing a joint tax return or
aliens should follow the rules in this chapter separate returns for 2009.
Tax on $40,100 based on aunless noted otherwise. Nonresident aliens 2008 separate returns and 2009 joint re- separate return ........ . $6,375should get Form 1040-ES (NR), U.S. Estimated Tax on $8,400 based on aturn. If you plan to file a joint return with yourTax for Nonresident Alien Individuals. separate return ........ .  863spouse for 2009, but you filed separate returns
Total ................. . $ 7,238You are an alien if you are not a citizen or for 2008, your 2008 tax is the total of the tax
national of the United States. You are a resident shown on your separate returns. You filed a Joe's percentage of total ($6,375
alien if you either have a green card or meet the ÷  $7,238) ............ . 88%separate return if you filed as single, head of
substantial presence test. For more information Joe's share of tax on joint return household, or married filing separately.
($6,476 ×  88%) ........ . $ 5,699about the substantial presence test, see Publi-
2008 joint return and 2009 separate re-cation 519.
turns. If you plan to file a separate return for
2009, but you filed a joint return for 2008, your How To Figure EstimatedMarried taxpayers. To figure whether you 2008 tax is your share of the tax on the joint Taxmust pay estimated tax, apply the rules dis- return. You file a separate return if you file ascussed here to your separate estimated income. single, head of household, or married filing sep- To figure your estimated tax, you must figureIf you can make joint estimated tax payments, arately. your expected adjusted gross income (AGI),you can apply these rules on a joint basis. To figure your share of the tax on the joint tax-able income, taxes, deductions, and creditsYou and your spouse can make joint esti- return, first figure the tax both you and your for the year.mated tax payments even if you are not living spouse would have paid had you filed separate When figuring your 2009 estimated tax, ittogether. returns for 2008 using the same filing status as may be helpful to use your income, deductions,
However, you and your spouse cannot make for 2009. Then multiply the tax on the joint return and credits for 2008 as a starting point. Use your
joint estimated tax payments if: by the following fraction. 2008 federal tax return as a guide. You can use
Page 40 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 43 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040-ES to figure your estimated tax. must make your first payment by the due date Estimated Tax Payments
Nonresident aliens use Form 1040-ES (NR) to for that period. You can pay your entire esti- Not Required
figure estimated tax. mated tax by the due date for that period or you
You must make adjustments both for can pay it in installments by the due date for that You do not have to pay estimated tax if your
changes in your own situation and for recent period and the due dates for the remaining peri- withholding in each payment period is at least as
changes in the tax law. For 2009, there are ods. The following chart shows when to make much as:
several changes in the law. For a discussion of installment payments. • One-fourth of your required annual pay-these changes, see Publication 553, Highlights ment, orIf you first haveof 2008 Tax Changes, or visit the IRS website at income on which Make a Make laterwww.irs.gov. • Your required annualized income install-you must pay payment installments
Form 1040-ES includes a worksheet to help ment for that period.estimated tax: by:* by:*
you figure your estimated tax. Keep the work- You also do not have to pay estimated tax if youBefore April 1 April 15 June 15sheet for your records. Sept. 15 will pay enough through withholding to keep theFor more complete information and exam- Jan. 15 next year amount you owe with your return under $1,000.ples of how to figure your estimated tax for 2009,
April 1 ± May 31 June 15 Sept. 15see chapter 2 of Publication 505.
Jan. 15 next year How To Pay Estimated Tax
June 1 ± Aug. 31 Sept. 15 Jan. 15 next yearWhen To Pay Estimated There are five ways to pay estimated tax.
After Aug. 31 Jan. 15 (None)Tax • Credit an overpayment on your 2008 re-next year
turn to your 2009 estimated tax.For estimated tax purposes, the year is divided *See January payment and Saturday, Sunday,
into four payment periods. Each period has a holiday rule under When To Pay Estimated • Send in your payment (check or money
Tax, earlier.specific payment due date. If you do not pay order) with a payment voucher from Form
enough tax by the due date of each of the pay- 1040-ES.
ment periods, you may be charged a penalty • Pay electronically using the ElectronicHow much to pay to avoid a penalty. Toeven if you are due a refund when you file your Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS).determine how much you should pay by eachincome tax return. The following chart gives the payment due date, see How To Figure Eachpayment periods and due dates for estimated • Pay by electronic funds withdrawal if youPayment, next. If the earlier discussion of Notax payments. are filing Form 1040 or Form 1040A elec-income subject to estimated tax during first pe- tronically.riod or the later discussion of Change in esti- For the period:  Due date: • Pay by credit card using a pay-by-phonemated tax applies to you, you may need to read
system or the Internet.Annualized Income Installment Method in chap-Jan. 1* ± March 31 ...... . April 15
ter 2 of Publication 505 for information on how toApril 1 ± May 31 ........ . June 15
avoid a penalty.June 1 ± August 31 ..... . Sept. 15 Credit an Overpayment
Sept. 1± Dec. 31 ....... . January 15
next year** If you show an overpayment of tax after complet-How To Figure Each
ing your Form 1040 or Form 1040A for 2008,*If your tax year does not begin on January 1, Payment you can apply part or all of it to your estimatedsee the Form 1040-ES instructions.
tax for 2009. On line 74 of Form 1040, or line 46**See January payment, later. You should pay enough estimated tax by the of Form 1040A, enter the amount you wantdue date of each payment period to avoid a credited to your estimated tax rather than re-Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule. If the due penalty for that period. You can figure your re- funded. The amount you have credited shoulddate for an estimated tax payment falls on a quired payment for each period by using either be taken into account when figuring your esti-Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the payment the regular installment method or the annualized mated tax payments.will be on time if you make it on the next day that income installment method. These methods are The credit will be applied to your payments inis not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. described in chapter 2 of Publication 505. If you the order necessary to avoid the penalty fordo not pay enough each payment period, youJanuary payment. If you file your 2009 Form underpayment of estimated tax. You cannotmay be charged a penalty even if you are due a1040 or Form 1040A by February 1, 2010, and have any of that amount refunded to you untilrefund when you file your tax return.pay the rest of the tax you owe, you do not need the close of that tax year. You also cannot use
Underpayment penalty. Under the regularto make the payment due on January 15, 2010. that overpayment in any other way.
method, if your estimated tax payment for any
Fiscal year taxpayers. If your tax year does period is less than one-fourth of your estimated
not start on January 1, see the Form 1040-ES tax, you may be charged a penalty for underpay- Pay by Check or Money Orderinstructions for your payment due dates. ment of estimated tax for that period when you Using the Estimated Tax Paymentfile your tax return. See chapter 4 of Publication Voucher505 for more information.
When To Start Each payment of estimated tax by check orChange in estimated tax. After you make an
money order must be accompanied by a pay-estimated tax payment, changes in your income,You do not have to make estimated tax pay- ment voucher from Form 1040-ES. If you madeadjustments, deductions, credits, or exemptionsments until you have income on which you will estimated tax payments last year and did notmay make it necessary for you to refigure yourowe the tax. If you have income subject to esti- use a paid preparer to file your return, youestimated tax. Pay the unpaid balance of yourmated tax during the first payment period, you should receive a copy of the 2009 Formamended estimated tax by the next paymentmust make your first payment by the due date 1040-ES in the mail. It will contain paymentdue date after the change or in installments byfor the first payment period. You can pay all your vouchers preprinted with your name, address,that date and the due dates for the remainingestimated tax at that time, or you can pay it in and social security number. Using the preprintedpayment periods.installments. If you choose to pay in install- vouchers will speed processing, reduce thements, make your first payment by the due date chance of error, and help save processing costs.for the first payment period. Make your remain-
Use the window envelopes that came withing installment payments by the due dates for
your Form 1040-ES package. If you use yourthe later periods.
own envelopes, make sure you mail your pay-
No income subject to estimated tax during ment vouchers to the address shown in the
first period. If you do not have income subject Form 1040-ES instructions for the place where
to estimated tax until a later payment period, you you live.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 41

Page 44 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you did not pay estimated tax last year, you • Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, • Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distribu-
will have to get Form 1040-ES (see inside back tions;• Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,cover of this publication). Follow the instructions or • Form 1099-G, Certain Government Pay-in the package to make sure you use the vouch- ments;• A form in the 1099 series.ers correctly.
• Form 1099-INT, Interest Income;Do not use the address shown in the
Forms W-2 and W-2G. Always file Form W-2Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruc- • Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income;
with your income tax return. File Form W-2Gtions.
CAUTION
! • Form 1099-OID, Original Issue Discount;with your return only if it shows any federalIf you file a joint return and you are making income tax withheld from your winnings. • Form 1099-Q, Payments From Qualifiedjoint estimated tax payments, enter the names You should get at least two copies of each Education Programs;and social security numbers on the payment form you receive. Attach one copy to the front ofvoucher in the same order as they will appear on • Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen-your federal income tax return. Keep one copythe joint return. sions, Annuities, Retirement orfor your records. You also should receive copies Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insuranceto file with your state and local returns.Change of address. You must notify the IRS Contracts, etc.;
if you are making estimated tax payments and
• Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefityou changed your address during the year.
Form W-2 Statement; andSend a clear and concise written statement to
the Internal Revenue Service Center where you • Form RRB-1099, Payments by the Rail-Your employer is required to provide or sendfiled your last return and provide all of the follow- road Retirement Board.Form W-2 to you no later than February 2, 2009.ing. You should receive a separate Form W-2 from
If you received the types of income reported• Your full name (and spouse's full name). each employer you worked for.
on some forms in the 1099 series, you may notIf you stopped working before the end of the• Your signature (and spouse's signature). be able to use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.year, your employer could have given you your
See the instructions to these forms for details.• Your old address (and spouse's old ad- Form W-2 at any time after you stopped working.
dress if different). However, your employer must provide or send it
Form 1099-R. Attach Form 1099-R to yourto you by February 2, 2009.• Your new address. return if box 4 shows federal income tax with-If you ask for the form, your employer must
• Your social security number (and spouse's held. Include the amount withheld in the total onsend it to you within 30 days after receiving your
social security number). line 62 of Form 1040 or line 38 of Form 1040A.written request or within 30 days after your final
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if you receivedwage payment, whichever is later.You can use Form 8822, Change of Address, for payments reported on Form 1099-R.If you have not received your Form W-2 onthis purpose. time, you should ask your employer for it. If you
do not receive it by February 15, call the IRS. Backup withholding. If you were subject toPay Electronically Form W-2 shows your total pay and other backup withholding on income you received dur-
compensation and the income tax, social secur- ing 2008, include the amount withheld, asIf you want to make estimated payments by
ity tax, and Medicare tax that was withheld dur- shown in box 4 of your Form 1099, in the total onusing EFTPS, by electronic funds withdrawal, or
ing the year. Include the federal income tax line 62 of Form 1040, line 38 of Form 1040A, orby credit card, see the Form 1040-ES instruc-
withheld (as shown on Form W-2) on: line 7 of Form 1040EZ.tions or How To Pay Estimated Tax in chapter 2
of Publication 505. • Line 62 if you file Form 1040,
• Line 38 if you file Form 1040A, or Form Not Correct
• Line 7 if you file Form 1040EZ. If you receive a form with incorrect information
Credit for Withholding on it, you should ask the payer for a correctedIn addition, Form W-2 is used to report any
form. Call the telephone number or write to thetaxable sick pay you received and any income
and Estimated Tax address given for the payer on the form. Thetax withheld from your sick pay.
corrected Form W-2G or Form 1099 you receive
When you file your 2008 income tax return, take will have an ªXº in the ªCORRECTEDº box at theForm W-2Gcredit for all the income tax and excess social top of the form. A special form, Form W-2c,
security or railroad retirement tax withheld from Corrected Wage and Tax Statement, is used toIf you had gambling winnings in 2008, the payer
your salary, wages, pensions, etc. Also, take correct a Form W-2.may have withheld income tax. If tax was with-
credit for the estimated tax you paid for 2008. held, the payer will give you a Form W-2G show-
These credits are subtracted from your tax. You ing the amount you won and the amount of tax
should file a return and claim these credits, even withheld. Form Received After Filing
if you do not owe tax. Report the amounts you won on line 21 of
If you file your return and you later receive aForm 1040. Take credit for the tax withheld onTwo or more employers. If you had two or form for income that you did not include on yourline 62 of Form 1040. If you had gambling win-more employers and were paid wages of more return, you should report the income and takenings, you must use Form 1040; you cannot usethan $102,000 during 2008, too much social credit for any income tax withheld by filing FormForm 1040A or Form 1040EZ.security or tier 1 railroad retirement tax may 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
have been withheld from your wages. You may Return.
be able to claim the excess as a credit against The 1099 Seriesyour income tax when you file your return. See
Credit for Excess Social Security Tax or Rail- Most forms in the 1099 series are not filed with Separate Returnsroad Retirement Tax Withheld in chapter 37. your return. In general, you should be sent these
If you are married but file a separate return, youforms by February 2, 2009. Unless instructed to
can take credit only for the tax withheld fromfile any of these forms with your return, keepWithholding your own income. Do not include any amountthem for your records. There are several differ-
withheld from your spouse's income. However,If you had income tax withheld during 2008, you ent forms in this series, including:
different rules may apply if you live in a commu-should be sent a statement by February 2, 2009, • Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and nity property state.showing your income and the tax withheld. De- Barter Exchange Transactions; Community property states are listed inpending on the source of your income, you will
chapter 2. For more information on these rules,receive: • Form 1099-C, Cancellation of Debt;
Page 42 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 45 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and some exceptions, see Publication 555, If you made joint estimated tax payments, Generally, you will not have to pay a penalty
Community Property. you must decide how to divide the payments for 2008 if any of the following situations applies.
between your returns. One of you can claim all • The total of your withholding and esti-of the estimated tax paid and the other none, or mated tax payments was at least as muchyou can divide it in any other way you agree on.Fiscal Years as your 2007 tax (or 110% of your 2007If you cannot agree, you must divide the pay- tax if your AGI was more than $150,000,If you file your tax return on the basis of a fiscal ments in proportion to each spouse's individual $75,000 if your 2008 filing status is mar-year (a 12-month period ending on the last day tax as shown on your separate returns for 2008. ried filing separately) and you paid all re-of any month except December), you must fol- quired estimated tax payments on time.low special rules to determine your credit for
federal income tax withholding. For a discussion • The tax balance due on your return is noDivorced Taxpayers
of how to take credit for withholding on a fiscal more than 10% of your total 2008 tax, and
year return, see Fiscal Years (FY) in chapter 3 of If you made joint estimated tax payments for you paid all required estimated tax pay-
Publication 505. 2008, and you were divorced during the year, ments on time.
either you or your former spouse can claim all of • Your total 2008 tax minus your withholdingthe joint payments, or you each can claim part ofEstimated Tax is less than $1,000.them. If you cannot agree on how to divide the
payments, you must divide them in proportion to • You did not have a tax liability for 2007.Take credit for all your estimated tax payments each spouse's individual tax as shown on yourfor 2008 on line 63 of Form 1040 or line 39 of • You did not have any withholding taxesseparate returns for 2008.Form 1040A. Include any overpayment from and your current year tax less any house-If you claim any of the joint payments on your2007 that you had credited to your 2008 esti- hold employment taxes is less thantax return, enter your former spouse's socialmated tax. You must use Form 1040 or Form $1,000.security number (SSN) in the space provided on1040A if you paid estimated tax. You cannot use the front of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you Special rules apply if you are a farmer or fisher-Form 1040EZ. divorced and remarried in 2008, enter your pres- man. See Farmers and Fishermen in chapter 4
Name changed. If you changed your name, ent spouse's SSN in that space and write your of Publication 505 for more information.
and you made estimated tax payments using former spouse's SSN, followed by ªDIV,º to the
your old name, attach a brief statement to the left of Form 1040, line 63, or Form 1040A, line IRS can figure the penalty for you. If you
front of your tax return indicating: 39. think you owe the penalty but you do not want to
figure it yourself when you file your tax return,• When you made the payments,
you may not have to. Generally, the IRS will
• The amount of each payment, figure the penalty for you and send you a bill.
However, if you think you are able to lower or• The IRS address to which you sent the Underpayment Penalty
eliminate your penalty, you must complete Formpayments,
2210 or Form 2210-F and attach it to your return.If you did not pay enough tax, either through• Your name when you made the payments, See chapter 4 of Publication 505.withholding or by making estimated tax pay-and ments, you will have an underpayment of esti-
• Your social security number. mated tax and you may have to pay a penalty.
The statement should cover payments you
made jointly with your spouse as well as any you
made separately.
Separate Returns
If you and your spouse made separate esti-
mated tax payments for 2008 and you file sepa-
rate returns, you can take credit only for your
own payments.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 43

Page 46 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Two.
The eight chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income. They explainIncome which income is and is not taxed. See Part Three for information on gains and
losses you report on Schedule D (Form 1040) and for information on selling
your home.
The chapter explains what income is included Miscellaneousin the employee's gross income and what is not
Compensationincluded.
5.
This section discusses different types of em-Useful Items ployee compensation.
You may want to see:
Advance commissions and other earnings.
Wages, Salaries, If you receive advance commissions or otherPublication
amounts for services to be performed in the❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car future and you are a cash-method taxpayer, youand Other Expenses must include these amounts in your income in
the year you receive them.❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care
If you repay unearned commissions or otherEarnings Expenses
amounts in the same year you receive them,❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax reduce the amount included in your income by
the repayment. If you repay them in a later tax❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-What's New ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),
or you may be able to take a credit for that year.Disaster relief provision. The Heartland Dis- See Repayments in chapter 12.aster Tax Relief Act of 2008 provides tax relief to Employeepersons affected by the severe storms, torna- Allowances and reimbursements. If you re-
does, and flooding occurring in the Midwestern ceive travel, transportation, or other businessCompensationdisaster areas. For details, see Publication expense allowances or reimbursements from
4492-B, Information for Affected Taxpayers in your employer, see Publication 463. If you areThis section discusses various types of em-the Midwestern Disaster Areas. reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-ployee compensation including fringe benefits, tion 521, Moving Expenses.retirement plan contributions, stock options, and
restricted property. Back pay awards. Include in income amounts
you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for
Reminder back pay. These include payments made to youForm W-2. If you are an employee, you should
for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,receive Form W-2 from your employer showing
and unpaid health insurance premiums. TheyForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or the pay you received for your services. Include
should be reported to you by your employer onresident alien, you must report income from your pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A,
Form W-2.sources outside the United States (foreign in- or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not
come) on your tax return unless it is exempt by receive a Form W-2. Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awardsU.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside If you performed services, other than as an you receive for outstanding work are included inor outside the United States and whether or not independent contractor, and your employer did your income and should be shown on your Formyou receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- not withhold social security and Medicare taxes W-2. These include prizes such as vacation tripsment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This from your pay, you must file Form 8919, Uncol- for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award youapplies to earned income (such as wages and lected Social Security and Medicare Tax on receive is goods or services, you must includetips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- the fair market value of the goods or services inWages, with your Form 1040. These wagesest, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, your income. However, if your employer merelymust be included on line 7 of Form 1040. Seeand royalties). promises to pay you a bonus or award at someForm 8919 for more information.If you reside outside the United States, you future time, it is not taxable until you receive it or
may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign it is made available to you.Childcare providers. If you provide childcare,source earned income. For details, see Publica- either in the child's home or in your home or Employee achievement award. If you re-tion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi- other place of business, the pay you receive ceive tangible personal property (other thandent Aliens Abroad. must be included in your income. If you are not cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as
an employee, you are probably self-employed an award for length of service or safety achieve-
ment, you generally can exclude its value fromand must include payments for your services on
your income. However, the amount you can ex-Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From
Introduction clude is limited to your employer's cost andBusiness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net
cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardsProfit From Business. You generally are not anThis chapter discusses compensation received that are not qualified plan awards) for all suchemployee unless you are subject to the will andfor services as an employee, such as wages, awards you receive during the year. Your em-control of the person who employs you as tosalaries, and fringe benefits. The following top- ployer can tell you whether your award is awhat you are to do and how you are to do it.ics are included. qualified plan award. Your employer must make
Babysitting. If you babysit for relatives or• Bonuses and awards. the award as part of a meaningful presentation,
neighborhood children, whether on a regular under conditions and circumstances that do not• Special rules for certain employees. basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare create a significant likelihood of it being dis-
• Sickness and injury benefits. providers apply to you. guised pay.
Page 44 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 47 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
However, the exclusion does not apply to the services, you must include the fair market value Medicare taxes and your social security and
following awards. (usually the discount value) of the note in your Medicare benefits. However, these payments
income for the year you receive it. When you are not treated as social security and Medicare• A length-of-service award if you received it later receive payments on the note, a propor- wages if you are a household worker or a farmfor less than 5 years of service or if you tionate part of each payment is the recovery of worker.received another length-of-service award the fair market value that you previously in-during the year or the previous 4 years. Stock appreciation rights. Do not include acluded in your income. Do not include that part
stock appreciation right granted by your em-• A safety achievement award if you are a again in your income. Include the rest of the
ployer in income until you exercise (use) themanager, administrator, clerical employee, payment in your income in the year of payment.
or other professional employee or if more right. When you use the right, you are entitled toIf your employer gives you a nonnegotiable
than 10% of eligible employees previously unsecured note as payment for your services, a cash payment equal to the fair market value of
received safety achievement awards dur- payments on the note that are credited toward the corporation's stock on the date of use minus
ing the year. the principal amount of the note are compensa- the fair market value on the date the right was
tion income when you receive them. granted. You include the cash payment in your
income in the year you use the right.Example. Ben Green received three em- Severance pay. You must include in incomeployee achievement awards during the year: a amounts you receive as severance pay and anynonqualified plan award of a watch valued at Fringe Benefitspayment for the cancellation of your employ-$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereo ment contract. Fringe benefits received in connection with thevalued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued at
Accrued leave payment. If you are a fed- performance of your services are included in$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-
eral employee and receive a lump-sum payment your income as compensation unless you payfied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each
for accrued annual leave when you retire or fair market value for them or they are specificallyaward by itself would be excluded from income.
resign, this amount will be included as wages on excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-However, because the $1,750 total value of the
your Form W-2. ance of services (for example, under a covenantawards is more than $1,600, Ben must include
If you resign from one agency and are reem- not to compete) is treated as the performance of$150 ($1,750 ± $1,600) in his income.
ployed by another agency, you may have to services for purposes of these rules.
Government cost-of-living allowances. repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-
Cost-of-living allowances generally are included ment to the second agency. You can reduce Accounting period. You must use the same
in your income. However, they are not included gross wages by the amount you repaid in the accounting period your employer uses to report
in your income if you are a federal civilian em- same tax year in which you received it. Attach to your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-
ployee or a federal court employee who is sta- your tax return a copy of the receipt or statement ployer has the option to report taxable noncash
tioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United given to you by the agency you repaid to explain fringe benefits by using either of the following
States. the difference between the wages on the return rules.
Allowances and differentials that increase and the wages on your Forms W-2. • The general rule: benefits are reported foryour basic pay as an incentive for taking a less
Outplacement services. If you choose to a full calendar year (January 1±Decemberdesirable post of duty are part of your compen-
accept a reduced amount of severance pay so 31).sation and must be included in income. For
that you can receive outplacement servicesexample, your compensation includes Foreign • The special accounting period rule: bene-(such as training in rÂesumÂe writing and interviewPost, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropical fits provided during the last 2 months oftechniques), you must include the unreduceddifferentials. For more information, see Publica- the calendar year (or any shorter period)amount of the severance pay in income.tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees are treated as paid during the followingHowever, you can deduct the value of theseStationed Abroad. calendar year. For example, each yearoutplacement services (up to the difference be- your employer reports the value of bene-Nonqualified deferred compensation plans. tween the severance pay included in income fits provided during the last 2 months ofYour employer will report to you the total amount and the amount actually received) as a miscella- the prior year and the first 10 months ofof deferrals for the year under a nonqualified neous deduction (subject to the the current year.deferred compensation plan. This amount is 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income (AGI) limit) on
shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. This Schedule A (Form 1040).
amount is not included in your income. Your employer does not have to use the same
Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employerHowever, if at any time during the tax year, accounting period for each fringe benefit, but
while you are sick or injured is part of your salarythe plan fails to meet certain requirements, or is must use the same period for all employees who
or wages. In addition, you must include in yournot operated under those requirements, all receive a particular benefit.
income sick pay benefits received from any ofamounts deferred under the plan for the tax year You must use the same accounting periodthe following payers.and all preceding tax years are included in your that you use to report the benefit to claim anincome for the current year. This amount is in- • A welfare fund. employee business deduction (for use of a car,cluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, box for example).• A state sickness or disability fund.1. It also is shown on Form W-2, box 12, using
code Z. • An association of employers or employ- Form W-2. Your employer reports your tax-For information on the requirements and the ees. able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, otheramount to include in income, see Internal Reve- compensation) of Form W-2. The total value of• An insurance company, if your employernue Code section 409A and Notice 2005-1. The your fringe benefits also may be noted in box 14.paid for the plan.notice is on page 274 of Internal Revenue Bulle- The value of your fringe benefits may be addedtin 2005-2 available at www.irs.gov/irb/ However, if you paid the premiums on an acci- to your other compensation on one Form W-2, or2005-02_IRB/ar13.html. dent or health insurance policy, the benefits you you may receive a separate Form W-2 showing
receive under the policy are not taxable. For just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 withFor tax years beginning after 2008,
more information, see Publication 525. a notation in box 14.portions of Notice 2005-1 are obsolete
and replaced by final regulations is-
CAUTION
!
Social security and Medicare taxes paid bysued under section 409A. For information on the
employer. If you and your employer have anapplicability of the regulations, see the preamble Accident or Health Plan
agreement that your employer pays your socialto Treasury Decision 9321, 2007-19 I.R.B. 1123
Generally, the value of accident or health plansecurity and Medicare taxes without deductingavailable at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-19_IRB/ar07.
coverage provided to you by your employer isthem from your gross wages, you must reporthtml.
not included in your income. Benefits you re-the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages
ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-Note received for services. If your employer on your tax return. The payment also is treated
plained later under Sickness and Injury Benefits.gives you a secured note as payment for your as wages for figuring your social security and
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 45

Page 48 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For information on the items covered in this are treated as guaranteed payments that are Educational Assistance
section, other than Long-term care coverage, includible in the partner's gross income. In both
You can exclude from your income up to $5,250see Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts situations, the partner can deduct the contribu-
of qualified employer-provided educational as-and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. tion made to the partner's HSA.
sistance. For more information, see PublicationContributions by an S corporation to a 2%Long-term care coverage. Contributions by 970, Tax Benefits for Education.shareholder-employee's HSA for services ren-your employer to provide coverage for long-term
dered are treated as guaranteed payments andcare services generally are not included in your
are includible in the shareholder-employee'sincome. However, contributions made through a Employer-Provided Vehiclesgross income. The shareholder-employee canflexible spending or similar arrangement (such
deduct the contribution made to the share-as a cafeteria plan) must be included in your If your employer provides a car (or other high-
holder-employee's HSA.income. This amount will be reported as wages way motor vehicle) to you, your personal use of
in box 1 of your Form W-2. the car is usually a taxable noncash fringe bene-Qualified HSA funding distribution. YouContributions you make to the plan are dis- fit.can make a one-time distribution from your indi-cussed in Publication 502, Medical and Dental Your employer must determine the actualvidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA andExpenses. value of this fringe benefit to include in youryou generally will not include any of the distribu-
income. For more information, see Publicationtion in your income. See Publication 590 for theArcher MSA contributions.  Contributions by 525.your employer to your Archer MSA generally are requirements for these qualified HSA funding
not included in your income. Their total will be distributions. Certain employer-provided transporta-
reported in box 12 of Form W-2 with code R. You tion can be excluded from gross in-Failure to maintain eligibility. If your HSAmust report this amount on Form 8853, Archer come. See the discussion on
TIPreceived qualified HSA distributions from aMSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance Con- Transportation, later.health FSA or HRA (discussed earlier) or a qual-tracts. File the form with your return. ified HSA funding distribution, you must be anIf your employer does not make contributions
eligible individual for HSA purposes for the pe-to your MSA, you can make your own contribu- Group-Term Life Insuranceriod beginning with the month in which the quali-tions to your MSA. These contributions are dis-
fied distribution was made and ending on thecussed in Publication 969. Also, see Form 8853. Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 oflast day of the 12th month following that month. group-term life insurance coverage provided toHealth flexible spending arrangement If you fail to be an eligible individual during this you by your employer (or former employer) is not(health FSA). If your employer provides a period, other than because of death or disability, included in your income. However, you musthealth FSA that qualifies as an accident or you must include the distribution in your income include in income the cost of employer-providedhealth plan, the amount of your salary reduction, for the tax year in which you become ineligible. insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000and reimbursements of your medical care ex- This income is also subject to an additional 10% of coverage reduced by any amount you paypenses and those of your spouse and depen- tax. toward the purchase of the insurance.dents, generally are not included in your income.
For exceptions, see Entire cost excluded ,
Qualified HSA distribution. A health FSA and Entire cost taxed, later.Adoption Assistancecan make a qualified HSA distribution. This dis- If your employer provided more than $50,000tribution is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee of coverage, the amount included in your in-You may be able to exclude from your incomeby your employer. Generally, the distribution is come is reported as part of your wages in box 1amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-not included in your income and is not deducti- of your Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately inployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-ble. See Publication 969 for the requirements for box 12 with code C.nection with your adoption of an eligible child.these qualified HSA distributions.
See the Instructions for Form 8839 for more Group-term life insurance. This insurance isHealth reimbursement arrangement (HRA). information. term life insurance protection (insurance for aIf your employer provides an HRA that qualifies  Adoption benefits are reported by your em- fixed period of time) that:as an accident or health plan, coverage and ployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. Theyreimbursements of your medical care expenses • Provides a general death benefit,also are included as social security and Medi-and those of your spouse and dependents gen- care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they are • Is provided to a group of employees,erally are not included in your income. not included as wages in box 1. To determine • Is provided under a policy carried by theQualified HSA distribution. An HRA can the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must employer, andmake a qualified HSA distribution. This distribu- complete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-
tion is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee by tion Expenses. File the form with your return. • Provides an amount of insurance to each
your employer. Generally, the distribution is not employee based on a formula that pre-
included in your income and is not deductible. vents individual selection.
See Publication 969 for the requirements for De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
these qualified HSA distributions. Permanent benefits. If your group-term life
If your employer provides you with a product or insurance policy includes permanent benefits,Health savings accounts (HSA). If you are service and the cost of it is so small that it would such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, youan eligible individual, you and any other person, be unreasonable for the employer to account for must include in your income, as wages, the costincluding your employer or a family member, it, the value is not included in your income. of the permanent benefits minus the amount youcan make contributions to your HSA. Contribu- Generally, the value of benefits such as dis- pay for them. Your employer should be able totions, other than employer contributions, are de- counts at company cafeterias, cab fares home tell you the amount to include in your income.ductible on your return whether or not you when working overtime, and company picnicsitemize deductions. Contributions made by your Accidental death benefits. Insurance thatare not included in your income.employer are not included in your income. Distri- provides accidental or other death benefits but
butions from your HSA that are used to pay does not provide general death benefits (travelHoliday gifts. If your employer gives you aqualified medical expenses are not included in insurance, for example) is not group-term lifeturkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atyour income. Distributions not used for qualified insurance.
Christmas or other holidays, do not include themedical expenses are included in your income.
value of the gift in your income. However, if yourContributions by a partnership to a bona fide Former employer. If your former employer
employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or apartner's HSA are not contributions by an em- provided more than $50,000 of group-term life
similar item that you can easily exchange forployer. The contributions are treated as a distri- insurance coverage during the year, the amount
cash, you include the value of that gift as extrabution of money and are not included in the included in your income is reported as wages in
salary or wages regardless of the amount in-partner's gross income. Contributions by a part- box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately
volved.nership to a partner's HSA for services rendered in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show the
Page 46 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 49 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount of uncollected social security and Medi- a. You retired before January 2, 1984, andWorksheet 5-1. Figuring the Cost of
were covered by the plan when you re-care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes Group-Term Life Insurance to
tired, orM and N. You must pay these taxes with your Include in IncomeÐIllustrated
income tax return. Include them in your total tax b. You reached age 55 before January 2,
on line 61, Form 1040, and enter ªUTº and the 1984, and were employed by the em-1. Enter the total amount of youramount of the taxes on the dotted line next to ployer or its predecessor in 1983.insurance coverage from yourline 61. employer(s) .......... . 1. 80,000
2. Limit on exclusion for
Two or more employers. Your exclusion for employer-provided Entire cost taxed. You are taxed on the entire
group-term life insurance cost of group-term life insurance if either of theemployer-provided group-term life insurance
coverage ............ . 2. 50,000 following circumstances apply.coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. 30,000coverage, whether the insurance is provided by • The insurance is provided by your em-4. Divide line 3 by $1,000.a single employer or multiple employers. If two ployer through a qualified employees'Figure to the nearest tenth 4. 30.0or more employers provide insurance coverage trust, such as a pension trust or a qualified5. Go to Table 5-1. Using yourthat totals more than $50,000, the amounts re- annuity plan.age on the last day of the taxported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not be year, find your age group in • You are a key employee and your em-correct. You must figure how much to include in the left column, and enter the ployer's plan discriminates in favor of keyyour income. Reduce the amount you figure by cost from the column on the employees.any amount reported with code C in box 12 of right for your age group .. . 5. .23
your Forms W-2, add the result to the wages 6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ... . 6. 6.90
reported in box 1, and report the total on your Retirement Planning Services7. Enter the number of full
return. months of coverage at this
If your employer has a qualified retirement plan,cost. ............... . 7. 12
qualified retirement planning services provided8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 ... . 8. 82.80Figuring the taxable cost. Use the following to you (and your spouse) by your employer are9. Enter the premiumsworksheet to figure the amount to include in your not included in your income. Qualified servicesyou paid per month 9. 4.15income. include retirement planning advice, information10. Enter the number of
about your employer's retirement plan, and in-months you paid
formation about how the plan may fit into yourthe premiums ... . 10. 12Worksheet 5-1. Figuring the Cost of overall individual retirement income plan. You11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. .. . 11. 49.80
Group-Term Life Insurance To cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,12. Subtract line 11 from line 8.
accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-Include in Income Include this amount in your
vided by your employer.income as wages ...... . 12. 33.00
1. Enter the total amount of your
insurance coverage from your Table 5-1. Cost of $1,000 of Transportationemployer(s) .......... . 1. Group-Term Life Insurance for One2. Limit on exclusion for If your employer provides you with a qualifiedMonthemployer-provided transportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedgroup-term life insurance from your income, up to certain limits. A qualifiedAge Costcoverage ............ . 2. 50,000 transportation fringe benefit is:Under 25 ................. . $ .053. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. 25 through 29 .............. . .06 • Transportation in a commuter highway ve-4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. 30 through 34 .............. . .08 hicle (such as a van) between your homeFigure to the nearest tenth 4. 35 through 39 .............. . .09 and work place,5. Go to Table 5-1. Using your 40 through 44 .............. . .10age on the last day of the tax 45 through 49 .............. . .15 • A transit pass, oryear, find your age group in 50 through 54 .............. . .23the left column, and enter the • Qualified parking.55 through 59 .............. . .43cost from the column on the 60 through 64 .............. . .66 Cash reimbursement by your employer for theseright for your age group .. . 5. 65 through 69 .............. . 1.27 expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ... . 6. 70 and older ............... . 2.06 rangement also is excludable. However, cash7. Enter the number of full reimbursement for a transit pass is excludablemonths of coverage at this only if a voucher or similar item that can becost. ............... . 7.
exchanged only for a transit pass is not readily8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 ... . 8. Entire cost excluded. You are not taxed on available for direct distribution to you.9. Enter the premiums the cost of group-term life insurance if any of the
you paid per month 9. following circumstances apply. Exclusion limit. The exclusion for commuter10. Enter the number of highway vehicle transportation and transit passmonths you paid 1. You are permanently and totally disabled fringe benefits cannot be more than a total ofthe premiums ... . 10. and have ended your employment. $115 a month.11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. .. . 11.
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-12. Subtract line 11 from line 8.
benefit cannot be more than $220 a month.icy for the entire period the insurance is inInclude this amount in your
If the benefits have a value that is more thanincome as wages ...... . 12. force during the tax year.
these limits, the excess must be included in your
3. A charitable organization (defined in chap- income.
ter 24) to which contributions are deducti-
Example. You are 51 years old and work for ble is the only beneficiary of the policy for Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high-employers A and B. Both employers provide the entire period the insurance is in force way vehicle that seats at least six adults (notgroup-term life insurance coverage for you for during the tax year. (You are not entitled to including the driver). At least 80% of the vehi-the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with a deduction for a charitable contribution for cle's mileage must reasonably be expected toemployer A and $45,000 with employer B. You naming a charitable organization as the be:pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em- beneficiary of your policy.)ployer B group plan. You figure the amount to • For transporting employees between their
include in your income as follows. 4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and homes and work place, and
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 47

Page 50 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• On trips during which employees occupy 5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans). vested. (You can choose to include the value of
at least half of the vehicle's adult seating the property in your income in the year it is6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans.capacity (not including the driver). transferred to you.) For more information, see
7. Section 457 plans. Restricted Property in Publication 525. 
Transit pass. This is any pass, token, fare- Dividends received on restricted stock.Qualified automatic contribution arrange-card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person Dividends you receive on restricted stock arements. Under a qualified automatic contribu-to ride mass transit (whether public or private) treated as compensation and not as dividendtion arrangement, your employer can treat youfree or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter income. Your employer should include theseas having elected to have a part of your compen-highway vehicle operated by a person in the payments on your Form W-2.sation contributed to a section 401(k) plan.business of transporting persons for compensa- Before each plan year, your employer must give Stock you chose to include in income.tion. you a written notice of your rights under the Dividends you receive on restricted stock you
arrangement. You can elect to change the chose to include in your income in the yearQualified parking. This is parking provided to amount of the contributions or elect out of the transferred are treated the same as any otheran employee at or near the employer's place of
arrangement. dividends. Report them on your return as divi-business. It also includes parking provided on or
dends. For a discussion of dividends, see chap-near a location from which the employee com- Overall limit on deferrals. For 2008, you ter 8.mutes to work by mass transit, in a commuter generally should not have deferred more than a   For information on how to treat dividendshighway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in- total of $15,500 of contributions to the plans reported on both your Form W-2 and Formclude parking at or near the employee's home. listed in (1) through (3) and (5) above. The limit 1099-DIV, see Dividends received on restrictedfor SIMPLE plans is $10,500. The limit for sec- stock in Publication 525.tion 501(c)(18)(D) plans is the lesser of $7,000Retirement Plan
or 25% of your compensation. The limit for sec-
Contributions tion 457 plans is the lesser of your includible
compensation or $15,500.Your employer's contributions to a qualified re- Special Rules forDesignated Roth contributions. Employ-tirement plan for you are not included in income
ers with section 401(k) and section 403(b) plansat the time contributed. (Your employer can tell Certain Employees
can create qualified Roth contribution programsyou whether your retirement plan is qualified.)
so that you may elect to have part or all of yourHowever, the cost of life insurance coverage This section deals with special rules for people
elective deferrals to the plan designated as af-included in the plan may have to be included. in certain types of employment: members of the
See Group-Term Life Insurance,  earlier, under ter-tax Roth contributions. Designated Roth clergy, members of religious orders, people
Fringe Benefits. contributions are treated as elective deferrals, working for foreign employers, military person-
If your employer pays into a nonqualified except that they are included in income. nel, and volunteers.
plan for you, you generally must include the Excess deferrals. Your employer or plancontributions in your income as wages for the administrator should apply the proper annual Clergytax year in which the contributions are made. limit when figuring your plan contributions. How-However, if your interest in the plan is not trans- ever, you are responsible for monitoring the total If you are a member of the clergy, you mustferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei- you defer to ensure that the deferrals are not include in your income offerings and fees youture (you have a good chance of losing it) at the more than the overall limit. receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,time of the contribution, you do not have to masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If theIf you set aside more than the limit, the ex-include the value of your interest in your income offering is made to the religious institution, it iscess generally must be included in your incomeuntil it is transferable or is no longer subject to a not taxable to you.for that year, unless you have an excess deferralsubstantial risk of forfeiture.    If you are a member of a religious organiza-of a designated Roth contribution. See Publica-
For information on distributions from tion and you give your outside earnings to thetion 525 for a discussion of the tax treatment of
retirement plans, see Publication 575, organization, you still must include the earningsexcess deferrals.
Pension and Annuity Income (or Publi- in your income. However, you may be entitled to
TIPCatch-up contributions. You may be al-cation 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Re- a charitable contribution deduction for thelowed catch-up contributions (additional electivetirement Benefits, if you are a federal employee amount paid to the organization. See chapterdeferral) if you are age 50 or older by the end ofor retiree). 24.your tax year.
Pension. A pension or retirement pay for aElective deferrals. If you are covered by cer- member of the clergy is usually treated as anytain kinds of retirement plans, you can choose to Stock Options other pension or annuity. It must be reported onhave part of your compensation contributed by lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12aIf you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or sellyour employer to a retirement fund, rather than and 12b of Form 1040A.stock or other property as payment for yourhave it paid to you. The amount you set aside
services, you usually will have income when you(called an elective deferral) is treated as an Housing.  Special rules for housing apply toreceive the option, when you exercise the optionemployer contribution to a qualified plan. An members of the clergy. Under these rules, you(use it to buy or sell the stock or other property),elective deferral, other than a designated Roth do not include in your income the rental value ofor when you sell or otherwise dispose of thecontribution (discussed later), is not included in a home (including utilities) or a designated hous-option. However, if your option is a statutorywages subject to income tax at the time contrib- ing allowance provided to you as part of yourstock option, you will not have any income untiluted. However, it is included in wages subject to pay. However, the exclusion cannot be moreyou sell or exchange your stock. Your employersocial security and Medicare taxes. than the reasonable pay for your service. If youcan tell you which kind of option you hold. ForElective deferrals include elective contribu- pay for the utilities, you can exclude any allow-more information, see Publication 525.tions to the following retirement plans. ance designated for utility cost, up to your actual
cost. The home or allowance must be provided1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section as compensation for your services as an or-Restricted Property401(k) plans). dained, licensed, or commissioned minister.
Generally, if you receive property for your serv- However, you must include the rental value of2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ-
ices, you must include its fair market value in the home or the housing allowance as earningsees.
your income in the year you receive the prop- from self-employment on Schedule SE (Form3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen- erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop- 1040) if you are subject to the self-employmentsion plans (SARSEP). erty that has certain restrictions that affect its tax. For more information, see Publication 517,
4. Savings incentive match plans for employ- value, you do not include the value of the prop- Social Security and Other Information for Mem-
ees (SIMPLE plans). erty in your income until it has substantially bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Page 48 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 51 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
U.S. citizen. If you are a U.S. citizen who Disability. If you are retired on disability,Members of Religious works in the United States for a foreign govern- see Military and Government Disability Pen-
Orders ment, an international organization, a foreign sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.
embassy, or any foreign employer, you must Veterans' benefits. Do not include in your in-If you are a member of a religious order who has include your salary in your income. come any veterans' benefits paid under any law,taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings
Social security and Medicare taxes. You regulation, or administrative practice adminis-that you renounce and turn over to the order
are exempt from social security and Medicare tered by the Department of Veterans Affairsdepends on whether your services are per-
employee taxes if you are employed in the (VA). The following amounts paid to veterans orformed for the order.
United States by an international organization or their families are not taxable.
a foreign government. However, you must payServices performed for the order. If you are • Education, training, and subsistence al-self-employment tax on your earnings from serv-performing the services as an agent of the order lowances.ices performed in the United States, evenin the exercise of duties required by the order,
though you are not self-employed. This rule also • Disability compensation and pension pay-do not include in your income the amounts
applies if you are an employee of a qualifying ments for disabilities paid either to veter-turned over to the order.
wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov- ans or their families.If your order directs you to perform services ernment.for another agency of the supervising church or • Grants for homes designed for wheelchair
an associated institution, you are considered to living.Employees of international organizations orbe performing the services as an agent of the
foreign governments. Your compensation • Grants for motor vehicles for veterans whoorder. Any wages you earn as an agent of an
for official services to an international organiza- lost their sight or the use of their limbs.order that you turn over to the order are not
tion is exempt from federal income tax if you areincluded in your income. • Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-not a citizen of the United States or you are a dends paid either to veterans or their ben-citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you areExample. You are a member of a church eficiaries, including the proceeds of aa citizen of the United States).order and have taken a vow of poverty. You veteran's endowment policy paid beforeYour compensation for official services to arenounce any claims to your earnings and turn death.foreign government is exempt from federal in-over to the order any salaries or wages you
• Interest on insurance dividends you leavecome tax if all of the following are true.earn. You are a registered nurse, so your order
on deposit with the VA.assigns you to work in a hospital that is an • You are not a citizen of the United Statesassociated institution of the church. However, • Benefits under a dependent-care assis-or you are a citizen of the Philippinesyou remain under the general direction and con- tance program.(whether or not you are a citizen of thetrol of the order. You are considered to be an United States). • The death gratuity paid to a survivor of aagent of the order and any wages you earn at
member of the Armed Forces who died• Your work is like the work done by em-the hospital that you turn over to your order are
after September 10, 2001.ployees of the United States in foreignnot included in your income.
countries. • Payments made under the compensated
Services performed outside the order. If work therapy program.• The foreign government gives an equalyou are directed to work outside the order, your exemption to employees of the United • Any bonus payment by a state or politicalservices are not an exercise of duties required States in its country. subdivision because of service in a com-by the order unless they meet both of the follow-
bat zone.ing requirements. Waiver of alien status. If you are an alien
who works for a foreign government or interna-• They are the kind of services that are ordi-
tional organization and you file a waiver undernarily the duties of members of the order. Volunteers
section 247(b) of the Immigration and National-• They are part of the duties that you must ity Act to keep your immigrant status, different The tax treatment of amounts you receive as aexercise for, or on behalf of, the religious rules may apply. See Foreign Employer in Publi- volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similarorder as its agent. cation 525. agency is covered in the following discussions.
If you are an employee of a third party, the
Peace Corps. Living allowances you receiveservices you perform for the third party will not Employment abroad. For information on the
as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leaderbe considered directed or required of you by the tax treatment of income earned abroad, see
for housing, utilities, household supplies, food,order. Amounts you receive for these services Publication 54.
and clothing are exempt from tax.are included in your income, even if you have
taken a vow of poverty. Taxable allowances. The following al-Military
lowances must be included in your income and
Example. Mark Brown is a member of a reported as wages. Payments you receive as a member of a militaryreligious order and has taken a vow of poverty. service generally are taxed as wages except for • Allowances paid to your spouse and minorHe renounces all claims to his earnings and retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. children while you are a volunteer leaderturns over his earnings to the order. Allowances generally are not taxed. For more training in the United States.Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed information on the tax treatment of military al-
by the superiors of the order to get a job with a • Living allowances designated by the Di-lowances and benefits, see Publication 3,
private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em- rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-Armed Forces' Tax Guide.
ployee of the school, and, at his request, the pensation. These are allowances for
school made the salary payments directly to the personal items such as domestic help,Military retirement pay. If your retirementorder. laundry and clothing maintenance, enter-pay is based on age or length of service, it is
tainment and recreation, transportation,Because Mark is an employee of the school, taxable and must be included in your income as
and other miscellaneous expenses.he is performing services for the school rather a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or
than as an agent of the order. The wages Mark on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not • Leave allowances.earns working for the school are included in his include in your income the amount of any reduc-
• Readjustment allowances or terminationincome. tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a
payments. These are considered receivedsurvivor annuity for your spouse or children
by you when credited to your account.under the Retired Serviceman's Family Protec-Foreign Employer tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.
For more detailed discussion of survivor an-Special rules apply if you work for a foreign Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corps
nuities, see chapter 10.employer. volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustment
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 49

Page 52 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
allowance during his period of service, to be paid You may be entitled to a tax credit if on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. The rules
to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour of you were permanently and totally dis- for reporting pensions are explained in How To
duty. Although the allowance is not available to abled when you retired. For informa- Report in chapter 10.
TIP
him until the end of his service, Gary must in- tion on this credit and the definition of permanent
clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is and total disability, see chapter 33.
credited to his account. Military and GovernmentFor information on disability payments from a
Disability Pensionsgovernmental program provided as a substituteVolunteers in Service to America (VISTA). If for unemployment compensation, see chapteryou are a VISTA volunteer, you must include Certain military and government disability pen-12.meal and lodging allowances paid to you in your sions are not taxable.
income as wages. Disability income. Generally, you must report
as income any amount you receive for personal Service-connected disability. You may beNational Senior Services Corps programs. injury or sickness through an accident or health able to exclude from income amounts you re-Do not include in your income amounts you plan that is paid for by your employer. If both you ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowancereceive for supportive services or reimburse- and your employer pay for the plan, only the for personal injury or sickness resulting fromments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol- amount you receive that is due to your em- active service in one of the following govern-lowing programs. ployer's payments is reported as income. How- ment services.
ever, certain payments may not be taxable to• Retired Senior Volunteer Program • The armed forces of any country.you. Your employer should be able to give you(RSVP).
specific details about your pension plan and tell • The National Oceanic and Atmospheric• Foster Grandparent Program. you the amount you paid for your disability pen- Administration.
sion. In addition to disability pensions and annui-• Senior Companion Program. • The Public Health Service.ties, you may be receiving other payments for
sickness and injury. • The Foreign Service.Service Corps of Retired Executives
Do not report as income any amounts(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support- Conditions for exclusion. Do not includepaid to reimburse you for medical ex-ive services or reimbursements for the disability payments in your income if any ofpenses you incurred after the plan wasout-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not
TIP the following conditions apply.established.include these amounts in income.
1. You were entitled to receive a disabilityCost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost ofVolunteer tax counseling. Do not include in payment before September 25, 1975.a health or accident insurance plan, do not in-your income any reimbursements you receive
clude any amounts you receive from the plan for 2. You were a member of a listed govern-for transportation, meals, and other expenses
personal injury or sickness as income on your ment service or its reserve component, oryou have in training for, or actually providing,
tax return. If your plan reimbursed you for medi- were under a binding written commitmentvolunteer federal income tax counseling for the
cal expenses you deducted in an earlier year, to become a member, on September 24,elderly (TCE).
you may have to include some, or all, of the 1975.You can deduct as a charitable contribution
reimbursement in your income. See Reimburse-your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in 3. You receive the disability payments for ament in a later year in chapter 21.taking part in the volunteer income tax assis- combat-related injury. This is a personaltance (VITA) program. See chapter 24. Cafeteria plans. Generally, if you are covered injury or sickness that
by an accident or health insurance plan throughVolunteer firefighters and emergency medi- a. Results directly from armed conflict,a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur-cal responders. If you are a volunteer ance premiums was not included in your in- b. Takes place while you are engaged infirefighter or emergency medical responder, do come, you are not considered to have paid the extra-hazardous service,not include in your income the following benefits premiums and you must include any benefitsyou receive from a state or local government. c. Takes place under conditions simulat-you receive in your income. If the amount of the
ing war, including training exercises• Rebates or reductions of property or in- premiums was included in your income, you are
such as maneuvers, orcome taxes you receive because of serv- considered to have paid the premiums, and any
ices you performed as a volunteer benefits you receive are not taxable. d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.firefighter or emergency medical re- Retirement and profit-sharing plans. If yousponder. 4. You would be entitled to receive disabilityreceive payments from a retirement or
compensation from the Department of Vet-• Payments you receive because of serv- profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-
erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-ices you performed as a volunteer bility retirement, do not treat the payments as a
tion for it. Your exclusion under thisfirefighter or emergency medical re- disability pension. The payments must be re-
condition is equal to the amount you wouldsponder, up to $30 for each month you ported as a pension or annuity. For more infor-
be entitled to receive from the VA.provided services. mation on pensions, see chapter 10.
The excluded income reduces any related tax or Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa- Pension based on years of service. If youcontribution deduction. bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for receive a disability pension based on years ofaccrued annual leave is a salary payment. The service, you generally must include it in yourpayment is not a disability payment. Include it in income. However, if the pension qualifies for theyour income in the tax year you receive it. exclusion for a service-connected disability (dis-Sickness and Injury How to report. If you retired on disability, you cussed earlier), do not include in income the part
must include in income any disability pension of your pension that you would have received ifBenefits you receive under a plan that is paid for by your the pension had been based on a percentage of
employer. You must report your taxable disabil- disability. You must include the rest of your pen-This section discusses sickness and injury ben- ity payments as wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or sion in your income.efits including disability pensions, long-term Form 1040A, until you reach minimum retire-care insurance contracts, workers' compensa- ment age. Minimum retirement age generally is VA disability benefits. Disability benefits yoution, and other benefits. the age at which you can first receive a pension receive from the VA are not included in your
or annuity if you are not disabled. income. If you are a military retiree and you
Beginning on the day after you reach mini- receive disability benefits from other than theDisability Pensions
mum retirement age, payments you receive are VA, do not include in your income the amount of
Generally, if you retire on disability, you must taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the disability benefits equal to the VA benefits to
report your pension or annuity as income. payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or which you are entitled.
Page 50 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 53 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Retroactive VA determination. If you retire for qualified long-term care services. The con- If part of your workers' compensation
from the armed services based on years of serv- reduces your social security ortract must:
ice and are later given a retroactive serv- equivalent railroad retirement benefits
CAUTION
!• Be guaranteed renewable,ice-connected disability rating by the VA, your received, that part is considered social security
retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex- (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and• Not provide for a cash surrender value or
cluded from income up to the amount of VA may be taxable. For more information, see Pub-other money that can be paid, assigned,
disability benefits you would have been entitled lication 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail-pledged, or borrowed,
to receive. You can claim a refund of any tax road Retirement Benefits.• Provide that refunds, other than refundspaid on the excludable amount (subject to the
on the death of the insured or completestatute of limitations) by filing an amended re- Return to work.   If you return to work aftersurrender or cancellation of the contract,turn on Form 1040X for each previous year qualifying for workers' compensation, salaryand dividends under the contract may beduring the retroactive period. payments you receive for performing light dutiesused only to reduce future premiums orIf you receive a lump-sum disability sever- are taxable as wages.increase future benefits, andance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-
ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severance • Generally not pay or reimburse expenses Other Sickness and Injurybenefit from your income. However, you must incurred for services or items that would
include in your income any lump-sum readjust- Benefitsbe reimbursed under Medicare, except
ment or other nondisability severance payment where Medicare is a secondary payer or In addition to disability pensions and annuities,you received on release from active duty, even if the contract makes per diem or other peri- you may receive other payments for sickness oryou are later given a retroactive disability rating odic payments without regard to ex- injury.by the VA. penses.
Special statute of limitations. Generally, Railroad sick pay.    Payments you receive asunder the statute of limitations a claim for credit sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-Qualified long-term care services. Qualifiedor refund must be filed within 3 years from the surance Act are taxable and you must includelong-term care services are:time a return was filed. However, if you receive a them in your income. However, do not includeretroactive service-connected disability rating • Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera- them in your income if they are for an on-the-jobdetermination, the statute of limitations is ex- peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re- injury.tended by a 1-year period beginning on the date habilitative services, and maintenance and If you received income because of a disabil-of the determination. This 1-year extended pe- personal care services, and ity, see Disability Pensions, earlier.riod applies to claims for credit or refund filed • Required by a chronically ill individual andafter June 17, 2008, and does not apply to any Federal Employees' Compensation Actprovided pursuant to a plan of care astax year that began more than 5 years before the (FECA). Payments received under this Act forprescribed by a licensed health care prac-date of the determination. personal injury or sickness, including paymentstitioner.
to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.Example. You retired in 2003 and receive a However, you are taxed on amounts you receivepension based on your years of service. On Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill in- under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45August 6, 2008, you receive a determination of dividual is one who has been certified by a days while a claim is being decided. Report thisservice-connected disability retroactive to 2003. licensed health care practitioner within the previ- income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A orGenerally, you could claim a refund for the taxes ous 12 months as one of the following. on line 1 of Form 1040-EZ. Also, pay for sickpaid on your pension for 2005, 2006, and 2007. leave while a claim is being processed is taxable• An individual who, for at least 90 days, isHowever, under the special limitation period, and must be included in your income as wages.you can also file a claim for 2004 as long as you unable to perform at least two activities of
file the claim by August 6, 2009. You cannot file If part of the payments you receivedaily living without substantial assistance
a claim for 2003 because that tax year began under FECA reduces your social se-due to loss of functional capacity. Activi-
more than 5 years before the determination. curity or equivalent railroad retirementties of daily living are eating, toileting,
CAUTION
!
benefits received, that part is considered socialtransferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-
Transition Rules If you received a retroac- security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-nence.
tive service-connected disability rating determi- fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of the
• An individual who requires substantial su-nation after December 31, 2000, and before taxability of these benefits, see Social security
pervision to be protected from threats toJune 17, 2008, you have 1 year from June 17, and equivalent railroad retirement benefits
health and safety due to severe cognitive2008, to file your claims. You cannot make any under Other Income, in Publication 525.
impairment.claims for tax years that began before 2001.   You can deduct the amount you spend to
buy back sick leave for an earlier year to be
Terrorist attack or military action. Do not eligible for nontaxable FECA benefits for thatLimit on exclusion. You generally can ex-
include in your income disability payments you period. It is a miscellaneous deduction subject toclude from gross income up to $270 a day for
receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter- the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040).2008. See Limit on exclusion, under Long-Term
rorist or military action. If you buy back sick leave in the same year youCare Insurance Contracts, under Sickness and
used it, the amount reduces your taxable sickInjury Benefits in Publication 525 for more infor-
leave pay. Do not deduct it separately.mation.Long-Term Care
Insurance Contracts Other compensation. Many other amounts
Workers' Compensation you receive as compensation for sickness or
Long-term care insurance contracts generally injury are not taxable. These include the follow-Amounts you receive as workers' compensationare treated as accident and health insurance ing amounts.for an occupational sickness or injury are fullycontracts. Amounts you receive from them
• Compensatory damages you receive forexempt from tax if they are paid under a workers'(other than policyholder dividends or premium
physical injury or physical sickness,compensation act or a statute in the nature of arefunds) generally are excludable from income
whether paid in a lump sum or in periodicas amounts received for personal injury or sick- workers' compensation act. The exemption also
payments.ness. To claim an exclusion for payments made applies to your survivors. The exemption, how-
on a per diem or other periodic basis under a ever, does not apply to retirement plan benefits • Benefits you receive under an accident or
long-term care insurance contract, you must file you receive based on your age, length of serv- health insurance policy on which either
Form 8853 with your return. ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you you paid the premiums or your employer
retired because of an occupational sickness orA long-term care insurance contract is an paid the premiums but you had to include
insurance contract that only provides coverage injury. them in your income.
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 51

Page 54 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Disability benefits you receive for loss of
income or earning capacity as a result of Reporting Tips to YourKeeping a Daily Tipinjuries under a no-fault car insurance pol-
icy. EmployerRecord• Compensation you receive for permanent
loss or loss of use of a part or function of Why report tips to your employer? YouWhy keep a daily tip record? You must keepyour body, or for your permanent disfig- must report tips to your employer so that:a daily tip record so you can:urement. This compensation must be
based only on the injury and not on the • Your employer can withhold federal in-• Report your tips accurately to your em-period of your absence from work. These come tax and social security and Medicareployer,benefits are not taxable even if your em- taxes or railroad retirement tax,
• Report your tips accurately on your taxployer pays for the accident and health • Your employer can report the correctplan that provides these benefits. return, and amount of your earnings to the Social Se-
curity Administration or Railroad Retire-• Prove your tip income if your return is ever
Reimbursement for medical care. A reim- ment Board (which affects your benefitsquestioned.
bursement for medical care is generally not tax- when you retire or if you become disabled,
able. However, it may reduce your medical or your family's benefits if you die), andHow to keep a daily tip record. There are twoexpense deduction. For more information, see • You can avoid the penalty for not reportingways to keep a daily tip record. You can either:chapter 21. tips to your employer (explained later).
• Write information about your tips in a tip
diary, or
What tips to report. Report to your employer
• Keep copies of documents that show your only cash, check, debit, or credit card tips you
tips, such as restaurant bills and credit receive.
card charge slips. If your total tips for any one month from any
6. one job are less than $20, do not report the tipsYou should keep your daily tip record with your
for that month to that employer.personal records. You must keep your records
If you participate in a tip-splitting orfor as long as they are important for administra-
tip-pooling arrangement, report only the tips yoution of the federal tax law. For information onTip Income receive and retain. Do not report to your em-how long to keep records, see Publication 552, ployer any portion of the tips you receive thatRecordkeeping for Individuals. you pass on to other employees.
  If you keep a tip diary, you can use Form Do not report the value of any noncash tips,Introduction
4070A, Employee's Daily Record of Tips. To get such as tickets or passes, to your employer. YouThis chapter is for employees who receive tips. do not pay social security and Medicare taxes orForm 4070A, ask the Internal Revenue ServiceAll tips you receive are income and are sub- railroad retirement tax on these tips.(IRS) or your employer for Publication 1244.ject to federal income tax. You must include in Publication 1244 includes a 1-year supply ofgross income all tips you receive directly, How to report.   If your employer does notForm 4070A. Each day, write in the informationcharged tips paid to you by your employer, and give you any other way to report tips, you canasked for on the form.your share of any tips you receive under a use Form 4070. Fill in the information asked for
tip-splitting or tip-pooling arrangement. If you do not use Form 4070A, start your on the form, sign and date the form, and give it to
The value of noncash tips, such as tickets, records by writing your name, your employer's your employer. To get a 1-year supply of the
passes, or other items of value are also income name, and the name of the business (if it is form, ask the IRS or your employer for Publica-
and subject to tax. tion 1244.different from your employer's name). Then,
Reporting your tip income correctly is not each workday, write the date and the following If you do not use Form 4070, give your em-
difficult. You must do three things. ployer a statement with the following informa-information.
tion.1. Keep a daily tip record. • Cash tips you get directly from customers
• Your name, address, and social securityor from other employees.2. Report tips to your employer. number.• Tips from credit card charge customers3. Report all your tips on your income tax • Your employer's name, address, and busi-that your employer pays you. (Also includereturn. ness name (if it is different from your em-tips from debit card charge customers.) ployer's name).
• The value of any noncash tips you get,This chapter will explain these three things and • The month (or the dates of any shortersuch as tickets, passes, or other items ofshow you what to do on your tax return if you period) in which you received tips.value.have not done the first two. This chapter will also
• The total tips required to be reported forshow you how to treat allocated tips. • The amount of tips you paid out to other that period.employees through tip pools or tip split-
Useful Items You must sign and date the statement. Youting, or other arrangements, and the
You may want to see: should keep a copy with your personal records.names of the employees to whom you
paid the tips. Your employer may require you to report yourPublication tips more than once a month. However, the
❏ 531 Reporting Tip Income statement cannot cover a period of more thanDo not write in your tip diary the one calendar month.amount of any service charge that your❏ 1244 Employee's Daily Record of Tips
employer adds to a customer's bill andand Report to Employer Electronic tip statement. Your employer
CAUTION
!
then pays to you and treats as wages. This is can have you furnish your tip statements elec-
part of your wages, not a tip.Form (and Instructions) tronically.
❏ 4137 Social Security and Medicare Tax Electronic tip record. You can use an elec- When to report. Give your report for eachon Unreported Tip Income tronic system provided by your employer to re- month to your employer by the 10th of the next
cord your daily tips. If you do, you must receive❏ 4070 Employee's Report of Tips to month. If the 10th falls on a Saturday, Sunday,
and keep a paper copy of this record.Employer or legal holiday, give your employer the report by
Page 52 Chapter 6 Tip Income

Page 55 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(TRDA) and the Tip Reporting Alternative Com- John's Form W-2 from Diamond Restaurantthe next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or
shows $17,000 ($10,000 wages plus $7,000 re-mitment (TRAC). In addition, employers in thelegal holiday.
ported tips) in box 1. He adds the $18 unre-food and beverage industry may be able to get
ported tips to that amount and reports $17,018approval of an employer-designed EmTRACExample 1. You must report your tips re-
as wages on his tax return.program. For information on the EmTRAC pro-ceived in September 2009 by October 13, 2009.
gram, see Notice 2001-1, which is on page 261October 10th is a Saturday, and the 13th is the Reporting social security and Medicareof Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2 at next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal taxes on tips not reported to your employer.www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-02.pdf.holiday. If you received $20 or more in cash and chargeIf you are employed in the gaming industry, tips in a month from any one job and did notyour employer may have a Gaming Industry TipExample 2. You must report your tips re- report all of those tips to your employer, youCompliance Agreement Program. See Revenueceived in October 2009 by November 10, 2009. must report the social security and MedicareProcedure 2007-32, 2007-22 I.R.B. 1322, avail- taxes on the unreported tips as additional tax onFinal report. If your employment ends dur- able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-22_IRB/ar13.html. your return. To report these taxes, you must fileing the month, you can report your tips when If you are employed in the food and beverage a return even if you would not otherwise have toyour employment ends. industry, your employer may participate in an file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot fileAttributed Tip Income Program (ATIP). See Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A.)Penalty for not reporting tips. If you do not Revenue Procedure 2006-30, 2006-31 I.R.B. Use Form 4137 to figure these taxes. Enterreport tips to your employer as required, you 110 available at www.irs.gov/irs/2006_IRB/ the tax on line 58, Form 1040, and attach Formmay be subject to a penalty equal to 50% of the ar11.html. 4137 to your return.social security and Medicare taxes or railroad Your employer can provide you with a copyretirement tax you owe on the unreported tips. If you are subject to the Railroad Re-of any applicable agreement. To find out more(For information about these taxes, see Report- tirement Tax Act, you cannot use Formabout these agreements, visit www.irs.gov anding social security and Medicare taxes on tips 4137 to pay railroad retirement tax ontype ªrestaurant tip reportingº in the Keyword
CAUTION
!not reported to your employer  under Reporting unreported tips. To get railroad retirement credit,search box. You may also call 1-800-829-4933Tips on Your Tax Return , later.) The penalty you must report tips to your employer.or visit www.irs.gov/localcontacts for the IRS
amount is in addition to the taxes you owe. Taxpayer Assistance Center in your area; or
You can avoid this penalty if you can show Reporting uncollected social security andsend an email to TIP.Program@irs.gov and re-
reasonable cause for not reporting the tips to Medicare taxes on tips. If your employerquest information on this program.
your employer. To do so, attach a statement to could not collect all the social security and Medi-
care taxes or railroad retirement tax you owe onyour return explaining why you did not report
tips reported for 2008, the uncollected taxes willthem.
be shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 (codes AReporting Tips on YourGiving your employer money for taxes. and B). You must report these amounts as addi-
Your regular pay may not be enough for your tional tax on your return. You may have uncol-Tax Returnemployer to withhold all the taxes you owe on lected taxes if your regular pay was not enough
your regular pay plus your reported tips. If this for your employer to withhold all the taxes you
happens, you can give your employer money owe and you did not give your employer enoughHow to report tips.   Report your tips withuntil the close of the calendar year to pay the money to pay the rest of the taxes.your wages on line 1 of Form 1040EZ or line 7 ofrest of the taxes. To report these uncollected taxes, you mustForm 1040A or Form 1040.If you do not give your employer enough file a return even if you would not otherwise havemoney, your employer will apply your regular to file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot fileWhat tips to report. You must report all tipspay and any money you give to the taxes in the Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A.) Include the taxesyou received in 2008 on your tax return, includ-following order. in your total tax amount on line 61, and writeing both cash tips and noncash tips. Any tips you
ªUTº and the total of the uncollected taxes on thereported to your employer for 2008 are included1. All taxes on your regular pay. dotted line next to line 61.in the wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2.2. Social security and Medicare taxes or rail- Add to the amount in box 1 only the tips you didroad retirement tax on your reported tips. not report to your employer.
3. Federal, state, and local income taxes on If you received $20 or more in cash andyour reported tips. Allocated Tipscharge tips in a month and did not
report all of those tips to your em-Any taxes that remain unpaid can be col-
CAUTION
! If your employer allocated tips to you, they areployer, see Reporting social security and Medi-lected by your employer from your next shown separately in box 8 of your Form W-2.care taxes on tips not reported to your employer,paycheck. If withholding taxes remain uncol- They are not included in box 1 with your wageslater.lected at the end of the year, you may be subject and reported tips. If box 8 is blank, this discus-to a penalty for underpayment of estimated sion does not apply to you.If you did not keep a daily tip record astaxes. See Publication 505, Tax Withholding required and an amount is shown inand Estimated Tax, for more information. What are allocated tips? These are tips thatbox 8 of your Form W-2, see Allocated
CAUTION
!
Uncollected taxes.  You must report your employer assigned to you in addition to theTips, later.
on your tax return any social security tips you reported to your employer for the year.If you kept a daily tip record and reported tipsand Medicare taxes or railroad retire- Your employer will have done this only if:
CAUTION
!to your employer as required under the rulesment tax that remained uncollected at the end of explained earlier, add the following tips to the • You worked in a restaurant, cocktail2008. See Reporting uncollected social security amount in box 1 of your Form W-2. lounge, or similar business that must allo-and Medicare taxes on tips  under Reporting cate tips to employees,• Cash and charge tips you received thatTips on Your Tax Return , later. These uncol-
totaled less than $20 for any month.lected taxes will be shown in box 12 of your 2008 • The tips you reported to your employer
Form W-2 (codes A and B). were less than your share of 8% of food• The value of noncash tips, such as tickets, and drink sales, andpasses, or other items of value.
• You did not participate in your employer'sTip Rate Determination
Attributed Tip Income Program (ATIP).Example. John Allen began working at theand Education Program
Diamond Restaurant (his only employer in 2008)
on June 30 and received $10,000 in wagesYour employer may participate in the Tip Rate How were your allocated tips figured? The
during the year. John kept a daily tip recordDetermination and Education Program. The pro- tips allocated to you are your share of an amount
showing that his tips for June were $18 and hisgram was developed to help employees and figured by subtracting the reported tips of all
tips for the rest of the year totaled $7,000. Heemployers understand and meet their tip report- employees from 8% (or an approved lower rate)
was not required to report his June tips to hising responsibilities. of food and drink sales (other than carryout
employer, but he reported all of the rest of hisThere are two agreements under the pro- sales and sales with a service charge of 10% or
tips to his employer as required.gram: the Tip Rate Determination Agreement more). Your share of that amount was figured
Chapter 6 Tip Income Page 53

Page 56 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
using either a method provided by an em-
ployer-employee agreement or a method pro- Reminder General Informationvided by IRS regulations based on employees'
sales or hours worked. For information about the A few items of general interest are covered here.Foreign-source income. If you are a U.S. citi-exact allocation method used, ask your em-
zen with interest income from sources outsideployer. Recordkeeping. You should keep a
the United States (foreign income), you must list showing sources and amounts ofMust you report your allocated tips on your report that income on your tax return unless it is interest received during the year. Also,
RECORDSreturn? You must report allocated tips on your exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you keep the forms you receive that show your inter-tax return unless either of the following excep- reside inside or outside the United States and est income (Forms 1099-INT, for example) astions applies. whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the an important part of your records.
foreign payer.• You kept a daily tip record, or other evi-
dence that is as credible and as reliable as Tax on investment income of certain chil-
a daily tip record, as required under rules dren. Part of a child's 2008 investment income
explained earlier. may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. This may
happen if all of the following are true.Introduction• Your tip record is incomplete, but it shows
that your actual tips were more than the This chapter discusses the following topics. 1. The child had more than $1,800 of invest-tips you reported to your employer plus ment income.the allocated tips. • Different types of interest income.
2. The child is required to file a tax return.If either exception applies, report your actual tips • What interest is taxable and what interest
on your return. Do not report the allocated tips. is nontaxable. 3. The child was:See What tips to report under Reporting Tips on
• When to report interest income.Your Tax Return, earlier. a. Under age 18 at the end of 2008,
• How to report interest income on your tax b. Age 18 at the end of 2008 and did notHow to report allocated tips. If you must return. have earned income that was morereport allocated tips on your return, add the
than half of the child's support, oramount in box 8 of your Form W-2 to the amount In general, any interest you receive or that isin box 1. Report the total as wages on line 7 of c. A full-time student over age 18 andcredited to your account and can be withdrawnForm 1040. (You cannot file Form 1040EZ or under age 24 at the end of 2008 andis taxable income. Exceptions to this rule areForm 1040A.) did not have earned income that wasdiscussed later in this chapter.Because social security and Medicare taxes more than half of the child's support.You may be able to deduct expenses youwere not withheld from the allocated tips, you have in earning this income on Schedule Amust report those taxes as additional tax on your 4. At least one of the child's parents was(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Seereturn. Complete Form 4137, and include the alive at the end of 2008.chapter 28.allocated tips on line 1 of the form. See Report-
ing social security and Medicare taxes on tips 5. The child does not file a joint return for
not reported to your employer  under Reporting 2008.Useful Items
Tips on Your Tax Return, earlier. You may want to see: A child born on January 1, 1991, is considered
to be age 18 at the end of 2008; a child bornPublication on January 1, 1990, is considered to be age 19
at the end of 2008; a child born on January 1,❏ 537 Installment Sales
1985, is considered to be age 24 at the end of❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses 2008.
If all these statements are true, Form 8615,❏ 1212 Guide to Original Issue Discount7. Tax for Certain Children With Investment In-(OID) Instruments
come of More Than $1,800, must be completed
and attached to the child's tax return. If any ofForm (and Instructions)
these statements is not true, Form 8615 is notInterest Income ❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and required and the child's income is taxed at his orOrdinary Dividends her own tax rate.
However, the parent can choose to include❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and
the child's interest and dividends on the parent'sOrdinary Dividends for Form 1040AWhat's New return if certain requirements are met. Use FormFilers
8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter-❏ 3115 Application for Change inTax on child's investment income. Form est and Dividends, for this purpose.Accounting Method8615 is required to figure the tax for a child with For more information about the tax on invest-investment income of more than $1,800 if the ❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series ment income of children and the parents' elec-child: EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds tion, see chapter 31.
Issued After 19891. Was under age 18 at the end of 2008, Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest
❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record you receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust2. Was age 18 at the end of 2008 and did not Redemption of Series EE and I is generally taxable income. You should receivehave earned income that was more than U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After a Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary'shalf of the child's support, or 1989 Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from3. Was a full-time student over age 18 and the fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and itsunder age 24 at the end of 2008 and did instructions will tell you where to report the in-not have earned income that was more come on your Form 1040.than half of the child's support.
Social security number (SSN). You mustThe election to report a child's investment in- give your name and SSN to any person requiredcome on a parent's return and the special rule by federal tax law to make a return, statement,for when a child must file Form 6251 also now or other document that relates to you. This in-apply to the children listed above. For more cludes payers of interest.information, see Tax on investment income of
certain children  under General Information , SSN for joint account. If the funds in a joint
later. account belong to one person, list that person's
Page 54 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 57 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
name first on the account and give that person's Form 1099-INT. Interest income is generally you make withdrawals from the IRA. See chap-
SSN to the payer. (For information on who owns reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar ter 17.
the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts, statement, by banks, savings and loans, and
later.) If the joint account contains combined other payers of interest. This form shows you the
funds, give the SSN of the person whose name interest you received during the year. Keep this
is listed first on the account. form for your records. You do not have to attach Taxable Interestit to your tax return.These rules apply both to joint ownership by
Report on your tax return the total amount ofa married couple and to joint ownership by other Taxable interest includes interest you receiveinterest income that you receive for the tax year.individuals. For example, if you open a joint from bank accounts, loans you make to others,
savings account with your child using funds be- and other sources. The following are someInterest not reported on Form 1099-INT.longing to the child, list the child's name first on sources of taxable interest.Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, youthe account and give the child's SSN. must still report all of your taxable interest in- Dividends that are actually interest. Certaincome. For example, you may receive distributiveCustodian account for your child. If your distributions commonly called dividends are ac-shares of interest from partnerships or S corpo-child is the actual owner of an account that is tually interest. You must report as interestrations. This interest is reported to you onrecorded in your name as custodian for the child, so-called ªdividendsº on deposits or on shareSchedule K-1 (Form 1065) or Schedule K-1give the child's SSN to the payer. For example, accounts in:(Form 1120S).you must give your child's SSN to the payer of
• Cooperative banks,interest on an account owned by your child, Nominees. Generally, if someone receiveseven though the interest is paid to you as custo- • Credit unions,interest as a nominee for you, that person willdian. give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interest • Domestic building and loan associations,received on your behalf.Penalty for failure to supply SSN. If you
• Domestic savings and loan associations,If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includesdo not give your SSN to the payer of interest,
amounts belonging to another person, see theyou may have to pay a penalty. See Failure to • Federal savings and loan associations,discussion on nominee distributions under Howsupply social security number under Penalties in andTo Report Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publi-chapter 1. Backup withholding also may apply.
• Mutual savings banks.cation 550, or see the Schedule 1 (Form 1040A)
or Schedule B (Form 1040) instructions.Backup withholding. Your interest income is
generally not subject to regular withholding. Money market funds. Generally, amountsIncorrect amount. If you receive a Form
However, it may be subject to backup withhold- you receive from money market funds should be1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (or
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on the reported as dividends, not as interest.other incorrect information), you should ask the
income. Under backup withholding, the payer of issuer for a corrected form. The new Form Certificates of deposit and other deferredinterest must withhold, as income tax, 28% of 1099-INT you receive will be marked ªCor- interest accounts. If you open any of thesethe amount you are paid. rected.º accounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervalsBackup withholding may also be required if of 1 year or less during the term of the account.Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest incomethe Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter- You generally must include this interest in yourmay also be shown on Form 1099-OID, Originalmined that you underreported your interest or income when you actually receive it or are enti-Issue Discount. For more information aboutdividend income. For more information, see tled to receive it without paying a substantialamounts shown on this form, see Original IssueBackup Withholding in chapter 4. penalty. The same is true for accounts that ma-Discount (OID), later in this chapter.
Reporting backup withholding. If backup ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single
withholding is deducted from your interest in- Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest payment at maturity. If interest is deferred for
come, the payer must give you a Form 1099-INT dividends you receive from a mutual fund or more than 1 year, see Original Issue Discount
for the year that indicates the amount withheld. other regulated investment company are not in- (OID), later.
The Form 1099-INT will show any backup with- cluded in your taxable income. (However, see Interest subject to penalty for early with-holding as ªFederal income tax withheld.º Information-reporting requirement , next.) Ex- drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferredempt-interest dividends should be shown in box interest account before maturity, you may have8 of Form 1099-INT.Joint accounts. If two or more persons hold to pay a penalty. You must report the totalproperty (such as a savings account or bond) as Information-reporting requirement. Al- amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or tenants though exempt-interest dividends are not tax- count during the year, without subtracting thein common, each person's share of any interest able, you must show them on your tax return if penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-from the property is determined by local law. you have to file. This is an information-reporting ings in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for more
requirement and does not change the ex- information on how to report the interest and
Income from property given to a child. empt-interest dividends into taxable income. deduct the penalty.
Property you give as a parent to your child under
Money borrowed to invest in certificate ofthe Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid from deposit. The interest you pay on money bor-Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law specified private activity bonds may be subject rowed from a bank or savings institution to meetbecomes the child's property. to the alternative minimum tax. See Alternative the minimum deposit required for a certificate ofMinimum Tax  in chapter 30 for more informa-Income from the property is taxable to the deposit from the institution and the interest yoution. Chapter 1 of Publication 550 contains achild, except that any part used to satisfy a legal earn on the certificate are two separate items.discussion on private activity bonds under Stateobligation to support the child is taxable to the You must report the total interest you earn onor Local Government Obligations.parent or guardian having that legal obligation. the certificate in your income. If you itemize
Savings account with parent as trustee. deductions, you can deduct the interest you payInterest on VA dividends. Interest on insur-
Interest income from a savings account opened as investment interest, up to the amount of yourance dividends that you leave on deposit with
for a child who is a minor, but placed in the name net investment income. See Interest Expensesthe Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not
and subject to the order of the parents as trust- in chapter 3 of Publication 550.taxable. This includes interest paid on dividends
ees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of the on converted United States Government Life
state in which the child resides, both of the Example. You deposited $5,000 with aInsurance and on National Service Life Insur-
following are true. bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank toance policies.
make up the $10,000 minimum deposit required• The savings account legally belongs to the Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer-child. Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable. tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2008, but you
• The parents are not legally permitted to Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You received only $265, which represented the $575
use any of the funds to support the child. generally do not include it in your income until you earned minus $310 interest charged on your
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 55

Page 58 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form Interest income on frozen deposits. Ex- interest income on these bonds and how to treat
1099-INT for 2008 showing the $575 interest clude from your gross income interest on frozen transfers of these bonds.
you earned. The bank also gives you a state- deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the For other information on U.S. savingsment showing that you paid $310 interest for year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de- bonds, write to:2008. You must include the $575 in your in- posit because:
come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched- • The financial institution is bankrupt or in- For series EE and I:ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject solvent, or Bureau of the Public Debtto the net investment income limit. Division of Customer Assistance• The state where the institution is located P.O. Box 7012Gift for opening account. If you receive non- has placed limits on withdrawals because Parkersburg, WV 26106-7012cash gifts or services for making deposits or for other financial institutions in the state are
opening an account in a savings institution, you bankrupt or insolvent. For series HH/H:may have to report the value as interest.
Bureau of the Public DebtFor deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or The amount of interest you must exclude is Division of Customer Assistanceservices valued at more than $10 must be re- the interest that was credited on the frozen de- P.O. Box 2186ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or posits minus the sum of: Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186more, gifts or services valued at more than $20
• The net amount you withdrew from thesemust be reported as interest. The value is deter- Or, on the Internet, visit:deposits during the year, andmined by the cost to the financial institution. www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/prod-
• The amount you could have withdrawn as ucts/products.htm.
Example. You open a savings account at of the end of the year (not reduced by any
your local bank and deposit $800. The account penalty for premature withdrawals of a Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac-earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal- time deposit). crual method of accounting, you must reportculator. If no other interest is credited to your
If you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in- interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as itaccount during the year, the Form 1099-INT you
come on deposits that were frozen at the end of accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interestreceive will show $35 interest for the year. You
2008, see Frozen deposits under How To Re- until you receive it or until the bonds mature.must report $35 interest income on your tax
port Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publication Accrual methods of accounting are explained inreturn.
550, for information about reporting this interest chapter 1 under Accounting Methods.
Interest on insurance dividends. Interest on income exclusion on your tax return.
insurance dividends left on deposit with an in- Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cashThe interest you exclude is treated as creditedsurance company that can be withdrawn annu- method of accounting, as most individual tax-to your account in the following year. You mustally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to payers do, you generally report the interest oninclude it in income in the year you can withdrawyour account. However, if you can withdraw it U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. Theit.only on the anniversary date of the policy (or cash method of accounting is explained in chap-
other specified date), the interest is taxable in ter 1 under Accounting Methods.Example. $100 of interest was credited onthe year that date occurs. your frozen deposit during the year. You with- Series HH bonds.  These bonds were issued
drew $80 but could not withdraw any more as ofPrepaid insurance premiums. Any increase at face value. Interest is paid twice a year by
the end of the year. You must include $80 inin the value of prepaid insurance premiums, direct deposit to your bank account. If you are a
your income and exclude $20 from your incomeadvance premiums, or premium deposit funds is cash method taxpayer, you must report interest
for the year. You must include the $20 in yourinterest if it is applied to the payment of premi- on these bonds as income in the year you re-
income for the year you can withdraw it.ums due on insurance policies or made avail- ceive it.
able for you to withdraw. Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980;Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at a
they were last offered in August 2004. Beforediscount when interest has been defaulted orU.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations, 1980, series H bonds were issued. Series Hwhen the interest has accrued but has not beensuch as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds, bonds are treated the same as series HH bonds.paid, the transaction is described as trading aissued by any agency or instrumentality of the If you are a cash method taxpayer, you mustbond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is notUnited States is taxable for federal income tax report the interest when you receive it.income and is not taxable as interest if paid later.purposes. Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30When you receive a payment of that interest, it is
years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.Interest on tax refunds. Interest you receive a return of capital that reduces the remaining
on tax refunds is taxable income. cost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues Series EE and series I bonds. Interest onafter the date of purchase, however, is taxableInterest on condemnation award. If the con- these bonds is payable when you redeem theinterest income for the year it is received ordemning authority pays you interest to compen- bonds. The difference between the purchaseaccrued. See Bonds Sold Between Interestsate you for a delay in payment of an award, the price and the redemption value is taxable inter-Dates, later, for more information.interest is taxable. est.
Below-market loans. In general, a be- Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds wereInstallment sale payments. If a contract for low-market loan is a loan on which no interest is first offered in January 1980. They have a matur-the sale or exchange of property provides for charged or on which interest is charged at a rate ity period of 30 years.deferred payments, it also usually provides for below the applicable federal rate. See Be-
interest payable with the deferred payments. low-Market Loans  in chapter 1 of Publication Before July 1980, series E bonds were is-That interest is taxable when you receive it. If 550 for more information. sued. The original 10-year maturity period oflittle or no interest is provided for in a deferred series E bonds has been extended to 40 yearspayment contract, part of each payment may be for bonds issued before December 1965 and 30U.S. Savings Bondstreated as interest. See Unstated Interest and years for bonds issued after November 1965.Original Issue Discount in Publication 537, In- Paper series EE and series E bonds are issuedThis section provides tax information on U.S.stallment Sales. at a discount. The face value is payable to you atsavings bonds. It explains how to report the
maturity. Electronic series EE bonds are issuedInterest on annuity contract. Accumulated at their face value. The face value plus accruedinterest on an annuity contract you sell before its interest is payable to you at maturity.maturity date is taxable. Owners of paper series E and EE bonds can
Usurious interest. Usurious interest is inter- convert them to electronic bonds. These con-
est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as verted bonds do not retain the denomination
interest unless state law automatically changes listed on the paper certificate but are posted at
it to a payment on the principal. their purchase price (with accrued interest).
Page 56 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 59 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internal Revenue ServiceTable 7-1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic
Rulings Branch)
IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ... Room 5336
1111 Constitution Avenue, NW you buy a bond in your name and the name of you.
Washington, DC 20224another person as co-owners, using only your
own funds Instead of filing this statement, you can re-
quest permission to change from method 2 toyou buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond. method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,who is the sole owner of the bond follow the form instructions for an automatic
change. No user fee is required.you and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion
co-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond.
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued inpurchase price
the names of co-owners, such as you and your
you and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate child or you and your spouse, interest on the
property state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who
property report one-half of the interest. bought the bond.
One co-owner's funds used.  If you used
your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the taxSeries I bonds. Series I bonds were first 1. You have typed or printed the following on the interest. This is true even if you let thenumber at the top: ª131ºoffered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed other co-owner redeem the bond and keep allbonds issued at their face amount with a matur- 2. It includes your name and social security the proceeds. Under these circumstances, sinceity period of 30 years. The face value plus all number under the label in (1). the other co-owner will receive a Form 1099-INTaccrued interest is payable to you at maturity. at the time of redemption, the other co-owner3. It includes the year of change (both theReporting options for cash method tax- must provide you with another Form 1099-INTbeginning and ending dates).payers. If you use the cash method of report- showing the amount of interest from the bond
4. It identifies the savings bonds for which that is taxable to you. The co-owner who re-ing income, you can report the interest on series
you are requesting this change. deemed the bond is a ªnominee.º See NomineeEE, series E, and series I bonds in either of the
distributions under How To Report Interest In-following ways. 5. It includes your agreement to:
come in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for more
1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest information about how a person who is a nomi-a. Report all interest on any bonds ac-
until the earlier of the year you cash or nee reports interest income belonging to an-quired during or after the year of
dispose of the bonds or the year they ma- other person.change when the interest is realized
ture. (However, see Savings bonds traded, upon disposition, redemption, or final Both co-owners' funds used. If you andlater.) maturity, whichever is earliest, and the other co-owner each contribute part of theNote. Series E bonds issued in 1978 ma- bond's purchase price, the interest is generallyb. Report all interest on the bonds ac-tured in 2008. If you have used method 1, taxable to each of you, in proportion to thequired before the year of change whenyou generally must report the interest on amount each of you paid.the interest is realized upon disposition,these bonds on your 2008 return. redemption, or final maturity, whichever Community property. If you and youris earliest, with the exception of the in-2. Method 2. Choose to report the increase spouse live in a community property state andterest reported in prior tax years.in redemption value as interest each year. hold bonds as community property, one-half of
the interest is considered received by each ofYou must use the same method for all series EE, You must attach this statement to your tax you. If you file separate returns, each of youseries E, and series I bonds you own. If you do return for the year of change, which you must file generally must report one-half of the bond inter-not choose method 2 by reporting the increase by the due date (including extensions). est. For more information about communityin redemption value as interest each year, you You can have an automatic extension of 6 property, see Publication 555, Community Prop-must use method 1. months from the due date of your return for the erty.year of change (excluding extensions) to file theIf you plan to cash your bonds in the
Table 7-1. These rules are also shown instatement with an amended return. On the state-same year that you will pay for higher
Table 7-1.ment, type or print ªFiled pursuant to sectioneducation expenses, you may want to
TIP
301.9100-2.º To get this extension, you mustuse method 1 because you may be able to Ownership transferred. If you bought serieshave filed your original return for the year of theexclude the interest from your income. To learn E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with yourchange by the due date (including extensions).how, see Education Savings Bond Program , own funds and had them reissued in yourlater. By the date you file the original state- co-owner's name or beneficiary's name alone,
ment with your return, you must also you must include in your gross income for theChange from method 1. If you want to send a signed copy to the address be- year of reissue all interest that you earned on
change your method of reporting the interest low. these bonds and have not previously reported.from method 1 to method 2, you can do so But, if the bonds were reissued in your namewithout permission from the IRS. In the year of Internal Revenue Service alone, you do not have to report the interestchange you must report all interest accrued to Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulings accrued at that time.date and not previously reported for all your Branch) This same rule applies when bonds (otherbonds. P.O. Box 7604 than bonds held as community property) are
Once you choose to report the interest each Benjamin Franklin Station transferred between spouses or incident to di-
year, you must continue to do so for all series Washington, DC 20044 vorce.
EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and for
Purchased jointly. If you and a co-ownerany you get later, unless you request permission If you use a private delivery service, send the each contributed funds to buy series E, seriesto change, as explained next. signed copy to the address below. EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the
Change from method 2. To change from bonds reissued in the co-owner's name alone,
method 2 to method 1, you must request permis- you must include in your gross income for the
sion from the IRS. Permission for the change is year of reissue your share of all the interest
automatically granted if you send the IRS a earned on the bonds that you have not previ-
statement that meets all the following require- ously reported. The former co-owner does not
ments. have to include in gross income at the time of
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 57

Page 60 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
reissue his or her share of the interest earned mature, or if you dispose of them before matur- distribution from the plan and not taxable
that was not reported before the transfer. This ity, you report as interest the difference between as interest. (This amount is generally
interest, however, as well as all interest earned their redemption value and your cost. Your cost shown on Form 1099-R, Distributions
after the reissue, is income to the former is the sum of the amount you paid for the traded From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or
co-owner. series EE or series E bonds plus any amount Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance
This income-reporting rule also applies when you had to pay at the time of the trade. Contracts, etc., for the year of distribution.)
the bonds are reissued in the name of your
Example.  In 2004, you traded series EE For more information on including the correctformer co-owner and a new co-owner. But the
bonds (on which you postponed reporting the amount of interest on your return, see How Tonew co-owner will report only his or her share of
interest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223 Report Interest Income , later. Publication 550the interest earned after the transfer.
in cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in- includes examples showing how to report theseIf bonds that you and a co-owner bought
come in 2004, the year of the trade. At the time amounts.jointly are reissued to each of you separately in
of the trade, the series EE bonds had accruedthe same proportion as your contribution to the Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-interest of $523 and a redemption value ofpurchase price, neither you nor your co-owner empt from state and local taxes. The$2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma-has to report at that time the interest earned Form 1099-INT you receive will indi-
TIPturity, when you receive $2,500. You must reportbefore the bonds were reissued. cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bond$300 as interest income in the year of maturity. interest in box 3.Example 1. You and your spouse each This is the difference between their redemption
spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (the
EE savings bond. The bond was issued to you amount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It is Education Savings 
and your spouse as co-owners. You both post- also the difference between the accrued interest
Bond Programpone reporting interest on the bond. You later of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223
have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one cash received on the trade.) You may be able to exclude from income all orin your name and one in your spouse's name. At Choice to report interest in year of trade. part of the interest you receive on the redemp-that time neither you nor your spouse has to You could have chosen to treat all of the previ- tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during thereport the interest earned to the date of reissue. ously unreported accrued interest on the series year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-
EE or series E bonds traded for series HH bonds penses during the same year. This exclusion isExample 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE as income in the year of the trade. If you made known as the Education Savings Bond Program.savings bond entirely with your own funds. The this choice, it is treated as a change from You do not qualify for this exclusion if yourbond was issued to you and your spouse as method 1. See Change from method 1  under filing status is married filing separately.co-owners. You both postpone reporting interest Series EE and series I bonds, earlier.on the bond. You later have the bond reissued Form 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure your
as two $500 bonds, one in your name and one in exclusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 orForm 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds inter-your spouse's name. You must report half the Form 1040A.est. When you cash a bond, the bank or otherinterest earned to the date of reissue. Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualifiedpayer that redeems it must give you a Form
U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued1099-INT if the interest part of the payment youTransfer to a trust. If you own series E, series after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must bereceive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your FormEE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a issued either in your name (sole owner) or in1099-INT should show the interest as the differ-trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must your and your spouse's names (co-owners).ence between the amount you received and theinclude in your income for that year the interest You must be at least 24 years old before theamount paid for the bond. However, your Formearned to the date of transfer if you have not bond's issue date. For example, a bond bought1099-INT may show more interest than youalready reported it. However, if you are consid- by a parent and issued in the name of his or herhave to include on your income tax return. Forered the owner of the trust and if the increase in child under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu-example, this may happen if any of the followingvalue both before and after the transfer contin- sion by the parent or child.are true.ues to be taxable to you, you can continue to
defer reporting the interest earned each year. The issue date of a bond may be earlier• You chose to report the increase in the
You must include the total interest in your in- than the date the bond is purchasedredemption value of the bond each year.
come in the year you cash or dispose of the because the issue date assigned to aThe interest shown on your Form
CAUTION
!
bonds or the year the bonds finally mature, bond is the first day of the month in which it is1099-INT will not be reduced by amounts
whichever is earlier. purchased.previously included in income.
The same rules apply to previously unre- • You received the bond from a decedent.ported interest on series EE or series E bonds if Beneficiary. You can designate any individualThe interest shown on your Formthe transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or (including a child) as a beneficiary of the bond.1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter-series H bonds you acquired in a trade for the est reported by the decedent before death,series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclu-or on the decedent's final return, or by thetraded, later. sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp-estate on the estate's income tax return. tion information from the Department of the
Treasury.Decedents. The manner of reporting interest • Ownership of the bond was transferred.
income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds, The interest shown on your Form Qualified expenses. Qualified higher edu-after the death of the owner, depends on the 1099-INT will not be reduced by interest cational expenses are tuition and fees requiredaccounting and income-reporting methods pre- that accrued before the transfer. for you, your spouse, or your dependent (forviously used by the decedent. This is explained whom you claim an exemption) to attend an• You were named as a co-owner and thein chapter 1 of Publication 550. eligible educational institution.other co-owner contributed funds to buy
Qualified expenses include any contributionthe bond. The interest shown on yourSavings bonds traded. If you postponed re- you make to a qualified tuition program or to aForm 1099-INT will not be reduced by theporting the interest on your series EE or series E Coverdell education savings account.amount you received as nominee for thebonds, you did not recognize taxable income other co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in Qualified expenses do not include expenseswhen you traded the bonds for series HH or this chapter, for more information about for room and board or for courses involvingseries H bonds, unless you received cash in the the reporting requirements.) sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of atrade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se- degree or certificate granting program.ries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can- • You received the bond in a taxable distri-
not trade any other series of bonds for series HH bution from a retirement or profit-sharing Eligible educational institutions. These
bonds.) Any cash you received is income up to plan. The interest shown on your Form institutions include most public, private, and
the amount of the interest earned on the bonds 1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter- nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational
traded. When your series HH or series H bonds est portion of the amount taxable as a schools that are accredited and are eligible to
Page 58 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 61 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
participate in student aid programs run by the 1. Foreign earned income exclusion, denominations of $100 to $1 million. Both notes
Department of Education. and bonds generally pay interest every 62. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction, months. Generally, you report this interest forReduction for certain benefits. You must 3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents the year paid. For more information, see U.S.reduce your qualified higher educational ex- of American Samoa, Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds in chapter 1 ofpenses by all of the following tax-free benefits. Publication 550.4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,
1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow- For other information on Treasury5. Exclusion for adoption benefits receivedships (see Scholarships and fellowships in notes or bonds, write to:under an employer's adoption assistancechapter 12).
program, Bureau of The Public Debt2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
6. Deduction for tuition and fees, P.O. Box 7015tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.
Parkersburg, WV 26106-70157. Deduction for student loan interest, and3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
tion of distributions from a qualified tuition Or, on the Internet, visit: www.8. Deduction for domestic production activi-
program. treasurydirect.gov/indiv/indiv.htmties.
4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or Use the worksheet in the instructions for line
inheritances) received for educational ex- 9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If you
penses, such as For information on series EE, series I, andclaim any of the exclusion or deduction items
series HH savings bonds, see U.S. Savingslisted above (except items 6, 7 and 8), add thea. Veterans' educational assistance bene- Bonds, earlier.amount of the exclusion or deduction (exceptfits, any deduction for tuition and fees, student loan Treasury inflation-protected securitiesb. Qualified tuition reductions, or interest, or domestic production activities) to the (TIPS). These securities pay interest twice a
amount on line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amountc. Employer-provided educational assis- total on Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI. that is adjusted to take into account inflation andtance.
If you have investment interest expense in- deflation. For the tax treatment of these securi-
curred to earn royalties and other investment ties, see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments5. Any expense used in figuring the Hope
income, see Education Savings Bond Program under Original Issue Discount (OID), in Publica-and lifetime learning credits.
in chapter 1 of Publication 550. tion 550.
Amount excludable. If the total proceeds Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter-
(interest and principal) from the qualified U.S. est exclusion, you must keep a written Bonds Sold Betweensavings bonds you redeem during the year are record of the qualified U.S. savings
RECORDS Interest Datesnot more than your adjusted qualified higher bonds you redeem. Your record must include
educational expenses for the year, you may be the serial number, issue date, face value, and If you sell a bond between interest paymentable to exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds total redemption proceeds (principal and inter- dates, part of the sales price represents interestare more than the expenses, you may be able to est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818, accrued to the date of sale. You must report thatexclude only part of the interest. Optional Form To Record Redemption of Series part of the sales price as interest income for theTo determine the excludable amount, multi- EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989, year of sale.ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction. to record this information. You should also keep If you buy a bond between interest paymentThe numerator of the fraction is the qualified bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu- dates, part of the purchase price representshigher educational expenses you paid during mentation that shows you paid qualified higher interest accrued before the date of purchase.the year. The denominator of the fraction is the educational expenses during the year. When that interest is paid to you, treat it as atotal proceeds you received during the year.
return of your capital investment, rather than
interest income, by reducing your basis in theU.S. Treasury Bills,Example. In February 2008, Mark and
bond. See Accrued interest on bonds  underJoan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se- Notes, and Bonds How To Report Interest Income  in chapter 1 ofries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in April
Publication 550 for information on reporting the1996. They received proceeds of $7,816 repre- Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts payment.senting principal of $5,000 and interest of (obligations) of the U.S. Government.
$2,816. In 2008, they paid $4,000 of their daugh-
ter's college tuition. They are not claiming an Taxation of interest. Interest income from Insuranceeducation credit for that amount, and their Treasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to
daughter does not have any tax-free educational federal income tax, but is exempt from all state Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-
assistance. They can exclude $1,441 ($2,816 × and local income taxes. You should receive ciary of the insured person are usually not tax-
($4,000 ÷  $7,816)) of interest in 2008. They Form 1099-INT showing the amount of interest able. But if you receive the proceeds in
must pay tax on the remaining $1,375 ($2,816 − (in box 3) that was paid to you for the year. installments, you must usually report a part of
$1,441) interest. each installment payment as interest income.Payments of principal and interest generally
will be credited to your designated checking or For more information about insurance pro-Modified adjusted gross income limit.
savings account by direct deposit through the ceeds received in installments, see PublicationThe interest exclusion is limited if your modified
TREASURY DIRECT system. 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:
Treasury bills. These bills generally have a• $67,100 to $82,100 for taxpayers filing sin- Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-4-week, 13-week, or 26-week maturity period.gle or head of household, and ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-They are issued at a discount in the amount of• $100,650 to $130,650 for married taxpay- ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income$100 and multiples of $100. The difference be-ers filing jointly or for a qualifying from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income.tween the discounted price you pay for the billswidow(er) with dependent child. See chapter 10 for information on pension andand the face value you receive at maturity is
annuity income from nonqualified plans.interest income. Generally, you report this inter-You do not qualify for the interest exclusion if
est income when the bill is paid at maturity.your modified AGI is equal to or more than the
upper limit for your filing status. State or LocalTreasury notes and bonds. Treasury
notes have maturity periods of more than 1 year,Modified AGI, for purposes of this exclusion, Government Obligations
ranging up to 10 years. Maturity periods foris adjusted gross income (Form 1040A, line 21
Treasury bonds are longer than 10 years. Both Interest on a bond used to finance governmentor Form 1040, line 37) figured before the interest
of these Treasury issues generally are issued in operations generally is not taxable if the bond isexclusion, and modified by adding back any:
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 59

Page 62 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a includible in income. If you buy a debt instrument • The debt instrument is a stripped bond or
possession of the United States, or any of their with de minimis OID at a discount, the discount a stripped coupon (including certain zero
political subdivisions. is reported under the market discount rules. See coupon instruments).
Bonds issued after 1982 by an Indian tribal Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publica- For information about figuring the correctgovernment are treated as issued by a state. tion 550. amount of OID to include in your income, seeInterest on these bonds is generally tax exempt Figuring OID on Long-Term Debt Instruments inExceptions to reporting OID. The OID rulesif the bonds are part of an issue of which sub- Publication 1212.discussed in this chapter do not apply to thestantially all of the proceeds are to be used in the
following debt instruments. exercise of any essential government function. Refiguring periodic interest shown on FormInterest on arbitrage bonds issued by state 1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, seeor local governments after October 9, 1969, is or acquired it from another holder during theStripped tax-exempt obligations undertaxable. year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates ,Stripped Bonds and Coupons in chapter 1Interest on a private activity bond that is not a earlier, for information about the treatment ofof Publication 550).qualified bond is taxable. For more information periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 ofon whether such interest is taxable or tax ex- 2. U.S. savings bonds. Form 1099-OID for that instrument.empt, see State or Local Government Obliga- 3. Short-term debt instruments (those with ations in chapter 1 of Publication 550. Certificates of deposit (CDs). If you buy afixed maturity date of not more than 1 year CD with a maturity of more than 1 year, you mustfrom the date of issue).Information reporting requirement. If you include in income each year a part of the totalmust file a tax return, you are required to show 4. Obligations issued by an individual before interest due and report it in the same manner asany tax-exempt interest you received on your March 2, 1984. other OID.return. This is an information-reporting require- This also applies to similar deposit arrange-5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow-ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter- ments with banks, building and loan associa-ing are true.est to taxable interest. tions, etc., including:
a. The lender is not in the business of • Time deposits,Original Issue lending money.
• Bonus plans,Discount (OID) b. The amount of the loan, plus the
• Savings certificates,amount of any outstanding prior loans
Original issue discount (OID) is a form of inter- between the same individuals, is • Deferred income certificates,est. You generally include OID in your income as $10,000 or less.
it accrues over the term of the debt instrument, • Bonus savings certificates, andc. Avoiding any federal tax is not one ofwhether or not you receive any payments from • Growth savings certificates.the principal purposes of the loan.the issuer.
A debt instrument generally has OID when Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 gener-the instrument is issued for a price that is less ally must be in registered form. Bearer CDs areForm 1099-OID. The issuer of the debt instru-than its stated redemption price at maturity. OID CDs that are not in registered form. They are notment (or your broker, if you held the instrumentis the difference between the stated redemption issued in the depositor's name and are transfer-through a broker) should give you Formprice at maturity and the issue price. able from one individual to another.1099-OID, Original Issue Discount, or a similarAll debt instruments that pay no interest Banks must provide the IRS and the personstatement, if the total OID for the calendar yearbefore maturity are presumed to be issued at a redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.is $10 or more. Form 1099-OID will show, in boxdiscount. Zero coupon bonds are one example 1, the amount of OID for the part of the year thatof these instruments. More information. See chapter 1 of Publica-you held the bond. It also will show, in box 2, theThe OID accrual rules generally do not apply tion 550 for more information about OID andstated interest that you must include in yourto short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma- related topics, such as market discount bonds.income. A copy of Form 1099-OID will be sent toturity date of 1 year or less from date of issue). the IRS. Do not file your copy with your return.See Discount on Short-Term Obligations  in Keep it for your records.chapter 1 of Publication 550. In most cases, you must report the entire
amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID as When To ReportDe minimis OID. You can treat the discount interest income. But see Refiguring OID shownas zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) on Form 1099-OID,  later in this discussion, for Interest Incomeof the stated redemption price at maturity multi- more information.plied by the number of full years from the date of
When to report your interest income depends onoriginal issue to maturity. This small discount is Form 1099-OID not received. If you had OID whether you use the cash method or an accrualknown as ªde minimisº OID. for the year but did not receive a Form method to report income.
1099-OID, see www.irs.gov, which lists totalExample 1. You bought a 10-year bond with Cash method. Most individual taxpayers useOID on certain debt instruments and has infor-a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000, the cash method. If you use this method, youmation that will help you figure OID. If your debtissued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth of generally report your interest income in the yearinstrument is not listed, consult the issuer for1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10 in which you actually or constructively receive it.further information about the accrued OID for(the number of full years from the date of original However, there are special rules for reportingthe year.issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20 the discount on certain debt instruments. Seediscount is less than $25, the OID is treated as Nominee. If someone else is the holder of U.S. Savings Bonds  and Original Issue Dis-zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you will record (the registered owner) of an OID instru- count, earlier.recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.) ment that belongs to you and receives a Form
1099-OID on your behalf, that person must give Example. On September 1, 2006, youExample 2. The facts are the same as in you a Form 1099-OID. loaned another individual $2,000 at 12%, com-Example 1, except that the bond was issued at pounded annually. You are not in the business$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID. of lending money. The note stated that principalis more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or box and interest would be due on August 31, 2008.must include the OID in income as it accrues 6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the following In 2008, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-over the term of the bond. apply. pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash
Debt instrument bought after original is- • You bought the debt instrument after its method, you must include in income on your
sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de original issue and paid a premium or an 2008 return the $508.80 interest you received in
minimis OID at a premium, the discount is not acquisition premium. that year.
Page 60 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 63 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Constructive receipt. You constructively • You received, as a nominee, interest that 9. Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list is
receive income when it is credited to your ac- actually belongs to someone else. true.
count or made available to you. You do not need • You received a Form 1099-INT for interest On Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and theto have physical possession of it. For example, on frozen deposits. amount received from each. If you received ayou are considered to receive interest, divi-
Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-List each payer's name and the amount of inter-dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-
kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.est income received from each payer on line 1. Ifcount in a bank, savings and loan, or similar
you received a Form 1099-INT or Formfinancial institution, or interest on life insurance
1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-policy dividends left to accumulate, when they Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income,age firm as the payer.are credited to your account and subject to your except for interest from U.S. savings bonds andwithdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet You cannot use Form 1040A if you must use Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Formentered in your passbook. Form 1040, as described next. 1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxableYou constructively receive income on the interest income you received. You must reportForm 1040. You must use Form 1040 insteaddeposit or account even if you must:
of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if: all of your taxable interest income even if you do
• Make withdrawals in multiples of even not receive a Form 1099-INT.1. You forfeited interest income because ofamounts,
If you forfeited interest income because ofthe early withdrawal of a time deposit,• Give a notice to withdraw before making the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-2. You received or paid accrued interest onthe withdrawal, ductible amount will be shown on Formsecurities transferred between interest• Withdraw all or part of the account to with- 1099-INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with-payment dates,draw the earnings, or drawal of savings  in chapter 1 of Publication
3. You had a financial account in a foreign 550.• Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless country, unless the combined value of allthe interest you are to receive on an early Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the amountforeign accounts was $10,000 or less dur-withdrawal or redemption is substantially of interest income you received from U.S. sav-ing all of 2008 or the accounts were withless than the interest payable at maturity. ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, andcertain U.S. military banking facilities,
Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 34. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987Accrual method. If you use an accrual to any other taxable interest income you re-and choose to reduce interest income frommethod, you report your interest income when ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 wasthe bonds by any amortizable bond pre-you earn it, whether or not you have received it. previously included in interest income. If part ofmium (see Bond Premium Amortization inInterest is earned over the term of the debt the amount shown in box 3 was previously in-chapter 3 of Publication 550),instrument. cluded in your interest income, see U.S. savings5. You are reporting OID in an amount more bond interest previously reported, later.or less than the amount shown on FormExample. If, in the previous example, you
1099-OID, or Box 4 of Form 1099-INT (federal income taxuse an accrual method, you must include the
interest in your income as you earn it. You would withheld) will contain an amount if you were6. You received tax-exempt interest from pri-report the interest as follows: 2006, $80; 2007, subject to backup withholding. Report thevate activity bonds issued after August 7,$249.60; and 2008, $179.20. amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7; on1986.
Form 1040A, line 38; or on Form 1040, line 62
Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds is (federal income tax withheld).Schedule B. You must complete Schedule
taxable in the year the coupon becomes due and B (Form 1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 and Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investmentpayable. It does not matter when you mail the any of the following apply. expenses you may be able to deduct as ancoupon for payment.
itemized deduction. See chapter 3 of Publication1. Your taxable interest income is more than
550 for more information about investment ex-$1,500.
penses.2. You are claiming the interest exclusion
U.S. savings bond interest previously re-under the Education Savings Bond Pro-How To Report
gram (discussed earlier). ported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for
U.S. savings bond interest, the form may showInterest Income 3. You had a foreign account or you received interest you do not have to report. See Forma distribution from, or were a grantor of, orGenerally, you report all of your taxable interest 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds interest , ear-transferor to, a foreign trust.income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, line lier, under U.S. Savings Bonds.4. You received interest from a8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2. On Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, orseller-financed mortgage, and the buyerYou cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interest on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1,used the property as a home.income is more than $1,500. Instead, you must report all the interest shown on your Formuse Form 1040A or Form 1040. 5. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. 1099-INT. Then follow these steps.savings bond interest that includes
amounts you reported before 2008.Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1 1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal
(Form 1040A), Part I, if you file Form 1040A and of all interest listed on line 1.6. You received, as a nominee, interest that
any of the following are true. actually belongs to someone else. 2. Below the subtotal enter ªU.S. Savings
• Your taxable interest income is more than Bond Interest Previously Reportedº and7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
$1,500. on frozen deposits. enter amounts previously reported or inter-
est accrued before you received the bond.• You are claiming the interest exclusion 8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
under the Education Savings Bond Pro- on a bond that you bought between inter- 3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotalgram (discussed earlier). est payment dates. and enter the result on line 2.
• You received interest from a
seller-financed mortgage, and the buyer
used the property as a home. More information. For more information
about how to report interest income, see chapter• You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.
1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for thesavings bond interest that includes
form you must file.amounts you reported before 2008.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 61

Page 64 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This chapter also explains how to report divi- Income of More Than $1,800, must be com-
dend income on your tax return. pleted and attached to the child's tax return. If
any of these statements is not true, Form 8615 is  Dividends are distributions of money, stock,
8. not required and the child's income is taxed ator other property paid to you by a corporation.
his or her own tax rate.You also may receive dividends through a part-
However, the parent can choose to includenership, an estate, a trust, or an association that
the child's interest and dividends on the parent'sis taxed as a corporation. However, someDividends and return if certain requirements are met. Use Formamounts you receive that are called dividends
8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter-are actually interest income. (See Dividends that
est and Dividends, for this purpose.are actually interest  under Taxable Interest inOther Corporate
For more information about the tax on invest-chapter 7.)
ment income of children and the parents' elec-Most distributions are paid in cash (or
Distributions tion, see chapter 31.check). However, distributions can consist of
more stock, stock rights, other property, or serv- Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Dividendsices. and other distributions you receive as a benefi-
What's New ciary of an estate or trust are generally taxable
Useful Items income. You should receive a Schedule K-1
You may want to see: (Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share of Income,Maximum tax rate on qualified dividends and
Deductions, Credits, etc., from the fiduciary.net capital gain reduced. Beginning in 2008,
Publication Your copy of Schedule K-1 and its instructionsthe 5% maximum tax rate on qualified dividends
will tell you where to report the income on yourand net capital gain (the excess of net long-term ❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals Form 1040.capital gain over net short-term capital loss) is
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesreduced to 0 (zero) %. This reduction applies to Social security number (SSN).  You mustboth regular and alternative minimum tax. The ❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions give your name and SSN (or individual taxpayer15% maximum tax rate on qualified dividends identification number (ITIN)) to any person re-and net capital gain has not changed. Form (and Instructions) quired by federal tax law to make a return, state-
ment, or other document that relates to you. This❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest andTax on child's investment income. Form
includes payers of dividends. If you do not giveOrdinary Dividends8615 is required to figure the tax for a child with
your SSN or ITIN to the payer of dividends, youinvestment income of more than $1,800 if the ❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and may have to pay a penalty.child: Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040A For more information on SSNs and ITINs,
Filers see Social security number (SSN) in chapter 7.1. Was under age 18 at the end of 2008,
Backup withholding. Your dividend income2. Was age 18 at the end of 2008 and did not
is generally not subject to regular withholding.have earned income that was more than
However, it may be subject to backup withhold-half of the child's support, or
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on theGeneral Information3. Was a full-time student over age 18 and income. Under backup withholding, the payer ofunder age 24 at the end of 2008 and did dividends must withhold, as income tax, 28% ofThis section discusses general rules for divi-not have earned income that was more the amount you are paid.dend income.than half of the child's support. Backup withholding may also be required if
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter-The election to report a child's investment in- Tax on investment income of certain chil-
mined that you underreported your interest orcome on a parent's return and the special rule dren. Part of a child's 2008 investment income
dividend income. For more information, seefor when a child must file Form 6251 also now may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. This may
Backup Withholding in chapter 4.apply to the children listed above. For more happen if all of the following are true.
information, see Tax on investment income of Stock certificate in two or more names. If1. The child had more than $1,800 of invest-certain children  under General Information , two or more persons hold stock as joint tenants,ment income.later. tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common,
2. The child is required to file a tax return. each person's share of any dividends from the
stock is determined by local law.3. The child was:
Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use FormReminder a. Under age 18 at the end of 2008, 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to show
b. Age 18 at the end of 2008 and did not you the distributions you received from themForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen with have earned income that was more during the year. Keep this form with your rec-dividend income from sources outside the than half of the child's support, or ords. You do not have to attach it to your taxUnited States (foreign income), you must report return.c. A full-time student over age 18 andthat income on your tax return unless it is ex-
under age 24 at the end of 2008 and Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.empt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re-
did not have earned income that was Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, youside inside or outside the United States and
more than half of the child's support. must still report all of your taxable dividend in-whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the
come. For example, you may receive distributiveforeign payer.
4. At least one of the child's parents was shares of dividends from partnerships or S cor-
alive at the end of 2008. porations. These dividends are reported to you
on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K-15. The child does not file a joint return for (Form 1120S).2008.Introduction
Reporting tax withheld. If tax is withheldA child born on January 1, 1991, is consideredThis chapter discusses the tax treatment of: from your dividend income, the payer must giveto be age 18 at the end of 2008; a child born you a Form 1099-DIV that indicates the amount• Ordinary dividends, on January 1, 1990, is considered to be age 19 withheld.at the end of 2008; a child born on January 1,• Capital gain distributions,
1985, is considered to be age 24 at the end of Nominees. If someone receives distribu-• Nondividend distributions, and 2008. tions as a nominee for you, that person will give
• Other distributions you may receive from a If all of these statements are true, Form you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu-
corporation or a mutual fund. 8615, Tax for Certain Children With Investment tions received on your behalf.
Page 62 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

Page 65 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay- Holding period. You must have held the stock 2. You were grantor (writer) of an option to
ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interest for more than 60 days during the 121-day period buy substantially identical stock or securi-
that are received by a broker on your behalf that begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date. ties.
must be reported to you on Form 1099-MISC, The ex-dividend date is the first date following 3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holdingMiscellaneous Income, or a similar statement. the declaration of a dividend on which the buyer one or more other positions in substantiallySee Reporting Substitute Payments under Short of a stock will not receive the next dividend similar or related property.Sales in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for more payment. Instead, the seller will get the divi-
For information about how to apply conditioninformation about reporting these payments. dend.
(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.When counting the number of days you heldIncorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. If
the stock, include the day you disposed of theyou receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect Qualified foreign corporation. A foreign cor-stock, but not the day you acquired it. See theamount (or other incorrect information), you poration is a qualified foreign corporation if itexamples later.should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The meets any of the following conditions. new Form 1099 you receive will be marked ªCor- Exception for preferred stock. In the case
rected.º of preferred stock, you must have held the stock 1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.
more than 90 days during the 181-day period possession.Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold, that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend dateexchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a 2. The corporation is eligible for the benefitsif the dividends are due to periods totaling moredividend is declared, but before it is paid, the of a comprehensive income tax treaty withthan 366 days. If the preferred dividends are dueowner of record (usually the payee shown on the the United States that the Treasury De-to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold-dividend check) must include the dividend in partment determines is satisfactory for thising period in the previous paragraph applies.income. purpose and that includes an exchange of
information program. For a list of thoseExample 1. You bought 5,000 shares ofDividends received in January. If a mutual treaties, seeTable 8-1.XYZ Corp. common stock on July 1, 2008. XYZfund (or other regulated investment company) or
Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents perreal estate investment trust (REIT) declares a 3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)
share. The ex-dividend date was July 9, 2008.dividend (including any exempt-interest divi- above, but the stock for which the dividend
Your Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. showsdend or capital gain distribution) in October, is paid is readily tradable on an estab-
$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in boxNovember, or December payable to sharehold- lished securities market in the United
1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold theers of record on a date in one of those months States. See Readily tradable stock, later.
5,000 shares on August 4, 2008. You held yourbut actually pays the dividend during January of
shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of thethe next calendar year, you are considered to Exception. A corporation is not a qualified
121-day period (from July 2, 2008, through Au-have received the dividend on December 31. foreign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-
gust 4, 2008). The 121-day period began onYou report the dividend in the year it was de- vestment company during its tax year in which
May 10, 2008 (60 days before the ex-dividendclared. the dividends are paid or during its previous tax
date), and ended on September 7, 2008. You year.
have no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be- Readily tradable stock. Any stock (such ascause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61 common, ordinary stock, or preferred stock) ordays.Ordinary Dividends an American depositary receipt in respect of that
stock is considered to satisfy requirement (3) if itExample 2. Assume the same facts as inOrdinary (taxable) dividends are the most com- is listed on one of the following securities mar-Example 1 except that you bought the stock onmon type of distribution from a corporation. They kets: the New York Stock Exchange, the NAS-July 8, 2008 (the day before the ex-dividendare paid out of the earnings and profits of a DAQ Stock Market, the American Stockdate), and you sold the stock on September 9,corporation and are ordinary income to you. This Exchange, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cin-2008. You held the stock for 63 days (from Julymeans they are not capital gains. You can as- cinnati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stock Ex-9, 2008, through September 9, 2008). The $500sume that any dividend you receive on common change, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, orof qualified dividends shown in box 1b of youror preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unless the Pacific Exchange, Inc.Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends be-the paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi- cause you held the stock for 61 days of thenary dividends will be shown in box 1a of the Dividends that are not qualified dividends.121-day period (from July 9, 2008, through Sep-Form 1099-DIV you receive. The following dividends are not qualified divi-tember 7, 2008).
dends. They are not qualified dividends even if
they are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV.Qualified Dividends Example 3. You bought 10,000 shares of
ABC Mutual Fund common stock on July 1, • Capital gain distributions.Qualified dividends are the ordinary dividends 2008. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend of
that are subject to the same 0% or 15% maxi- • Dividends paid on deposits with mutual10 cents a share. The ex-dividend date was July
mum tax rate that applies to net capital gain. savings banks, cooperative banks, credit9, 2008. The ABC Mutual Fund advises you that
They should be shown in box 1b of the Form unions, U.S. building and loan associa-the portion of the dividend eligible to be treated
1099-DIV you receive. tions, U.S. savings and loan associations,as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per share.
Qualified dividends are subject to the 15% federal savings and loan associations, andYour Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual Fund
rate if the regular tax rate that would apply is similar financial institutions. (Report theseshows total ordinary dividends of $1,000 and
25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that would amounts as interest income.)qualified dividends of $200. However, you sold
apply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends are the 10,000 shares on August 4, 2008. You have • Dividends from a corporation that is asubject to the 0% rate. no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual Fund tax-exempt organization or farmer's coop-To qualify for the 0% or 15% maximum rate, because you held the ABC Mutual Fund stock erative during the corporation's tax year inall of the following requirements must be met. for less than 61 days. which the dividends were paid or during
• The dividends must have been paid by a the corporation's previous tax year.Holding period reduced where risk of loss
U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor- is diminished. When determining whether • Dividends paid by a corporation on em-poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora- you met the minimum holding period discussed ployer securities which are held on thetion later.) earlier, you cannot count any day during which date of record by an employee stock own-
you meet any of the following conditions.• The dividends are not of the type listed ership plan (ESOP) maintained by that
later under Dividends that are not qualified corporation.1. You had an option to sell, were under adividends. contractual obligation to sell, or had made • Dividends on any share of stock to the
• You meet the holding period (discussed (and not closed) a short sale of substan- extent that you are obligated (whether
next). tially identical stock or securities. under a short sale or otherwise) to make
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions Page 63

Page 66 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
stock of the company. If you buy stock in arelated payments for positions in substan- the fair market value of the stock you buy. When
corporation in different lots at different times,tially similar or related property. figuring this amount, use the fair market value of
and you cannot definitely identify the sharesthe stock on the dividend payment date.• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if subject to the nondividend distribution, reduce
you know or have reason to know that the the basis of your earliest purchases first.
Money Market Fundspayments are not qualified dividends. When the basis of your stock has been re-
duced to zero, report any additional nondividend• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box Report amounts you receive from money market distribution that you receive as a capital gain.1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent funds as dividend income. Money market funds Whether you report it as a long-term oryou know or have reason to know the pay- are a type of mutual fund and should not be short-term capital gain depends on how longments are not qualified dividends. confused with bank money market accounts that you have held the stock. See Holding Period in
pay interest. chapter 14.
Table 8-1. Income Tax Treaties Example. You bought stock in 1996 for
$100. In 1999, you received a nondividend dis-
Income tax treaties the United States has tribution of $80. You did not include this amountCapital Gainwith the following countries satisfy in your income, but you reduced the basis of
requirement (2) under Qualified foreign your stock to $20. You received a nondividendDistributionscorporation. distribution of $30 in 2008. The first $20 of this
amount reduced your basis to zero. You reportAustralia Indonesia Romania Capital gain distributions (also called capital the other $10 as a long-term capital gain forAustria Ireland Russian gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to 2008. You must report as a long-term capitalBangladesh1 Israel Federation your account by mutual funds (or other regu- gain any nondividend distribution you receive onlated investment companies) and real estateBarbados2 Italy Slovak this stock in later years.investment trusts (REITs). They will be shown inBelgium Jamaica Republic
box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive fromCanada Japan Slovenia Liquidating Distributionsthe mutual fund or REIT.China Kazakhstan South Africa Report capital gain distributions as long-termCyprus Korea Spain  Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liq-capital gains regardless of how long you ownedCzech Latvia Sri Lanka3 uidating dividends, are distributions you receiveyour shares in the mutual fund or REIT.Republic Lithuania Sweden during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-
Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds poration. These distributions are, at least in part,Denmark Luxembourg Switzerland
and REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs one form of a return of capital. They may be paidEgypt Mexico Thailand
keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on in one or more installments. You will receive aEstonia Morocco Trinidad and them. You must treat your share of these gains Form 1099-DIV from the corporation showingFinland Netherlands Tobago as distributions, even though you did not actu- you the amount of the liquidating distribution inFrance New Zealand Tunisia ally receive them. However, they are not in- box 8 or 9.Germany Norway Turkey cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are For more information on liquidating distribu-Greece Pakistan Ukraine reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share- tions, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.Hungary Philippines United holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capital
Iceland Poland Kingdom Gains.
India Portugal Venezuela Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a of
1Effective for dividends paid after August 6, 2006. Form 2439) as long-term capital gains on Distributions of Stock2Effective for dividends paid after December 19, Schedule D (Form 1040), column (f), line 11.
2004. and Stock RightsThe tax paid on these gains by the mutual3Effective for dividends paid after July 11, 2004. fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.   Distributions by a corporation of its own stockYou take credit for this tax by including it on are commonly known as stock dividends. StockForm 1040, line 68, and checking box a on that rights (also known as ªstock optionsº) are distri-line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return,Dividends Used to Buy butions by a corporation of rights to acquire theand keep Copy C for your records. corporation's stock. Generally, stock dividendsMore Stock Basis adjustment. Increase your basis in and stock rights are not taxable to you, and you
your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, by do not report them on your return.The corporation in which you own stock may the difference between the gain you report andhave a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan Taxable stock dividends and stock rights.the credit you claim for the tax paid.lets you choose to use your dividends to buy Distributions of stock dividends and stock rights
Additional information. For more information(through an agent) more shares of stock in the are taxable to you if any of the following apply.
on the treatment of distributions from mutualcorporation instead of receiving the dividends in
1. You or any other shareholder has thefunds, see Publication 564.cash. If you are a member of this type of plan choice to receive cash or other propertyand you use your dividends to buy more stock at instead of stock or stock rights.a price equal to its fair market value, you still
must report the dividends as income. 2. The distribution gives cash or other prop-
Nondividend erty to some shareholders and an increaseIf you are a member of a dividend reinvest-
in the percentage interest in the corpora-ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a price Distributions tion's assets or earnings and profits toless than its fair market value, you must report other shareholders.as dividend income the fair market value of the A nondividend distribution is a distribution that isadditional stock on the dividend payment date. 3. The distribution is in convertible preferrednot paid out of the earnings and profits of a stock and has the same result as in (2).You also must report as dividend income any corporation. You should receive a Form
service charge subtracted from your cash divi- 1099-DIV or other statement from the corpora- 4. The distribution gives preferred stock to
dends before the dividends are used to buy the tion showing the nondividend distribution. On some common stock shareholders and
additional stock. But you may be able to deduct Form 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution will common stock to other common stock
the service charge. See chapter 28  for more be shown in box 3. If you do not receive such a shareholders.
statement, you report the distribution as an ordi-information about deducting expenses of pro- 5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (Thenary dividend.ducing income. distribution, however, is not taxable if it is
In some dividend reinvestment plans, you Basis adjustment. A nondividend distribution an increase in the conversion ratio of con-
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at a reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxed vertible preferred stock made solely to take
price less than fair market value. If you choose until your basis in the stock is fully recovered. into account a stock dividend, stock split,
to do this, you must report as dividend income This nontaxable portion is also called a return of or similar event that would otherwise result
the difference between the cash you invest and capital. It is a return of your investment in the in reducing the conversion right.)
Page 64 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

Page 67 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The term ªstockº includes rights to acquire of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-
stock, and the term ªshareholderº includes a ceive it. You must include its fair market value in How To Reportholder of rights or of convertible securities. income on the date you receive it.
If you receive taxable stock dividends or Dividend Income
stock rights, include their fair market value at the
time of the distribution in your income. Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or
Form 1040A to report your dividend income.Preferred stock redeemable at a premium. Other Distributions Report the total of your ordinary dividends onIf you hold preferred stock having a redemption line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Reportprice higher than its issue price, the difference You may receive any of the following distribu- qualified dividends on line 9b of Form 1040 or(the redemption premium) generally is taxable tions during the year. Form 1040A.as a constructive distribution of additional stock   If you receive capital gain distributions, youon the preferred stock. For more information, may be able to use Form 1040A or you mayExempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interestsee chapter 1 of Publication 550. have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-dividends you receive from a mutual fund or
butions only in chapter 16. If you receive nondiv-other regulated investment company are not in-Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-
idend distributions required to be reported ascluded in your taxable income. Exempt-interestceived in a taxable distribution is their fair market
capital gains, you must use Form 1040. Youdividends should be shown in box 8 of Formvalue when distributed. If you receive stock or
cannot use Form 1040EZ if you receive anystock rights that are not taxable to you, see 1099-INT. dividend income.Stocks and Bonds under Basis of Investment Information reporting requirement. Al-Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for infor- Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichthough exempt-interest dividends are not tax-mation on how to figure their basis. you received $10 or more in dividends and otherable, you must show them on your tax return if
distributions, you should receive a Formyou have to file a return. This is an informationFractional shares. You may not own enough 1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive Formreporting requirement and does not change thestock in a corporation to receive a full share of 1099-DIV, you must report all of your taxableexempt-interest dividends to taxable income.stock if the corporation declares a stock divi- dividend income.dend. However, with the approval of the share- Alternative minimum tax treatment. Ex- See Form 1099-DIV for more information onholders, the corporation may set up a plan in empt-interest dividends paid from specified pri- how to report dividend income.which fractional shares are not issued, but in- vate activity bonds may be subject to thestead are sold, and the cash proceeds are given Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1alternative minimum tax. See Alternative Mini-to the shareholders. Any cash you receive for (Form 1040A), Part II, and attach it to your Formmum Tax in chapter 30 for more information.fractional shares under such a plan is treated as 1040A, if:
an amount realized on the sale of the fractional • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,shares. You must determine your gain or loss Dividends on insurance policies. Insurance box 1a) are more than $1,500, orand report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched- policy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses
ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is the • You received, as a nominee, dividendsto pay your premiums are not taxable. However,
difference between the cash you receive and the that actually belong to someone else.you must report as taxable interest income the
basis of the fractional shares sold. interest that is paid or credited on dividends left
List on line 5 each payer's name and thewith the insurance company.Example. You own one share of common amount of ordinary dividends you received. IfIf dividends on an insurance contract (otherstock that you bought on January 3, 2000, for you received a Form 1099-DIV from a brokeragethan a modified endowment contract) are distrib-$100. The corporation declared a common stock firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.uted to you, they are a partial return of thedividend of 5% on June 30, 2008. The fair mar- Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed
premiums you paid. Do not include them in yourket value of the stock at the time the stock on line 5. Also enter this total on Form 1040A,
gross income until they are more than the total ofdividend was declared was $200. You were paid line 9a.
all net premiums you paid for the contract. Re-$10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under Form 1040. You must fill in Schedule B, Partport any taxable distributions on insurance poli-a plan described in the above paragraph. You II, and attach it to your Form 1040, if:cies on Form 1040, line 21.figure your gain or loss as follows:
• Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,
Fair market value of old stock .... . $200.00 box 1a) are more than $1,500, orDividends on veterans' insurance. Divi-Fair market value of stock dividend
dends you receive on veterans' insurance poli- • You received, as a nominee, dividends(cash received) .............. .  +10.00
cies are not taxable. In addition, interest on that actually belong to someone else.Fair market value of old stock and
dividends left with the Department of Veteransstock dividend ............... . $210.00 If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,Affairs is not taxable.Basis (cost) of old stock after the you must also complete Schedule B, Part III.
stock dividend (($200 ÷  $210) ×  $100) $95.24 List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, eachBasis (cost) of stock dividend (($10 ÷ Patronage dividends. Generally, patronage payer's name and the amount of ordinary divi-$210) ×  $100) ............... . + 4.76 dividends you receive in money from a coopera- dends you received. If your securities are heldTotal ..................... . $100.00 tive organization are included in your income. by a brokerage firm (in ªstreet nameº), list theCash received ............... . $10.00 name of the brokerage firm that is shown onDo not include in your income patronageBasis (cost) of stock dividend ..... . − 4.76 Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock isdividends you receive on:Gain $5.24 held by a nominee who is the owner of record,• Property bought for your personal use, or and the nominee credited or paid you dividendsBecause you had held the share of stock for on the stock, show the name of the nominee and• Capital assets or depreciable propertymore than 1 year at the time the stock dividend the dividends you received or for which you werebought for use in your business. But youwas declared, your gain on the stock dividend is credited.must reduce the basis (cost) of the itemsa long-term capital gain. Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedbought. If the dividend is more than theScrip dividends. A corporation that de- on line 5. Also enter this total on Form 1040, lineadjusted basis of the assets, you must re-clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip 9a.port the excess as income.certificate that entitles you to a fractional share. Qualified dividends. Report qualified divi-The certificate is generally nontaxable when you These rules are the same whether the cooper- dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b ofreceive it. If you choose to have the corporation ative paying the dividend is a taxable or Form 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in boxsell the certificate for you and give you the pro- tax-exempt cooperative. 1b is already included in box 1a. Do not add theceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be- amount in box 1b to, or substract it from, thetween the proceeds and the portion of your basis amount in box 1a. Do not include any of thein the corporation's stock that is allocated to the Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.   Do not following on lines 9b.certificate. report these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-
port these amounts on Form 1040, line 21; FormHowever, if you receive a scrip certificate • Qualified dividends you received as a
1040A, line 13; or Form 1040EZ, line 3.that you can choose to redeem for cash instead nominee. See Nominees under How to
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions Page 65

Page 68 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Report Dividend Income in chapter 1 of • How to report your rental income and ex- Security deposits. Do not include a security
Publication 550. penses. deposit in your income when you receive it if you
plan to return it to your tenant at the end of the• Dividends on stock for which you did not If you sell or otherwise dispose of your rental lease. But if you keep part or all of the securitymeet the holding period. See Holding pe-
property, see Publication 544, Sales and Other deposit during any year because your tenantriod earlier under Qualified Dividends.
Dispositions of Assets. does not live up to the terms of the lease, include• Dividends on any share of stock to the If you have a loss from damage to, or theft of, the amount you keep in your income in that year.extent that you are obligated (whether rental property, see Publication 547, Casualties, If an amount called a security deposit is to beunder a short sale or otherwise) to make Disasters, and Thefts. used as a final payment of rent, it is advancerelated payments for positions in substan- If you rent a condominium or a cooperative rent. Include it in your income when you receivetially similar or related property. apartment, some special rules apply to you even it.
• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if though you receive the same tax treatment as
Payment for canceling a lease. If your tenantyou know or have reason to know that the other owners of rental property. See Publication
pays you to cancel a lease, the amount youpayments are not qualified dividends. 527, Residential Rental Property, for more infor-
receive is rent. Include the payment in yourmation.• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box income in the year you receive it regardless of1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent your method of accounting.you know or have reason to know the pay- Useful Items
ments are not qualified dividends. You may want to see: Expenses paid by tenant. If your tenant pays
any of your expenses, the payments are rentalIf you have qualified dividends, you must fig- Publication income. You must include them in your income.ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi- You can deduct the expenses if they are deduct-❏ 527 Residential Rental Propertydends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the ible rental expenses. See Rental Expenses ,Form 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched- ❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed in later, for more information.ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc- Service Before 1987tions, whichever applies. Enter qualified Property or services. If you receive propertydividends on line 2 of the worksheet. ❏ 535 Business Expenses or services, instead of money, as rent, include
Investment interest deducted. If you claim the fair market value of the property or services❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
a deduction for investment interest, you may in your rental income.❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertyhave to reduce the amount of your qualified If the services are provided at an agreed
dividends that are eligible for the 0% or 15% tax upon or specified price, that price is the fairForm (and Instructions)rate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi- market value unless there is evidence to the
dends you choose to include in investment in- contrary.❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortizationcome when figuring the limit on your investment
interest deduction. This is done on the Qualified ❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐ Rental of property also used as a home. If
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or Individuals you rent property that you also use as your
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor- home and you rent it fewer than 15 days during❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsmation about the limit on investment interest, the tax year, do not include the rent you receivesee Interest Expenses in chapter 23. ❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental in your income and do not deduct rental ex-
Income and Loss penses. However, you can deduct on Schedule
Expenses related to dividend income. You A (Form 1040) the interest, taxes, and casualtymay be able to deduct expenses related to divi- and theft losses that are allowed for nonrentaldend income if you itemize your deductions on property. See Personal Use of Dwelling UnitSchedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28  for (Including Vacation Home), later.general information about deducting expenses Rental Incomeof producing income. Part interest. If you own a part interest in
rental property, you must report your part of theYou generally must include in your gross income
More information. For more information rental income from the property.all amounts you receive as rent. Rental incomeabout how to report dividend income, see chap- is any payment you receive for the use or occu-ter 1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for the pation of property. In addition to amounts youform you must file. receive as normal rent payments, there are
other amounts that may be rental income. Rental Expenses
When to report. If you are a cash basis tax- This part discusses expenses of renting prop-payer, you report rental income on your return erty that you ordinarily can deduct from yourfor the year you actually or constructively re- rental income. It includes information on theceive it. You are a cash basis taxpayer if you expenses you can deduct if you rent part of yourreport income in the year you receive it, regard-9. property, or if you change your property to rentalless of when it was earned. You constructively use. Depreciation, which you can also deductreceive income when it is made available to you, from your rental income, is discussed later.for example, by being credited to your bank
account.Rental Income When to deduct. You generally deduct your
For more information about when you con- rental expenses in the year you pay them.
structively receive income, see Accounting
and Expenses Methods in chapter 1. Vacant rental property. If you hold property
for rental purposes, you may be able to deduct
Advance rent. Advance rent is any amount your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-
you receive before the period that it covers. ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, or
Introduction Include advance rent in your rental income in the maintaining the property while the property is
year you receive it regardless of the period cov- vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss ofThis chapter discusses rental income and ex- ered or the method of accounting you use. rental income for the period the property is va-penses. It also covers the following topics.
cant.
• Personal use of dwelling unit (including Example. You sign a 10-year lease to rent
vacation home). your property. In the first year, you receive Pre-rental expenses. You can deduct your
$5,000 for the first year's rent and $5,000 as rent ordinary and necessary expenses for managing,• Depreciation. for the last year of the lease. You must include conserving, or maintaining rental property from
• Limits on rental losses. $10,000 in your income in the first year. the time you make it available for rent.
Page 66 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 69 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Depreciation. You can begin to depreciate • Paving a driveway. • 501/2 cents a mile for the period January 1
rental property when it is ready and available for through June 30, 2008, and
If you make an improvement to property, therent. See Placed-in-Service under When Does • 581/2 cents a mile for the period July 1cost of the improvement must be capitalized.Depreciation Begin and End  in chapter 2 of through December 31, 2008.The capitalized cost can generally be depreci-Publication 527.
ated as if the improvement were separate prop- For more information, see chapter 26.Vacant while listed for sale. If you sell prop- erty.erty you held for rental purposes, you can de- To deduct car expenses under eitherduct the ordinary and necessary expenses for method, you must keep records thatOther Expensesmanaging, conserving, or maintaining the prop- follow the rules in chapter 26. In addi-
RECORDSerty until it is sold. tion, you must complete Form 4562, Part V, andOther expenses you can deduct from your rental attach it to your tax return.Personal use of rental property. If you income include advertising, cleaning and main-
sometimes use your rental property for personal tenance, utilities, fire and liability insurance,
purposes, you must divide your expenses be- taxes, interest, commissions for the collection of Tax return preparation. You can deduct, as atween rental and personal use. Also, your rental rent, ordinary and necessary travel and trans- rental expense, the part of tax return preparationexpense deductions may be limited. See Per- portation, and other expenses, discussed next. fees you paid to prepare Schedule E (Formsonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation 1040), Part I. For example, on your 2008 Sched-Rental of property. You can deduct the rentHome), later. ule E, you can deduct fees paid in 2008 toyou pay for property that you use for rental prepare your 2007 Schedule E, Part I. You canPart interest. If you own a part interest in purposes. If you buy a leasehold for rental pur- also deduct, as a rental expense, any expenserental property, you can deduct expenses that poses, you can deduct an equal part of the cost (other than federal taxes and penalties) you paidyou paid according to your percentage of owner- each year over the term of the lease. to resolve a tax underpayment related to yourship.
rental activities.Rental of equipment. You can deduct theUncollected rent. If you are a cash basis tax- rent you pay for equipment that you use forpayer, do not deduct uncollected rent. Because rental purposes. However, in some cases, leaseyou do not include it in your income, you cannot contracts are actually purchase contracts. If so,deduct it. you cannot deduct these payments. You can Not Rented for ProfitIf you use an accrual method, you report recover the cost of purchased equipmentincome when you earn it. If you are unable to through depreciation. If you do not rent your property to make a profit,collect the rent, you may be able to deduct it as a
you can deduct your rental expenses only up tobusiness bad debt. See chapter 10 of Publica- Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you the amount of your rental income. You cannottion 535 for more information about business pay an insurance premium for more than one deduct a loss or carry forward to the next yearbad debts. year in advance, for each year of coverage you any rental expenses that are more than yourcan deduct the part of the premium payment that rental income for the year. For more informationwill apply to that year. You cannot deduct theRepairs and Improvements about the rules for an activity not engaged in fortotal premium in the year you pay it. profit, see Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 ofYou can deduct the cost of repairs to your rental Local benefit taxes. Generally, you cannot Publication 535.property. You cannot deduct the cost of im- deduct charges for local benefits that increaseprovements. Instead, recover the cost of im- the value of your property, such as charges for Where to report. Report your not-for-profitprovements by taking depreciation (explained putting in streets, sidewalks, or water and sewer rental income on Form 1040, line 21. You canlater). systems. These charges are nondepreciable include your mortgage interest and any qualified
capital expenditures, and must be added to theSeparate the costs of repairs and im- mortgage insurance premiums (if you use the
basis of your property. However, you can deductprovements, and keep accurate rec- property as your main home or second home),
local benefit taxes that are for maintaining, re-ords. You will need to know the cost of real estate taxes, and casualty losses on the
RECORDS
pairing, or paying interest charges for the bene-improvements when you sell or depreciate your appropriate lines of Form 1040, Schedule A, if
fits.property. you itemize your deductions.
Claim your other rental expenses, subject toTravel expenses. You can deduct the ordi-Repairs. A repair keeps your property in good the rules explained in chapter 1 of Publicationnary and necessary expenses of traveling awayoperating condition. It does not materially add to 535, as miscellaneous itemized deductions onfrom home if the primary purpose of the trip wasthe value of your property or substantially pro- Form 1040, Schedule A, line 23. You can deductto collect rental income or to manage, conserve,long its life. Repainting your property inside or these expenses only if they, together with cer-or maintain your rental property. You must prop-out, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster- tain other miscellaneous itemized deductions,erly allocate your expenses between rental anding, and replacing broken windows are exam- total more than 2% of your adjusted gross in-nonrental activities. You cannot deduct the costples of repairs. come.of traveling away from home if the primary pur-If you make repairs as part of an extensive
pose of the trip was to improve your property.remodeling or restoration of your property, the
You recover the cost of improvements by takingwhole job is an improvement.
depreciation. For information on travel ex-Improvements. An improvement adds to the penses, see chapter 26. Property Changed value of property, prolongs its useful life, or
To deduct travel expenses, you mustadapts it to new uses. Improvements include the to Rental Usekeep records that follow the rules infollowing items.
chapter 26.
RECORDS• Putting a recreation room in an unfinished If you change your home or other property (or a
basement. part of it) to rental use at any time other than theLocal transportation expenses.  You can beginning of your tax year, you must dividededuct your ordinary and necessary local trans-• Paneling a den. yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance,portation expenses if you incur them to collect• Adding a bathroom or bedroom. between rental use and personal use.rental income or to manage, conserve, or main-
You can deduct as rental expenses only thetain your rental property.• Putting decorative grillwork on a balcony.
part of the expense that is for the part of the yearGenerally, if you use your personal car,• Putting up a fence. the property was used or held for rental pur-pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, you
poses.can deduct the expenses using one of two meth-• Putting in new plumbing or wiring.
You cannot deduct depreciation or insuranceods: actual expenses or the standard mileage• Putting in new cabinets. for the part of the year the property was held forrate. For 2008, the standard mileage rate for
personal use. However, you can include the• Putting on a new roof. each mile of business use is:
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 67

Page 70 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
home mortgage interest, qualified mortgage in- If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur-
surance premiums, and real estate tax ex- poses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price,Personal Use of
penses for the part of the year the property was do not count that day as a day of rental use in
held for personal use as an itemized deduction applying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day ofDwelling Unit 
on Schedule A (Form 1040). Alternatively, some personal use in applying both (1) and (2) above.
real estate taxes may be added to your standard However, this rule does not apply when dividing(Including Vacation
deduction. See your tax form instructions. expenses between rental and personal use.
Home)
Example. Your tax year is the calendar Fair rental price. A fair rental price for your
year. You moved from your home in May and If you have any personal use of a dwelling unit property generally is the amount of rent that a
started renting it out on June 1. You can deduct (including a vacation home) that you rent, you person who is not related to you would be willing
as rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearly must divide your expenses between rental use to pay. The rent you charge is not a fair rental
expenses, such as taxes and insurance. and personal use. See What Is a Day of Per- price if it is substantially less than the rents
sonal Use and How To Divide Expenses, later.Starting with June, you can deduct as rental charged for other properties that are similar to If you used a dwelling unit for personalexpenses the amounts you pay for items gener- your property.purposes, it may be considered a ªdwelling unitally billed monthly, such as utilities.
used as a home.º If it is, you cannot deduct
rental expenses that are more than your rental Examplesincome for the unit. See Dwelling Unit Used as
Home  and How To Figure Rental Income and The following examples show how to determineRenting Part of Deductions, later. If your dwelling unit is not whether you used your rental property as a
considered a dwelling unit used as a home, you home.Property can deduct rental expenses that are more than
rental income for the unit subject to certain lim- Example 1. You converted the basement ofIf you rent part of your property, you must divide its. See Limits on Rental Losses, later. your home into an apartment with a bedroom, acertain expenses between the part of the prop-
bathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented theException for minimal rental use. If you useerty used for rental purposes and the part of the
basement apartment at a fair rental price tothe dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewerproperty used for personal purposes, as though
college students during the regular school year.than 15 days during the year, that period is notyou actually had two separate pieces of prop-
You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273treated as rental activity. Do not include any oferty.
the rent in your income and do not deduct any of days). You figured 10% of the total days rentedYou can deduct the expenses related to the the rental expenses. To determine if you use a to others at a fair rental price is 27 days.part of the property used for rental purposes, dwelling unit as a home, see Dwelling Unit Used During June (30 days), your brothers stayedsuch as home mortgage interest, qualified mort- as Home, later. with you and lived in the basement apartmentgage insurance premiums, and real estate
rent free.taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Form Dwelling unit.  A dwelling unit includes a
Your basement apartment was used as ahouse, apartment, condominium, mobile home,1040). You can also deduct as rental expenses
home because you used it for personal pur-boat, vacation home, or similar property. It alsoa portion of other expenses that normally are
poses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your broth-includes all structures or other property belong-nondeductible personal expenses, such as ex-
ing to the dwelling unit. A dwelling unit has basic ers is considered personal use. Your personalpenses for electricity or painting the outside of
living accommodations, such as sleeping space, use (30 days) is more than the greater of 14your house.
a toilet, and cooking facilities. days or 10% of the total days it was rented (27There is no change in the types of expenses
   A dwelling unit does not include property days).deductible for the personal-use part of your used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similarproperty. Generally, these expenses may be establishment. Property is used solely as a ho- Example 2. You rented the guest bedroomdeducted only if you itemize your deductions on tel, motel, inn, or similar establishment if it is in your home at a fair rental price during the localSchedule A (Form 1040). regularly available for occupancy by paying cus- college's homecoming, commencement, andYou cannot deduct any part of the cost of the tomers and is not used by an owner as a home football weekends (a total of 27 days). Yourfirst phone line even if your tenants have unlim- during the year. sister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for theited use of it.
last 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 10%You do not have to divide the expenses that Example. You rent a room in your home of the total days rented to others at a fair rentalbelong only to the rental part of your property. that is always available for short-term occu- price is 3 days.For example, if you paint a room that you rent, or pancy by paying customers. You do not use the The room was used as a home because youif you pay premiums for liability insurance in room yourself, and you allow only paying cus- used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That isconnection with renting a room in your home, tomers to use the room. The room is used solely
more than the greater of 14 days or 10% of theyour entire cost is a rental expense. If you install as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishment
27 days it was rented (3 days).a second phone line strictly for your tenants' and is not a dwelling unit.
use, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-
Example 3. You own a condominium apart-ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre- Dwelling Unit ment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair rentalciation, discussed later, on the part of the house
price for a total of 170 days during the year. ForUsed as Homeused for rental purposes as well as on the furni-
12 of those days, the tenant was not able to useture and equipment you use for rental purposes.
The tax treatment of rental income and ex- the apartment and allowed you to use it even
penses for a dwelling unit that you also use for though you did not refund any of the rent. YourHow to divide expenses. If an expense is for personal purposes depends on whether you use family actually used the apartment for 10 ofboth rental use and personal use, such as mort- it as a home. (See How To Figure Rental Income those days. Therefore, the apartment is treatedgage interest or heat for the entire house, you and Deductions, later.) as having been rented for 160 (170 − 10) days.must divide the expense between the rental use You use a dwelling unit as a home during the You figured 10% of the total days rented toand the personal use. You can use any reasona- tax year if you use it for personal purposes more others at a fair rental price is 16 days. Yourble method for dividing the expense. It may be than the greater of: family also used the apartment for 7 other daysreasonable to divide the cost of some items (for
during the year.example, water) based on the number of people 1. 14 days, or
using them. The two most common methods for You used the apartment as a home because2. 10% of the total days it is rented to othersdividing an expense are based on (1) the num- you used it for personal purposes for 17 days.at a fair rental price.ber of rooms in your home, and (2) the square That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10%
footage of your home. of the 160 days it was rented (16 days).See What Is a Day of Personal Use, later.
Page 68 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 71 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Any day that the unit is available for rentUse As Main Home Before or After Examples
but not actually rented is not a day ofRenting The following examples show how to determine rental use.
days of personal use.For purposes of determining whether a dwelling
unit was used as a home, you may not have to Example. Your beach cottage was avail-Example 1. You and your neighbor arecount days you used the property as your main able for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92co-owners of a condominium at the beach. Lasthome before or after renting it or offering it for days). Your family uses the cottage during theyear, you rented the unit to vacationers when-rent as days of personal use. Do not count them last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unableever possible. The unit was not used as a mainas days of personal use if: to find a renter for the first week in August (7home by anyone. Your neighbor used the unit days). The person who rented the cottage for• You rented or tried to rent the property for for 2 weeks last year. July allowed you to use it over a weekend (212 or more consecutive months. Because your neighbor has an interest in the days) without any reduction in or refund of rent.
unit, both of you are considered to have used the• You rented or tried to rent the property for The cottage was not used at all before May 17 or
unit for personal purposes during those 2 after August 31.a period of less than 12 consecutive
weeks.months and the period ended because You figure the part of the cottage expensesyou sold or exchanged the property. to treat as rental expenses as follows.Example 2. You and your neighbors are
This special rule does not apply when dividing co-owners of a house under a shared equity • The cottage was used for rental a total ofexpenses between rental and personal use. financing agreement. Your neighbors live in the 85 days (92 − 7). The days it was avail-house and pay you a fair rental price. able for rent but not rented (7 days) are
Even though your neighbors have an interest not days of rental use. The July weekendWhat Is a Day
in the house, the days your neighbors live there (2 days) you used it is rental use becauseof Personal Use are not counted as days of personal use by you. you received a fair rental price for the
This is because your neighbors rent the house weekend.A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is any as their main home under a shared equity fi- • You used the cottage for personal pur-day that the unit is used by any of the following nancing agreement. poses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks inpersons.
May).Example 3. You own a rental property that1. You or any other person who has an inter- you rent to your son. Your son does not own any • The total use of the cottage was 99 daysest in it, unless you rent it to another owner interest in this property. He uses it as his main (14 days personal use + 85 days rentalas his or her main home under a shared home and pays you a fair rental price for the use).equity financing agreement (defined later). property. • Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) ofHowever, see Use as Main Home Before Your son's use of the property is not personal the cottage expenses.or After Renting under Dwelling Unit Used use by you because your son is using it as hisas Home, earlier. main home, he owns no interest in the property, When determining whether you used the cot-2. A member of your family or a member of and he is paying you a fair rental price. tage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) you
the family of any other person who owns used it is personal use even though you re-
Example 4. You rent your beach house toan interest in it, unless the family member ceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There-
Joshua. Joshua rents his house in the moun-uses the dwelling unit as his or her main fore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83
tains to you. You each pay a fair rental price.home and pays a fair rental price. Family days of rental use for this purpose. Because you
includes only your spouse, brothers and You are using your house for personal pur- used the cottage for personal purposes more
sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, an- poses on the days that Joshua uses it because than 14 days and more than 10% of the days of
your house is used by Joshua under an arrange-cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and rental use (8 days), you used it as a home. If you
ment that allows you to use his house. have a net loss, you may not be able to deductlineal descendants (children, grandchild-
all of the rental expenses. See Property Used asren, etc.).
a Home in the following discussion.3. Anyone under an arrangement that lets Days Used for Repairs andyou use some other dwelling unit. Maintenance How To Figure Rental4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.
Any day that you spend working substantially full Income and Deductions
time repairing and maintaining (not improving)
Main home. If the other person or member of How you figure your rental income and deduc-your property is not counted as a day of personal
the family in (1) or (2) above has more than one tions depends on whether you used the dwellinguse. Do not count such a day as a day of per-
home, his or her main home is ordinarily the one unit as a home (see Dwelling Unit Used assonal use even if family members use the prop-
Home, earlier) and, if you used it as a home,he or she lived in most of the time. erty for recreational purposes on the same day.
how many days the property was rented at a fair
rental price.Shared equity financing agreement. This is How To Divide Expensesan agreement under which two or more persons
acquire undivided interests for more than 50 If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and Property Not Used as a Homeyears in an entire dwelling unit, including the personal purposes, divide your expenses be-
land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti- tween the rental use and the personal use based If you do not use a dwelling unit as a home,tled to occupy the unit as his or her main home on the number of days used for each purpose. report all the rental income and deduct all theupon payment of rent to the other co-owner or You can deduct expenses for the rental use of rental expenses. See How To Report Rentalowners. the unit under the rules explained in How To Income and Expenses, later.Figure Rental Income and Deductions, later.
 Your deductible rental expenses can beDonation of use of property. You use a  When dividing your expenses, follow these more than your gross rental income. However,dwelling unit for personal purposes if: rules. see Limits on Rental Losses, later.
• You donate the use of the unit to a charita- • Any day that the unit is rented at a fair
ble organization, rental price is a day of rental use even if
you used the unit for personal purposes Property Used as a Home• The organization sells the use of the unit that day. This rule does not apply whenat a fund-raising event, and determining whether you used the unit as If you use a dwelling unit as a home during the
• The ªpurchaserº uses the unit. a home. year (see Dwelling Unit Used as Home, earlier),
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 69

Page 72 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
how you figure your rental income and deduc- Land. You cannot depreciate the cost of land Generally, any loss from an activity subject
tions depends on how many days the unit was because land generally does not wear out, be- to the at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent of
rented at a fair rental price. come obsolete, or get used up. The costs of the total amount you have at risk in the activity at
clearing, grading, planting, and landscaping are the end of the tax year. You are considered at
usually all part of the cost of land and cannot be risk in an activity to the extent of cash and theRented fewer than 15 days. If you use a
depreciated. adjusted basis of other property you contributeddwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewer
to the activity and certain amounts borrowed forthan 15 days during the year, do not include any More information. See Publication 527 for use in the activity. See Publication 925 for morerental income in your income. Also, you cannot more information about depreciating rental information.deduct any expenses as rental expenses. property and see Publication 946 for more infor-
mation about depreciation.Rented 15 days or more. If you use a dwell- Passive Activity Limits
ing unit as a home and rent it 15 days or more
Other Rules Aboutduring the year, include all your rental income in Generally, all rental activities (except those
your income. See How To Report Rental Income meeting the exception for real estate profession-Depreciable Propertyand Expenses, later. If you had a net profit from als, below) are passive activities. For this pur-
the rental property for the year (that is, if your pose, a rental activity is an activity from whichIn addition to the rules about what methods you
rental income is more than the total of your you receive income mainly for the use of tangi-can use, there are other rules you should be
rental expenses, including depreciation), deduct ble property, rather than for services.aware of with respect to depreciable property.
all of your rental expenses. However, if you had
Gain from disposition. If you dispose ofa net loss, your deduction for certain rental ex- Limits on passive activity deductions and
depreciable property at a gain, you may have topenses is limited. credits.  Deductions for losses from passive
report, as ordinary income, all or part of the gain.To figure your deductible rental expenses activities are limited. You generally cannot offset
See Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi-and any carryover to next year, use Worksheet income, other than passive income, with losses
tions of Assets.9-1 at the end of this chapter. from passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes
on income, other than passive income, withAlternative minimum tax. If you use acceler- credits resulting from passive activities. Any ex-ated depreciation, you may have to file Form cess loss or credit is carried forward to the next6251. Accelerated depreciation can be deter- tax year.Depreciation mined under MACRS, ACRS, and any other For a detailed discussion of these rules, seemethod that allows you to deduct more depreci- Publication 925.You recover the cost of income producing prop- ation than you could deduct using a straight line
You may have to complete Form 8582 toerty through yearly tax deductions. You do this method.
figure the amount of any passive activity loss forby depreciating the property; that is, by deduct-
the current tax year for all activities and theing some of the cost on the tax return each year.
amount of the passive activity loss allowed onThree basic factors determine how much de-
your tax return.preciation you can deduct. They are: (1) your Limits on
basis in the property, (2) the recovery period for Exception for real estate professionals.the property, and (3) the depreciation method Rental Losses Rental activities in which you materially partici-used. You cannot simply deduct your mortgage pated during the year are not passive activitiesor principal payments, or the cost of furniture, Rental real estate activities are generally con- if, for that year, you were a real estate profes-fixtures and equipment, as an expense. sidered passive activities, and the amount of sional. For a detailed discussion of the require-You can deduct depreciation only on the part loss you can deduct is limited. Generally, you ments, see Publication 527. For a detailedof your property used for rental purposes. De- cannot deduct losses from rental real estate discussion of material participation, see Publica-preciation reduces your basis for figuring gain or activities unless you have income from other tion 925.loss on a later sale or exchange. passive activities. However, you may be able to
You may have to use Form 4562 to figure deduct rental losses without regard to whether
and report your depreciation. See How To Re- you have income from other passive activities if Losses From Rental Real Estateport Rental Income and Expenses, later. you ªmateriallyº or ªactivelyº participated in your Activitiesrental activity. See Passive Activity Limits, later.
Losses from passive activities are first sub-Claiming the correct amount of depreciation. If you or your spouse actively participated in aject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit theYou should claim the correct amount of depreci- passive rental real estate activity, you can de-amount of deductible losses from holding mostation each tax year. Even if you did not claim duct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity fromreal property placed in service after 1986.depreciation that you were entitled to deduct, your nonpassive income. This special allowance
you must still reduce your basis in the property is an exception to the general rule disallowingException. If your rental losses are less thanby the full amount of depreciation that you could losses in excess of income from passive activi-$25,000, and you actively participated in thehave deducted. ties. Similarly, you can offset credits from therental activity, the passive activity limits probablyIf you deducted an incorrect amount of de- activity against the tax on up to $25,000 ofdo not apply to you. See Losses From Rentalpreciation for property in any year, you may be nonpassive income after taking into account anyReal Estate Activities, later.able to make a correction by filing Form 1040X, losses allowed under this exception.
Amended U.S Individual Income Tax Return. If Property used as a home. If you used the
you are not allowed to make the correction on an Active participation. You actively partici-rental property as a home during the year, the
amended return, you can change your account- pated in a rental real estate activity if you (andpassive activity rules do not apply to that home.
ing method to claim the correct amount of depre- your spouse) owned at least 10% of the rentalInstead, you must follow the rules explained
ciation. See Claiming the correct amount of property and you made management decisionsunder Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including
depreciation in chapter 2 of Publication 527 for in a significant and bona fide sense. Manage-Vacation Home), earlier.
more information. ment decisions include approving new tenants,
deciding on rental terms, approving expendi-Changing your accounting method to de- At-Risk Rules tures, and similar decisions.duct unclaimed depreciation. To change
your accounting method, you generally must file  The at-risk rules place a limit on the amount you Maximum special allowance. The maximumForm 3115, Application for Change in Account- can deduct as losses from activities often de- special allowance is:ing Method, to get the consent of the IRS. In scribed as tax shelters. Losses from holding real
• $25,000 for single individuals and marriedsome instances, that consent is automatic. For property (other than mineral property) placed in
individuals filing a joint return for the taxmore information, see chapter 1 of Publication service before 1987 are not subject to the at-risk
year,946. rules.
Page 70 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 73 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 9-1. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a Dwelling
Unit Used as a Home Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer ªyesº to all of the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit at a fair rental price 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
PART I. Rental Use Percentage
A. Total days available for rent at fair rental price ............................... . A.
B. Total days available for rent (line A) but not rented ............................ . B.
C. Total days of rental use. Subtract line B from line A ........................... . C.
D. Total days of personal use (including days rented at less than fair rental price) ........ . D.
E. Total days of rental and personal use. Add lines C and D ...................... . E.
F. Percentage of expenses allowed for rental. Divide line C by line E ................ . F.
PART II. Allowable Rental Expenses
1. Enter rents received ............................................................... . 1.
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest and qualified 
mortgage insurance premiums (see instructions) .............................. . 2a.
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes .................................. . b.
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ........ . c.
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions) ............................... . d.
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a±2d. Enter here and 
on the appropriate lines on Schedule E (see instructions) ...................................... . 2e.
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 3.
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining 
the dwelling unit (such as repairs, insurance, and utilities) ....................... . 4a.
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance 
premiums (see instructions) ............................................ . b.
c. Carryover of operating expenses from 2007 worksheet ......................... . c.
d. Add lines 4a±4c .................................................... . d.
e. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4d (see instructions) ........................ . 4e.
5. Subtract line 4e from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 5.
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions) .......... . 6a.
b. Enter the depreciation for the rental portion of the dwelling unit .................... . b.
c. Carryover of excess casualty losses and depreciation from 2007 worksheet ........... . c.
d. Add lines 6a±6c .................................................... . d.
e. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of 
line 5 or line 6d (see instructions) ...................................................... . 6e.
Part III. Carryover of Unallowed Expenses to Next Year
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4e from line 4d ................... . 7a.
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. 
Subtract line 6e from line 6d .......................................................... . b.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 71

Page 74 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 9-1 Instructions. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for
a Dwelling Unit Used as a Home Keep for Your Records
Caution. Use the percentage determined in Part I, line F, to figure the rental portions to enter on lines 2a ±2c, 4a±4b, and 6a±6b of 
Part II.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A (as if you were itemizing your
deductions) if you had not rented the unit. Do not include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit. For example,
do not include interest on a home equity loan used to pay off credit cards or other personal loans, buy a car, or pay college
tuition. Include interest on a loan used to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit, or to refinance such a loan. Include the rental
portion of this interest in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Figure the qualified mortgage insurance premiums on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on line 13 of Schedule A, if you
had not rented the unit. See page A-4 of the Schedule A instructions. However, figure your adjusted gross income (Form 1040,
line 38) without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. See Line 4b below to deduct the part of the qualified
mortgage insurance premiums not allowed because of the adjusted gross income limit. Include the rental portion of the amount
from Schedule A, line 13, in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Schedule A or use it to figure the amount to deduct on line 13 of that schedule. Instead, figure the
personal portion on a separate Schedule A. If you have deducted mortgage interest or qualified mortgage insurance premiums
on the dwelling unit on other forms, such as Schedule C or F, remember to reduce your Schedule A deduction by that amount.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses related to the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the
dwelling unit. To do this, complete Section A of Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts, treating the losses as personal losses. If
any of the loss is due to a federally declared disaster, see the Instructions for Form 4684. On Form 4684, line 22, enter 10% of
your adjusted gross income figured without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter the rental portion of
the result from Form 4684, line 24, on line 2c of this worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it to figure your personal losses on Schedule A. Instead, figure the personal portion
on a separate Form 4684.
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental expenses that are directly related only to the rental activity. These include interest on loans used
for rental activities other than to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also include rental agency fees, advertising, office
supplies, and depreciation on office equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 2e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d as rental expenses on Schedule E even if your rental expenses are
more than your rental income. Enter the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental portion of the mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums you could
deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the dwelling unit. If you had additional mortgage interest and qualified mortgage
insurance premiums that would not be deductible on Schedule A because of limits imposed on them, enter on line 4b of this
worksheet the rental portion of those excess amounts. Do not include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit (as
explained in the line 2a instructions).
Line 4e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 4a, 4b, and 4c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more
than the amount on line 4e.*
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684 you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
A. Enter the amount from Form 4684, line 10 ............................... .
B. Enter the rental portion of line A ...................................... .
C. Enter the amount from line 2c of this worksheet ........................... .
D. Subtract line C from line B. Enter the result here and on line 6a of this worksheet .... .
Line 6e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 6a, 6b, and 6c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more
than the amount on line 6e.*
*Allocating the limited deduction. If you cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4d or 6d this year, you can allocate the allowable deduction in any way you wish among
the expenses included on line 4d or 6d. Enter the amount you allocate to each expense on the appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I.
• $12,500 for married individuals who file you are married filing separately), there is no
separate returns for the tax year and lived special allowance. How To Reportapart from their spouses at all times during More information. See Publication 925 forthe tax year, and Rental Incomemore information on the passive loss limits, in-
• $25,000 for a qualifying estate reduced by cluding information on the treatment of unused
and Expensesthe special allowance for which the surviv- disallowed passive losses and credits and the
ing spouse qualified. treatment of gains and losses realized on the
If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, anddisposition of a passive activity.
provide only heat and light, trash collection, etc.,If your modified adjusted gross income is
you normally report your rental income and ex-more than $100,000 (more than $50,000 if mar-
penses on Form 1040, Schedule E, Part I. How-ried filing separately), your special allowance is
ever, do not use that schedule to report alimited to 50% of the difference between
$150,000 ($75,000 if married filing separately)
and your modified adjusted gross income.
Generally, if your modified adjusted gross
income is $150,000 or more ($75,000 or more if
Page 72 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 75 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not-for-profit activity. See Not Rented for Profit, • An employee pension or annuity from a
earlier. qualified plan,
• A disability retirement, and10.
Providing substantial services. If you pro- • A purchased commercial annuity.vide substantial services that are primarily for
your tenant's convenience, such as regular
What is not covered in this chapter. Thecleaning, changing linen, or maid service, report Retirement
following topics are not discussed in this chap-your rental income and expenses on Schedule
ter.C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Business, or Plans, Pensions,Schedule C-EZ, Net Profit From Business (Sole The General Rule. This is the method gen-
Proprietorship). Substantial services do not in- erally used to determine the tax treatment of
clude the furnishing of heat and light, cleaning of and Annuities pension and annuity income from nonqualified
public areas, trash collection, etc. For informa- plans (including commercial annuities). For a
tion, see Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small qualified plan, you generally cannot use the
Business. You also may have to pay General Rule unless your annuity starting dateWhat's New for 2008self-employment tax on your rental income. is before November 19, 1996. For more informa-
tion about the General Rule, see PublicationRollovers to Roth IRAs.  Beginning in 2008, 939, General Rule for Pensions and Annuities.Form 1098. If you paid $600 or more of mort- you can roll over distributions directly from agage interest on your rental property to any one Civil service retirement benefits. If youqualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA if, for theperson, you should receive a Form 1098, Mort- are retired from the federal government (eithertax year of the distribution, your modified ad-gage Interest Statement, or similar statement regular or disability retirement), see Publicationjusted gross income for Roth IRA purposes is
showing the interest you paid for the year. If you 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Retirementnot more than $100,000, and your filing status is
and at least one other person (other than your not married filing separately. See Rollovers to Benefits. Publication 721 also covers the infor-
spouse if you file a joint return) were liable for, Roth IRAs , later, for more information. mation that you need if you are the survivor or
and paid interest on the mortgage, and the other beneficiary of a federal employee or retiree whoTax relief for the Kansas disaster area.person received the Form 1098, report your died.Special rules apply to the use of retirementshare of the interest on Form 1040, Schedule E,
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).funds by qualified individuals who suffered anline 13. Attach a statement to your return show-
Information on the tax treatment of amounts youeconomic loss in the Kansas disaster area as aing the name and address of the other person. In
result of the tornadoes and storms that began on receive from an IRA is in chapter 17.the left margin of Schedule E (Form 1040), next
May 4, 2007. See Publication 4492-A, Informa-to line 13, enter ªSee attached.º tion for Taxpayers Affected by the May 4, 2007, Useful Items
Kansas Storms and Tornadoes, for more infor- You may want to see:Schedule E (Form 1040) mation.
PublicationUse Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I, to report Tax relief for the Midwestern disaster areas.
your rental income and expenses. List your total Special rules apply to the use of retirement ❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income
funds by qualified individuals who suffered anincome, expenses, and depreciation for each
❏ 721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Serviceeconomic loss in the Midwestern disaster areasrental property. Be sure to answer the question
Retirement Benefitsas a result of severe storms, tornadoes, or flood-on line 2.
ing affecting the Midwestern disaster areas on ❏ 939 General Rule for Pensions andIf you have more than three rental or royalty certain dates in 2008. See Publication 4492-B, Annuitiesproperties, complete and attach as many Information for Affected Taxpayers in the Mid-Schedules E as are needed to list the properties. western Disaster Areas, for more information. Form (and Instructions)Complete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How-
ever, fill in the ªTotalsº column on only one Qualified settlement income. If you received ❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for Pension
Schedule E. The figures in the ªTotalsº column qualified settlement income in connection with or Annuity Payments
on that Schedule E should be the combined the Exxon Valdez litigation, you may roll over the ❏ 1099-R Distributions From Pensions,amount received, or part of the amount re-totals of all Schedules E. Annuities, Retirement orceived, to an eligible retirement plan. For morePage 2 of Schedule E is used to report in- Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs,information, see Qualified settlement income income or loss from partnerships, S corporations, Insurance Contracts, etc.Publication 575.estates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-
❏ 4972 Tax on Lump-Sum Distributionsment conduits. If you need to use Schedule E,
page 2, use page 2 of the same Schedule E you ❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans
used to enter the combined totals in Part I. (Including IRAs) and Other
Reminder Tax-Favored AccountsOn Schedule E, page 1, line 20, enter the
depreciation you are claiming for each property.
Hurricane tax relief. Special rules apply toYou must complete and attach Form 4562 for
retirement funds received by qualified individu-rental activities only if you are claiming:
als who suffered an economic loss as a result of
• Depreciation, including the special depre- Hurricane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma. See Hurri- General Information
ciation allowance, on property placed in cane-Related Relief,  in Publication 575, Pen-
service during 2008, sion and Annuity Income, or Publication 4492, Designated Roth accounts. A designatedInformation for Taxpayers Affected by Hurri-• Depreciation on listed property (such as a Roth account is a separate account createdcanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma, for informationcar), regardless of when it was placed in under a qualified Roth contribution program toon these special rules.service, or which participants may elect to have part or all of
their elective deferrals to a 401(k) or 403(b) plan• Any other car expenses, including the
designated as Roth contributions. Elective de-standard mileage rate or lease expenses.
ferrals that are designated as Roth contributionsOtherwise, figure your depreciation on your own Introduction are included in your income. However, qualifiedworksheet. You do not have to attach these distributions are not included in your income.This chapter discusses the tax treatment of dis-computations to your return. tributions you receive from: See Publication 575 for more information.
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 73

Page 76 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
More than one program. If you receive bene- For payments other than eligible rollover dis- Treated as Distributions in Publication 575. For
fits from more than one program under a single tributions, you can tell the payer how much to information on the deductibility of interest, see
trust or plan of your employer, such as a pension withhold by filing Form W-4P. If you receive an chapter 23.
plan and a profit-sharing plan, you may have to eligible rollover distribution, 20% will generally
Tax-free exchange. No gain or loss is recog-figure the taxable part of each pension or annu- be withheld. There is no withholding on a direct
nized on an exchange of an annuity contract fority contract separately. Your former employer or rollover of an eligible rollover distribution. See
another annuity contract if the insured or annui-the plan administrator should be able to tell you Direct rollover option under Rollovers, later. If
tant remains the same. However, if an annuityif you have more than one pension or annuity you choose not to have tax withheld or you do
contract is exchanged for a life insurance orcontract. not have enough tax withheld, you may have to
endowment contract, any gain due to interestpay estimated tax.
Disability pensions. If you retired on disabil- accumulated on the contract is ordinary income.For more information, see Pensions and An-
ity, you generally must include in income any See Transfers of Annuity Contracts in Publica-nuities under Withholding in chapter 4.
disability pension you receive under a plan that tion 575 for more information about exchangesQualified plans for self-employed individu-is paid for by your employer. You must report of annuity contracts.als. Qualified plans set up by self-employedyour taxable disability payments as wages on
individuals are sometimes called Keogh or H.R.line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A until you How To Report10 plans. Qualified plans can be set up by solereach minimum retirement age. Minimum retire-
proprietors, partnerships (but not a partner), andment age generally is the age at which you can If you file Form 1040, report your total annuity oncorporations. They can cover self-employedfirst receive a pension or annuity if you are not line 16a and the taxable part on line 16b. If yourpersons, such as the sole proprietor or partners,disabled. pension or annuity is fully taxable, enter it on lineas well as regular (common-law) employees. 16b; do not make an entry on line 16a.You may be entitled to a tax credit if Distributions from a qualified plan are usually If you file Form 1040A, report your total an-you were permanently and totally dis- fully taxable because most recipients have no nuity on line 12a and the taxable part on lineabled when you retired. For informa-
TIP cost basis. If you have an investment (cost) in 12b. If your pension or annuity is fully taxable,tion on this credit, see chapter 33. the plan, however, your pension or annuity pay- enter it on line 12b; do not make an entry on lineBeginning on the day after you reach mini- ments from a qualified plan are taxed under the 12a.mum retirement age, payments you receive are Simplified Method. For more information about
taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the qualified plans, see Publication 560, Retirement More than one annuity. If you receive morepayments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b, or Plans for Small Business. than one annuity and at least one of them is noton Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b. fully taxable, enter the total amount receivedSection 457 deferred compensation plans.
Disability payments for injuries in- from all annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, orIf you work for a state or local government or for
curred as a direct result of a terrorist Form 1040A, line 12a, and enter the taxable parta tax-exempt organization, you may be able to
attack directed against the United on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, lineparticipate in a section 457 deferred compensa-
TIP
States (or its allies) are not included in income. 12b. If all the annuities you receive are fullytion plan. If your plan is an eligible plan, you are
For more information about payments to survi- taxable, enter the total of all of them on Formnot taxed currently on pay that is deferred under
vors of terrorist attacks, see Publication 3920, 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b.the plan or on any earnings from the plan's
Tax Relief for Victims of Terrorist Attacks. investment of the deferred pay. You are gener-
Joint return. If you file a joint return and youally taxed on amounts deferred in an eligibleFor more information on how to report disa- and your spouse each receive one or more pen-state or local government plan only when theybility pensions, including military and certain sions or annuities, report the total of the pen-are distributed from the plan. You are taxed ongovernment disability pensions, see chapter 5. sions and annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, oramounts deferred in an eligible tax-exempt or-
Form 1040A, line 12a, and report the taxableRetired public safety officers. An eligible ganization plan when they are distributed or
part on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, linepublic safety officer can elect to exclude from otherwise made available to you.
12b.income distributions of up to $3,000 made di- This chapter covers the tax treatment of ben-
rectly from a government retirement plan to the efits under eligible section 457 plans, but it does
provider of accident, health, or long-term disabil- not cover the treatment of deferrals. For infor-
ity insurance. See Insurance Premiums for Re- mation on deferrals under section 457 plans,
tired Public Safety Officers in Publication 575 for see Retirement Plan Contributions under Em- Cost (Investment in themore information. ployee Compensation in Publication 525, Tax-
able and Nontaxable Income. Contract)Railroad retirement benefits. Part of the rail- For general information on these deferredroad retirement benefits you receive is treated compensation plans, see Section 457 Deferred Before you can figure how much, if any, of afor tax purposes like social security benefits, and Compensation Plans in Publication 575. distribution from your pension or annuity plan ispart is treated like an employee pension. For taxable, you must determine your cost (yourPurchased annuities. If you receive pensioninformation about railroad retirement benefits investment in the contract) in the pension oror annuity payments from a privately purchasedtreated as social security benefits, see Publica- annuity. Your total cost in the plan includes eve-annuity contract from a commercial organiza-tion 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail- rything that you paid. It also includes amountstion, such as an insurance company, you gener-road Retirement Benefits. For information about your employer paid that were taxable to youally must use the General Rule to figure therailroad retirement benefits treated as an em- when paid. Cost does not include any amountstax-free part of each annuity payment. For moreployee pension, see Railroad Retirement Bene- you deducted or excluded from income.information about the General Rule, get Publica-fits in Publication 575. From this total cost, subtract any refunds oftion 939. Also, see Variable Annuities in Publica- premiums, rebates, dividends, unrepaid loans,Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If you tion 575 for the special provisions that apply to or other tax-free amounts you received by thereceive a disability pension or annuity, you may these annuity contracts. later of the annuity starting date or the date onbe able to take the credit for the elderly or the
Loans. If you borrow money from your quali- which you received your first payment.disabled. See chapter 33.
fied pension or annuity plan, tax-sheltered annu- Your annuity starting date is the later of the
Withholding and estimated tax. The payer ity program, government plan, or contract first day of the first period for which you received
of your pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus, an- purchased under any of these plans, you must a payment, or the date the plan's obligations
nuity, or deferred compensation plan will with- treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribution un- became fixed.
hold income tax on the taxable parts of amounts less certain exceptions apply. This means that
paid to you. You can choose not to have tax you must include in income all or part of the Designated Roth accounts. Your cost in
withheld unless they are eligible rollover distri- amount borrowed. Even if you do not have to these accounts is your designated Roth contri-
butions. See Eligible rollover distributions under treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribution, you butions that were included in your income as
Rollovers, later. You make this choice by filing may not be able to deduct the interest on the wages subject to applicable withholding require-
Form W-4P. loan in some situations. For details, see Loans ments.
Page 74 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 77 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
apply in determining your cost. See PublicationWorksheet 10-A. Simplified Method Worksheet for Bill Smith
575.
1. Enter the total pension or annuity payments received this year.
Also, add this amount to the total for Form 1040, line 16a, or Form
1040A, line 12a ................................... . 1. 14,400
2. Enter your cost in the plan (contract) at the Taxation of Periodic
annuity starting date plus any death benefit
exclusion*. See Cost (Investment in the Payments
Contract) earlier ..................... . 2. 31,000
Note: If your annuity starting date was before Fully taxable payments. Generally, if you didthis year and you completed this worksheet not pay any part of the cost of your employeelast year, skip line 3 and enter the amount from pension or annuity and your employer did notline 4 of last year's worksheet on line 4 below withhold part of the cost from your pay while you(even if the amount of your pension or annuity worked, the amounts you receive each year arehas changed). Otherwise, go to line 3. fully taxable. You must report them on your3. Enter the appropriate number from Table 1 income tax return.below. But if your annuity starting date was
after 1997 and the payments are for your life Partly taxable payments. If you paid part of
and that of your beneficiary, enter the the cost of your annuity, you are not taxed on the
appropriate number from Table 2 below .... . 3. 310 part of the annuity you receive that represents a
4. Divide line 2 by the number on line 3 ...... . 4. 100 return of your cost. The rest of the amount you
5. Multiply line 4 by the number of months for receive is generally taxable. Your annuity start-
which this year's payments were made. If your ing date determines which method you must or
annuity starting date was before 1987, enter may use.
this amount on line 8 below and skip lines 6, 7, If you contributed to your pension or annuity
10, and 11. Otherwise, go to line 6 ........ . 5. 1,200 plan, you figure the tax-free and the taxable
parts of your annuity payments under either the6. Enter any amounts previously recovered tax
Simplified Method or the General Rule. If yourfree in years after 1986. This is the amount
annuity starting date is after November 18,shown on line 10 of your worksheet for last
1996, and your payments are from a qualifiedyear ............................. . 6. -0-
plan, you must use the Simplified Method. Gen-7. Subtract line 6 from line 2 .............. . 7. 31,000
erally, you must use the General Rule only for8. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 7 ...................... . 8. 1,200
nonqualified plans.9. Taxable amount for year. Subtract line 8 from line 1. Enter the If you had more than one partly taxable pen-result, but not less than zero. Also, add this amount to the total for sion or annuity, figure the tax-free part and theForm 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b .............. . 9. 13,200 taxable part of each separately.Note: If your Form 1099-R shows a larger taxable amount, use the If your annuity is paid under a qualified planamount figured on this line instead. If you are a retired public safety and your annuity starting date is after July 1,officer, see Insurance Premiums for Retired Public Safety Officers 1986, and before November 19, 1996, you couldin Publication 575 before entering an amount on your tax return. have chosen to use either the General Rule or10. Was your annuity starting date before 1987? the Simplified Method.M Yes. STOP. Do not complete the rest of this worksheet.
ú No. Add lines 6 and 8. This is the amount you have recovered tax Exclusion limit. Your annuity starting date
free through 2008. You will need this number if you need to fill out determines the total amount of annuity pay-
this worksheet next year ............................. . 10. 1,200 ments that you can exclude from your taxable
11. Balance of cost to be recovered. Subtract line 10 from line 2. If income over the years.
zero, you will not have to complete this worksheet next year. The Exclusion limited to cost. If your annuitypayments you receive next year will generally be fully taxable ... . 11. 29,800 starting date is after 1986, the total amount of
annuity income that you can exclude over theTABLE 1 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE years as a recovery of the cost cannot exceedAND your annuity starting date wasÐ your total cost. Any unrecovered cost at your (orIF the age at annuity before November 19, after November 18, the last annuitant's) death is allowed as a mis-starting date was... 1996, enter on line 3... 1996, enter on line 3... cellaneous itemized deduction on the final return55 or under 300 360 of the decedent. This deduction is not subject to56±60 260 310 the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.61±65 240 260
Exclusion not limited to cost. If your an-66±70 170 210
nuity starting date is before 1987, you can con-71 or older 120 160
tinue to take your monthly exclusion for as long
as you receive your annuity. If you chose a jointTABLE 2 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE
and survivor annuity, your survivor can continueIF the combined ages
to take the survivor's exclusion figured as of theat annuity starting THEN enter
annuity starting date. The total exclusion may bedate were... on line 3...
more than your cost.110 or under 410
111±120 360
121±130 310 Simplified Method
131±140 260
141 or older 210 Under the Simplified Method, you figure the
tax-free part of each annuity payment by divid-
ing your cost by the total number of anticipated* A death benefit exclusion (up to $5,000) applied to certain benefits received by employees who
monthly payments. For an annuity that is pay-died before August 21, 1996.
able for the lives of the annuitants, this number
Foreign employment contributions. If you were made to your retirement plan, special rules is based on the annuitants' ages on the annuity
worked in a foreign country and contributions starting date and is determined from a table. For
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 75

Page 78 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any other annuity, this number is the number of Bill's tax-free monthly amount is $100 amount of a nonperiodic distribution depends on
monthly annuity payments under the contract. ($31,000 ÷  310) as shown on line 4 of the work- whether it is made before the annuity starting
sheet. Upon Bill's death, if Bill has not recovered date or on or after the annuity starting date. If it is
Who must use the Simplified Method. You the full $31,000 investment, Kathy will also ex- made before the annuity starting date, its tax
must use the Simplified Method if your annuity clude $100 from her $600 monthly payment. treatment also depends on whether it is made
starting date is after November 18, 1996, and The full amount of any annuity payments re- under a qualified or nonqualified plan and, if it is
you receive pension or annuity payments from a ceived after 310 payments are paid must be made under a nonqualified plan, whether it fully
qualified employee plan, qualified employee an- included in gross income. discharges the contract, is received under cer-
nuity, or a tax-sheltered annuity (403(b)) plan, If Bill and Kathy die before 310 payments are tain life insurance or endowment contracts, or is
unless you were at least 75 years old and enti- made, a miscellaneous itemized deduction will allocable to an investment you made before
tled to annuity payments from a qualified plan be allowed for the unrecovered cost on the final August 14, 1982.
that are guaranteed for 5 years or more. income tax return of the last to die. This deduc- Annuity starting date. The annuity startingtion is not subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- date is either the first day of the first period forGuaranteed payments. Your annuity contract gross-income limit. which you receive an annuity payment under theprovides guaranteed payments if a minimum
Who must use the General Rule. You must contract or the date on which the obligationnumber of payments or a minimum amount (for
use the General Rule if you receive pension or under the contract becomes fixed, whichever isexample, the amount of your investment) is pay-
annuity payments from: later.able even if you and any survivor annuitant do
not live to receive the minimum. If the minimum • A nonqualified plan (such as a private an- Distribution on or after annuity starting date.
amount is less than the total amount of the nuity, a purchased commercial annuity, or If you receive a nonperiodic payment from your
payments you are to receive, barring death, dur- a nonqualified employee plan), or annuity contract on or after the annuity starting
ing the first 5 years after payments begin (fig- date, you generally must include all of the pay-• A qualified plan if you are age 75 or olderured by ignoring any payment increases), you ment in gross income.on your annuity starting date and your an-are entitled to less than 5 years of guaranteed
nuity payments are guaranteed for at least Distribution before annuity starting date. Ifpayments.
5 years. you receive a nonperiodic distribution before the
annuity starting date from a qualified retirementHow to use the Simplified Method. Com- Annuity starting before November 19, plan, you generally can allocate only part of it toplete the Simplified Method Worksheet in Publi- 1996. If your annuity starting date is after July the cost of the contract. You exclude from yourcation 575 to figure your taxable annuity for 1, 1986, and before November 19, 1996, you gross income the part that you allocate to the2008. had to use the General Rule for either circum- cost. You include the remainder in your grossSingle-life annuity.  If the annuity is pay- stance described earlier. You also had to use it income.able only over your life, use Table 1 at the for any fixed-period annuity. If you did not have If you receive a nonperiodic distributionbottom of the worksheet to determine the total to use the General Rule, you could have chosen before the annuity starting date from a plan othernumber of expected monthly payments. Enter to use it. If your annuity starting date is before than a qualified retirement plan, it is generallyon line 3 the number shown for your age at the July 2, 1986, you had to use the General Rule allocated first to earnings (the taxable part) andannuity starting date. unless you could use the Three-Year Rule. then to the cost of the contract (the tax-free
If you had to use the General Rule (or chose part). This allocation rule applies, for example,Multiple-lives annuity. If your annuity is to use it), you must continue to use it each year to a commercial annuity contract you boughtpayable for the lives of more than one annuitant, that you recover your cost. directly from the issuer.use Table 2 at the bottom of the worksheet to
For more information, see Figuring the Tax-determine the total number of expected monthly Who cannot use the General Rule. You can- able Amount , under Taxation of Nonperiodicpayments. Enter on line 3 the number shown for not use the General Rule if you receive your Payments, in Publication 575.the combined ages of you and the youngest pension or annuity from a qualified plan and
survivor annuitant at the annuity starting date. none of the circumstances described in the pre-
However, if your annuity starting date began ceding discussions apply to you. See Who must Lump-Sum Distributions
before January 1, 1998, do not use Table 2 and use the Simplified Method, earlier.
do not combine the annuitants' ages. Instead A lump-sum distribution is the distribution orMore information. For complete informationyou must use Table 1 and enter on line 3 the payment in 1 tax year of a plan participant'son using the General Rule, including the actua-number shown for the primary annuitant's age at entire balance from all of the employer's quali-rial tables you need, see Publication 939.the annuity starting date. fied plans of one kind (for example, pension,
profit-sharing, or stock bonus plans). A distribu-Be sure to keep a copy of the com- tion from a nonqualified plan (such as a privatelypleted worksheet; it will help you figure purchased commercial annuity or a section 457your taxable annuity in later years.
RECORDS Taxation of deferred compensation plan of a state or local
government or tax-exempt organization) cannot
Example. Bill Smith, age 65, began receiv- Nonperiodic Payments qualify as a lump-sum distribution.
ing retirement benefits in 2008, under a joint and The participant's entire balance from a plan
survivor annuity. Bill's annuity starting date is Nonperiodic distributions are also known as does not include certain forfeited amounts. It
January 1, 2008. The benefits are to be paid for amounts not received as an annuity. They in- also does not include any deductible voluntary
the joint lives of Bill and his wife Kathy, age 65. clude all payments other than periodic payments employee contributions allowed by the plan after
Bill had contributed $31,000 to a qualified plan and corrective distributions. 1981 and before 1987. For more information
and had received no distributions before the about distributions that do not qualify asCorrective distributions of excess plan con-annuity starting date. Bill is to receive a retire- lump-sum distributions, see Distributions that dotributions. Generally, if the contributionsment benefit of $1,200 a month, and Kathy is to not qualify  under Lump-Sum Distributions  inmade for you during the year to certain retire-receive a monthly survivor benefit of $600 upon Publication 575.ment plans exceed certain limits, the excess isBill's death. If you receive a lump-sum distribution from ataxable to you. To correct an excess, your planBill must use the Simplified Method to figure qualified employee plan or qualified employeemay distribute it to you (along with any incomehis taxable annuity because his payments are annuity and the plan participant was born beforeearned on the excess). For information on planfrom a qualified plan and he is under age 75. January 2, 1936, you may be able to elect op-contribution limits and how to report correctiveBecause his annuity is payable over the lives of tional methods of figuring the tax on the distribu-distributions of excess contributions, see Retire-more than one annuitant, he uses his and tion. The part from active participation in the planment Plan Contributions under Employee Com-Kathy's combined ages and Table 2 at the bot- before 1974 may qualify as capital gain subjectpensation in Publication 525.tom of the worksheet in completing line 3 of the to a 20% tax rate. The part from participation
worksheet. His completed worksheet is shown Figuring the taxable amount of nonperiodic after 1973 (and any part from participation
in Worksheet 10-A. payments. How you figure the taxable before 1974 that you do not report as capital
Page 76 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 79 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gain) is ordinary income. You may be able to use for the taxable and nontaxable parts of the rollo-Capital Gain Treatment
ver or through a rollover to a traditional or Roththe 10-year tax option, discussed later, to figure
Capital gain treatment applies only to the tax- IRA.tax on the ordinary income part.
able part of a lump-sum distribution resulting If you roll over only part of a distribution thatUse Form 4972 to figure the separate tax on
from participation in the plan before 1974. The includes both taxable and nontaxable amounts,a lump-sum distribution using the optional meth-
amount treated as capital gain is taxed at a 20% the amount you roll over is treated as comingods. The tax figured on Form 4972 is added to
rate. You can elect this treatment only once for first from the taxable part of the distribution.the regular tax figured on your other income.
any plan participant, and only if the plan partici- Any after-tax contributions that you roll overThis may result in a smaller tax than you would
pant was born before January 2, 1936. into your traditional IRA, become part of yourpay by including the taxable amount of the distri-
basis (cost) in your IRAs. To recover your basisComplete Part II of Form 4972 to choose thebution as ordinary income in figuring your regu-
when you take distributions from your IRA, you20% capital gain election. For more information,lar tax.
must complete Form 8606 for the year of thesee Capital Gain Treatment under Lump-Sum
distribution. For more information, see the FormDistributions in Publication 575.How to treat the distribution. If you receive a
8606 instructions.lump-sum distribution, you may have the follow-
ing options for how you treat the taxable part. Time for making rollover. You generally10-Year Tax Option• Report the part of the distribution from par- must complete the rollover of an eligible rollover
ticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if distribution paid to you by the 60th day followingThe 10-year tax option is a special formula used
you qualify) and the part from participation the day on which you receive the distributionto figure a separate tax on the ordinary income
from your employer's plan. (If an amount distrib-after 1973 as ordinary income. part of a lump-sum distribution. You pay the tax
uted to you becomes a frozen deposit in a finan-only once, for the year in which you receive the• Report the part of the distribution from par- cial institution during the 60-day period after youdistribution, not over the next 10 years. You canticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if receive it, the rollover period is extended for theelect this treatment only once for any plan par-you qualify) and use the 10-year tax option period during which the distribution is in a frozenticipant, and only if the plan participant was bornto figure the tax on the part from partici- deposit in a financial institution.)before January 2, 1936.pation after 1973 (if you qualify).
The ordinary income part of the distribution is The IRS may waive the 60-day require-• Use the 10-year tax option to figure the tax the amount shown in box 2a of the Form 1099-R ment where the failure to do so wouldon the total taxable amount (if you qualify). given to you by the payer, minus the amount, if be against equity or good conscience,
TIP
any, shown in box 3. You also can treat the such as in the event of a casualty, disaster, or• Roll over all or part of the distribution. See
capital gain part of the distribution (box 3 of other event beyond your reasonable control.Rollovers, later. No tax is currently due on
Form 1099-R) as ordinary income for thethe part rolled over. Report any part not
10-year tax option if you do not choose capital Direct rollover option. You can choose torolled over as ordinary income. 
gain treatment for that part. have any part or all of an eligible rollover distri-
• Report the entire taxable part of the distri- bution paid directly to another qualified retire-Complete Part III of Form 4972 to choose thebution as ordinary income on your tax re- ment plan that accepts rollover distributions or to10-year tax option. You must use the specialturn. a traditional or Roth IRA. If you choose the directTax Rate Schedule shown in the instructions for
rollover option, or have an automatic rollover, noPart III to figure the tax. Publication 575 illus-The first three options are explained in the tax will be withheld from any part of the distribu-trates how to complete Form 4972 to figure thefollowing discussions. tion that is directly paid to the trustee of the otherseparate tax.
plan.Electing optional lump-sum treatment. You
can choose to use the 10-year tax option or Payment to you option. If an eligible rollover
capital gain treatment only once after 1986 for distribution is paid to you, 20% generally will be
Rolloversany plan participant. If you make this choice, you withheld for income tax. However, the full
cannot use either of these optional treatments amount is treated as distributed to you even
If you withdraw cash or other assets from afor any future distributions for the participant. though you actually receive only 80%. You gen-
qualified retirement plan in an eligible rollover erally must include in income any part (including
Taxable and tax-free parts of the distribution. distribution, you can defer tax on the distribution the part withheld) that you do not rollover within
The taxable part of a lump-sum distribution is the by rolling it over to another qualified retirement 60 days to another qualified retirement plan or to
employer's contributions and income earned on plan or a traditional IRA. a traditional or Roth IRA. (See Pensions and
your account. You may recover your cost in the For this purpose, the following plans are Annuities under Withholding in chapter 4.)
lump sum and any net unrealized appreciation qualified retirement plans. If you decide to roll over an amount(NUA) in employer securities tax free. • A qualified employee plan. equal to the distribution before with-
Cost. In general, your cost is the total of: holding, your contribution to the new
CAUTION
!• A qualified employee annuity. plan or IRA must include other money (for exam-• The plan participant's nondeductible con- • A tax-sheltered annuity plan (403(b) plan). ple, from savings or amounts borrowed) to re-tributions to the plan, place the amount withheld.• An eligible state or local government sec-• The plan participant's taxable costs of any The administrator must give you a writtention 457 deferred compensation plan.life insurance contract distributed, explanation of your distribution options within a
reasonable period of time before making an eli-• Any employer contributions that were tax- Eligible rollover distributions. Generally, an gible rollover distribution.able to the plan participant, and eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of
• Repayments of any loans that were tax- Rollover by surviving spouse. You may beall or any part of the balance to your credit in a
able to the plan participant. able to roll over tax free all or part of a distribu-qualified retirement plan. For information about
tion from a qualified retirement plan you receiveexceptions to eligible rollover distributions, seeYou must reduce this cost by amounts previ- as the surviving spouse of a deceased em-Publication 575.ously distributed tax free. ployee. The rollover rules apply to you as if you
Net unrealized appreciation (NUA). The Rollover of nontaxable amounts. You may were the employee. You can roll over a distribu-
NUA in employer securities (box 6 of Form be able to roll over the nontaxable part of a tion into a qualified retirement plan or a tradi-
1099-R) received as part of a lump-sum distribu- distribution (such as your after-tax contributions) tional or Roth IRA. For a rollover to a Roth IRA,
tion is generally tax free until you sell or ex- made to another qualified retirement plan that is see Rollovers to Roth IRAs, later.
change the securities. (For more information, a qualified employee plan or a 403(b) plan, or to A distribution paid to a beneficiary other than
see Distributions of employer securities under a traditional or Roth IRA. The transfer must be the employee's surviving spouse is generally not
Taxation of Nonperiodic Payments  in Publica- made either through a direct rollover to a quali- an eligible rollover distribution. However, see
tion 575.) fied plan or 403(b) plan that separately accounts Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary, next.
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 77

Page 80 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary. If you Exceptions to tax. Certain early distributions
are excepted from the early distribution tax. Ifare a designated beneficiary (other than a sur- Special Additional the payer knows that an exception applies toviving spouse) of a deceased employee, you
your early distribution, distribution code ª2,º ª3,ºmay be able to roll over tax free all or a portion of Taxes or ª4º should be shown in box 7 of your Forma distribution you receive from an eligible retire-
1099-R and you do not have to report the distri-ment plan of the employee. The distribution To discourage the use of pension funds for pur- bution on Form 5329. If an exception applies butmust be a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer to poses other than normal retirement, the law im- distribution code ª1º (early distribution, noyour traditional or Roth IRA that was set up to poses additional taxes on early distributions of known exception) is shown in box 7, you mustreceive the distribution. The transfer will be those funds and on failures to withdraw the
file Form 5329. Enter the taxable amount of thetreated as an eligible rollover distribution and the funds timely. Ordinarily, you will not be subject to
distribution shown in box 2a of your Formreceiving plan will be treated as an inherited these taxes if you roll over all early distributions
1099-R on line 1 of Form 5329. On line 2, enterIRA. For information on inherited IRAs, see Pub- you receive, as explained earlier, and begin
the amount that can be excluded and the excep-lication 590. drawing out the funds at a normal retirement
tion number shown in the Form 5329 instruc-age, in reasonable amounts over your life ex-
tions.pectancy. These special additional taxes are theQualified domestic relations order (QDRO). taxes on: If distribution code ª1º is incorrectlyYou may be able to roll over tax free all or part of
shown on your Form 1099-R for a dis-a distribution from a qualified retirement plan • Early distributions, and
tribution received when you were agethat you receive under a QDRO. If you receive
TIP • Excess accumulation (not receiving mini- 591/2 or older, include that distribution on Formthe distribution as an employee's spouse or for- mum distributions). 5329. Enter exception number ª12º on line 2.mer spouse (not as a nonspousal beneficiary),
These taxes are discussed in the following sec-the rollover rules apply to you as if you were the General exceptions. The tax does not ap-tions.employee. You can roll over the distribution from ply to distributions that are:the plan into a traditional IRA or to another If you must pay either of these taxes, report
• Made as part of a series of substantiallyeligible retirement plan. See Publication 575 for them on Form 5329. However, you do not have
equal periodic payments (made at leastmore information on benefits received under a to file Form 5329 if you owe only the tax on early
annually) for your life (or life expectancy)QDRO. distributions and your Form 1099-R correctly
or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)shows a ª1º in box 7. Instead, enter 10% of the
of you and your designated beneficiary (iftaxable part of the distribution on Form 1040,Retirement bonds. If you redeem retirement from a qualified retirement plan, the pay-line 59 and write ªNoº under the heading ªOtherbonds purchased under a qualified bond Taxesº to the left of line 59. ments must begin after your separationpurchase plan, you can roll over the proceeds from service),Even if you do not owe any of these taxes,that exceed your basis tax free into an IRA as
you may have to complete Form 5329 and at- • Made because you are totally and perma-discussed in Publication 590 or qualified em-
tach it to your Form 1040. This applies if you nently disabled, orployer plan. meet an exception to the tax on early distribu-
• Made on or after the death of the plantions but box 7 of your Form 1099-R does not
participant or contract holder.Designated Roth accounts. You can roll indicate an exception.
over an eligible rollover distribution from a desig-
Additional exceptions for qualified retire-nated Roth account only into another desig- Tax on Early Distributions ment plans. The tax does not apply to distri-nated Roth account or a Roth IRA. If you want to
butions that are:roll over the part of the distribution that is not Most distributions (both periodic and nonperi-
included in income, you must make a direct odic) from qualified retirement plans and non- • From a qualified retirement plan (other
rollover of the entire distribution or you can roll qualified annuity contracts made to you before than an IRA) after your separation from
over the entire amount (or any portion) to a Roth you reach age 591/2 are subject to an additional service in or after the year you reached
IRA. For more information on rollovers from des- tax of 10%. This tax applies to the part of the age 55 (age 50 for qualified public safety
ignated Roth accounts, see Publication 575. distribution that you must include in gross in- employees),
come.
• From a qualified retirement plan (otherFor this purpose, a qualified retirement planRollovers to Roth IRAs. Beginning in 2008, than an IRA) to an alternate payee underis:you can roll over distributions directly from a a qualified domestic relations order,
qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA if, for the • A qualified employee plan, • From a qualified retirement plan to the ex-tax year of the distribution, both of the following • A qualified employee annuity plan, tent you have deductible medical ex-requirements are met.
penses (medical expenses that exceed• A tax-sheltered annuity plan, or• Your modified adjusted gross income for 7.5% of your adjusted gross income),
Roth IRA purposes (explained in chapter 2 • An eligible state or local government sec- whether or not you itemize your deduc-
of Publication 590) is not more than tion 457 deferred compensation plan (to tions for the year,
$100,000. the extent that any distribution is attributa- • From an employer plan under a writtenble to amounts the plan received in a di-• You are not a married individual filing a election that provides a specific schedulerect transfer or rollover from one of theseparate return. for distribution of your entire interest if, asother plans listed here or an IRA).
of March 1, 1986, you had separated fromYou must include in your gross income distribu-
service and had begun receiving pay-tions from a qualified retirement plan that you 5% rate on certain early distributions from ments under the election,would have had to include in income if you had deferred annuity contracts. If an early with-not rolled them over into a Roth IRA. You do not • From an employee stock ownership plandrawal from a deferred annuity is otherwise sub-
include in gross income any part of a distribution for dividends on employer securities heldject to the 10% additional tax, a 5% rate may
from a qualified retirement plan that is a return of by the plan,apply instead. A 5% rate applies to distributions
contributions to the plan that were taxable to you under a written election providing a specific • From a qualified retirement plan due to anwhen paid. In addition, the 10% tax on early schedule for the distribution of your interest in IRS levy of the plan, ordistributions does not apply. the contract if, as of March 1, 1986, you had
• From elective deferral accounts underbegun receiving payments under the election.
More information. For more information on 401(k) or 403(b) plans or similar arrange-On line 4 of Form 5329, multiply the line 3
the rules for rolling over distributions, see Publi- ments that are qualified reservist distribu-amount by 5% instead of 10%. Attach an expla-
cation 575. nation to your return. tions.
Page 78 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 81 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified public safety employees. If you For this purpose, a qualified retirement plan minimum required distribution from your quali-
are a qualified public safety employee, distribu- includes: fied retirement plan.
tions made from a governmental defined benefit
1. A qualified employee plan,pension plan are not subject to the additional tax
on early distributions. You are a qualified public 2. A qualified employee annuity plan,safety employee if you provide police protection,
Survivorsfirefighting services, or emergency medical 3. An eligible section 457 deferred compen-
services for a state or municipality, and you sation plan, or
Generally, a survivor or beneficiary reports pen-separated from service in or after the year you 4. A tax-sheltered annuity plan (for benefits sion or annuity income in the same way the planattained age 50. accruing after 1986). participant would have. However, some specialQualified reservist distributions. A quali- rules apply.fied reservist distribution is not subject to the
additional tax on early distributions. A qualified Required beginning date. Unless the rule for
Survivors of retirees. If you receive a survi-reservist distribution is a distribution (a) from 5% owners applies, you generally must begin to
vor annuity because of the death of a retiree whoelective deferrals under a section 401(k) or receive distributions from your qualified retire-
had reported the annuity under the Three-Year403(b) plan, (b) to an individual ordered or called ment plan by April 1 of the year that follows the
Rule and recovered all of the cost tax free, yourto active duty (because he or she is a member of later of:
survivor payments are fully taxable.a reserve component) for a period of more than • The calendar year in which you reach age179 days or for an indefinite period, and (c) If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-701/2, ormade during the period beginning on the date of ments under the General Rule, you must applythe order or call and ending at the close of the • The calendar year in which you retire from the same exclusion percentage to your initialactive duty period. You must have been ordered employment with the employer maintain- survivor annuity payment called for in the con-or called to active duty after September 11, ing the plan. tract. The resulting tax-free amount will then2001. For more information, see Publication remain fixed. Any increases in the survivor an-However, your plan may require you to begin to575. nuity are fully taxable.receive distributions by April 1 of the year that
Additional exceptions for nonqualified an- follows the year in which you reach age 70 1/2, If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-nuity contracts. The tax does not apply to even if you have not retired. ments under the Simplified Method, the part ofdistributions that are: each payment that is tax free is the same as theState insurer delinquency proceedings.
tax-free amount figured by the retiree at the• From a deferred annuity contract to the You might not receive the minimum distribution
annuity starting date. This amount remains fixedextent allocable to investment in the con- because assets are invested in a contract is-
even if the annuity payments are increased ortract before August 14, 1982, sued by an insurance company in state insurer
decreased. See Simplified Method, earlier.delinquency proceedings. If your payments are• From a deferred annuity contract under a reduced below the minimum due to these pro- In any case, if the annuity starting date isqualified personal injury settlement, ceedings, you should contact your plan adminis- after 1986, the total exclusion over the years• From a deferred annuity contract pur- trator. Under certain conditions, you will not cannot be more than the cost.chased by your employer upon termination have to pay the 50% excise tax.
of a qualified employee plan or qualified 5% owners. If you are a 5% owner, youemployee annuity plan and held by your Survivors of employees. If you are entitled tomust begin to receive distributions by April 1 ofemployer until your separation from serv- receive a survivor annuity on the death of anthe year that follows the calendar year in whichice, or employee, who died before becoming entitled toyou reach age 701/2. any annuity payments, you can exclude part of• From an immediate annuity contract (a each annuity payment as a tax-free recovery ofsingle premium contract providing sub- the employee's investment in the contract. YouAge 701/2. You reach age 701/2 on the date thatstantially equal annuity payments that start must figure the taxable and tax-free parts of youris 6 calendar months after the date of your 70thwithin one year from the date of purchase annuity payments using the method that appliesbirthday.and are paid at least annually). as if you were the employee.For example, if you are retired and your 70th
birthday was on June 30, 2008, you were age
Tax on Excess 701/2 on December 30, 2008. If your 70th birth- Estate tax deduction. If your annuity was a
day was on July 1, 2008, you reached age 701/2 joint and survivor annuity that was included inAccumulation on January 1, 2009. the decedent's estate, an estate tax may have
been paid on it. You can deduct the part of theTo make sure that most of your retirement bene-
total estate tax that was based on the annuity.fits are paid to you during your lifetime, rather Required distributions. By the required be- The deceased annuitant must have died afterthan to your beneficiaries after your death, the ginning date, as explained earlier, you must ei- the annuity starting date. (For details, see sec-payments that you receive from qualified retire- ther: tion 1.691(d)-1 of the regulations.) Deduct it inment plans must begin no later than on your
equal amounts over your remaining life expec-• Receive your entire interest in the plan (forrequired beginning date (defined later). The pay-
tancy.a tax-sheltered annuity, your entire benefitments each year cannot be less than the re-
accruing after 1986), orquired minimum distribution. If the decedent died before the annuity start-
ing date of a deferred annuity contract and you• Begin receiving periodic distributions inRequired distributions not made. If the
receive a death benefit under that contract, theannual amounts calculated to distributeactual distributions to you in any year are less
amount you receive (either in a lump sum or asyour entire interest (for a tax-sheltered an-than the minimum required distribution for that
periodic payments) in excess of the decedent'snuity, your entire benefit accruing afteryear, you are subject to an additional tax. The
cost is included in your gross income as income1986) over your life or life expectancy ortax equals 50% of the part of the required mini-
in respect of a decedent for which you may beover the joint lives or joint life expectan-mum distribution that was not distributed.
able to claim an estate tax deduction.cies of you and a designated beneficiary
(or over a shorter period).Waiver. The tax may be waived if you estab- You can take the estate tax deduction as an
lish that the shortfall in distributions was due to itemized deduction on Schedule A, Form 1040.Additional information. For more informa-reasonable error and that reasonable steps are This deduction is not subject to thetion on this rule, see Tax on Excess Accumula-being taken to remedy the shortfall. See the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit on miscella-tion in Publication 575.instructions for Form 5329 for the procedure to neous deductions. See Publication 559, Survi-
follow if you believe you qualify for a waiver of Form 5329. You must file a Form 5329 if vors, Executors, and Administrators, for more
this tax. you owe a tax because you did not receive a information on the estate tax deduction.
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 79

Page 82 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Non-social security equivalent benefit taxable and you probably do not have to file a
(NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits. return. If you have income in addition to your
benefits, you may have to file a return even if• Tier 2 benefits.11. none of your benefits are taxable.
• Vested dual benefits.
Base amount. Your base amount is:• Supplemental annuity benefits.
• $25,000 if you are single, head of house-Social Security For information on these benefits, see Publica- hold, or qualifying widow(er),tion 575, Pension and Annuity Income.
• $25,000 if you are married filing separatelyThis chapter also does not cover the tax rulesand Equivalent and lived apart from your spouse for all offor foreign social security benefits. These bene- 2008,fits are taxable as annuities, unless they areRailroad • $32,000 if you are married filing jointly, orexempt from U.S. tax or treated as a U.S. social
security benefit under a tax treaty. • $-0- if you are married filing separately
Retirement and lived with your spouse at any time
Useful Items during 2008.
You may want to see:Benefits
Worksheet 11-1.  You can use WorksheetPublication 11-1 to figure the amount of income to compare
❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income with your base amount. This is a quick way to
Introduction check whether some of your benefits may be❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements taxable.This chapter explains the federal income tax (IRAs)
rules for social security benefits and equivalent ❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalent Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To Check if Yourtier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It explains the Railroad Retirement Benefits Benefits May be Taxablefollowing topics.
• How to figure whether your benefits are Forms (and Instructions) A. Enter the amount from box 5 of all
your Forms SSA-1099 andtaxable. ❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals RRB-1099. Include the full amount
• How to use the social security benefits of any lump-sum benefit payments❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Requestworksheet (with examples). received in 2008, for 2008 and
earlier years. (If you received more• How to report your taxable benefits. than one form, combine the
amounts from box 5 and enter the• How to treat repayments that are more
total.) ................. . A.than the benefits you received during the Are Any of Your Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stopyear. here; none of your benefits are taxable this year.
Benefits Taxable? B. Enter one-half of the amount onSocial security benefits include monthly retire-
line A .................. . B.ment, survivor, and disability benefits. They do To find out whether any of your benefits may benot include supplemental security income (SSI) C. Enter your taxable pensions,taxable, compare the base amount for your filingpayments, which are not taxable. wages, interest, dividends, andstatus with the total of: other taxable income ........ . C.Equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits
are the part of tier 1 benefits that a railroad 1. One-half of your benefits, plus D. Enter any tax-exempt interest
employee or beneficiary would have been enti- income (such as interest on2. All your other income, includingtled to receive under the social security system. municipal bonds) plus anytax-exempt interest.They are commonly called the social security exclusions from income (listed
earlier) ................. . D.equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion of tier 1 bene- When making this comparison, do not re-
fits. duce your other income by any exclusions for: E. Add lines B, C, and D ....... . E.
If you received these benefits during 2008, Note. Compare the amount on line E to your base• Interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds,you should have received a Form SSA-1099, amount for your filing status. If the amount on line
• Employer-provided adoption benefits, E equals or is less than the base amount for yourSocial Security Benefit Statement, or Form
filing status, none of your benefits are taxable thisRRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire- • Foreign earned income or foreign housing, year. If the amount on line E is more than yourment Board, (Form SSA-1042S, Social Security or base amount, some of your benefits may beBenefit Statement, or Form RRB-1042S, State- taxable. You need to complete Worksheet 1 in• Income earned by bona fide residents ofment for Nonresident Alien Recipients of: Pay- Publication 915 (or the Social Security BenefitsAmerican Samoa or Puerto Rico.ments by the Railroad Retirement Board, if you Worksheet in your tax form instruction booklet). If
are a nonresident alien). These forms show the none of your benefits are taxable, but you
amounts received and repaid, and taxes with- otherwise must file a tax return, see Benefits notFiguring total income. To figure the total of taxable, later, under How To Report Yourheld for the year. You may receive more than one-half of your benefits plus your other income, Benefits.one of these forms for the same year. You use Worksheet 11-1 later in this discussion. Ifshould add the amounts shown on all forms you the total is more than your base amount, part ofreceive for the year to determine the ªtotalº your benefits may be taxable. Example. You and your spouse (both overamounts received and repaid, and taxes with- If you are married and file a joint return for 65) are filing a joint return for 2008 and you bothheld for that year. See the Appendix at the end 2008, you and your spouse must combine your received social security benefits during the year.of Publication 915 for more information. incomes and your benefits to figure whether any In January 2009, you received a Formof your combined benefits are taxable. Even if SSA-1099 showing net benefits of $7,500 in boxNote. When the term ªbenefitsº is used in your spouse did not receive any benefits, you 5. Your spouse received a Form SSA-1099this chapter, it applies to both social security must add your spouse's income to yours to fig- showing net benefits of $3,500 in box 5. Youbenefits and the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad ure whether any of your benefits are taxable. also received a taxable pension of $20,000 andretirement benefits.
If the only income you received during interest income of $500. You did not have any
What is not covered in this chapter. This 2008 was your social security or the tax-exempt interest income. Your benefits are
chapter does not cover the tax rules for the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retire- not taxable for 2008 because your income, as
TIP
following railroad retirement benefits. ment benefits, your benefits generally are not figured in Worksheet 11-1 on the next page, is
Page 80 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 83 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not more than your base amount ($32,000) for your social security benefits and/or the SSEB either that worksheet or Worksheet 1 in Publica-
married filing jointly. portion of your tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. tion 915, unless any of the following situations
Even though none of your benefits are tax- If you choose to do this, you must complete a applies to you.
able, you must file a return for 2008 because Form W-4V. You can choose withholding at 7%,
1. You contributed to a traditional individualyour taxable gross income ($20,500) exceeds 10%, 15%, or 25% of your total benefit payment.
retirement arrangement (IRA) and you orthe minimum filing requirement amount for your If you do not choose to have income tax your spouse is covered by a retirementfiling status. withheld, you may have to request additional plan at work. In this situation, you mustwithholding from other income or pay estimated use the special worksheets in Appendix Btax during the year. For details, see PublicationFilled-in Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To Check of Publication 590 to figure both your IRA505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax, or theif Your Benefits May be Taxable deduction and your taxable benefits.instructions for Form 1040-ES.
2. Situation (1) does not apply and you takeA. Enter the amount from box 5 of
an exclusion for interest from qualified U.S.all your Forms SSA-1099 and
RRB-1099. Include the full savings bonds (Form 8815), for adoption
amount of any lump-sum benefit benefits (Form 8839), for foreign earnedHow To Reportpayments received in 2008, for income or housing (Form 2555 or Form2008 and earlier years. (If you 2555-EZ), or for income earned in Ameri-Your Benefitsreceived more than one form, can Samoa (Form 4563) or Puerto Rico bycombine the amounts from box 5 bona fide residents. In this situation, youand enter the total.) ....... . A. $ 11,000 If part of your benefits are taxable, you must use must use Worksheet 1 in Publication 915Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use to figure your taxable benefits.here; none of your benefits are taxable this year. Form 1040EZ.
3. You received a lump-sum payment for anB. Enter one-half of the amount on
Reporting on Form 1040. Report your netline A ................ . B. 5,500 earlier year. In this situation, also complete
benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Form Worksheet 2 or 3 and Worksheet 4 in Pub-C. Enter your taxable pensions, SSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 20a and lication 915. See Lump-sum election be-wages, interest, dividends, and the taxable part on line 20b. If you are married low.other taxable income ...... . C.  20,500 filing separately and you lived apart from your
D. Enter any tax-exempt interest spouse for all of 2008, also enter ªDº to the right Lump-sum election. You must include theincome (such as interest on of the word ªbenefitsº on line 20a. taxable part of a lump-sum (retroactive) pay-municipal bonds) plus any
exclusions from income (listed ment of benefits received in 2008 in your 2008Reporting on Form 1040A. Report your netearlier) ............... . D. -0- income, even if the payment includes benefitsbenefits (the amount in box 5 of your Form for an earlier year.E. Add lines B, C, and D ...... . E. $26,000 SSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 14a and
Note. Compare the amount on line E to your base the taxable part on line 14b. If you are married This type of lump-sum benefit payment
amount for your filing status. If the amount on line filing separately and you lived apart from your should not be confused with theE equals or is less than the base amount for your spouse for all of 2008, also enter ªDº to the right lump-sum death benefit that both the
TIPfiling status, none of your benefits are taxable this of the word ªbenefitsº on line 14a. SSA and RRB pay to many of their beneficiaries.year. If the amount on line E is more than your
No part of the lump-sum death benefit is subjectbase amount, some of your benefits may be Benefits not taxable. If you are filing Form to tax.taxable. You then need to complete Worksheet 1
1040EZ, do not report any benefits on your taxin Publication 915 (or the Social Security Benefits Generally, you use your 2008 income to fig-return. If you are filing Form 1040 or FormWorksheet in your tax form instruction booklet). If ure the taxable part of the total benefits received1040A, report your net benefits (the amount innone of your benefits are taxable, but you in 2008. However, you may be able to figure theotherwise must file a tax return, see Benefits not box 5 of your Form SSA-1099 or Form taxable part of a lump-sum payment for an ear-taxable, later, under How To Report Your RRB-1099) on Form 1040, line 20a, or Form lier year separately, using your income for theBenefits. 1040A, line 14a. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line earlier year. You can elect this method if it low-20b, or Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are married ers your taxable benefits.filing separately and you lived apart from yourWho is taxed. Benefits are included in the Making the election. If you received aspouse for all of 2008, also enter ªDº to the righttaxable income (to the extent they are taxable) lump-sum benefit payment in 2008 that includesof the word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, orof the person who has the legal right to receive benefits for one or more earlier years, follow theForm 1040A, line 14a.the benefits. For example, if you and your child instructions in Publication 915 under Lump-Sumreceive benefits, but the check for your child is Election to see whether making the election willmade out in your name, you must use only your How Much Is Taxable? lower your taxable benefits. That discussionpart of the benefits to see whether any benefits also explains how to make the election.If part of your benefits are taxable, how much isare taxable to you. One-half of the part that
taxable depends on the total amount of yourbelongs to your child must be added to your Because the earlier year's taxable ben-
benefits and other income. Generally, the higherchild's other income to see whether any of those efits are included in your 2008 income,
that total amount, the greater the taxable part ofbenefits are taxable to your child. no adjustment is made to the earlier
CAUTION
!
your benefits. year's return. Do not file an amended return forRepayment of benefits. Any repayment of the earlier year.benefits you made during 2008 must be sub- Maximum taxable part. Generally, up to 50%
tracted from the gross benefits you received in of your benefits will be taxable. However, up to
2008. It does not matter whether the repayment 85% of your benefits can be taxable if either of
was for a benefit you received in 2008 or in an the following situations applies to you.
Examplesearlier year. If you repaid more than the gross • The total of one-half of your benefits andbenefits you received in 2008, see Repayments all your other income is more than The following are a few examples you can useMore Than Gross Benefits, later. $34,000 ($44,000 if you are married filing as a guide to figure the taxable part of yourYour gross benefits are shown in box 3 of jointly). benefits.Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099. Your repay-
ments are shown in box 4. The amount in box 5 • You are married filing separately and lived
Example 1. George White is single and filesshows your net benefits for 2008 (box 3 minus with your spouse at any time during 2008.
Form 1040 for 2008. He received the followingbox 4). Use the amount in box 5 to figure
income in 2008:whether any of your benefits are taxable. Which worksheet to use. A worksheet to fig-
Tax withholding and estimated tax. You can ure your taxable benefits is in the instructions for Fully taxable pension ............ . $18,600
Wages from part-time job ......... .  9,400choose to have federal income tax withheld from your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You can use
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Page 81

Page 84 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
12.Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero orTaxable interest income .......... . 990 No.
STOP None of your benefits are taxable. Enterless, enter -0- ................. . -0-Total ...................... . $28,990 -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line13.Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 .. . 6,980 14b.14.Enter one-half of line 13 .......... . 3,490George also received social security benefits Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ..... . 31,55015.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 ... . 2,990 9. If you are:during 2008. The Form SSA-1099 he received in 16.Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 isJanuary 2009 shows $5,980 in box 5. To figure • Married filing jointly, enter $32,000zero, enter -0- ................. . -0-
• Single, head of household, qualifyinghis taxable benefits, George completes the 17.Add lines 15 and 16 ............. . 2,990
widow(er), or married filing separatelyworksheet shown here. 18.Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ........ . 5,083 and you lived apart from your spouse19.Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of for all of 2008, enter $25,000 .... . 32,000Worksheet 1. line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount Note. If you are married filing separatelyon Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, Figuring Your Taxable Benefits and you lived with your spouse at any timeline 14b .................... . $2,990 in 2008, skip lines 9 through 16; multiply1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL line 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the result onyour Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. line 17. Then go to line 18.Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line The amount on line 19 of George's worksheet 10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ....... . $5,980 shows that $2,990 of his social security benefits amount on line 8?2. Enter one-half of line 1 ........... . 2,990
is taxable. On line 20a of his Form 1040, George3. Enter the total of the amounts from: No.
STOP None of your benefits areenters his net benefits of $5,980. On line 20b, heForm 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10 through taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b,14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, and 21. enters his taxable benefits of $2,990. or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are
Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b, married filing separately and you lived
12b, and 13 ................. . 28,990 apart from your spouse for all of 2008, beExample 2. Ray and Alice Hopkins file a4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form sure you entered ªDº to the right of thejoint return on Form 1040A for 2008. Ray is1040 or 1040A, line 8b .......... . -0- word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, or
retired and received a fully taxable pension of5. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any on Form 1040A, line 14a.
exclusions/adjustments for: Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... .$15,500. He also received social security bene-
• Qualified U.S. savings bond 11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly;fits, and his Form SSA-1099 for 2008 shows netinterest (Form 8815, line 14), $9,000 if single, head of household,benefits of $5,600 in box 5. Alice worked during• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line qualifying widow(er), or married filing
30), the year and had wages of $14,000. She made a separately and you lived apart from your
• Foreign earned income or housing spouse for all of 2008 ............ .deductible payment to her IRA account of
(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, or 12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or$1,000. Ray and Alice have two savings ac-Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and less, enter -0- ................. .counts with a total of $250 in taxable interest• Certain income of bona fide 13. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 .. .
residents of American income. They complete Worksheet 1 and find 14. Enter one-half of line 13 .......... .
Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) 15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 ... .that none of Ray's social security benefits areor Puerto Rico 16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 istaxable. On line 3 of the worksheet, they enterForm 1040A filers: Enter the total of zero, enter -0- ................ .$29,750 ($15,500 + $14,000 + $250). On Formany exclusions for qualified U.S. 17. Add lines 15 and 16 ............. .savings bond interest (Form 8815, line 1040A, they enter $5,600 on line 14a and -0- on 18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ........ .14) or for adoption benefits (Form 8839, line 14b. 19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of lineline 30). ................... . -0- 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount on6. Add lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ........... . 31,980 Worksheet 1. Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from 14b ....................... .Figuring Your Taxable BenefitsForm 1040, lines 23 through 32, and any
write-in adjustments you entered on the 1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALLdotted line next to line 36. your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. Example 3. Joe and Betty Johnson file aForm 1040A filers: Enter the amount Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line joint return on Form 1040 for 2008. Joe is afrom Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 .... . -0- 20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ....... . $5,600 retired railroad worker and in 2008 received the8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the 2. Enter one-half of line 1 ........... . 2,800 social security equivalent benefit (SSEB) portionamount on line 6? 3. Enter the total of the amounts from: of tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. Joe's FormForm 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10 throughNo.
STOP None of your social security benefits are RRB-1099 shows $10,000 in box 5. Betty is a14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, and 21.taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form
retired government worker and receives a fullyForm 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b,1040A, line 14b.
12b, and 13 ................ . 29,750 taxable pension of $38,000. They had $2,300 inYes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ..... . 31,980
4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form taxable interest income plus interest of $200 on9. If you are:
1040 or 1040A, line 8b .......... . -0- a qualified U.S. savings bond. The savings bond• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000 5. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any interest qualified for the exclusion. They figure• Single, head of household, qualifying exclusions/adjustments for:widow(er), or married filing separately their taxable benefits by completing Worksheet• Qualified U.S. savings bondand you lived apart from your spouse 1. On line 3 of the worksheet, they enter $40,300interest (Form 8815, line 14),for all of 2008, enter $25,000 .... . 25,000 ($38,000 + $2,300).• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, lineNote. If you are married filing separately 30),and you lived with your spouse at any time Worksheet 1.• Foreign earned income or housingin 2008, skip lines 9 through 16; multiply Figuring Your Taxable Benefits(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, orline 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the result on Form 2555-EZ, line 18), andline 17. Then go to line 18. 1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL• Certain income of bona fide10.Is the amount on line 9 less than the your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099.residents of Americanamount on line 8? Also enter this amount on Form 1040,Samoa (Form 4563, line 15)
line 20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ... . $10,000or Puerto RicoNo.
STOP None of your benefits are 2. Enter one-half of line 1 .......... . 5,000Form 1040A filers: Enter the total oftaxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b,
3. Enter the total of the amounts from:any exclusion for qualified U.S. savingsor on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are
bond interest (Form 8815, line 14) or for Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10married filing separately and you lived
adoption benefits (Form 8839, line 30) -0- through 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19,apart from your spouse for all of 2008, be
and 21.6. Add lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ........... . 32,550sure you entered ªDº to the right of the
Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b,7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount fromword ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, or
12b, and 13 ............... . 40,300Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, and anyon Form 1040A, line 14a.
write-in adjustments you entered on the 4. Enter the amount, if any, from FormYes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... . 6,980
dotted line next to line 36. 1040 or 1040A, line 8b ......... . -0-11.Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly;
Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount from 5. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any$9,000 if single, head of household,
Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 ....... . 1,000 exclusions/adjustments for:qualifying widow(er), or married filing
8. Is the amount on line 7 less than theseparately and you lived apart from your • Qualified U.S. savings bond
amount on line 6?spouse for all of 2008 ............ . 9,000 interest (Form 8815, line 14),
Page 82 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 85 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line Deduction $3,000 or less. If this deduction
30), is $3,000 or less, it is subject to theDeductions Related to• Foreign earned income or housing 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, or to certain miscellaneous itemized deductions.Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and Your Benefits Claim it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.• Certain income of bona fide
residents of American You may be entitled to deduct certain amounts Deduction more than $3,000. If this deduc-Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) related to the benefits you receive. tion is more than $3,000, you should figure youror Puerto Rico
tax two ways:Form 1040A filers: Enter the total of
Disability payments. You may have receivedany exclusions for qualified U.S.
1. Figure your tax for 2008 with the itemizedsavings bond interest (Form 8815, line disability payments from your employer or an
14) or for adoption benefits (Form deduction included on Schedule A, line 28.insurance company that you included as income
8839, line 30) .............. . 200 on your tax return in an earlier year. If you 2. Figure your tax for 2008 in the following6. Add lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 .......... . 45,500 received a lump-sum payment from SSA or steps.7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from RRB, and you had to repay the employer orForm 1040, lines 23 through 32, and any
insurance company for the disability payments, a. Figure the tax without the itemized de-write-in adjustments you entered on the
you can take an itemized deduction for the partdotted line next to line 36. duction included on Schedule A, line
Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount of the payments you included in gross income in 28.
from Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 ... . -0- the earlier year. If the amount you repay is more b. For each year after 1983 for which part8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the than $3,000, you may be able to claim a taxamount on line 6? of the negative figure represents a re-credit instead. Claim the deduction or credit in payment of benefits, refigure your tax-No.
STOP None of your benefits are taxable. Enter the same way explained under Repayments able benefits as if your total benefits for-0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line More Than Gross Benefits, later. the year were reduced by that part of14b.
Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 .... . 45,500 the negative figure. Then refigure theLegal expenses. You can usually deduct le-9.  If you are: tax for that year.gal expenses that you pay or incur to produce or• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000 collect taxable income or in connection with the c. Subtract the total of the refigured tax• Single, head of household, qualifying determination, collection, or refund of any tax. amounts in (b) from the total of yourwidow(er), or married filing
Legal expenses for collecting the taxable actual tax amounts.separately and you lived apart from
part of your benefits are deductible as a miscel-your spouse for all of 2008, enter d. Subtract the result in (c) from the result$25,000 ................ . 32,000 laneous itemized deduction on Schedule A in (a).Note. If you are married filing separately (Form 1040), line 23.
and you lived with your spouse at any
time in 2008, skip lines 9 through 16; Compare the tax figured in methods (1) and
multiply line 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the Repayments More Than (2). Your tax for 2008 is the smaller of the tworesult on line 17. Then go to line 18. amounts. If method (1) results in less tax, takeGross Benefits10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the the itemized deduction on Schedule A (Formamount on line 8?
1040), line 28. If method (2) results in less tax,In some situations, your Form SSA-1099 or
No.
STOP None of your benefits are claim a credit for the amount from step 2(c)Form RRB-1099 will show that the total benefits
taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line above on Form 1040, line 68, and enter ªI.R.C.you repaid (box 4) are more than the gross20b, or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you 1341º in the margin to the left of line 68. If bothbenefits (box 3) you received. If this occurred,are married filing separately and you methods produce the same tax, deduct the re-your net benefits in box 5 will be a negativelived apart from your spouse for all of
payment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28.2008, be sure you entered ªDº to the right figure (a figure in parentheses) and none of your
of the word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line benefits will be taxable. Do not use a worksheet
20a, or on Form 1040A, line 14a. in this case. If you receive more than one form, aYes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 .... . 13,500 negative figure in box 5 of one form is used to11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; offset a positive figure in box 5 of another form$9,000 if single, head of household,
for that same year.qualifying widow(er), or married filing
separately and you lived apart from your If you have any questions about this negative
spouse for all of 2008 ........... . 12,000 12.figure, contact your local SSA office or your local
12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or RRB field office.less, enter -0- ................ . 1,500
13. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 . . 12,000 Joint return. If you and your spouse file a joint14. Enter one-half of line 13 ......... . 6,000 Other Incomereturn, and your Form SSA-1099 or RRB-109915. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .. . 5,000
has a negative figure in box 5, but your spouse's16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 is
does not, subtract the amount in box 5 of yourzero, enter -0- ............... . 1,275
form from the amount in box 5 of your spouse's17. Add lines 15 and 16 ............ . 6,275
What's New18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ....... . 8,500 form. You do this to get your net benefits when
19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of figuring if your combined benefits are taxable.
line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount Disaster relief provision. The Heartland Dis-
on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, aster Tax Relief Act of 2008 provides tax relief toExample. John and Mary file a joint returnline 14b ................... . $6,275 persons affected by the severe storms, torna-for 2008. John received Form SSA-1099 show-
does, and flooding occurring in the Midwesterning $3,000 in box 5. Mary also received Form
More than 50% of Joe's net benefits are tax- disaster areas. For details, see PublicationSSA-1099 and the amount in box 5 was ($500).
able because the income on line 8 of the work- 4492-B, Information for Affected Taxpayers inJohn and Mary will use $2,500 ($3,000 minus
sheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000. Joe and the Midwestern Disaster Areas.$500) as the amount of their net benefits when
Betty enter $10,000 on Form 1040, line 20a, and figuring if any of their combined benefits are
$6,275 on Form 1040, line 20b. taxable.
Repayment of benefits received in an earlier Introductionyear. If the total amount shown in box 5 of all
of your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 is a You must include on your return all income you
negative figure, you can take an itemized deduc- receive in the form of money, property, and
tion for the part of this negative figure that repre- services unless the tax law states that you do
sents benefits you included in gross income in not include them. Some items, however, are
an earlier year. only partly excluded from income. This chapter
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 83

Page 86 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
discusses many kinds of income and explains shares in your income on Schedule C (Form income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. If
1040) or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year the interest would be deductible (such as on awhether they are taxable or nontaxable.
you receive them. business loan), include in your income the net• Income that is taxable must be reported amount of the canceled debt (the amount shownon your tax return and is subject to tax. Example 2. You are self-employed and a in box 2 less the interest amount shown in box
member of a barter club. The club uses ªcredit 3).• Income that is nontaxable may have to be
unitsº as a means of exchange. It adds creditshown on your tax return but is not tax-
Discounted mortgage loan. If your financialunits to your account for goods or services youable.
institution offers a discount for the early paymentprovide to members, which you can use to
of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-purchase goods or services offered by otherThis chapter begins with discussions of the
count is canceled debt. You must include themembers of the barter club. The club subtractsfollowing income items.
canceled amount in your income.credit units from your account when you receive• Bartering. goods or services from other members. You Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi-must include in your income the value of the• Canceled debts. tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgagecredit units that are added to your account, even (recourse debt), and you are relieved of the• Host or hostess. though you may not actually receive goods or mortgage when you dispose of the property, youservices from other members until a later tax• Life insurance proceeds. may realize gain or loss up to the fair marketyear. value of the property. To the extent the mort-• Partnership income.
gage discharge exceeds the fair market value ofExample 3. You own a small apartment• S Corporation income. the property, it is income from discharge of in-building. In return for 6 months rent-free use of• Recoveries (including state income tax re- debtedness unless it qualifies for exclusionan apartment, an artist gives you a work of art under Excluded debt, later. Report any incomefunds). she created. You must report as rental income from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusinesson Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental In-• Rents from personal property. debt that does not qualify for exclusion as othercome and Loss, the fair market value of the• Repayments. income on Form 1040, line 21.artwork, and the artist must report as income on
Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule C-EZ• Royalties. You may be able to exclude part of the
(Form 1040) the fair rental value of the apart- mortgage relief on your principal resi-• Unemployment benefits. ment. dence. See Excluded debt, later.
TIP
• Welfare and other public assistance bene- If you are not personally liable for a mortgageForm 1099-B from barter exchange. If youfits. (nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved of theexchanged property or services through a barter
mortgage when you dispose of the propertyThese discussions are followed by brief discus- exchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker
(such as through foreclosure or repossession),sions of other income items arranged in alpha- and Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similar
that relief is included in the amount you realize.betical order. statement from the barter exchange should be
You may have a taxable gain if the amount yousent to you by February 17, 2009. It should show
realize exceeds your adjusted basis in the prop-the value of cash, property, services, credits, orUseful Items erty. Report any gain on nonbusiness propertyscrip you received from exchanges during 2008.You may want to see: as a capital gain.The IRS also will receive a copy of Form 1099-B.
See Foreclosures and Repossessions  inPublication Publication 544 for more information.
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income Stockholder debt. If you are a stockholder in
Canceled Debts❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of a corporation and the corporation cancels or
Assets forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a
Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled or constructive distribution that is generally divi-❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses, forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you dend income to you. For more information, seeIncluding Capital Gains and Losses must include the canceled amount in your in- Publication 542, Corporations.
come. You have no income from the canceled If you are a stockholder in a corporation and
debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-
includes any indebtedness for which you are tion, you generally do not realize income. This is
liable or which attaches to property you hold. because the canceled debt is considered as aBartering If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the contribution to the capital of the corporation
canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is a equal to the amount of debt principal that youBartering is an exchange of property or services. business debt, report the amount on Schedule C canceled.You must include in your income, at the time (Form 1040) or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or
received, the fair market value of property or on Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Repayment of canceled debt. If you included
services you receive in bartering. If you ex- Farming, if the debt is farm debt and you are a a canceled amount in your income and later pay
change services with another person and you farmer). the debt, you may be able to file a claim for
both have agreed ahead of time as to the value refund for the year the amount was included inForm 1099-C. If a Federal Governmentof the services, that value will be accepted as income. You can file a claim on Form 1040X ifagency, financial institution, or credit unionfair market value unless the value can be shown the statute of limitations for filing a claim is stillcancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 orto be otherwise. open. The statute of limitations generally doesmore, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella- not end until 3 years after the due date of yourGenerally, you report this income on Sched- tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt is original return.ule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Busi- shown in box 2.ness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit
From Business . However, if the barter involves Interest included in canceled debt. If any Exceptionsan exchange of something other than services, interest is forgiven and included in the amount of
such as in Example 3 below, you may have to canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interest There are several exceptions to the inclusion of
use another form or schedule instead. also will be shown in box 3. Whether or not you canceled debt in income. These are explained
must include the interest portion of the canceled next.
Example 1. You are a self-employed attor- debt in your income depends on whether the
ney who performs legal services for a client, a interest would be deductible if you paid it. See Student loans. Certain student loans contain
small corporation. The corporation gives you Deductible debt, under Exceptions, later. a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to
shares of its stock as payment for your services. If the interest would not be deductible (such attend the qualified educational institution will be
You must include the fair market value of the as interest on a personal loan), include in your canceled if you work for a certain period of time
Page 84 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 87 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in certain professions for any of a broad class of • The debt is qualified farm debt and is can- More information. For more information, see
employers. celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3 Life Insurance Proceeds in Publication 525.
of Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide. You do not have income if your student loan Surrender of policy for cash. If you surren-is canceled after you agreed to this provision • The debt is qualified real property busi- der a life insurance policy for cash, you mustand then performed the services required. To ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publication include in income any proceeds that are morequalify, the loan must have been made by: 334. than the cost of the life insurance policy. In
general, your cost (or investment in the contract)1. The Federal Government, a state or local • The cancellation is intended as a gift. is the total of premiums that you paid for the lifegovernment, or an instrumentality, agency, • The debt is qualified principal residence insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,or subdivision thereof, indebtedness. See Publication 525 for ad- rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that were
2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation ditional information. not included in your income.
that has assumed control of a state,  You should receive a Form 1099-R showing
county, or municipal hospital, and whose the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report
employees are considered public employ- these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Form
ees under state law, or 1040 or lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
Host or Hostess3. An educational institution
Endowment ContractIf you host a party at which sales are made, anya. Under an agreement with an entity de-
gift you receive for giving the party is a payment Proceedsscribed in (1) or (2) that provided the
for helping a direct seller make sales. You mustfunds to the institution to make the loan,
An endowment contract is a policy under whichreport it as income at its fair market value.or
you are paid a specified amount of money on aYour out-of-pocket party expenses are sub-b. As part of a program of the institution certain date unless you die before that date, inject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainmentdesigned to encourage students to which case, the money is paid to your desig-expenses. These expenses are deductible asserve in occupations or areas with un- nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid inmiscellaneous itemized deductions subject tomet needs and under which the serv- a lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only ifthe 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040),ices provided are for or under the the proceeds are more than the cost of thebut only up to the amount of income you receivedirection of a governmental unit or a policy. To determine your cost, subtract anyfor giving the party.tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza- amount that you previously received under theFor more information about the 50% limit fortion. contract and excluded from your income frommeal and entertainment expenses, see 50% the total premiums (or other consideration) paidLimit in Publication 463, Travel, Entertainment,Section 501(c)(3) organizations are defined for the contract. Include the part of the lump sumGift, and Car Expenses.in Publication 525. payment that is more than your cost in your
A loan to refinance a qualified student loan income.
also will qualify if it was made by an educational
institution or a tax-exempt 501(a) organization
Accelerated Deathunder its program designed as described in Life Insurance(3)(b) above. Benefits
ProceedsEducation loan repayment assistance. Certain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-Education loan repayments made to you by the efits under a life insurance contract or viaticalLife insurance proceeds paid to you because ofNational Health Service Corps Loan Repayment settlement before the insured's death are ex-the death of the insured person are not taxableProgram (NHSC Loan Repayment Program) or cluded from income if the insured is terminally orunless the policy was turned over to you for aa state education loan repayment program eligi- chronically ill.price. This is true even if the proceeds were paidble for funds under the Public Health Service Act
under an accident or health insurance policy orare not taxable if you agree to provide primary Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign-an endowment contract.health services in health professional shortage ment of any part of the death benefit under a life
areas. insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-Proceeds not received in installments. If vider. A viatical settlement provider is a persondeath benefits are paid to you in a lump sum orDeductible debt. You do not have income who regularly engages in the business of buyingother than at regular intervals, include in yourfrom the cancellation of a debt if your payment of or taking assignment of life insurance contractsincome only the benefits that are more than thethe debt would be deductible. This exception on the lives of insured individuals who are termi-amount payable to you at the time of the insuredapplies only if you use the cash method of ac- nally or chronically ill and who meets the require-person's death. If the benefit payable at death iscounting. For more information, see chapter 5 of ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internalnot specified, you include in your income thePublication 334, Tax Guide for Small Business. Revenue Code.benefit payments that are more than the present
value of the payments at the time of death. Exclusion for terminal illness.   AcceleratedPrice reduced after purchase. Generally, if death benefits are fully excludable if the insuredthe seller reduces the amount of debt you owe Proceeds received in installments. If you re- is a terminally ill individual. This is a person whofor property you purchased, you do not have ceive life insurance proceeds in installments, has been certified by a physician as having anincome from the reduction. The reduction of the you can exclude part of each installment from illness or physical condition that can reasonablydebt is treated as a purchase price adjustment your income. be expected to result in death within 24 monthsand reduces your basis in the property. from the date of the certification.To determine the excluded part, divide the
amount held by the insurance company (gener- Exclusion for chronic illness. If the insuredExcluded debt. Do not include a canceled ally the total lump sum payable at the death of is a chronically ill individual who is not terminallydebt in your gross income in the following situa- the insured person) by the number of install- ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basistions. ments to be paid. Include anything over this of costs incurred for qualified long-term care• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case excluded part in your income as interest. services are fully excludable. Accelerated deathunder title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi- Surviving spouse. If your spouse died benefits paid on a per diem  or other periodiccation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro- basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit
• The debt is canceled when you are insol- ceeds paid to you because of the death of your applies to the total of the accelerated death
vent. However, you cannot exclude any spouse are received in installments, you can benefits and any periodic payments received
amount of canceled debt that is more than exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in- from long-term care insurance contracts. For
the amount by which you are insolvent. cluded in the installments. If you remarry, you information on the limit and the definitions of
See Publication 908. can continue to take the exclusion. chronically ill individual, qualified long-term care
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 85

Page 88 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
services, and long-term care insurance con- of income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at- to include in your income. See Publication 525
tributable to the business between you and your for when you must use another worksheet.tracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con-
spouse in accordance with your respective inter- If you could choose to deduct for a tax yeartracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits in
ests in the venture. Each of you must file a either:Publication 525.
separate Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form • State and local income taxes, orException. The exclusion does not apply to 1040).
any amount paid to a person (other than the • State and local general sales taxes, then
insured) who has an insurable interest in the life the maximum refund that you may have to in-of the insured because the insured: clude in income is limited to the excess of the tax
S Corporation Income• Is a director, officer, or employee of the you chose to deduct for that year over the tax
person, or you did not choose to deduct for that year. For
In general, an S corporation does not pay tax on examples, see Publication 525.• Has a financial interest in the person's its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc-business. tions, and credits of the corporation are passed Mortgage interest refund. If you received a
through to the shareholders based on each refund or credit in 2008 of mortgage interest paid
shareholder's pro rata share.Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler- in an earlier year, the amount should be shown
in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interestated death benefits made on a per diem or other
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). An S corpora- Statement. Do not subtract the refund amountperiodic basis, you must file Form 8853, Archer
tion must file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. from the interest you paid in 2008. You mayMSAs and Long-term Care Insurance Con-
Income Tax Return for an S Corporation, and have to include it in your income under the rulestracts, with your return. You do not have to file send Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) to each explained in the following discussions.Form 8853 to exclude accelerated death bene- shareholder. In addition, the S corporation willfits paid on the basis of actual expenses in- send each shareholder a copy of the Share- Interest on recovery. Interest on any of thecurred. holder's Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form amounts you recover must be reported as inter-
1120S) to help each shareholder report his or est income in the year received. For example,
Public Safety Officer Killed her share of the S corporation's income, losses, report any interest you received on state or local
credits, and deductions. income tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a.in the Line of Duty
Keep Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) for Recovery and expense in same year. If theIf you are a survivor of a public safety officer who your records. Do not attach it to your refund or other recovery and the expense occurwas killed in the line of duty, you may be able to Form 1040.
RECORDS in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-exclude from income certain amounts you re- duction or credit and is not reported as income.For more information on S corporations andceive.
their shareholders, see Instructions for Form   For this purpose, the term public safety Recovery for 2 or more years. If you receive1120S.officer includes law enforcement officers, a refund or other recovery that is for amounts
firefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad and you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must
ambulance crew members. For more informa- allocate, on a pro rata  basis, the recovered
tion, see Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, amount between the years in which you paid it.
Recoveriesand Administrators. This allocation is necessary to determine the
amount of recovery from any earlier years and to
A recovery is a return of an amount you de- determine the amount, if any, of your allowable
ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The deduction for this item for the current year. For
most common recoveries are refunds, reim- information on how to compute the allocation,Partnership Income bursements, and rebates of deductions itemized see Recoveries in Publication 525.
on Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may haveA partnership generally is not a taxable entity. recoveries of non-itemized deductions (such asThe income, gains, losses, deductions, and Itemized Deductionpayments on previously deducted bad debts)credits of a partnership are passed through to and recoveries of items for which you previously Recoveriesthe partners based on each partner's distributive claimed a tax credit.share of these items. For more information, see If you recover any amount that you deducted inPublication 541. Tax benefit rule. You must include a recovery an earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you
in your income in the year you receive it up to the generally must include the full amount of theSchedule K-1 (Form 1065). Although a part- amount by which the deduction or credit you recovery in your income in the year you receivenership generally pays no tax, it must file an took for the recovered amount reduced your tax it.information return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-Partnership Income, and send Schedule K-1 Where to report. Enter your state or local in-crease to an amount carried over to the current(Form 1065) to each partner. In addition, the come tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and theyear that resulted from the deduction or credit ispartnership will send each partner a copy of the total of all other recoveries as other income onconsidered to have reduced your tax in the ear-
Partner's Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form 1040Alier year. For more information, see Publication
1065) to help each partner report his or her or Form 1040EZ.525.
share of the partnership's income, deductions,
Standard deduction limit. You generally arecredits, and tax preference items. Federal income tax refund. Refunds of fed-
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you doeral income taxes are not included in your in-Keep Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) for not itemize your deductions. Only your itemizedcome because they are never allowed as ayour records. Do not attach it to your deductions that are more than your standarddeduction from income.Form 1040.
RECORDS deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-
State tax refund. If you received a state or less you are required to itemize your deduc-For more information on partnerships, see
local income tax refund (or credit or offset) in tions). If your total deductions on the earlier yearPublication 541, Partnerships.
2008, you generally must include it in income if return were not more than your income for that
Qualified joint venture. If you and your you deducted the tax in an earlier year. The year, include in your income this year the lesser
spouse each materially participate as the only payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov- of:
members of a jointly owned and operated busi- ernment Payments, to you by February 2, 2009. • Your recoveries, orness, and you file a joint return for the tax year, The IRS also will receive a copy of the Form
you can make a joint election to be treated as a 1099-G. Use the State and Local Income Tax • The amount by which your itemized de-
qualified joint venture instead of a partnership. Refund worksheet in the 2008 Form 1040 in- ductions exceeded the standard deduc-
To make this election, you must divide all items structions for line 10 to figure the amount (if any) tion.
Page 86 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 89 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. For 2007, you filed a joint return. • You received a recovery for an item for 1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deduct
Your taxable income was $60,000 and you were which you claimed a tax credit (other than it as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). If
not entitled to any tax credits. Your standard investment credit or foreign tax credit) in a you reported it as wages, unemployment com-
deduction was $10,700, and you had itemized prior year. pensation, or other nonbusiness income, deduct
deductions of $12,000. In 2008, you received it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction on
the following recoveries for amounts deducted Schedule A (Form 1040).
on your 2007 return: Repayment of $3,000 or less. If the amount
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it fromRents from PersonalMedical expenses ............. . $200 your income in the year you repaid it. If you mustState and local income tax refund ... . 400 deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,Refund of mortgage interest ....... . 325 Property enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.
Total recoveries ............... . $925 If you rent out personal property, such as equip- Repayment over $3,000. If the amount you
ment or vehicles, how you report your income repaid was more than $3,000, you can deductNone of the recoveries were more than the de-
and expenses is generally determined by: the repayment (as explained under Type of de-ductions taken for 2007. The difference between
duction, earlier). However, you can choose in-the state and local income tax you deducted and • Whether or not the rental activity is a busi- stead to take a tax credit for the year ofyour local general sales tax was more than ness, and repayment if you included the income under a$400.
• Whether or not the rental activity is con- claim of right. This means that at the time youYour total recoveries are less than the ducted for profit. included the income, it appeared that you had anamount by which your itemized deductions ex- unrestricted right to it. If you qualify for thisceeded the standard deduction ($12,000 − Generally, if your primary purpose is income or choice, figure your tax under both methods and10,700 = $1,300), so you must include your total profit and you are involved in the rental activity compare the results. Use the method (deductionrecoveries in your income for 2008. Report the with continuity and regularity, your rental activity or credit) that results in less tax.state and local income tax refund of $400 on is a business. See Publication 535, Business
Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of your Expenses, for details on deducting expenses for Method 1. Figure your tax for 2008 claiming
recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21. both business and not-for-profit activities. a deduction for the repaid amount. If you must
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,
Standard deduction for earlier years. To de- Reporting business income and expenses. enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28.
termine if amounts recovered in 2008 must be If you are in the business of renting personal Method 2. Figure your tax for 2008 claimingincluded in your income, you must know the property, report your income and expenses on a credit for the repaid amount. Follow thesestandard deduction for your filing status for the Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The steps.year the deduction was claimed. Standard de- form instructions have information on how to
duction amounts for 2007, 2006, and 2005, are complete them. 1. Figure your tax for 2008 without deductingin Publication 525. the repaid amount.Reporting nonbusiness income. If you are
not in the business of renting personal property, 2. Refigure your tax from the earlier yearExample. You filed a joint return for 2007
report your rental income on Form 1040, line 21. without including in income the amountwith taxable income of $45,000. Your itemized
List the type and amount of the income on the you repaid in 2008.deductions were $11,550. The standard deduc-
dotted line next to line 21.tion that you could have claimed was $10,700. In 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown2008, you recovered $2,100 of your 2007 item- on your return for the earlier year. This isReporting nonbusiness expenses. If youized deductions. None of the recoveries were the credit.rent personal property for profit, include yourmore than the actual deductions for 2007. In- rental expenses in the total amount you enter on 4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forclude $850 of the recoveries in your 2008 in- Form 1040, line 36. Also enter the amount and 2008 figured without the deduction (Stepcome. This is the smaller of your recoveries ªPPRº on the dotted line next to line 36. 1).($2,100) or the amount by which your itemized If you do not rent personal property for profit,deductions were more than the standard deduc- If method 1 results in less tax, deduct theyour deductions are limited and you cannot re-tion ($11,550 − 10,700 = $850). amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,port a loss to offset other income. See  Activity
claim the credit figured in (3) above on Formnot for profit, under Other Income, later.Recovery limited to deduction. You do not 1040, line 68, and enter ªI.R.C. 1341º in theinclude in your income any amount of your re- column to the right of line 68.covery that is more than the amount you de- An example of this computation can be foundducted in the earlier year. The amount you in Publication 525.include in your income is limited to the smaller Repayments
of: Repaid social security benefits. If you re-
paid social security benefits, see Repayment ofIf you had to repay an amount that you included• The amount deducted on Schedule A benefits in chapter 11.in your income in an earlier year, you may be(Form 1040), or able to deduct the amount repaid from your
• The amount recovered. income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if
the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you
may be able to take a credit against your tax for RoyaltiesExample. During 2007 you paid $1,700 for the year in which you repaid it. Generally, youmedical expenses. From this amount you sub- can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay- Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in and mineral properties are taxable as ordinarygross income. Your actual medical expense de- your trade or business or in a for-profit transac- income. duction was $200. In 2008, you received a $500 tion. You generally report royalties in Part I ofreimbursement from your medical insurance for
Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if you holdyour 2007 expenses. The only amount of the Type of deduction. The type of deduction you an operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or are in$500 reimbursement that must be included in are allowed in the year of repayment depends business as a self-employed writer, inventor,your income for 2008 is $200 Ðthe amount ac- on the type of income you included in the earlier artist, etc., report your income and expenses ontually deducted. year. You generally deduct the repayment on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040).the same form or schedule on which you previ-Other recoveries. See Recoveries in Publica- ously reported it as income. For example, if you Copyrights and patents. Royalties fromtion 525 if: reported it as self-employment income, deduct it copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works,
• You have recoveries of items other than as a business expense on Schedule C or Sched- and similar property, or from patents on inven-
itemized deductions, or ule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 87

Page 90 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your work over a specified period of time. Royal- Types of unemployment compensation. in section 5 of Publication 15-A, Employer's
Supplemental Tax Guide. Report these pay-Unemployment compensation generally in-ties generally are based on the number of units
ments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A orcludes any amount received under an unem-sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a
on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.ployment compensation law of the United Statesperformance, or machines sold.
or of a state. It includes the following benefits. Repayment of benefits. You may have to
Oil, gas, and minerals. Royalty income from repay some of your supplemental unemploy-• Benefits paid by a state or the District of
oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustmentColumbia from the Federal Unemployment
you receive when natural resources are ex- allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If youTrust Fund.
tracted from your property. The royalties are repay supplemental unemployment benefits in• State unemployment insurance benefits.based on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and the same year you receive them, reduce the
are paid to you by a person or company who total benefits by the amount you repay. If you• Railroad unemployment compensation
repay the benefits in a later year, you mustleases the property from you. benefits.
include the full amount of the benefits receivedDepletion. If you are the owner of an eco- • Disability payments from a government in your income for the year you received them.nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas program paid as a substitute for unem- Deduct the repayment in the later year as anployment compensation. (Amounts re-wells, you can recover your investment through adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (Youceived as workers' compensation forthe depletion allowance. For information on this cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In-injuries or illness are not unemploymentsubject, see chapter 9 of Publication 535. clude the repayment on Form 1040, line 36, andcompensation. See chapter 5 for more in- enter ªSub-Pay TRAº and the amount on theCoal and iron ore. Under certain circum- formation.) dotted line next to line 36. If the amount youstances, you can treat amounts you receive
repay in a later year is more than $3,000, you• Trade readjustment allowances under thefrom the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-
may be able to take a credit against your tax forTrade Act of 1974.ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather
the later year instead of deducting the amountthan as royalty income. For information about • Unemployment assistance under the Dis- repaid. For more information on this, see Repay-gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore, aster Relief and Emergency Assistance ments, earlier.see Publication 544. Act. 
Private unemployment fund. Unemploy-Sale of property interest. If you sell your ment benefit payments from a private (nonun-Governmental program. If you contributecomplete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, ion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute areto a governmental unemployment compensa-the amount you receive is considered payment taxable only if the amounts you receive are moretion program and your contributions are not de-for the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty than your total payments into the fund. Reportductible, amounts you receive under theincome. Under certain circumstances, the sale the taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21.program are not included as unemploymentis subject to capital gain or loss treatment on compensation until you recover your contribu- Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you asSchedule D (Form 1040). For more information tions. If you deducted all of your contributions to an unemployed member of a union from regularon selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3 the program, the entire amount you receive union dues are included in your income on Formof Publication 544. under the program is included in your income. 1040, line 21. However, if you contribute to aIf you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty,
special union fund and your payments to theRepayment of unemployment compensa-or a net profit interest in a mineral property for fund are not deductible, the unemployment ben-tion. If you repaid in 2008 unemploymentthe life of the property, you have made a lease or efits you receive from the fund are includible incompensation you received in 2008, subtracta sublease, and any cash you receive for the your income only to the extent they are morethe amount you repaid from the total amount youassignment of other interests in the property is than your contributions.received and enter the difference on line 19 ofordinary income subject to a depletion allow-
Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 ofance. Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re-Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your ceive from your employer during periods of un-Part of future production sold. If you own entry enter ªRepaidº and the amount you repaid. employment, under a union agreement thatmineral property but sell part of the future pro- If you repaid unemployment compensation in guarantees you full pay during the year, areduction, you generally treat the money you re- 2008 that you included in income in an earlier taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 ofceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a year, you can deduct the amount repaid on Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formloan from the buyer. Do not include it in your Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, if you itemize 1040EZ.income or take depletion based on it. deductions. If the amount is more than $3,000,
State employees. Payments similar to asee  Repayments, earlier.When production begins, you include all the
state's unemployment compensation may beproceeds in your income, deduct all the produc- Tax withholding. You can choose to have made by the state to its employees who are nottion expenses, and deduct depletion from that federal income tax withheld from your unem- covered by the state's unemployment compen-amount to arrive at your taxable income from the ployment compensation. To make this choice, sation law. Although the payments are fully tax-property. complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholding able, do not report them as unemployment
Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax will compensation. Report these payments on Form
be withheld at 10% of your payment. 1040, line 21.
If you do not choose to have tax with-
Unemployment held from your unemployment com-
pensation, you may be liable for
CAUTION
!
Benefits estimated tax. If you do not pay enough tax, Welfare and Other
either through withholding or estimated tax, or a
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits you combination of both, you may have to pay a Public Assistancereceive depends on the type of program paying penalty. For more information on estimated tax,
the benefits. see chapter 4. Benefits
Unemployment compensation. You must in- Supplemental unemployment benefits. Do not include in your income governmental
clude in your income all unemployment compen- Benefits received from an employer-financed benefit payments from a public welfare fund
sation you receive. You should receive a Form fund (to which the employees did not contribute) based upon need, such as payments due to
1099-G, Certain Government Payments, show- are not unemployment compensation. They are blindness. Payments from a state fund for the
ing the amount paid to you. Generally, you enter taxable as wages and are subject to withholding victims of crime should not be included in the
unemployment compensation on line 19 of Form for income tax. They may be subject to social victims' incomes if they are in the nature of
1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form security and Medicare taxes. For more informa- welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-
1040EZ. tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefits penses that are reimbursed by such a fund. You
Page 88 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 91 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must include in your income any welfare pay- if you were a participant or conspirator in a
ments that are compensation for services or that terrorist action or his or her representative. Other Incomeare obtained fraudulently. A qualified disaster is:
The following brief discussions are arranged in• A disaster which results from a terrorist orAlternative trade adjustment assistance alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-military action;(ATAA) payments. Payments you receive cussed in greater detail in another publicationfrom a state agency under the Demonstration • A federally declared disaster; or include a reference to that publication.Project for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis-
• A disaster which results from an accidenttance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in- Activity not for profit. You must include oninvolving a common carrier, or from anycluded in your income. The state must send you your return income from an activity from whichother event, which is determined to be cat-Form 1099-G to advise you of the amount you you do not expect to make a profit. An exampleastrophic by the Secretary of the Treasuryshould include in income. The amount should be of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm youor his or her delegate.reported on Form 1040, line 21. operate mostly for recreation and pleasure.
Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc-For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster isPersons with disabilities. If you have a disa-
tions for expenses related to the activity arequalified if it is determined by an applicablebility, you must include in income compensation
limited. They cannot total more than the incomefederal, state, or local authority to warrant assis-you receive for services you perform unless the
you report and can be taken only if you itemizetance from the federal, state, or local govern-compensation is otherwise excluded. However,
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Seement, agency, or instrumentality.you do not include in income the value of goods,
Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica-services, and cash that you receive, not in return
Disaster mitigation payments. You also can tion 535 for information on whether an activity isfor your services, but for your training and reha-
exclude from income any amount you receive considered carried on for a profit.bilitation because you have a disability. Excluda-
that is a qualified disaster mitigation payment.ble amounts include payments for transportation
Like qualified disaster relief payments, qualified Alaska Permanent Fund dividend. If you re-and attendant care, such as interpreter services
disaster mitigation payments are also most com- ceived a payment from Alaska's mineral incomefor the deaf, reader services for the blind, and
monly paid to you in the period immediately fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), reportservices to help mentally retarded persons do
following damage to property as a result of a it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 oftheir work.
natural disaster. However, disaster mitigation Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. The
payments are grants you use to mitigate (reduceDisaster relief grants. Do not include state of Alaska sends each recipient a document
the severity of) potential damage from futurepost-disaster grants received under the Disaster that shows the amount of the payment with the
natural disasters. They are paid to you throughRelief and Emergency Assistance Act in your check. The amount also is reported to IRS.
state and local governments based on the provi-income if the grant payments are made to help
sions of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Reliefyou meet necessary expenses or serious needs Alimony. Include in your income on Form
and Emergency Assistance Act or the Nationalfor medical, dental, housing, personal property, 1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-
Flood Insurance Act.transportation, or funeral expenses. Do not de- ceive. Amounts you receive for child support are
You cannot increase the basis or adjustedduct casualty losses or medical expenses that not income to you. Alimony and child support
basis of your property for improvements madeare specifically reimbursed by these disaster payments are discussed in chapter 18.
with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments.relief grants. If you have deducted a casualty
loss for the loss of your personal residence and Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in yourMortgage assistance payments. Paymentsyou later receive a disaster relief grant for the income.made under section 235 of the National Housingloss of the same residence, you may have to
Act for mortgage assistance are not included ininclude part or all of the grant in your taxable Campaign contributions. These contribu-the homeowner's income. Interest paid for theincome. See Recoveries, earlier. Unemploy- tions are not income to a candidate unless theyhomeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-ment assistance payments under the Act are are diverted to his or her personal use. To begram cannot be deducted.taxable unemployment compensation. See Un- exempt from tax, the contributions must beemployment compensation under Unemploy- spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fundMedicare. Medicare benefits received underment Benefits, earlier. for use in future campaigns. However, interesttitle XVIII of the Social Security Act are not earned on bank deposits, dividends received onincludible in the gross income of the individualsDisaster relief payments. You can exclude contributed securities, and net gains realized onfor whom they are paid. This includes basic (partfrom income any amount you receive that is a sales of contributed securities are taxable andA (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged))qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis- must be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. In-and supplementary (part B (Supplementaryaster relief payment is an amount paid to you: come Tax Return for Certain Political Organiza-Medical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)). tions. Excess campaign funds transferred to an1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
office account must be included in the office-essary personal, family, living, or funeral Old-age, survivors, and disability insurance holder's income on Form 1040, line 21, in theexpenses that result from a qualified disas- benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under year transferred.ter; section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act
are not includible in the gross income of the2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive fromindividuals to whom they are paid. This appliesessary expenses incurred for the repair or a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy isto old-age insurance benefits, and insurancerehabilitation of your home or repair or re- not income, but you must reduce your basis bybenefits for wives, husbands, children, widows,placement of its contents to the extent it is the amount of the rebate.widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, asdue to a qualified disaster; well as the lump-sum death payment.
Example. You buy a new car for $9,0003. By a person engaged in the furnishing or
cash and receive a $400 rebate check from thesale of transportation as a common carrier Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Food
manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you.because of the death or personal physical benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-
Your basis in the car is $8,600. This is the basisinjuries incurred as a result of a qualified gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-
on which you figure gain or loss if you sell the cardisaster; or pare and serve free meals for the program,
and depreciation if you use it for business.include in your income as wages the cash pay4. By a federal, state, or local government, or you receive, even if you are also eligible for foodagency, or instrumentality in connection Casualty insurance and other reimburse-benefits.with a qualified disaster in order to pro- ments. You generally should not report thesemote the general welfare. Payments to reduce cost of winter energy. reimbursements on your return unless you are
You can exclude this amount only to the extent Payments made by a state to qualified people to figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft.
any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur- reduce their cost of winter energy use are not See Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and
ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not apply taxable. Thefts, for more information.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 89

Page 92 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Child support payments. You should not re- illness, disability, or unemployment. Report on applies to distributions of tax-exempt interest
port these payments on your return. See Publi- Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits you and capital gains.
cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals, received during the year that is more than the The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell
for more information. amount of the premiums you paid during the you the type of items making up your share of
year. the estate or trust income and any credits you
Court awards and damages. To determine if are allowed on your individual income tax return.
Down payment assistance. If you purchasesettlement amounts you receive by compromise Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-a home and receive assistance from a nonprofitor judgment must be included in your income, ally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.corporation to make the down payment, thatyou must consider the item that the settlement
assistance is not included in your income. If thereplaces. The character of the income as ordi- Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantor
corporation qualifies as a tax-exempt charitablenary income or capital gain depends on the trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-
organization, the assistance is treated as a giftnature of the underlying claim. Include the fol- ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over
and is included in your basis of the house. If thelowing as ordinary income. the trust. (The grantor is the one who transferred
corporation does not qualify, the assistance is property to the trust.) This rule applies if the1. Interest on any award. treated as a rebate or reduction of the purchase property (or income from the property) put into
price and is not included in your basis. the trust will or may revert (be returned) to the2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profits
grantor or the grantor's spouse.in most cases. Employment agency fees. If you get a job Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It does through an employment agency, and the fee is grantor has a reversionary interest valued (atnot matter if they relate to a physical injury paid by your employer, the fee is not includible in the date of transfer) at more than 5% of theor physical sickness. your income if you are not liable for it. However, value of the transferred property.if you pay it and your employer reimburses you4. Amounts received in settlement of pension Expenses paid by another. If your personalfor it, it is includible in your income.rights (if you did not contribute to the plan). expenses are paid for by another person, such
Energy conservation subsidies. You can5. Damages for: as a corporation, the payment may be taxable to
exclude from gross income any subsidy pro- you depending upon your relationship with that
a. Patent or copyright infringement, vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili- person and the nature of the payment. But if the
ties for the purchase or installation of an energy payment makes up for a loss caused by thatb. Breach of contract, or conservation measure for a dwelling unit. person, and only restores you to the position you
c. Interference with business operations. were in before the loss, the payment is notEnergy conservation measure. This in-
includible in your income.cludes installations or modifications that are pri-6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis- marily designed to reduce consumption of Fees for services. Include all fees for yourtress received to satisfy a claim under Title electricity or natural gas, or improve the man- services in your income. Examples of these feesVII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. agement of energy demand. are amounts you receive for services you per-7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin- form as:Dwelling unit. This includes a house, apart-gent fees) where the underlying recovery ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi- • A corporate director,is included in gross income. lar property. If a building or structure contains
• An executor, administrator, or personalDo not include in your income compensatory both dwelling and other units, any subsidy must
representative of an estate,damages for personal physical injury or physical be properly allocated.
sickness (whether received in a lump sum or • A manager of a trade or business you op-Estate and trust income.     An estate or trust,installments). erated before declaring Chapter 11 bank-unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal ruptcy,Emotional distress. Emotional distress it- income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estateself is not a physical injury or physical sickness, or trust, you may be taxed on your share of its • A notary public, orbut damages you receive for emotional distress income distributed or required to be distributed • An election precinct official.due to a physical injury or sickness are treated to you. However, there is never a double tax.as received for the physical injury or sickness. Estates and trusts file their returns on Form Nonemployee compensation. If you areDo not include them in your income. 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and not an employee and the fees for your servicesIf the emotional distress is due to a personal Trusts, and your share of the income is reported from the same payer total $600 or more for theinjury that is not due to a physical injury or to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041). year, you may receive a Form 1099-MISC. Yousickness (for example, employment discrimina-
may need to report your fees asCurrent income required to be distributed.tion or injury to reputation), you must include the
self-employment income. See Self-EmployedIf you are the beneficiary of an estate or trustdamages in your income, except for any dam-
Persons, in chapter 1, for a discussion of whenthat must distribute all of its current income, youages you receive for medical care due to that
you are considered self-employed.must report your share of the distributable netemotional distress. Emotional distress includes
income, whether or not you actually received it.physical symptoms that result from emotional Corporate director. Corporate directordistress, such as headaches, insomnia, and fees are self-employment income. Report theseCurrent income not required to be distrib-stomach disorders. payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZuted.  If you are the beneficiary of an estate or
(Form 1040).trust and the fiduciary has the choice of whetherDeduction for costs involved in unlawful
to distribute all or part of the current income, youdiscrimination suits. You may be able to de- Personal representatives. All personalmust report:duct attorney fees and court costs paid to re- representatives must include in their gross in-cover a judgment or settlement for a claim of come fees paid to them from an estate. If you• All income that is required to be distributedunlawful discrimination under various provisions are not in the trade or business of being anto you, whether or not it is actually distrib-of federal, state, and local law listed in Internal executor (for instance, you are the executor of auted, plusRevenue Code section 62(e), a claim against friend's or relative's estate), report these fees on• All other amounts actually paid or creditedthe United States government, or a claim under Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade orto you,section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act. business of being an executor, report these feesFor more information, see Publication 525. up to the amount of your share of distributable as self-employment income on Schedule C or
net income. Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee is notCredit card insurance. Generally, if you re- includible in income if it is waived.ceive benefits under a credit card disability or How to report. Treat each item of income
unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are the same way that the estate or trust would treat Manager of trade or business for bank-
taxable to you. These plans make the minimum it. For example, if a trust's dividend income is ruptcy estate. Include in your income all pay-
monthly payment on your credit card account if distributed to you, you report the distribution as ments received from your bankruptcy estate for
you cannot make the payment due to injury, dividend income on your return. The same rule managing or operating a trade or business that
Page 90 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 93 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you operated before you filed for bankruptcy. 1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade or Excludable restitution payments are pay-
Report this income on Form 1040, line 21. business of organizing tours. You cannot deduct ments or distributions made by any country or
your expenses in serving as the voluntary leader any other entity because of persecution of anNotary public.  Report payments for these of the group at the group's request. If you organ- individual on the basis of race, religion, physicalservices on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ ize tours as a trade or business, report the tour's or mental disability, or sexual orientation by Nazi(Form 1040). These payments are not subject to value on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form Germany, any other Axis regime, or any otherself-employment tax. (See the separate instruc- 1040). Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whethertions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details. the payments are made under a law or as a
Gambling winnings. You must include yourElection precinct official. You should re- result of a legal action. They include compensa-
gambling winnings in income on Form 1040, lineceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv- tion or reparation for property losses resulting
21. If you itemize your deductions on Scheduleices performed as an election official or election from Nazi persecution, including proceeds
A (Form 1040), you can deduct gambling lossesworker. Report these payments on line 7 of under insurance policies issued before and dur-
you had during the year, but only up to theForm 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form ing World War II by European insurance compa-
amount of your winnings. See chapter 28  for1040EZ. nies.
information on recordkeeping.
Illegal activities. Income from illegal activi-Foster care providers. Payments you re- Lotteries and raffles. Winnings from lotter- ties, such as money from dealing illegal drugs,ceive from a state, political subdivision, or a ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi- must be included in your income on Form 1040,qualified foster care placement agency for pro- tion to cash winnings, you must include in your line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZviding care to qualified foster individuals in your income the fair market value of bonds, cars, (Form 1040) if from your self-employment activ-home generally are not included in your income. houses, and other noncash prizes. ity.However, you must include in your income pay-
ments received for the care of more than 5 If you win a state lottery prize payable Indian fishing rights. If you are a member ofindividuals age 19 or older and certain diffi- in installments, see Publication 525 for a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rightsculty-of-care payments. more information.
TIP secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act ofA qualified foster individual is a person who: Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not includeForm W-2G. You may have received a in your income amounts you receive from activi-1. Is living in a foster family home, and Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, show- ties related to those fishing rights. The income ising the amount of your gambling winnings and2. Was placed there by: not subject to income tax, self-employment tax,any tax taken out of them. Include the amount or employment taxes.a. An agency of a state or one of its politi- from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include the
cal subdivisions, or Interest on frozen deposits. In general, youamount shown in box 2 on Form 1040, line 63,
exclude from your income the amount of interestas federal income tax withheld.b. A qualified foster care placement earned on a frozen deposit. See  Interest incomeagency. Gifts and inheritances. Generally, property on frozen deposits in chapter 7.
you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance is Interest on qualified savings bonds. Younot included in your income. However, if prop-Difficulty-of-care payments. These are may be able to exclude from income the interesterty you receive this way later produces incomeadditional payments that are designated by the from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem ifsuch as interest, dividends, or rents, that incomepayer as compensation for providing the addi- you pay qualified higher educational expensesis taxable to you. If property is given to a trusttional care that is required for physically, men- in the same year. For more information on thisand the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified foster exclusion, see Education Savings Bond Pro-tributed to you, that income is also taxable toindividuals. A state must determine that the ad- gram under U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 7.you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is theditional compensation is needed, and the care
income from the property, that income is taxablefor which the payments are made must be pro- Job interview expenses. If a prospective em-
to you.vided in your home. ployer asks you to appear for an interview and
You must include in your income diffi- either pays you an allowance or reimburses youInherited pension or IRA. If you inherited aculty-of-care payments received for more than: for your transportation and other travel ex-pension or an individual retirement arrangement penses, the amount you receive is generally not(IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-• 10 qualified foster individuals under age taxable. You include in income only the amountited amount in your income. See chapter 10 if19, or you receive that is more than your actual ex-you inherited a pension. See chapter 17 if you• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or penses.inherited an IRA.older. Jury duty.   Jury duty pay you receive must beHobby losses. Losses from a hobby are not included in your income on Form 1040, line 21. IfMaintaining space in home. If you are paid deductible from other income. A hobby is an you must give the pay to your employer becauseto maintain space in your home for emergency activity from which you do not expect to make a your employer continues to pay your salaryfoster care, you must include the payment in profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier. while you serve on the jury, you can deduct theyour income. amount turned over to your employer as anIf you collect stamps, coins, or other
Reporting taxable payments.  If you re- adjustment to your income. Enter the amountitems as a hobby for recreation and
ceive payments that you must include in your you repay your employer on Form 1040, line 36.pleasure, and you sell any of the items,
CAUTION
!
income, you are in business as a foster care Enter ªJury Payº and the amount on the dottedyour gain is taxable as a capital gain. (See
provider and you are self-employed. Report the line next to line 36.chapter 16.) However, if you sell items from your
payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ collection at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss. Kickbacks.   You must include kickbacks, side(Form 1040). See Publication 587, Business commissions, push money, or similar paymentsUse of Your Home (Including Use by Daycare Holocaust victims restitution. Restitution you receive in your income on Form 1040, lineProviders), to help you determine the amount payments you receive as a Holocaust victim (or 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formyou can deduct for the use of your home. the heir of a Holocaust victim) and interest 1040), if from your self-employment activity.earned on the payments, including interestFound property. If you find and keep property earned on amounts held in certain escrow ac-that does not belong to you that has been lost or Example. You sell cars and help arrangecounts or funds, are not taxable. You also do notabandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable to you car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers payinclude them in any computations in which youat its fair market value in the first year it is your back part of their commissions to you for refer-ordinarily would add excludable income to yourundisputed possession. ring customers to them. You must include theadjusted gross income, such as the computation kickbacks in your income.Free tour. If you received a free tour from a to determine the taxable part of social security
travel agency for organizing a group of tourists, benefits. If the payments are made in property, Medical savings accounts (MSAs). You
you must include its value in your income. Re- your basis in the property is its fair market value generally do not include in income amounts you
port the fair market value of the tour on Form when you receive it. withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 91

Page 94 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay for included in income. This is a return of the invest- present, or future teaching, research, or other
qualified medical expenses. Generally, qualified ment in the program. services. This applies even if all candidates for a
medical expenses are those you can deduct on The beneficiary generally does not include in degree must perform the services to receive the
Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions. income any earnings distributed from a QTP if degree.
For more information about qualified medical the total distribution is less than or equal to For information about the rules that apply to
expenses, see chapter 21. For more information adjusted qualified higher education expenses. a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to
about Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage See Publication 970 for more information. employees and their families by an educational
MSAs, see Publication 969, Health Savings Ac- institution, see Publication 970.Railroad retirement annuities. The followingcounts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. types of payments are treated as pension or VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-
Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in a annuity income and are taxable under the rules partment of Veterans Affairs are not included in
lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz explained in chapter 11. your income. These allowances are not consid-
program, beauty contest, or other event, you ered scholarship or fellowship grants.• Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that aremust include it in your income. For example, if more than the social security equivalent Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contestyou win a $50 prize in a photography contest, benefit. are not scholarships or fellowships if you do notyou must report this income on Form 1040, line have to use the prizes for educational purposes.• Tier 2 benefits.21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not include You must include these amounts in your incomeits value in your income. • Vested dual benefits. on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you usePrizes and awards in goods or services must the amounts for educational purposes.be included in your income at their fair market
Rewards. If you receive a reward for providing Stolen property. If you steal property, youvalue.
information, include it in your income. must report its fair market value in your incomeEmployee awards or bonuses. Cash in the year you steal it unless in the same year,Sale of home. You may be able to excludeawards or bonuses given to you by your em- you return it to its rightful owner.from income all or part of any gain from the saleployer for good work or suggestions generally
or exchange of a personal residence. See chap- Transporting school children. Do not in-must be included in your income as wages.
ter 15. clude in your income a school board mileageHowever, certain noncash employee achieve-
allowance for taking children to and from schoolment awards can be excluded from income. See Sale of personal items. If you sold an item if you are not in the business of taking children toBonuses and awards in chapter 5. you owned for personal use, such as a car, school. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, orPulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes. If you ing this transportation.silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.were awarded a prize in recognition of accom-
Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can- Union benefits and dues. Amounts deductedplishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-
not deduct a loss. from your pay for union dues, assessments,tistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you
However, if you sold an item you held for contributions, or other payments to a union can-generally must include the value of the prize in
investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins, not be excluded from your income.your income. However, you do not include this
or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain You may be able to deduct some of theseprize in your income if you meet all of the follow-
and any loss is deductible as a capital loss. payments as a miscellaneous deduction subjecting requirements.
to the 2%-of-AGI limit if they are related to your• You were selected without any action on Example. You sold a painting on an online job and if you itemize deductions on Schedule Ayour part to enter the contest or proceed- auction website for $100. You bought the paint- (Form 1040). For more information, see  Unioning. ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Report Dues and Expenses in chapter 28.
your gain as a capital gain on Schedule D (Form• You are not required to perform substan- Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits paid1040).tial future services as a condition to receiv- to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits,ing the prize or award. Scholarships and fellowships. A candidate including both cash and the fair market value of
for a degree can exclude amounts received as a• The prize or award is transferred by the other property, are usually included in your in-
qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualifiedpayer directly to a governmental unit or come as compensation. You can exclude these
scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-tax-exempt charitable organization as des- benefits from your income only when the facts
ceive that is for:ignated by you. clearly show that the union intended them as
gifts to you.• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend anSee Publication 525 for more information about
educational institution, orthe conditions that apply to the transfer. Utility rebates. If you are a customer of an
electric utility company and you participate in the• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-Qualified tuition programs (QTPs). A quali- utility's energy conservation program, you mayquired for courses at the educational insti-fied tuition program (also known as a 529 pro- receive on your monthly electric bill either:tution.gram) is a program set up to allow you to either • A reduction in the purchase price of elec-Amounts used for room and board do not qualifyprepay or contribute to an account established tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), orfor the exclusion. See Publication 970 for morefor paying a student's qualified higher education
information on qualified scholarships and fellow- • A nonrefundable credit against theexpenses at an eligible educational institution. A
ship grants. purchase price of the electricity.program can be established and maintained by
a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state, Payment for services. Generally, you must The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-or an eligible educational institution. include in income the part of any scholarship or able credit is not included in your income.The part of a distribution representing the fellowship that represents payment for past,amount paid or contributed to a QTP is not
Page 92 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 95 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Three.
The four chapters in this part discuss investment gains and losses, includingGains and how to figure your basis in property. A gain from selling or trading stocks,
bonds, or other investment property may be taxed or it may be tax free, atLosses least in part. A loss may or may not be deductible. These chapters also
discuss gains from selling property you personally use Ð including the special
rules for selling your home. Nonbusiness casualty and theft losses are dis-
cussed in chapter 25 in Part Five.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of the buildings. Allocate the cost basis according
Assets to the respective fair market values (FMVs) of
the land and buildings at the time of purchase.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses13. Figure the basis of each asset by multiplying the
❏ 551 Basis of Assets lump sum by a fraction. The numerator is the
FMV of that asset and the denominator is the❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions FMV of the whole property at the time of
Basis of ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property purchase.
If you are not certain of the FMVs of the
land and buildings, you can allocateProperty
the basis according to their assessed
TIP
values for real estate tax purposes.Cost Basis
Fair market value (FMV). FMV is the priceIntroduction The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. at which the property would change hands be-The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtThis chapter discusses how to figure your basis tween a willing buyer and a willing seller, neitherobligations, other property, or services. Yourin property. It is divided into the following sec- having to buy or sell, and both having reasona-cost also includes amounts you pay for the fol-tions. ble knowledge of all the necessary facts. Saleslowing items: of similar property on or about the same date• Cost basis.
may be helpful in figuring the FMV of the prop-• Sales tax,
• Adjusted basis. erty.• Freight,
• Basis other than cost. Assumption of mortgage. If you buy prop-• Installation and testing,
erty and assume (or buy the property subject to)Your basis is the amount of your investment in • Excise taxes, an existing mortgage on the property, your basisproperty for tax purposes. Use the basis to figure includes the amount you pay for the property• Legal and accounting fees (when theygain or loss on the sale, exchange, or other plus the amount to be paid on the mortgage.must be capitalized),disposition of property. Also use it to figure de-
ductions for depreciation, amortization, deple- • Revenue stamps, Settlement costs. Your basis includes thetion, and casualty losses. settlement fees and closing costs you paid for• Recording fees, andIf you use property for both business or in- buying the property. (A fee for buying property isvestment purposes and for personal purposes, • Real estate taxes (if you assume liability a cost that must be paid even if you buy theyou must allocate the basis based on the use. for the seller). property for cash.) Do not include fees and costsOnly the basis allocated to the business or in- for getting a loan on the property in your basis.In addition, the basis of real estate and businessvestment use of the property can be depreci- The following are some of the settlementassets may include other items.ated. fees or closing costs you can include in the basisYour original basis in property is adjusted of your property.Loans with low or no interest.  If you buy(increased or decreased) by certain events. For property on a time-payment plan that charges • Abstract fees (abstract of title fees).example, if you make improvements to the prop- little or no interest, the basis of your property iserty, increase your basis. If you take deductions • Charges for installing utility services.your stated purchase price minus any amountfor depreciation or casualty losses, or claim cer- considered to be unstated interest. You gener- • Legal fees (including fees for the titletain credits, reduce your basis. ally have unstated interest if your interest rate is search and preparation of the sales con-less than the applicable federal rate.Keep accurate records of all items that tract and deed). For more information, see Unstated Interestaffect the basis of your property. For
• Recording fees.and Original Issue Discount (OID) in Publicationmore information on keeping records,
RECORDS
537.see chapter 1. • Survey fees.
• Transfer taxes. Real PropertyUseful Items
• Owner's title insurance.You may want to see: Real property, also called real estate, is land and • Any amounts the seller owes that yougenerally anything built on, growing on, or at-Publication agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-tached to land. est, recording or mortgage fees, chargesIf you buy real property, certain fees and❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe for improvements or repairs, and salesother expenses you pay are part of your costBenefits commissions.basis in the property.❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Lump sum purchase. If you buy buildings Settlement costs do not include amounts❏ 535 Business Expenses and the land on which they stand for a lump placed in escrow for the future payment of items
❏ 537 Installment Sales sum, allocate the cost basis among the land and such as taxes and insurance.
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 93

Page 96 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The following are some of the settlement Table 13-1. Examples of Adjustments to Basis
fees and closing costs you cannot include in the
basis of property. Increases to Basis Decreases to Basis
• Casualty insurance premiums. • Capital improvements: • Exclusion from income of
• Rent for occupancy of the property before Putting an addition on your home  subsidies for energy conservation
closing. Replacing an entire roof  measures
Paving your driveway• Charges for utilities or other services re-
Installing central air conditioning • Casualty or theft loss deductionslated to occupancy of the property before
Rewiring your home  and insurance reimbursementsclosing.
• Charges connected with getting a loan, • Assessments for local improvements:such as points (discount points, loan origi- Water connectionsnation fees), mortgage insurance premi-
Extending utility service lines to the • Postponed gain from the sale of a homeums, loan assumption fees, cost of a
propertycredit report, and fees for an appraisal re-
Sidewalks • Alternative motor vehicle credit quired by a lender.
(Form 8910)
• Fees for refinancing a mortgage. Roads
• Alternative fuel vehicle refueling
property credit (Form 8911)Real estate taxes. If you pay real estate taxes
the seller owed on real property you bought, and
the seller did not reimburse you, treat those • Residential energy efficient property 
taxes as part of your basis. You cannot deduct credit (Form 5695)
them as an expense.
• Casualty losses: • Depreciation and section 179 deductionIf you reimburse the seller for taxes the seller
Restoring damaged propertypaid for you, you can usually deduct that amount
• Nontaxable corporate distributionsas an expense in the year of purchase. Do not
include that amount in the basis of your property. • Legal fees:
If you did not reimburse the seller, you must Cost of defending and perfecting a title • Certain canceled debt excluded from
reduce your basis by the amount of those taxes. Fees for getting a reduction of an  income
assessment
Points. If you pay points to get a loan (includ-
• Zoning costs • Easementsing a mortgage, second mortgage, line of credit,
or a home equity loan), do not add the points to
• Adoption tax benefitsthe basis of the related property. Generally, you
deduct the points over the term of the loan. For
more information on how to deduct points, see
basement, adding another bathroom or bed- You must increase your basis in the propertychapter 23.
by the amount you spend on repairs that restoreroom, putting up a fence, putting in new plumb-Points on home mortgage. Special rules the property to its pre-casualty condition.ing or wiring, installing a new roof, or paving yourmay apply to points you and the seller pay when driveway. For more information on casualty and theftyou get a mortgage to buy your main home. If losses, see chapter 25.Assessments for local improvements.certain requirements are met, you can deduct
Add to the basis of property assessments forthe points in full for the year in which they are
Depreciation and section 179 deduction.improvements such as streets and sidewalks ifpaid. Reduce the basis of your home by any
Decrease the basis of your qualifying businessthey increase the value of the property as-seller-paid points.
property by any section 179 deduction you takesessed. Do not deduct them as taxes. However,
and the depreciation you deducted, or couldyou can deduct as taxes assessments for main-
have deducted (including any special deprecia-tenance or repairs, or for meeting interest
tion allowance), on your tax returns under thecharges related to the improvements.
Adjusted Basis method of depreciation you selected.
For more information about depreciation andExample. Your city changes the street in
Before figuring gain or loss on a sale, exchange, the section 179 deduction, see Publication 946front of your store into an enclosed pedestrian
or other disposition of property or figuring allow- and the Instructions for Form 4562.mall and assesses you and other affected prop-
able depreciation, depletion, or amortization, erty owners for the cost of the conversion. Add
you must usually make certain adjustments (in- Example. You owned a duplex used asthe assessment to your property's basis. In this
creases and decreases) to the cost of the prop- rental property that cost you $40,000, of whichexample, the assessment is a depreciable as-
erty. The result is the adjusted basis. $35,000 was allocated to the building andset.
$5,000 to the land. You added an improvement
to the duplex that cost $10,000. In February lastIncreases to Basis Decreases to Basis year, the duplex was damaged by fire. Up to that
time, you had been allowed depreciation ofIncrease the basis of any property by all items Decrease the basis of any property by all items $23,000. You sold some salvaged material forproperly added to a capital account. Examples that represent a return of capital for the period $1,300 and collected $19,700 from your insur-of items that increase basis are shown in Table during which you held the property. Examples of ance company. You deducted a casualty loss of13-1. These include the items discussed below. items that decrease basis are shown in Table $1,000 on your income tax return for last year.13-1. These include the items discussed below. You spent $19,000 of the insurance proceeds
Improvements. Add to your basis in property for restoration of the duplex, which was com-
the cost of improvements having a useful life of Casualty and theft losses. If you have a cas- pleted this year. You must use the duplex's
more than 1 year, that increase the value of the ualty or theft loss, decrease the basis in your adjusted basis after the restoration to determine
property, lengthen its life, or adapt it to a differ- property by any insurance proceeds or other depreciation for the rest of the property's recov-
ent use. For example, improvements include reimbursement and by any deductible loss not ery period. Figure the adjusted basis of the du-
putting a recreation room in your unfinished covered by insurance. plex as follows:
Page 94 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Page 97 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Original cost of duplex ........ . $35,000 property at the time it is transferred to you, less You realized a gain of $5,000 ($31,000 −
Addition to duplex ........... . 10,000 any amount you paid for it. Property is substan- $26,000). You bought replacement property
Total cost of duplex .......... . $45,000 tially vested when it is transferable or when it is similar in use to the converted property for
Minus: Depreciation ......... . 23,000 not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture (you $29,000. You recognize a gain of $2,000
Adjusted basis before casualty ... . $22,000 do not have a good chance of losing it). For ($31,000 − $29,000), the unspent part of the
Minus: Insurance more information, see Restricted Property in payment from the state. Your unrecognized gain
proceeds ..... . $19,700 Publication 525. is $3,000, the difference between the $5,000Deducted casualty realized gain and the $2,000 recognized gain.Bargain purchases. A bargain purchase isloss ......... . 1,000 The basis of the replacement property is figureda purchase of an item for less than its FMV. If, asSalvage proceeds  1,300  22,000 as follows:compensation for services, you buy goods orAdjusted basis after casualty .... . $-0-
Add: Cost of restoring duplex .... . 19,000 other property at less than FMV, include the Cost of replacement property ..... . $29,000Adjusted basis after restoration $19,000 difference between the purchase price and the Minus: Gain not recognized ...... . 3,000property's FMV in your income. Your basis in the Basis of replacement property .. . $26,000property is its FMV (your purchase price plus theNote. Your basis in the land is its original amount you include in income). cost of $5,000. Allocating the basis. If you buy more thanIf the difference between your purchase one piece of replacement property, allocate yourEasements. The amount you receive for price and the FMV is a qualified employee dis- basis among the properties based on their re-granting an easement is generally considered to count, do not include the difference in income. spective costs.be proceeds from the sale of an interest in real However, your basis in the property is still its
property. It reduces the basis of the affected part FMV. See Employee Discounts in Publication Basis for depreciation. Special rules apply in
of the property. If the amount received is more 15-B. determining and depreciating the basis of
than the basis of the part of the property affected MACRS property acquired in an involuntary con-
by the easement, reduce your basis in that part version. For information, see What Is the BasisTaxable Exchangesto zero and treat the excess as a recognized of Your Depreciable Property?  in chapter 1 of
gain. Publication 946.A taxable exchange is one in which the gain isIf the gain is on a capital asset, see chapter taxable or the loss is deductible. A taxable gain16 for information about how to report it. If the or deductible loss also is known as a recognized Nontaxable Exchangesgain is on property used in a trade or business, gain or loss. If you receive property in exchangesee Publication 544 for information about how to for other property in a taxable exchange, the A nontaxable exchange is an exchange in whichreport it. basis of the property you receive is usually its you are not taxed on any gain and you cannot
FMV at the time of the exchange.Exclusion of subsidies for energy conserva- deduct any loss. If you receive property in a
tion measures. You can exclude from gross nontaxable exchange, its basis is generally the
income any subsidy you received from a public same as the basis of the property you trans-Involuntary Conversionsutility company for the purchase or installation of ferred. See Nontaxable Trades in chapter 14.
an energy conservation measure for a dwelling If you receive replacement property as a result
unit. Reduce the basis of the property for which of an involuntary conversion, such as a casualty,
you received the subsidy by the excluded Like-Kind Exchangestheft, or condemnation, figure the basis of the
amount. For more information about this sub- replacement property using the basis of the con- The exchange of property for the same kind ofsidy, see chapter 12. verted property. property is the most common type of nontaxablePostponed gain from sale of home. If you exchange. To qualify as a like-kind exchange,Similar or related property. If you receivepostponed gain from the sale of your main home the property traded and the property receivedreplacement property similar or related in serv-under rules in effect before May 7, 1997, you must be both of the following.ice or use to the converted property, the replace-must reduce the basis of the home you acquired ment property's basis is the same as the • Qualifying property.as a replacement by the amount of the post- converted property's basis on the date of theponed gain. For more information on the rules • Like-kind property.conversion, with the following adjustments.for the sale of a home, see chapter 15.
The basis of the property you receive is gener-1. Decrease the basis by the following.
ally the same as the adjusted basis of the prop-
a. Any loss you recognize on the involun- erty you gave up. If you trade property in a
tary conversion.Basis Other Than Cost like-kind exchange and also pay money, the
basis of the property received is the adjustedb. Any money you receive that you do not
There are many times when you cannot use cost basis of the property you gave up increased byspend on similar property.
as basis. In these cases, the fair market value or the money you paid.
the adjusted basis of the property can be used. 2. Increase the basis by the following. Qualifying property. In a like-kind exchange,Fair market value (FMV) and adjusted basis you must hold for investment or for productivea. Any gain you recognize on the involun-were discussed earlier. use in your trade or business both the propertytary conversion.
you give up and the property you receive.
Property Received b. Any cost of acquiring the replacement
Like-kind property. There must be an ex-property.for Services change of like-kind property. Like-kind proper-
ties are properties of the same nature orIf you receive property for your services, include Money or property not similar or related.  If character, even if they differ in grade or quality.its FMV in income. The amount you include in you receive money or property not similar or The exchange of real estate for real estate andincome becomes your basis. If the services related in service or use to the converted prop- personal property for similar personal propertywere performed for a price agreed on before- erty, and you buy replacement property similar are exchanges of like-kind property.hand, it will be accepted as the FMV of the or related in service or use to the convertedproperty if there is no evidence to the contrary. Example. You trade in an old truck used inproperty, the basis of the replacement property
Restricted property. If you receive prop- your business with an adjusted basis of $1,700is its cost decreased by the gain not recognized
erty for your services and the property is subject for a new one costing $6,800. The dealer allowson the conversion.
to certain restrictions, your basis in the property you $2,000 on the old truck, and you pay $4,800.
is its FMV when it becomes substantially vested. Example. The state condemned your prop- This is a like-kind exchange. The basis of the
However, this rule does not apply if you make an erty. The adjusted basis of the property was new truck is $6,500 (the adjusted basis of the old
election to include in income the FMV of the $26,000 and the state paid you $31,000 for it. one, $1,700, plus the amount you paid, $4,800).
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 95

Page 98 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you sell your old truck to a third party for the adjusted basis and holding period of the purposes after reduction by any annual exclu-
$2,000 instead of trading it in and then buy a property as of the date of the transfer. sion and marital or charitable deduction that
new one from the dealer, you have a taxable For more information about the transfer of applies to the gift. For information on the gift tax,
gain of $300 on the sale (the $2,000 sale price property from a spouse, see chapter 14. see Publication 950, Introduction to Estate and
minus the $1,700 adjusted basis). The basis of Gift Taxes.
the new truck is the price you pay the dealer. Property Received Example. In 2008, you received a gift of
Partially nontaxable exchanges. A partially as a Gift property from your mother that had an FMV of
nontaxable exchange is an exchange in which $50,000. Her adjusted basis was $20,000. TheTo figure the basis of property you receive as ayou receive unlike property or money in addition amount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasgift, you must know its adjusted basis to theto like-kind property. The basis of the property $38,000 ($50,000 minus the $12,000 annualdonor just before it was given to you, its FMV atyou receive is the same as the adjusted basis of exclusion). She paid a gift tax of $7,760 on thethe time it was given to you, and any gift tax paidthe property you gave up, with the following property. Your basis is $26,130, figured as fol-on it.adjustments. lows:
1. Decrease the basis by the following FMV less than donor's adjusted basis. If the Fair market value ............. . $50,000amounts. FMV of the property at the time of the gift is less Minus: Adjusted basis .......... . −20,000than the donor's adjusted basis, your basis de- Net increase in value .......... . $30,000a. Any money you receive. pends on whether you have a gain or a loss
when you dispose of the property. Your basis forb. Any loss you recognize on the ex- Gift tax paid ................ . $7,760figuring gain is the same as the donor's adjustedchange. Multiplied by ($30,000 ÷  $38,000) .. . ×  .79basis plus or minus any required adjustments to Gift tax due to net increase in value $6,130
basis while you held the property. Your basis for2. Increase the basis by the following Adjusted basis of property to your
figuring loss is its FMV when you received theamounts. mother .................... . +20,000
gift plus or minus any required adjustments to Your basis in the property ...... . $26,130
a. Any additional costs you incur. basis while you held the property. See Adjusted
Basis, earlier.b. Any gain you recognize on the ex- Note.  If you received a gift before 1977,change. your basis in the gift (the donor's adjusted basis)Example. You received an acre of land as a
includes any gift tax paid on it. However, yourgift. At the time of the gift, the land had an FMVIf the other party to the exchange assumes basis cannot exceed the FMV of the gift at theof $8,000. The donor's adjusted basis wasyour liabilities, treat the debt assumption as time it was given to you.$10,000. After you received the property, nomoney you received in the exchange. events occurred to increase or decrease your
Allocation of basis. If you receive like-kind basis. If you later sell the property for $12,000, Inherited Propertyand unlike properties in the exchange, allocate you will have a $2,000 gain because you must
the basis first to the unlike property, other than use the donor's adjusted basis at the time of the Your basis in property you inherit from a dece-money, up to its FMV on the date of the ex- gift ($10,000) as your basis to figure gain. If you dent is generally one of the following.change. The rest is the basis of the like-kind sell the property for $7,000, you will have a
• The FMV of the property at the date of theproperty. $1,000 loss because you must use the FMV at
decedent's death.the time of the gift ($8,000) as your basis to
More information. See Like-Kind Exchanges figure loss. • The FMV on the alternate valuation date ifin chapter 1 of Publication 544 for more informa- If the sales price is between $8,000 and the personal representative for the estatetion. $10,000, you have neither gain nor loss. elects to use alternate valuation.
Business property. If you hold the gift asBasis for depreciation. Special rules apply in • The value under the special-use valuationbusiness property, your basis for figuring anydetermining and depreciating the basis of method for real property used in farmingdepreciation, depletion, or amortization deduc-MACRS property acquired in a like-kind ex- or a closely held business if elected fortions is the same as the donor's adjusted basischange. For information, see What Is the Basis estate tax purposes.plus or minus any required adjustments to basisof Your Depreciable Property?  in chapter 1 of
• The decedent's adjusted basis in land towhile you hold the property.Publication 946.
the extent of the value excluded from the
FMV equal to or greater than donor's ad- decedent's taxable estate as a qualifiedProperty Transferred justed basis. If the FMV of the property is conservation easement.
equal to or greater than the donor's adjustedFrom a Spouse
basis, your basis is the donor's adjusted basis at If a federal estate tax return does not have to
The basis of property transferred to you or trans- the time you received the gift. Increase your be filed, your basis in the inherited property is its
ferred in trust for your benefit by your spouse is basis by all or part of any gift tax paid, depending appraised value at the date of death for state
the same as your spouse's adjusted basis. The on the date of the gift, explained later. inheritance or transmission taxes.
same rule applies to a transfer by your former Also, for figuring gain or loss from a sale or For more information, see the instructions tospouse that is incident to divorce. However, for other disposition or for figuring depreciation, de- Form 706, United States Estate (and Genera-property transferred in trust, adjust your basis pletion, or amortization deductions on business tion-Skipping Transfer) Tax Return.for any gain recognized by your spouse or for- property, you must increase or decrease your
mer spouse if the liabilities assumed, plus the basis (the donor's adjusted basis) by any re- Community property. In community propertyliabilities to which the property is subject, are quired adjustments to basis while you held the states (Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana,more than the adjusted basis of the property property. See Adjusted Basis, earlier.
Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, andtransferred.  If you received a gift during the tax year,
Wisconsin), husband and wife are each usuallyIf the property transferred to you is a series increase your basis in the gift (the donor's ad-
considered to own half the community property.E, series EE, or series I U.S. savings bond, the justed basis) by the part of the gift tax paid on it
When either spouse dies, the total value of thetransferor must include in income the interest due to the net increase in value of the gift. Figure
community property, even the part belonging toaccrued to the date of transfer. Your basis in the the increase by multiplying the gift tax paid by a
the surviving spouse, generally becomes thebond immediately after the transfer is equal to fraction. The numerator of the fraction is the net
basis of the entire property. For this rule tothe transferor's basis increased by the interest increase in value of the gift and the denominator
apply, at least half the value of the communityincome includible in the transferor's income. For is the amount of the gift.
property interest must be includible in the dece-more information on these bonds, see chapter 7. The net increase in value of the gift is the
dent's gross estate, whether or not the estateAt the time of the transfer, the transferor FMV of the gift minus the donor's adjusted basis.
must give you the records needed to determine The amount of the gift is its value for gift tax must file a return.
Page 96 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Page 99 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You and your spouse owned the change in the property's use, as discussed deduct the premium on a tax-exempt bond, you
earlier under Adjusted Basis. must amortize the premium each year and re-community property that had a basis of $80,000.
duce your basis in the bond by the amortizedWhen your spouse died, half the FMV of the
Example. Assume the same facts as in the amount.community interest was includible in your
previous example, except that you sell the prop-spouse's estate. The FMV of the community
Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru-erty at a loss after being allowed depreciationinterest was $100,000. The basis of your half of
ments. You must increase your basis in andeductions of $37,500. In this case, you wouldthe property after the death of your spouse is
OID debt instrument by the OID you include instart with the FMV on the date of the change to$50,000 (half of the $100,000 FMV). The basis
income for that instrument. See Original Issuerental use ($180,000), because it is less than theof the other half to your spouse's heirs is also
Discount (OID)  in chapter 7 and Publicationadjusted basis of $203,000 ($178,000 +$50,000.
1212, Guide To Original Issue Discount (OID)$25,000 (land)) on that date. Reduce thatFor more information about community prop-
Instruments.amount ($180,000) by the depreciation deduc-erty, see Publication 555, Community Property.
tions ($37,500). The basis for loss is $142,500 Tax-exempt obligations. OID on($180,000 − $37,500). tax-exempt obligations is generally not taxable.Property Changed From
However, when you dispose of a tax-exempt
Personal to Business or obligation issued after September 3, 1982, andStocks and Bonds
acquired after March 1, 1984, you must accrueRental Use The basis of stocks or bonds you buy generally OID on the obligation to determine its adjusted
is the purchase price plus any costs of purchase, basis. The accrued OID is added to the basis ofIf you hold property for personal use and then
such as commissions and recording or transfer the obligation to determine your gain or loss.change it to business use or use it to produce
fees. If you get stocks or bonds other than by See chapter 4 of Publication 550.rent, you can begin to depreciate the property at
purchase, your basis is usually determined bythe time of the change. To do so, you must figure
the FMV or the previous owner's adjusted basis,its basis for depreciation. An example of chang-
as discussed earlier.ing property held for personal use to business or
You must adjust the basis of stocks for cer-rental use would be renting out your former
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam-personal residence.
ple, if you receive additional stock from
nontaxable stock dividends or stock splits, re-Basis for depreciation. The basis for depre- 14.
duce your basis for each share of stock by divid-ciation is the lesser of the following amounts.
ing the adjusted basis of the old stock by the
• The FMV of the property on the date of the number of shares of old and new stock. This rule
change. applies only when the additional stock received Sale of Property
is identical to the stock held. Also reduce your• Your adjusted basis on the date of the
basis when you receive nontaxable distribu-change.
tions. They are a return of capital.
What's NewExample. Several years ago, you paid Example. In 2006 you bought 100 shares of
$160,000 to have your house built on a lot that XYZ stock for $1,000 or $10 a share. In 2007 Like-kind exchanges. The trade of stock in acost $25,000. You paid $20,000 for permanent you bought 100 shares of XYZ stock for $1,600 mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation companyimprovements to the house and claimed a or $16 a share. In 2008 XYZ declared a 2-for-1 may qualify as a like-kind exchange. For more$2,000 casualty loss deduction for damage to stock split. You now have 200 shares of stock information, see Like-kind exchanges  underthe house before changing the property to rental with a basis of $5 a share and 200 shares with a Nontaxable Trades, later.use last year. Because land is not depreciable, basis of $8 a share.
you include only the cost of the house when Worthless securities. Worthless securitiesOther basis. There are other ways to figurefiguring the basis for depreciation. may include stock abandoned after March 12,the basis of stocks or bonds depending on howYour adjusted basis in the house when you 2008. For more information, see Worthless Se-you acquired them. For detailed information, seechanged its use was $178,000 ($160,000 + curities, later.Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of Investment$20,000 − $2,000). On the same date, your
Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550.property had an FMV of $180,000, of which
$15,000 was for the land and $165,000 was for Identifying stocks or bonds sold. If you canthe house. The basis for figuring depreciation on adequately identify the shares of stock or the Reminderthe house is its FMV on the date of the change bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other($165,000) because it is less than your adjusted basis of the particular shares of stocks or bonds. Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen whobasis ($178,000). If you buy and sell securities at various times in sells property located outside the United States,varying quantities and you cannot adequatelySale of property. If you later sell or dispose of you must report all gains and losses from theidentify the shares you sell, the basis of theproperty changed to business or rental use, the sale of that property on your tax return unless itsecurities you sell is the basis of the securitiesbasis you use will depend on whether you are is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether youyou acquired first. For more information aboutfiguring gain or loss. reside inside or outside the United States andidentifying securities you sell, see Stocks and whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from theGain. The basis for figuring a gain is your Bonds under Basis of Investment Property  in payer.adjusted basis in the property when you sell the chapter 4 of Publication 550.
property.
Mutual fund shares. If you sell mutual fund
shares you acquired at various times and pricesExample. Assume the same facts as in the
and left on deposit in an account kept by aprevious example except that you sell the prop- Introduction
custodian or agent, you can elect to use anerty at a gain after being allowed depreciation This chapter discusses the tax consequences ofaverage basis. For more information, see Publi-deductions of $37,500. Your adjusted basis for selling or trading investment property. It explainscation 564.figuring gain is $165,500 ($178,000 + $25,000 the following.(land) − $37,500). Bond premium. If you buy a taxable bond at a • What a sale or trade is.Loss. Figure the basis for a loss starting premium and elect to amortize the premium,
with the smaller of your adjusted basis or the reduce the basis of the bond by the amortized • Figuring gain or loss.
FMV of the property at the time of the change to premium you deduct each year. See Bond Pre- • Nontaxable trades.business or rental use. Then make adjustments mium Amortization in chapter 3 of Publication
(increases and decreases) for the period after • Related party transactions.550 for more information. Although you cannot
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 97

Page 100 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Capital gains or losses. you issued for stock that became worthless, youWhat Is a Sale or Trade? can deduct these payments as losses in the• Capital assets and noncapital assets. years you actually make the payments. Do notThis section explains what is a sale or trade. It• Holding period. deduct them in the year the stock became worth-also explains certain transactions and events less.that are treated as sales or trades.• Rollover of gain from publicly traded se-
A sale is generally a transfer of property for How to report loss. Report worthless se-curities.
money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to curities on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or
pay money. line 8, whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d),Other property transactions. Certain trans- A trade is a transfer of property for other enter ªWorthless.º Enter the amount of your lossfers of property are not discussed here. They are property or services and may be taxed in the in parentheses in column (f).
discussed in other IRS publications. These in- same way as a sale. Filing a claim for refund. If you do notclude the following. claim a loss for a worthless security on yourSale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transaction
• Sales of a main home, covered in chapter original return for the year it becomes worthless,is not a trade when you voluntarily sell property
15. you can file a claim for a credit or refund due tofor cash and immediately buy similar property to
the loss. You must use Form 1040X, Amendedreplace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-• Installment sales, covered in Publication U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to amendrate transactions. But see Like-kind exchanges537, Installment Sales. your return for the year the security becameunder Nontaxable Trades, later.
worthless. You must file it within 7 years from the• Transactions involving business property,
Redemption of stock. A redemption of stock date your original return for that year had to becovered in Publication 544, Sales and is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to the filed, or 2 years from the date you paid the tax,Other Dispositions of Assets. capital gain or loss provisions unless the re- whichever is later. For more information about
• Transfers of property at death, covered in demption is a dividend or other distribution on filing a claim, see Amended Returns and Claims
stock.Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, and for Refund in chapter 1.
Administrators. Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a
redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,• Dispositions of an interest in a passive ac- How To Figure
or other distribution depends on the circum-tivity, covered in Publication 925, Passive Gain or Lossstances in each case. Both direct and indirectActivity and At-Risk Rules. ownership of stock will be considered. The re- You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade ofdemption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if:Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex- property by comparing the amount you realize
penses (Including Capital Gains and Losses), • The redemption is not essentially with the adjusted basis of the property.
equivalent to a dividend (see chapter 8),provides a more detailed discussion about sales Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale orand trades of investment property. Publication • There is a substantially disproportionate trade is more than the adjusted basis of the550 includes information about the rules cover- redemption of stock, property you transfer, the difference is a gain.
ing nonbusiness bad debts, straddles, section • There is a complete redemption of all the Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property you1256 contracts, puts and calls, commodity fu- stock of the corporation owned by the transfer is more than the amount you realize, thetures, short sales, and wash sales. It also dis- shareholder, or difference is a loss.cusses investment-related expenses.
• The redemption is a distribution in partial Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of prop-
liquidation of a corporation. erty is your original cost or other original basisUseful Items
properly adjusted (increased or decreased) forYou may want to see: certain items. See chapter 13 for more informa-Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re-
tion about determining the adjusted basis ofdemption or retirement of bonds or notes at theirPublication property.maturity is generally treated as a sale or trade.
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses Amount realized. The amount you realizeSurrender of stock. A surrender of stock by a
from a sale or trade of property is everything you❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions dominant shareholder who retains control of the
receive for the property. This includes thecorporation is treated as a contribution to capital
money you receive plus the fair market value ofForm (and Instructions) rather than as an immediate loss deductible
any property or services you receive. If youfrom taxable income. The surrendering share-❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains received a note or other debt instrument for theholder must reallocate his or her basis in theand Losses property, see How To Figure Gain or Loss  insurrendered shares to the shares he or she
chapter 4 of Publication 550 to figure the amount❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges retains.
realized.
Worthless securities. Stocks, stock rights, If you finance the buyer's purchase of your
and bonds (other than those held for sale by a property and the debt instrument does not pro-
securities dealer) that became completely vide for adequate stated interest, the unstated
worthless during the tax year are treated as interest that you must report as ordinary incomeSales and Trades though they were sold on the last day of the tax will reduce the amount realized from the sale.
year. This affects whether your capital loss is For more information, see Publication 537.If you sold property such as stocks, bonds, or long-term or short-term. See Holding Period , Fair market value. Fair market value is thecertain commodities through a broker during the later. price at which the property would change handsyear, you should receive, for each sale, a Form Worthless securities also include securities between a buyer and a seller, neither being1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex- that you abandon after March 12, 2008. To forced to buy or sell and both having reasonablechange Transactions, or an equivalent state- abandon a security, you must permanently sur- knowledge of all the relevant facts.ment from the broker. You should receive the render and relinquish all rights in the security
and receive no consideration in exchange for it.statement by February 15 of the next year. It will Example. You trade A Company stock withAll the facts and circumstances determineshow the gross proceeds from the sale. The IRS an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Companywhether the transaction is properly character-will also get a copy of Form 1099-B from the stock with a fair market value of $10,000, whichized as an abandonment or other type of trans-broker. is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000action, such as an actual sale or exchange, ($10,000 − $7,000).Use Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state- contribution to capital, dividend, or gift.
ment received from your broker) to complete If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make Debt paid off. A debt against the property,
Schedule D (Form 1040). payments on a negotiable promissory note that or against you, that is paid off as a part of the
Page 98 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 101 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
transaction, or that is assumed by the buyer, of an apartment house for a store building, • The shares in the company have been
must be included in the amount realized. This is recognized by the highest court of theor a panel truck for a pickup truck, is a
true even if neither you nor the buyer is person- state in which the company was organizedtrade of like property. The trade of a piece
ally liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or or by applicable state statute as constitut-of machinery for a store building is not a
trade property that is subject to a nonrecourse ing or representing real property or an in-trade of like property. Real property lo-
loan, the amount you realize generally includes terest in real property.cated in the United States and real prop-
the full amount of the note assumed by the buyer erty located outside the United States are • The trade occurred after May 22, 2008.even if the amount of the note is more than the not like property. Also, personal property
fair market value of the property. used predominantly within the United
How to report. You must report the trade ofStates and personal property used
Example. You sell stock that you had like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-predominantly outside the United States
pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000. nized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it onare not like property.
Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer Schedule D (Form 1040), or on Form 4797,5. The property to be received must be identi-pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in Sales of Business Property, whichever applies.fied in writing within 45 days after the datecash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000 For information on using Form 4797, seeyou transfer the property given up in the+ $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 − chapter 4 of Publication 544.trade.$6,000). Corporate stocks. The following trades of6. The property to be received must be re-Payment of cash. If you trade property and corporate stocks generally do not result in aceived by the earlier of:cash for other property, the amount you realize taxable gain or a deductible loss.
is the fair market value of the property you re- a. The 180th day after the date on which Corporate reorganizations. In some in-ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- you transfer the property given up in the stances, a company will give you common stocktracting the cash you pay plus the adjusted basis trade, or for preferred stock, preferred stock for commonof the property you trade in from the amount you stock, or stock in one corporation for stock inb. The due date, including extensions, forrealize. If the result is a positive number, it is a another corporation. If this is a result of ayour tax return for the year in which thegain. If the result is a negative number, it is a merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlledtransfer of the property given up occurs.loss. corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-
No gain or loss. You may have to use a basis porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-If you trade property with a related party in afor figuring gain that is different from the basis zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.used for figuring loss. In this case, you may have See Related Party Transactions , later in this Stock for stock of the same corporation.neither a gain nor a loss. See Basis Other Than chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544 You can exchange common stock for commonCost in chapter 13. for more information on exchanges of business stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the
property and special rules for exchanges using same corporation without having a recognized
qualified intermediaries or involving multipleNontaxable Trades gain or loss. This is true for a trade between two
properties. stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-
This section discusses trades that generally do holder and the corporation.
Partly nontaxable exchange. If you receivenot result in a taxable gain or deductible loss.
Convertible stocks and bonds. You gen-money or unlike property in addition to like prop-For more information on nontaxable trades, see
erally will not have a recognized gain or loss iferty, and the above six conditions are met, youchapter 1 of Publication 544.
you convert bonds into stock or preferred stockhave a partly nontaxable trade. You are taxed onLike-kind exchanges. If you trade business into common stock of the same corporation ac-any gain you realize, but only up to the amountor investment property for other business or cording to a conversion privilege in the terms ofof the money and the fair market value of theinvestment property of a like kind, you do not the bond or the preferred stock certificate.unlike property you receive. You cannot deductpay tax on any gain or deduct any loss until you a loss. Property for stock of a controlled corpora-sell or dispose of the property you receive. To be
tion. If you transfer property to a corporationLike property and unlike property trans-nontaxable, a trade must meet all six of the
solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-following conditions. 
and immediately after the trade you are in con-tion to the like property, you must recognize gain
trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not1. The property must be business or invest- or loss on the unlike property you give up. The
recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies bothment property. You must hold both the gain or loss is the difference between the ad-
to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-property you trade and the property you justed basis of the unlike property and its fair
erty to a corporation. It does not apply if thereceive for productive use in your trade or market value.
corporation is an investment company.business or for investment. Neither prop-
For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-erty may be property used for personal Like property and money transferred. If
ration, you or your group of transferors mustpurposes, such as your home or family conditions (1) ± (6) are met, you have a nontax-
own, immediately after the exchange, at leastcar. able trade even if you pay money in addition to
80% of the total combined voting power of allthe like property.2. The property must not be held primarily for classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%sale. The property you trade and the prop- of the outstanding shares of each class of non-Basis of property received. To figure the ba-erty you receive must not be property you voting stock of the corporation.sis of the property received, see Nontaxablesell to customers, such as merchandise. If this provision applies to you, you may haveExchanges in chapter 13.
to attach to your return a complete statement of3. The property must not be stocks, bonds,
Special rules for mutual ditch, reservoir, or all facts pertinent to the exchange. For details,notes, choses in action, certificates of trust
irrigation company stock. For purposes of see Regulations section 1.351-3.or beneficial interest, or other securities or
item 3 above, stock does not include shares in aevidences of indebtedness or interest, in- Additional information. For more informa-mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation company ifcluding partnership interests. However, tion on trades of stock, see Nontaxable Tradesall of the following conditions are met at the timesee Special rules for mutual ditch, reser- in chapter 4 of Publication 550.of the trade.voir, or irrigation company stock, later.
Also, you can have a nontaxable trade of Insurance policies and annuities. You will• The mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigationcorporate stocks under a different rule, as not have a recognized gain or loss if the insuredcompany is an organization described indiscussed later. or annuitant is the same under both contractssection 501(c)(12)(A) of the Internal Reve- and you trade:nue Code (determined without regard to4. There must be a trade of like property. The
the percentage of its income that is col-trade of real estate for real estate, or per- • A life insurance contract for another life
lected from its members for the purpose ofsonal property for similar personal prop- insurance contract or for an endowment or
meeting losses and expenses).erty, is a trade of like property. The trade annuity contract,
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 99

Page 102 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• An endowment contract for an annuity • Two S corporations if the same personsRelated Party Transactions own more than 50% in value of the out-contract or for another endowment con-
standing stock of each corporation. tract that provides for regular payments Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop-
beginning at a date not later than the be- erty between related parties. • Two corporations, one of which is an Sginning date under the old contract, or corporation, if the same persons ownGain on sale or trade of depreciable prop- more than 50% in value of the outstanding• An annuity contract for another annuity erty. Your gain from the sale or trade of prop- stock of each corporation.contract. erty to a related party may be ordinary income,
rather than capital gain, if the property can be • An executor and a beneficiary of an estateYou also may not have to recognize gain or depreciated by the party receiving it. See chap- (except in the case of a sale or trade to
loss on an exchange of a portion of an annuity ter 3 of Publication 544 for more information. satisfy a pecuniary bequest). 
contract for another annuity contract. See Reve-
Like-kind exchanges. Generally, if you trade • Two corporations that are members of thenue Ruling 2003-76 and Notice 2003-51 in Inter-
business or investment property for other busi- same controlled group. (Under certainnal Revenue Bulletin 2003-33. Revenue Ruling ness or investment property of a like kind, no conditions, however, these losses are not2003-76 is available at www.irs.gov/irb/ gain or loss is recognized. See Like-kind ex- disallowed but must be deferred.) 2003-33_IRB/ar11.html . Notice 2003-51 is changes earlier under Nontaxable Trades.available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-33_IRB/ar14. • Two partnerships if the same personsThis rule also applies to trades of propertyhtml. own, directly or indirectly, more than 50%between related parties, defined next under of the capital interests or the profit inter-Exchanges of contracts not included in this Losses on sales or trades of property. However, ests in both partnerships. list, such as an annuity contract for an endow- if either you or the related party disposes of the
ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con- like property within 2 years after the trade, you Multiple property sales or trades. If youtract for a life insurance contract, are taxable. both must report any gain or loss not recognized sell or trade to a related party a number of blockson the original trade on your return filed for theDemutualization of life insurance compa- of stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, youyear in which the later disposition occurs.nies. If you received stock in exchange for must figure the gain or loss separately for each
your equity interest as a policyholder or an annu- Losses on sales or trades of property. You block of stock or piece of property. The gain on
itant, you generally will not have a recognized cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade of each item may be taxable. However, you cannot
gain or loss. See Demutualization of Life Insur- property, other than a distribution in complete deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannot
ance Companies in Publication 550. liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is reduce gains from the sales of any of these
directly or indirectly between you and the follow- items by losses on the sales of any of the other
U.S. Treasury notes or bonds. You can trade ing related parties. items.
certain issues of U.S. Treasury obligations for • Members of your family. This includes only Indirect transactions. You cannot deductother issues designated by the Secretary of the your brothers and sisters, half-brothers your loss on the sale of stock through yourTreasury, with no gain or loss recognized on the and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par- broker if, under a prearranged plan, a relatedtrade. ents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de- party buys the same stock you had owned. This
scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.). does not apply to a trade between related par-
ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-Transfers Between • A partnership in which you directly or indi- dental and is not prearranged.rectly own more than 50% of the capitalSpouses
interest or the profits interest. Constructive ownership of stock. In de-
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a termining whether a person directly or indirectly• A corporation in which you directly or indi-transfer of property from an individual to (or in owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-rectly own more than 50% in value of thetrust for the benefit of) a spouse, or if incident to tion, the following rules apply.outstanding stock. (See Constructive own-a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition ership of stock, later.) Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned byrule does not apply in the following situations. or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust• A tax-exempt charitable or educational or- is considered owned proportionately by or for its• The recipient spouse or former spouse is ganization that is directly or indirectly con- shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.a nonresident alien. trolled, in any manner or by any method,
by you or by a member of your family, Rule 2. An individual is considered to own• Property is transferred in trust. Gain must
whether or not this control is legally en- the stock that is directly or indirectly owned by orbe recognized to the extent the amount of
forceable. for his or her family. Family includes only broth-the liabilities assumed by the trust, plus
ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,any liabilities on the property, exceed the
In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.adjusted basis of the property.
property is not deductible if the transaction is Rule 3. An individual owning, other than byFor other situations, see Publication 550, chap- directly or indirectly between the following re- applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation ister 4. lated parties. considered to own the stock that is directly or
Any transfer of property to a spouse or former • A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciary indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.
spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is and beneficiary, of any trust. Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stocktreated by the recipient as a gift and is not • Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or the constructively owned by a person under rule 1 isconsidered a sale or exchange. The recipient's fiduciary and beneficiary of two different treated as actually owned by that person. Butbasis in the property will be the same as the trusts, if the same person is the grantor of stock constructively owned by an individualadjusted basis of the giver immediately before both trusts. under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned bythe transfer. This carryover basis rule applies that individual for again applying either rule 2 or• A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whichwhether the adjusted basis of the transferred rule 3 to make another person the constructivemore than 50% in value of the outstandingproperty is less than, equal to, or greater than owner of the stock.stock is directly or indirectly owned by oreither its fair market value at the time of transfer
for the trust, or by or for the grantor of theor any consideration paid by the recipient. This Property received from a related party. Iftrust.rule applies for purposes of determining loss as you sell or trade at a gain property that you
well as gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer acquired from a related party, you recognize the• A corporation and a partnership if the
in trust increases the basis. gain only to the extent it is more than the losssame persons own more than 50% in
A transfer of property is incident to a divorce previously disallowed to the related party. Thisvalue of the outstanding stock of the cor-
if the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date rule applies only if you are the original transfereeporation and more than 50% of the capital
on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is and you acquired the property by purchase orinterest, or the profits interest, in the part-
related to the ending of the marriage. exchange. This rule does not apply if the relatednership.
Page 100 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 103 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
party's loss was disallowed because of the wash • Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac- Investment Property
sale rules described in chapter 4 of Publication count,
Investment property is a capital asset. Any gain550 under Wash Sales. • A house owned and used by you and your or loss from its sale or trade is generally a capitalIf you sell or trade at a loss property that you family, gain or loss.acquired from a related party, you cannot recog-
nize the loss that was not allowed to the related • Household furnishings,
party. Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.• A car used for pleasure or commuting, These are capital assets except when they are
Example 1. Your brother sells you stock for • Coin or stamp collections, held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss you
$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brother have from their sale or trade generally is a capi-• Gems and jewelry, andcannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell tal gain or loss.
the same stock to an unrelated party for • Gold, silver, or any other metal.
$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report- Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of these
able gain is $500 (the $2,900 gain minus the Any property you own is a capital asset, ex- (including stock received as a dividend) are cap-
$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother). cept the following noncapital assets. ital assets except when held for sale by a securi-
ties dealer. However, if you own small business1. Property held mainly for sale to customersExample 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the stock, see Losses on Section 1244 (Small Busi-or property that will physically become astock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog- ness) Stock and Losses on Small Business In-nized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minus part of the merchandise that is for sale to vestment Company Stock  in chapter 4 of$6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that was customers. For an exception, see Capital Publication 550.not allowed to your brother. Asset Treatment for Self-Created Musical
Works later.
Personal Use Property2. Depreciable property used in your trade or
business, even if fully depreciated. Property held for personal use only, rather thanCapital Gains
for investment, is a capital asset, and you must3. Real property used in your trade or busi-
report a gain from its sale as a capital gain.ness. and Losses
However, you cannot deduct a loss from selling4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artistic personal use property.This section discusses the tax treatment of composition, a letter or memorandum, orgains and losses from different types of invest- similar property that is:ment transactions.    
Capital Asset Treatment fora. Created by your personal efforts,Character of gain or loss. You need to clas- Self-Created Musical Workssify your gains and losses as either ordinary or b. Prepared or produced for you (in thecapital gains or losses. You then need to classify You can elect to treat musical compositions andcase of a letter, memorandum, or simi-your capital gains and losses as either short copyrights in musical works as capital assetslar property), orterm or long term. If you have long-term gains when you sell or exchange them if:c. Acquired under circumstances (for ex-and losses, you must identify your 28% rate
• Your personal efforts created the property,gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain, ample, by gift) entitling you to the basis
oryou must also identify any unrecaptured section of the person who created the property
1250 gain. or for whom it was prepared or pro- • You acquired the property under circum-The correct classification and identification duced. stances (for example, by gift) entitling youhelps you figure the limit on capital losses and to the basis of the person who created theFor an exception to this rule, see Capitalthe correct tax on capital gains. Reporting capi- property or for whom it was prepared orAsset Treatment for Self-Created Musicaltal gains and losses is explained in chapter 16. produced.Works later.
You must make a separate election for eachCapital or Ordinary 5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in
musical composition (or copyright in a musicalthe ordinary course of a trade or businessGain or Loss work) sold or exchanged during the tax year.for services rendered or from the sale of You must make the election on or before the dueIf you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss property described in (1). date (including extensions) of the income taxfrom a transaction, it may be either a capital gain 6. U.S. Government publications that you re- return for the tax year of the sale or exchange.or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on ceived from the government free or for less You must make the election on Schedule Dthe circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of (Form 1040) by treating the sale or exchange asthan the normal sales price, or that youa capital asset (defined next) results in a capital the sale or exchange of a capital asset, accord-acquired under circumstances entitling yougain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset ing to the Schedule D and its instructions.to the basis of someone who received thegenerally results in ordinary gain or loss. De-
You can revoke the election if you have IRSpublications free or for less than the nor-pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on
approval. To get IRS approval, you must submitmal sales price.a sale or trade of property used in a trade or
a request for a letter ruling under the appropriatebusiness may be treated as either capital or 7. Certain commodities derivative financial in- IRS revenue procedure. See, for example, Rev.ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In struments held by commodities derivatives Proc. 2008-1, 2008-1 I.R.B. 1, available at www.some situations, part of your gain or loss may be dealers. irs.gov/irb/2008-01_IRB/ar06.html. Alternativelya capital gain or loss and part may be an ordi-
you are granted an automatic 6-month exten-8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-nary gain or loss.
sion from the due date of your income tax returnaction is clearly identified as a hedging
(excluding extensions) to revoke the election,transaction before the close of the day onCapital Assets and provided you timely file your income tax return,which it was acquired, originated, or en- and within this 6-month extension period, youNoncapital Assets tered into. file Form 1040X, Amended Individual Income
9. Supplies of a type you regularly use or Tax Return, that treats the sale or exchange asFor the most part, everything you own and use
consume in the ordinary course of your the sale or exchange of property that is not afor personal purposes, pleasure, or investment
capital asset.trade or business.is a capital asset. Some examples are:
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 101

Page 104 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. On July 1, 1997, the date of is- Notes of individuals. If you hold an obligationDiscounted Debt Instruments
sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond of an individual that was issued with OID after
Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption, for $800. The face amount of the bond was March 1, 1984, you generally must include the
or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument $1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time OID in your income currently, and your gain or
originally issued at a discount or bought at a the bond was issued, the issuer had no intention loss on its sale or retirement is generally capital
discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex- of redeeming it before it matured. The bond was gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap-plained in the following discussions. callable at its face amount beginning 10 years plies if the obligation is a loan between individu-
after the issue date. als and all of the following requirements are met.Short-term government obligations. Treat
The issuer redeemed the bond at the end ofgains on short-term federal, state, or local gov- • The lender is not in the business of lend-11 years (July 1, 2008) for its face amount ofernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli- ing money.$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. Thegations) as ordinary income up to your ratable
OID earned during the time you held the bond,share of the acquisition discount. This treatment • The amount of the loan, plus the amount
applies to obligations that have a fixed maturity $73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000
date not more than 1 year from the date of issue. interest also is not taxable. However, you must or less.
Acquisition discount is the stated redemption report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a • Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga- capital gain. cipal purposes of the loan.tion. Long-term debt instruments issued afterHowever, do not treat these gains as income 1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before July If the exception applies, or the obligation wasto the extent you previously included the dis- 2, 1982, if a government instrument). If you issued before March 2, 1984, you do not includecount in income. See Discount on Short-Term
sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of these the OID in your income currently. When you sellObligations in chapter 1 of Publication 550.
debt instruments, the part of your gain that is not or redeem the obligation, the part of your gainShort-term nongovernment obligations. more than your ratable share of the OID at the that is not more than your accrued share of theTreat gains on short-term nongovernment obli- time of the sale or redemption is ordinary in- OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest ofgations as ordinary income up to your ratable come. The rest of the gain is capital gain. If, the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on theshare of original issue discount (OID). This treat- however, there was an intention to call the debt sale or redemption is capital loss.ment applies to obligations that have a fixed instrument before maturity, all of your gain that ismaturity date of not more than 1 year from the not more than the entire OID is treated as ordi-date of issue. nary income at the time of the sale. This treat- Deposit in Insolvent or BankruptHowever, to the extent you previously in- ment of taxable gain also applies to corporate Financial Institutioncluded the discount in income, you do not have instruments issued after May 27, 1969, under ato include it in income again. See Discount on written commitment that was binding on May 27, If you lose money you have on deposit in aShort-Term Obligations in chapter 1 of Publica- 1969, and at all times thereafter. qualified financial institution that becomes insol-tion 550.
vent or bankrupt, you may be able to deductLong-term debt instruments issued afterTax-exempt state and local government your loss in one of three ways.May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-bonds. If these bonds were originally issued ernment instrument). If you hold one of these • Ordinary loss,at a discount before September 4, 1982, or you debt instruments, you must include a part of theacquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your • Casualty loss, orOID in your gross income each year that youpart of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure own the instrument. Your basis in that debt in- • Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capitalyour gain or loss on the sale or trade of these strument is increased by the amount of OID that loss).bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part you have included in your gross income. Seeof the OID. Original Issue Discount (OID)  in chapter 7 forIf the bonds were issued after September 3, For more information, see Deposit in Insolventinformation about the OID that you must report1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in- or Bankrupt Financial Institution, in chapter 4 ofon your tax return.crease the adjusted basis by your part of the Publication 550.If you sell or trade the debt instrument beforeOID to figure gain or loss. For more information
maturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, ifon the basis of these bonds, see Discounted
Sale of Annuityat the time the instrument was originally issuedDebt Instruments  in chapter 4 of Publication
there was an intention to call it before its matur-550. The part of any gain on the sale of an annuityity, your gain generally is ordinary income to theAny gain from market discount is usually contract before its maturity date that is based onextent of the entire OID reduced by any amountstaxable on disposition or redemption of interest accumulated on the contract is ordinaryof OID previously includible in your income. Intax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bonds income.this case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain.before May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis-
count is capital gain. If you bought the bonds Market discount bonds. If the debt instru-after April 30, 1993, the gain is ordinary income. ment has market discount and you chose to Losses on Section 1244 (SmallYou figure the market discount by sub- include the discount in income as it accrued, Business) Stocktracting the price you paid for the bond from the increase your basis in the debt instrument by thesum of the original issue price of the bond and accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss on  You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thanthe amount of accumulated OID from the date of its disposition. If you did not choose to include as a capital loss, your loss on the sale, trade, orissue that represented interest to any earlier the discount in income as it accrued, you must worthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report theholders. For more information, see Market Dis- report gain as ordinary interest income up to the loss on Form 4797, line 10.count Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550. instrument's accrued market discount. The restA loss on the sale or other disposition of a Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capitalof the gain is capital gain. See Market Discounttax-exempt state or local government bond is gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550.deductible as a capital loss. Report the gain on Schedule D (Form 1040).A different rule applies to market discount See Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business)Redeemed before maturity. If a state or bonds issued before July 19, 1984, and pur- Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980, chased by you before May 1, 1993. See Marketis redeemed before it matures, the OID is not discount bonds under Discounted Debt Instru-taxable to you. ments in chapter 4 of Publication 550. Losses on Small BusinessIf a state or local bond issued after June 8,
Retirement of debt instrument. Any1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part of Investment Company Stock
amount that you receive on the retirement of athe OID that is earned while you hold the bond is
See Losses on Small Business Investmentdebt instrument is treated in the same way as ifnot taxable to you. However, you must report the
you had sold or traded that instrument.unearned part of the OID as a capital gain. Company Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.
Page 102 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 105 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the donor's adjusted basis, your holding period How to report bad debts.  Deduct nonbusi-Holding Period is considered to have started on the same day ness bad debts as short-term capital losses on
the donor's holding period started. Schedule D (Form 1040).If you sold or traded investment property, you
If your basis is determined by the fair market On Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the namemust determine your holding period for the prop-
value of the property, your holding period starts of the debtor and ªstatement attachedº in col-erty. Your holding period determines whether
on the day after the date of the gift.any capital gain or loss was a short-term or umn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt in
long-term capital gain or loss. parentheses in column (f). Use a separate lineInherited property. If you inherit investment for each bad debt.property, your capital gain or loss on any laterLong term or short term. If you hold invest- For each bad debt, attach a statement todisposition of that property is treated as ament property more than 1 year, any capital gain your return that contains:long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If you
gardless of how long you actually held the prop-hold the property 1 year or less, any capital gain • A description of the debt, including the
erty.or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss. amount, and the date it became due,
To determine how long you held the invest- • The name of the debtor, and any businessReal property bought. To figure how longment property, begin counting on the date after or family relationship between you and theyou have held real property bought under anthe day you acquired the property. The day you
debtor,unconditional contract, begin counting on thedisposed of the property is part of your holding
day after you received title to it or on the dayperiod. • The efforts you made to collect the debt,after you took possession of it and assumed the andburdens and privileges of ownership, whicheverExample. If you bought investment property
• Why you decided the debt was worthless.happened first. However, taking delivery or pos-on February 5, 2007, and sold it on February 5,
session of real property under an option agree- For example, you could show that the bor-2008, your holding period is not more than 1
ment is not enough to start the holding period. rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-year and you have a short-term capital gain or
The holding period cannot start until there is an gal action to collect would probably notloss. If you sold it on February 6, 2008, your
actual contract of sale. The holding period of the result in payment of any part of the debt.holding period is more than 1 year and you will
seller cannot end before that time.have a long-term capital gain or loss.
Filing a claim for refund.  If you do not
Stock dividends. The holding period for stockSecurities traded on established market. deduct a bad debt on your original return for the
you received as a taxable stock dividend beginsFor securities traded on an established securi- year it becomes worthless, you can file a claimon the date of distribution.ties market, your holding period begins the day for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To doThe holding period for new stock you re-after the trade date you bought the securities, this, use Form 1040X to amend your return forceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins onand ends on the trade date you sold them. the year the debt became worthless. You mustthe same day as the holding period of the old file it within 7 years from the date your originalDo not confuse the trade date with the stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired insettlement date, which is the date by return for that year had to be filed, or 2 yearsa ªspin-off,º which is a distribution of stock orwhich the stock must be delivered and from the date you paid the tax, whichever is
CAUTION
!securities in a controlled corporation.payment must be made. later. For more information about filing a claim,
see Amended Returns and Claims for Refund inNontaxable stock rights. Your holding period
Example. You are a cash method, calendar chapter 1.for nontaxable stock rights begins on the same
year taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De- day as the holding period of the underlying
cember 29, 2008. According to the rules of the Additional information. For more informa-stock. The holding period for stock acquired
stock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery through the exercise of stock rights begins on tion, see Nonbusiness Bad Debts in Publication
of the stock 3 trading days after the sale, on the date the right was exercised. 550. For information on business bad debts, see
January 2, 2009. You received payment of the chapter 10 of Publication 535, Business Ex-
sales price on that same day. Report your gain penses.Nonbusiness Bad Debtson your 2008 return, even though you received
the payment in 2009. The gain is long term or If someone owes you money that you cannot Wash Salesshort term depending on whether you held the collect, you have a bad debt. You may be able tostock more than 1 year. Your holding period deduct the amount owed to you when you figure You cannot deduct losses from sales or tradesended on December 29. If you had sold the your tax for the year the debt becomes worth- of stock or securities in a wash sale.stock at a loss, you would also report it on your less. A wash sale occurs when you sell or trade2008 return. Generally, bad debts that did not come from stock or securities at a loss and within 30 daysoperating your trade or business are nonbusi-Automatic investment service. In determin- before or after the sale you:ness bad debts and are deductible as short-terming your holding period for shares bought by the
capital losses. To be deductible, nonbusiness 1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi-bank or other agent, full shares are considered
bad debts must be totally worthless. You cannot ties,bought first and any fractional shares are con-
deduct a partly worthless nonbusiness debt.sidered bought last. Your holding period starts 2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se-on the day after the bank's purchase date. If a curities in a fully taxable trade,Genuine debt required. A debt must be gen-share was bought over more than one purchase
uine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is genuine if 3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-date, your holding period for that share is a split
it arises from a debtor-creditor relationshipholding period. A part of the share is considered stantially identical stock or securities, orbased on a valid and enforceable obligation toto have been bought on each date that stock 4. Acquire substantially identical stock forrepay a fixed or determinable sum of money.was bought by the bank with the proceeds of your individual retirement account (IRA) oravailable funds. Basis in bad debt required. To deduct a bad Roth IRA.
debt, you must have a basis in it Ðthat is, youNontaxable trades. If you acquire investment If your loss was disallowed because of themust have already included the amount in yourproperty in a trade for other investment property wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to theincome or loaned out your cash. For example,and your basis for the new property is deter- cost of the new stock or securities (except in (4)you cannot claim a bad debt deduction formined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the above). The result is your basis in the new stockcourt-ordered child support not paid to you byold property, your holding period for the new or securities. This adjustment postpones theyour former spouse. If you are a cash methodproperty begins on the day following the date loss deduction until the disposition of the newtaxpayer (as most individuals are), you generallyyou acquired the old property. stock or securities.cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid
For more information, see Wash Sales , inProperty received as a gift. If you receive a salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,
chapter 4 of Publication 550.gift of property and your basis is determined by and similar items.
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 103

Page 106 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
31, 2008, many of the rules discussed in Publi-Rollover of Gain From cation 523, Business Use or Rental of Home, will
Publicly Traded Securities not apply. You will no longer be able to exclude
15. gain allocated to periods of nonqualified use of
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain the property. For information, see Publication
gains from the sale of publicly traded securities. 553, Highlights of 2008 Tax Changes.
This means that if you buy certain replacement
Selling Yourproperty and make the choice described in this
section, you postpone part or all of your gain.
HomeYou postpone the gain by adjusting the basis Reminders
of the replacement property as described in Ba-
sis of replacement property , later. This Home sold with undeducted points. If you
postpones your gain until the year you dispose have not deducted all the points you paid toWhat's Newof the replacement property. secure a mortgage on your old home, you may
You qualify to make this choice if you meet be able to deduct the remaining points in theExclusion on sale of main home by surviving year of the sale. See Mortgage ending earlyall the following tests. spouse. If you are an unmarried widow or
under Points in chapter 23.widower on the date of sale, you may qualify to• You sell publicly traded securities at a
exclude up to $500,000 of any gain from the salegain. Publicly traded securities are securi-
or exchange of your main home. For more infor-ties traded on an established securities mation, see Sale of main home by survivingmarket. spouse under Ownership and Use Tests, later. Introduction• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.
This chapter explains the tax rules that applyMortgage debt forgiveness. You can ex-• During the 60-day period beginning on the clude from gross income any discharge of quali- when you sell your main home. Generally, your
date of the sale, you buy replacement fied principal residence indebtedness. This main home is the one in which you live most of
property. This replacement property must exclusion applies to discharges made after 2006 the time.
be either common stock or a partnership and before 2013. Additionally, the basis of the If you sold your main home in 2008, you mayinterest in a specialized small business in- principal residence (main home) must be re- be able to exclude from income any gain up to a
vestment company (SSBIC). This is any duced (but not below zero) by the amount ex- limit of $250,000 ($500,000 on a joint return in
cluded from gross income. For morepartnership or corporation licensed by the most cases). See Excluding the Gain , later. If
information, see Discharges of qualified princi-Small Business Administration under sec- you can exclude all of the gain, you do not need
pal residence indebtedness , later, and Formtion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest- to report the sale on your tax return.982, Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Dis-ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13, If you have gain that cannot be excluded, it ischarge of Indebtedness (and Section 1082 Ba-1993. taxable. Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040).sis Adjustment). You may also have to complete Form 4797,
Sales of Business Property. See Reporting theNew rule for employees and volunteers ofAmount of gain recognized. If you make the
Sale, later.the Peace Corps. If you or your spouse is anchoice described in this section, you must rec-
employee, enrolled volunteer, or volunteer If you have a loss on the sale, you cannotognize gain only up to the following amount.
leader of the Peace Corps, you may be able to deduct it on your return. However, you may need• The amount realized on the sale, minus exclude from income a gain from selling your to report it. See Reporting the Sale, later.
main home, even if you did not live in it for 2• The cost of any common stock or partner- The following are main topics in this chapter.
years during the 5-year period ending on theship interest in an SSBIC that you bought • Figuring gain or loss.date of sale. Generally, you can elect to have theduring the 60-day period beginning on the
5-year test period for ownership and use sus- • Basis.date of sale (and did not previously take
pended (maximum of 10 years) during any pe-into account on an earlier sale of publicly • Excluding the gain.riod you or your spouse serves outside thetraded securities). United States (on qualified official extended duty • Ownership and use tests.
if an employee). This provision applies to a sale
• Reporting the sale.If this amount is less than the amount of your of a main home after December 31, 2007, and is
gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain, now included under a special rule that already Other topics include the following.
allows similar benefits to members of the uni-subject to the limit described next. If this amount • Business use or rental of home.formed services or Foreign Service, or employ-is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,
ees of the intelligence community. For moreyou must recognize the full amount of your gain. • Recapturing a federal mortgage subsidy.
information, see Members of the uniformedLimit on gain postponed. The amount of service or Foreign Service, employees of thegain you can postpone each year is limited to the Useful Itemsintelligence community, or employees or volun-
smaller of: teers of the Peace Corps, later. You may want to see:
• $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and First-time homebuyer credit. If you bought a Publicationfile a separate return), or main home in the United States after April 8,
2008, and did not own a main home during the• $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married ❏ 523 Selling Your Home
prior 3 years, you may be able to take theand file a separate return), minus the ❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Timefirst-time homebuyer credit. See the instructionsamount of gain you postponed for all ear- Homeownersfor Form 1040, line 69.lier years.
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and TheftsState and local general sales taxes. The op-
Basis of replacement property. You must tion to deduct state and local general sales taxes Form (and Instructions)subtract the amount of postponed gain from the instead of state and local income taxes was
extended through 2009. See the instructions forbasis of your replacement property. ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5. and Losses
How to report and postpone gain.  See ❏ 982 Reduction of Tax Attributes Due toNonqualifed use of property used partly for
chapter 4 of Publication 550 for details on how to Discharge of Indebtedness (andbusiness or rental. Beginning with sales or
report and postpone the gain. Section 1082 Basis Adjustments)exchanges of your main home after December
Page 104 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 107 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Selling price❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage Amount of Gain or Loss− Selling expensesSubsidy
To figure the amount of gain or loss, compareAmount realized
the amount realized to the adjusted basis.
Amount realized
Gain on sale. If the amount realized is more− Adjusted basisMain Home than the adjusted basis, the difference is a gain
Gain or loss and, except for any part you can exclude, gener-This section explains the term ªmain home.º ally is taxable.Usually, the home you live in most of the time is
your main home and can be a: Selling Price Loss on sale. If the amount realized is less
than the adjusted basis, the difference is a loss.• House, The selling price is the total amount you receive A loss on the sale of your main home cannot befor your home. It includes money; all notes,• Houseboat, deducted.mortgages, or other debts assumed by the• Mobile home, buyer as part of the sale; and the fair market Jointly owned home. If you and your spouse
value of any other property or any services you• Cooperative apartment, or sell your jointly owned home and file a joint
receive. return, you figure your gain or loss as one tax-• Condominium. payer.Payment by employer. You may have to sell
your home because of a job transfer. If yourTo exclude gain under the rules of this chap- Separate returns. If you file separate re-
employer pays you for a loss on the sale or forter, you generally must have owned and lived in turns, each of you must figure your own gain or
your selling expenses, do not include the pay-the property as your main home for at least 2 loss according to your ownership interest in the
ment as part of the selling price. Your employeryears during the 5-year period ending on the home. Your ownership interest is determined by
will include it as wages in box 1 of your Formdate of sale. state law.
W-2 and you will include it in your income on Joint owners not married. If you and aLand. If you sell the land on which your main Form 1040, line 7, or on Form 1040NR, line 8. joint owner other than your spouse sell yourhome is located, but not the house itself, you
Option to buy. If you grant an option to buy jointly owned home, each of you must figurecannot exclude any gain you have from the sale
your home and the option is exercised, add the your own gain or loss according to your owner-of the land. However, if you sell vacant land
amount you receive for the option to the selling ship interest in the home. Each of you appliesused as part of your main home and that is
price of your home. If the option is not exercised, the rules discussed in this chapter on an individ-adjacent to it, you may be able to exclude the
you must report the amount as ordinary income ual basis.gain from the sale under certain circumstances.
in the year the option expires. Report thisSee Vacant land under Main Home in Publica-
amount on Form 1040, line 21, or on Formtion 523 for more information. Dispositions Other Than1040NR, line 21.
SalesExample. You buy a piece of land and move Form 1099-S. If you received Form 1099-S,
your main home to it. Then you sell the land on Proceeds From Real Estate Transactions, box 2 Some special rules apply to other dispositions ofwhich your main home was located. This sale is (gross proceeds) should show the total amount your main home.not considered a sale of your main home, and you received for your home.
you cannot exclude any gain on the sale of the However, box 2 will not include the fair mar- Foreclosure or repossession. If your homeland. ket value of any services or property other than was foreclosed on or repossessed, you have a
cash or notes you received or will receive. In- disposition.More than one home. If you have more than stead, box 4 will be checked to indicate your You figure the gain or loss from the disposi-one home, you can exclude gain only from the receipt or expected receipt of these items. tion in generally the same way as gain or losssale of your main home. You must include in If you can exclude the entire gain, the person from a sale. But the selling price of your homeincome gain from the sale of any other home. If responsible for closing the sale generally will not used to figure the amount of your gain or lossyou have two homes and live in both of them, have to report it on Form 1099-S. If you do not depends, in part, on whether you were person-your main home is ordinarily the one you live in receive Form 1099-S, use sale documents and ally liable for repaying the debt secured by themost of the time. other records to figure the total amount you home and whether the debt is qualified principal
received for your home. residence indebtedness. See Publication 523Example 1. You own and live in a house in
for more information.the city. You also own a beach house, which you
Amount Realizeduse during summer months. The house in the Form 1099-A and Form 1099-C. Generally,
city is your main home. you will receive Form 1099-A, Acquisition orThe amount realized is the selling price minus Abandonment of Secured Property, from yourselling expenses.Example 2. You own a house, but you live in lender if your home is transferred in a foreclo-
another house that you rent. The rented house is sure. This form will have the information youSelling expenses. Selling expenses include:your main home. need to determine the amount of your gain or• Commissions, loss and any ordinary income from cancellationProperty used partly as your main home. If of debt that is not a discharge of qualified princi-• Advertising fees,you use only part of the property as your main pal residence indebtedness. If your debt is can-home, the rules discussed in this chapter apply • Legal fees, and celed, you may receive Form 1099-C,only to the gain or loss on the sale of that part of Cancellation of Debt.• Loan charges paid by the seller, such asthe property. For details, see Business Use or loan placement fees or ªpoints.ºRental of Home, later. Discharges of qualified principal residence
indebtedness. You may be able to exclude
from gross income a discharge of qualified prin-Adjusted Basis
cipal residence indebtedness. This exclusion
While you owned your home, you may have applies to discharges made after 2006 andFiguring Gain or Loss
made adjustments (increases or decreases) to before 2013. If you choose to exclude this in-
To figure the gain or loss on the sale of your the basis. This adjusted basis must be deter- come, you must reduce (but not below zero) the
main home, you must know the selling price, the mined before you can figure gain or loss on the basis of the principal residence by the amount
amount realized, and the adjusted basis. Sub- sale of your home. For information on how to excluded from your gross income.
tract the adjusted basis from the amount real- figure your home's adjusted basis, see Deter- File Form 982 with your tax return. See the
ized to get your gain or loss. mining Basis, later. form's instructions for detailed information.
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 105

Page 108 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Principal residence. Your principal resi- built it. If you got it in some other way (inheri- putting up a new fence, putting in new plumbing
dence is the home where you ordinarily live most tance, gift, etc.), your basis is either its fair mar- or wiring, putting on a new roof, or paving your
of the time. You can have only one principal ket value when you received it or the adjusted unpaved driveway are improvements. An addi-
residence at any one time. See Main Home , basis of the previous owner. tion to your house, such as a new deck, a sun-
earlier. While you owned your home, you may have room, or a new garage, is also an improvement.
made adjustments (increases or decreases) toQualified principal residence indebted- Repairs. These maintain your home in goodyour home's basis. The result of these adjust-ness. This indebtedness is a mortgage you condition but do not add to its value or prolongments is your home's adjusted basis, which istook out to buy, build, or substantially improve its life. You do not add their cost to the basis ofused to figure gain or loss on the sale of youryour principal residence. It also must be secured your property.home. See Adjusted Basis, later.by your principal residence. For example, repainting your house inside orYou can find more information on basis and
outside, fixing your gutters or floors, repairingAmount eligible for the exclusion. The adjusted basis in chapter 13 of this publication
leaks or plastering, and replacing broken win-exclusion applies only to debt discharged after and in Publication 523.
dow panes are examples of repairs.2006 and before 2013. The maximum amount
you can treat as qualified principal residence
indebtedness is $2 million ($1 million if married Cost As Basis Decreases to basis. These include the fol-
filing separately). You cannot exclude from lowing.
The cost of property is the amount you pay for itgross income discharge of qualified principal • Discharges of qualified principal indebted-in cash, debt obligations, other property, or serv-residence indebtedness if the discharge was for ness (but do not reduce basis below zero).ices.services performed for the lender or on account
of any other factor not directly related to a de- • Gain you postponed from the sale of aPurchase. If you buy your home, your basis iscline in the value of your residence or to your previous home before May 7, 1997.its cost to you. This includes the purchase pricefinancial condition. and certain settlement or closing costs. Gener- • General sales taxes claimed as an item-
ally, your purchase price includes your downAbandonment. If you abandon your home, ized deduction on Schedule A (Form
payment and any debt, such as a first or secondyou may have ordinary income. If the aban- 1040) that were imposed on the purchase
mortgage or notes you gave the seller in pay-doned home secures a debt for which you are of personal property, such as a houseboat
ment for the home. If you build, or contract topersonally liable and the debt is canceled, you used as your home or a mobile home.build, a new home, your purchase price canhave ordinary income equal to the amount of the
• Deductible casualty losses.include costs of construction, as discussed incanceled debt. See Publication 523 for more
Publication 523.information. • Insurance payments you received or ex-
pect to receive for casualty losses.Trading (exchanging) homes. If you trade Settlement fees or closing costs. When you
your old home for another home, treat the trade bought your home, you may have paid settle- • Payments you received for granting an
as a sale and a purchase. ment fees or closing costs in addition to the easement or right-of-way.
contract price of the property. You can include in
• Depreciation allowed or allowable if youExample. You owned and lived in a home your basis some of the settlement fees and
used your home for business or rental pur-with an adjusted basis of $41,000. A real estate closing costs you paid for buying the home, but
poses.dealer accepted your old home as a trade-in and not the fees and costs for getting a mortgage
allowed you $50,000 toward a new home priced loan. A fee paid for buying the home is any fee • Residential energy credit (generally al-
at $80,000. This is treated as a sale of your old you would have had to pay even if you paid cash lowed from 1977 through 1987) claimedhome for $50,000 with a gain of $9,000 ($50,000 for the home (that is, without the need for financ- for the cost of energy improvements that± $41,000). ing). you added to the basis of your home.If the dealer had allowed you $27,000 and Chapter 13 lists some of the settlement fees
• Nonbusiness energy property credit (al-assumed your unpaid mortgage of $23,000 on and closing costs that you can include in the
lowed beginning in 2006) claimed for mak-your old home, your sales price would still be basis of property, including your home. It also
ing certain energy saving improvements$50,000 (the $27,000 trade-in allowed plus the lists some settlement costs that cannot be in-
that you added to the basis of your home.$23,000 mortgage assumed). cluded in basis.
Also see Publication 523 for additional items • Residential energy efficient property creditTransfer to spouse. If you transfer your home and a discussion of basis other than cost. (allowed beginning in 2006) claimed forto your spouse or to your former spouse incident
making certain energy saving improve-to your divorce, you generally have no gain or
loss. This is true even if you receive cash or ments that you added to the basis of yourAdjusted Basisother consideration for the home. Therefore, the home.
rules in this chapter do not apply. Adjusted basis is your cost or other basis in- • Adoption credit you claimed for improve-
creased or decreased by certain amounts. ToMore information. If you need more infor- ments added to the basis of your home.
figure your adjusted basis, you can use Work-mation, see Transfer to spouse in Publication • Nontaxable payments from an adoptionsheet 1 in Publication 523.523 and Property Settlements in Publication assistance program of your employer that504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. Increases to basis. These include the follow- you used for improvements you added to
ing.Involuntary conversion. You have a disposi- the basis of your home.
tion when your home is destroyed or con- • Additions and other improvements that • Energy conservation subsidy excludeddemned and you receive other property or have a useful life of more than 1 year. from your gross income because you re-money in payment, such as insurance or a con- ceived it (directly or indirectly) from a pub-• Special assessments for local improve-demnation award. This is treated as a sale and lic utility after 1992 to buy or install anyments.you may be able to exclude all or part of any gain energy conservation measure. An energyfrom the destruction or condemnation of your • Amounts you spent after a casualty to re- conservation measure is an installation orhome, as explained later under Special Situa- store damaged property. modification that is primarily designed ei-tions.
ther to reduce consumption of electricity orImprovements. These add to the value of natural gas or to improve the managementyour home, prolong its useful life, or adapt it toDetermining Basis of energy demand for a home.new uses. You add the cost of additions and
• District of Columbia first-time homebuyerYou need to know your basis in your home to other improvements to the basis of your prop-
credit (allowed on the purchase of a princi-figure any gain or loss when you sell it. Your erty.
pal residence in the District of Columbiabasis in your home is determined by how you got For example, putting a recreation room or
beginning on August 5, 1997).the home. Your basis is its cost if you bought it or another bathroom in your unfinished basement,
Page 106 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 109 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Recordkeeping.  You should keep You may be able to exclude up to $500,000 of David sold the house on March 1, 2008. Al-
records to prove your home's adjusted though the total time David used his home isthe gain on the sale of your main home if you are
basis. Ordinarily, you must keep rec- less than 2 years (21 months), he may excludemarried and file a joint return and meet the
RECORDS
ords for 3 years after the due date for filing your any gain up to $250,000. The 2-month vacationsrequirements listed in the discussion of the spe-
return for the tax year in which you sold your are short temporary absences and are countedcial rules for joint returns, later, under Married
home. But if you sold a home before May 7, as periods of use in determining whether DavidPersons.
1997, and postponed tax on any gain, the basis used the home for the required 2 years.
of that home affects the basis of the new home Ownership and Use Tests Example 2. Professor Paul Beard, who isyou bought. Keep records proving the basis of
single, bought and moved into a house on Au-both homes as long as they are needed for tax To claim the exclusion, you must meet the own- gust 28, 2005. He lived in it as his main homepurposes. ership and use tests. This means that during the continuously until January 5, 2007, when heThe records you should keep include: 5-year period ending on the date of the sale, you went abroad for a 1-year sabbatical leave. Onmust have:• Proof of the home's purchase price and February 6, 2008, 1 month after returning from
purchase expenses, • Owned the home for at least 2 years (the the leave, Paul sold the house at a gain. Be-
ownership test), and cause his leave was not a short temporary ab-• Receipts and other records for all improve-
sence, he cannot include the period of leave toments, additions, and other items that af- • Lived in the home as your main home for meet the 2-year use test. He cannot exclude anyfect the home's adjusted basis, at least 2 years (the use test). part of his gain, because he did not use the
• Any worksheets or other computations you residence for the required 2 years.
used to figure the adjusted basis of the Exception. If you owned and lived in the prop-
home you sold, the gain or loss on the Ownership and use tests met at differenterty as your main home for less than 2 years,
sale, the exclusion, and the taxable gain, times. You can meet the ownership and useyou can still claim an exclusion in some cases.
tests during different 2-year periods. However,The maximum amount you may be able to ex-• Any Form 982 that you filed to report any you must meet both tests during the 5-year pe-clude will be reduced. See Reduced Maximumdischarge of qualified principal residence riod ending on the date of the sale.Exclusion, later.indebtedness,
• Any Form 2119, Sale of Your Home, that Example. In 1999, Helen Jones lived in aExample 1 Ðhome owned and occupied
you filed to postpone gain from the sale of rented apartment. The apartment building wasfor at least 2 years. Amanda bought and
a previous home before May 7, 1997, and later converted to condominiums, and shemoved into her main home in September 2005.
bought her same apartment on December 3,She sold the home at a gain on September 15,• Any worksheets you used to prepare Form 2005. In 2006, Helen became ill and on April 142008. During the 5-year period ending on the2119, such as the Adjusted Basis of Home of that year she moved to her daughter's home.date of sale (September 16, 2003 ±SeptemberSold Worksheet or the Capital Improve- On July 12, 2008, while still living in her daugh-15, 2008), she owned and lived in the home forments Worksheet from the Form 2119 in- ter's home, she sold her condominium.more than 2 years. She meets the ownershipstructions, or other source of Helen can exclude gain on the sale of herand use tests.computations. condominium because she met the ownership
and use tests during the 5-year period from JulyExample 2 Ðownership test met but use
13, 2003, to July 12, 2008, the date she sold thetest not met. Dan bought a home in 2002.
condominium. She owned her condominiumAfter living in it for 6 months, he moved out. He
from December 3, 2005, to July 12, 2008 (morenever lived in the home again and sold it at aExcluding the Gain than 2 years). She lived in the property from Julygain on June 28, 2008. He owned the home
13, 2003 (the beginning of the 5-year period), toduring the entire 5-year period ending on theYou may qualify to exclude from your income all April 14, 2006 (more than 2 years).date of sale (June 29, 2003 ±June 28, 2008).or part of any gain from the sale of your main The time Helen lived in her daughter's homeHowever, he did not live in it for the required 2home. This means that, if you qualify, you will during the 5-year period can be counted towardyears. He meets the ownership test but not thenot have to pay tax on the gain up to the limit her period of ownership, and the time she liveduse test. He cannot exclude any part of his gaindescribed under Maximum Exclusion, next. To in her rented apartment during the 5-year periodon the sale, unless he qualified for a reducedqualify, you must meet the ownership and use can be counted toward her period of use.maximum exclusion (explained later).tests described later.
You can choose not to take the exclusion by Cooperative apartment. If you sold stock as
including the gain from the sale in your gross a tenant-stockholder in a cooperative housingPeriod of Ownership and Useincome on your tax return for the year of the corporation, the ownership and use tests are
sale. met if, during the 5-year period ending on theThe required 2 years of ownership and use dur-You can use Worksheet 2 in Publication 523 date of sale, you:ing the 5-year period ending on the date of theto figure the amount of your exclusion and your sale do not have to be continuous nor do they • Owned the stock for at least 2 years, andtaxable gain, if any. have to occur at the same time. • Lived in the house or apartment that theIf you have any taxable gain from the  You meet the tests if you can show that you stock entitles you to occupy as your mainsale of your home, you may have to owned and lived in the property as your main home for at least 2 years.increase your withholding or make esti- home for either 24 full months or 730 days (365
CAUTION
!
mated tax payments. See Publication 505, Tax ×  2) during the 5-year period ending on the date
Withholding and Estimated Tax. of sale. Exceptions to Ownership and Use
TestsTemporary absence. Short temporary ab-Maximum Exclusion sences for vacations or other seasonal ab- The following sections contain exceptions to the
sences, even if you rent out the property during ownership and use tests for certain taxpayers.You can exclude up to $250,000 of the gain on the absences, are counted as periods of use.the sale of your main home if all of the following The following examples assume that the re- Exception for individuals with a disability.are true. duced maximum exclusion (discussed later) There is an exception to the use test if, during
does not apply to the sales.• You meet the ownership test. the 5-year period before the sale of your home:
• You meet the use test. • You become physically or mentally unableExample 1. David Johnson, who is single, to care for yourself, andbought and moved into his home on February 1,• During the 2-year period ending on the
2006. Each year during 2006 and 2007, Daviddate of the sale, you did not exclude gain • You owned and lived in your home as your
left his home for a 2-month summer vacation.from the sale of another home. main home for a total of at least 1 year.
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 107

Page 110 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Under this exception, you are considered to live • Neither you nor your spouse excludedMarried Persons
gain from the sale of another home duringin your home during any time that you own the
If you and your spouse file a joint return for the the last 2 years.home and live in a facility (including a nursing
year of sale and one spouse meets the owner-home) that is licensed by a state or political
ship and use test, you can exclude up to Example. Harry has owned and used asubdivision to care for persons in your condition.
$250,000 of the gain. (But see Special rules for house as his main home since 2005. Harry andIf you meet this exception to the use test, you joint returns, next.) Wilma marry on July 1, 2008, and from that date
still have to meet the 2-out-of-5-year ownership they use Harry's house as their main home.Special rules for joint returns. You can ex-test to claim the exclusion. Harry died on August 15, 2008, and Wilma in-clude up to $500,000 of the gain on the sale of herited the property. Wilma sold the property onyour main home if all of the following are true. September 1, 2008, at which time she had notPrevious home destroyed or condemned.
remarried. Although Wilma owned and used the• You are married and file a joint return forFor the ownership and use tests, you add the house for less than 2 years, Wilma is consideredthe year.time you owned and lived in a previous home to have satisfied the ownership and use teststhat was destroyed or condemned to the time • Either you or your spouse meets the own- because her period of ownership and use in-you owned and lived in the replacement home ership test. cludes the period that Harry owned and used theon whose sale you wish to exclude gain. This property before death.• Both you and your spouse meet the userule applies if any part of the basis of the home test. Home transferred from spouse. If youryou sold depended on the basis of the destroyed
home was transferred to you by your spouse (or• During the 2-year period ending on theor condemned home. Otherwise, you must have
former spouse if the transfer was incident todate of the sale, neither you nor yourowned and lived in the same home for 2 of the 5
divorce), you are considered to have owned itspouse excluded gain from the sale of an-years before the sale to qualify for the exclusion.
during any period of time when your spouseother home.
owned it.If either spouse does not satisfy all these re-Members of the uniformed services or For-
Use of home after divorce. You are consid-quirements, the maximum exclusion that can beeign Service, employees of the intelligence ered to have used property as your main homeclaimed by the couple is the total of the maxi-community, or employees or volunteers of during any period when:mum exclusions that each spouse would qualifythe Peace Corps. You can choose to have the for if not married and the amounts were figured5-year test period for ownership and use sus- • You owned it, andseparately. For this purpose, each spouse ispended during any period you or your spouse • Your spouse or former spouse is allowedtreated as owning the property during the periodserve on ªqualified official extended dutyº as a to live in it under a divorce or separationthat either spouse owned the property.member of the uniformed services or Foreign instrument and uses it as his or her mainService of the United States, as an employee of home.Example 1 Ðone spouse sells a home.the intelligence community, or as an employee Emily sells her home in June 2008. She marries
or volunteer of the Peace Corps. This means Jamie later in the year. She meets the owner-
that you may be able to meet the 2-year use test Reduced Maximumship and use tests, but Jamie does not. Emily
even if, because of your service, you did not can exclude up to $250,000 of gain on a sepa- Exclusionactually live in your home for at least the re- rate or joint return for 2008. The $500,000 maxi-
quired 2 years during the 5-year period ending mum exclusion for certain joint returns does not If you fail to meet the requirements to qualify foron the date of sale. apply because Jamie does not meet the use the $250,000 or $500,000 exclusion, you may
test.If this helps you qualify to exclude gain, you still qualify for a reduced exclusion. This applies
can choose to have the 5-year test period sus- to those who:
Example 2 Ðeach spouse sells a home.pended by filing a return for the year of sale that • Fail to meet the ownership and use tests,The facts are the same as in Example 1 exceptdoes not include the gain. orthat Jamie also sells a home in 2008 before he
marries Emily. He meets the ownership and use • Have used the exclusion within 2 years ofExample. David bought and moved into a tests on his home, but Emily does not. Emily and selling their current home.home in 2000. He lived in it as his main home for Jamie can each exclude up to $250,000 of gain.21/2 years. For the next 6 years, he did not live in .The $500,000 maximum exclusion for certainit because he was on qualified official extended joint returns does not apply because Emily and In both cases, to qualify for a reduced exclu-duty with the Army. He then sold the home at a Jamie do not jointly meet the use test for the sion, the sale of your main home must be due togain in 2008. To meet the use test, David same home. one of the following reasons.chooses to suspend the 5-year test period for
Sale of main home by surviving spouse. Ifthe 6 years he was on qualified official extended • A change in place of employment.
your spouse died and you did not remarry beforeduty. This means he can disregard those 6 • Health.the date of sale, you are considered to haveyears. Therefore, David's 5-year test period con-
owned and lived in the property as your mainsists of the 5 years before he went on qualified • Unforeseen circumstances.
home during any period of time when yourofficial extended duty. He meets the ownership
spouse owned and lived in it as a main home.and use tests because he owned and lived in the Unforeseen circumstances. The sale of yourIf you meet all of the following requirements,home for 21/2 years during this test period. main home is because of an unforeseen circum-you may qualify to exclude up to $500,000 of stance if your primary reason for the sale is thePeriod of suspension. The period of sus- any gain from the sale or exchange of your main occurrence of an event that you could not rea-pension cannot last more than 10 years. To- home. sonably have anticipated before buying and oc-gether, the 10-year suspension period and the
• The sale or exchange took place after cupying your main home.5-year test period can be as long as, but no 2007. See Publication 523 for more informationmore than, 15 years. You cannot suspend the
and to use Worksheet 3 to figure your reduced5-year period for more than one property at a • The sale or exchange took place no more maximum exclusion.time. You can revoke your choice to suspend the than 2 years after the date of death of your
5-year period at any time. spouse.
For more information about the suspension • You have not remarried.
of the 5-year test period, see Members of the • You and your spouse met the use test atuniformed services or Foreign Service, employ- the time of your spouse's death.ees of the intelligence community, or employees
or volunteers of the Peace Corps in Publication • You or your spouse met the ownership
523. test at the time of your spouse's death.
Page 108 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 111 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Business Use or Special SituationsReporting the Sale
The situations that follow may affect your exclu-Rental of Home Do not report the 2008 sale of your main home sion.on your tax return unless:
You may be able to exclude gain from the sale of • You have a gain and you do not qualify to Sale of home acquired in a like-kind ex-a home that you have used for business or to exclude all of it, change. You cannot claim the exclusion if:produce rental income. But you must meet the
• You acquired your home in a like-kind ex-• You have a gain and you choose not toownership and use tests.
change (also known as a section 1031 ex-exclude it, or
change) or your basis in your home isExample 1. On May 29, 2002, Amy bought • You have a loss and you received Form determined by reference to the basis ofa house. She moved in on that date and lived in 1099-S. the home in the hands of the person whoit until May 31, 2004, when she moved out of the acquired the property in a like-kind ex-house and put it up for rent. The house was  If you have any taxable gain on the sale of change (for example, you received therented from June 1, 2004, to March 31, 2006. your main home that cannot be excluded, report home from that person as a gift), andAmy moved back into the house on April 1, the entire gain on Schedule D (Form 1040). • You sold the home during the 5-year pe-2006, and lived there until she sold it on January Report it in column (f) of line 1 or line 8 of riod beginning with the date your home30, 2008. During the 5-year period ending on the Schedule D, as short-term or long-term capital was acquired in the like-kind exchange.date of the sale (January 31, 2003±January 30, gain depending on how long you owned the Gain from a like-kind exchange is not taxable at2008), Amy owned and lived in the house for home. If you qualify for an exclusion, show it on the time of the exchange. This means that gainmore than 2 years as shown in the following the line directly below the line on which you will not be taxed until you sell or otherwise dis-table. report the gain. Enter ªSection 121 exclusionº in pose of the property you receive. To defer gaincolumn (a) of that line and show the amount of from a like-kind exchange, you must have ex-Five Year Used as Used as the exclusion in column (f) as a loss (in paren- changed business or investment property for Period  Home  Rental theses). business or investment property of a like kind.
 1/31/03 ± For more information about like-kind ex-If you have a loss on the sale of your main
5/31/04 16 months changes, see Publication 544, Sales and Otherhome for which you received a Form 1099-S,
Dispositions of Assets.you must report the loss on Schedule D even 6/1/04 ±
though the loss is not deductible. Report the3/31/06  22 months Home relinquished in a like-kind exchange.transaction on line 1 or 8, as above. Complete 4/1/06 ± If you use your main home partly for business orcolumns (a) through (e). Enter -0- in column (f).1/30/08 22 months rental purposes and then exchange the home
If you used the home for business or to38 months 22 months for another property, see Publication 523.
produce rental income, you may have to use
Form 4797 to report the sale of the business orAmy can exclude gain up to $250,000. However, Expatriates. You cannot claim the exclusion if
rental part (or the sale of the entire property ifshe cannot exclude the part of the gain equal to the expatriation tax applies to you. The expatria-
used entirely for business or rental). See Busi-the depreciation she claimed or could have tion tax applies to certain U.S. citizens who have
ness Use or Rental of Home  in Publication 523 renounced their citizenship (and to certainclaimed for renting the house, as explained after
long-term residents who have ended their resi-and the Instructions for Form 4797.Example 2.
dency). For more information about the expatria-
tion tax, see chapter 4 of Publication 519, U.S.Installment sale. Some sales are made underExample 2. William owned and used a
Tax Guide for Aliens.arrangements that provide for part or all of thehouse as his main home from 2002 through
selling price to be paid in a later year. These Note. The expatriation rules changed for ex-2005. On January 1, 2006, he moved to another
sales are called ªinstallment sales.º If you fi- patriations after June 16, 2008.state. He rented his house from that date until
nance the buyer's purchase of your home your-April 30, 2008, when he sold it. During the 5-year
self instead of having the buyer get a loan or Home destroyed or condemned. If yourperiod ending on the date of sale (May 1,
mortgage from a bank, you probably have an home was destroyed or condemned, any gain2003±April 30, 2008), William owned and lived (for example, because of insurance proceedsinstallment sale. You may be able to report thein the house for 32 months (more than 2 years). you received) qualifies for the exclusion.part of the gain you cannot exclude on the in-He must report the sale on Form 4797 because Any part of the gain that cannot be excludedstallment basis.it was rental property at the time of sale. Be- (because it is more than the maximum exclu-Use Form 6252, Installment Sale Income, tocause he met the ownership and use tests, he sion) can be postponed under the rules ex-report the sale. Enter your exclusion on line 15can exclude gain up to $250,000. However, he plained in:of Form 6252.cannot exclude the part of the gain equal to the • Publication 547, in the case of a home thatdepreciation he claimed or could have claimed Seller-financed mortgage. If you sell your was destroyed, orfor renting the house, as explained next. home and hold a note, mortgage, or other finan- •  Publication 544, chapter 1, in the case ofcial agreement, the payments you receive gen- a home that was condemned.Depreciation after May 6, 1997. If you were erally consist of both interest and principal. You
entitled to take depreciation deductions be- must separately report as interest income the
Sale of remainder interest. Subject to thecause you used your home for business pur- interest you receive as part of each payment. If
other rules in this chapter, you can choose toposes or as rental property, you cannot exclude the buyer of your home uses the property as a
exclude gain from the sale of a remainder inter-main or second home, you must also report thethe part of your gain equal to any depreciation
est in your home. If you make this choice, youname, address, and social security numberallowed or allowable as a deduction for periods cannot choose to exclude gain from your sale of(SSN) of the buyer on line 1 of either Schedule Bafter May 6, 1997. If you can show by adequate any other interest in the home that you sell(Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A). Therecords or other evidence that the depreciation separately.buyer must give you his or her SSN and youallowed was less than the amount allowable, the
Exception for sales to related persons.must give the buyer your SSN. Failure to meetamount you cannot exclude is the amount al-
You cannot exclude gain from the sale of athese requirements may result in a $50 penaltylowed. See Publication 544 for more informa- remainder interest in your home to a relatedfor each failure. If you or the buyer does nottion. person. Related persons include your brothers,have and is not eligible to get an SSN, see
sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, an-Social Security Number in chapter 1.Property used partly for business or rental. cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal
If you used property partly as a home and partly More information. For more information on descendants (children, grandchildren, etc.). Re-
for business or to produce rental income, see installment sales, see Publication 537, Install- lated persons also include certain corporations,
Publication 523. ment Sales. partnerships, trusts, and exempt organizations.
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 109

Page 112 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your home is destroyed by a casualty, and
you replace it on its original site within 2Recapturing (Paying Introductionyears after the end of the tax year when
the destruction happened (within 5 years if This chapter discusses how to report capitalBack) a Federal the home was in the Hurricane Katrina dis- gains and losses from sales, exchanges, andaster area and was destroyed by reason other dispositions of investment property onMortgage Subsidy of the hurricane after August 24, 2005). If Schedule D of Form 1040. The discussion in-your home was located in the Kansas dis- cludes the following topics.If you financed your home under a federally aster area, one of the Midwestern disastersubsidized program (loans from tax-exempt • How to report short-term gains and losses.areas, or another federally declared disas-qualified mortgage bonds or loans with mort- ter area, see Replacement Period in Publi- • How to report long-term gains and losses.gage credit certificates), you may have to recap- cation 547.ture all or part of the benefit you received from • How to figure capital loss carryovers.• You refinance your mortgage loan (unlessthat program when you sell or otherwise dispose
• How to figure your tax on a net capitalyou later meet the conditions listed previ-of your home. You recapture the benefit by in-
ously under When the recapture applies). gain.creasing your federal income tax for the year of
the sale. You may have to pay this recapture tax • An illustrated example of how to complete
even if you can exclude your gain from income Notice of amounts. At or near the time of Schedule D.
under the rules discussed earlier; that exclusion settlement of your mortgage loan, you should
does not affect the recapture tax. receive a notice that provides the federally sub- If you sell or otherwise dispose of property
sidized amount and other information you will used in a trade or business or for the production
need to figure your recapture tax.Loans subject to recapture rules. The re- of income, see Publication 544, Sales and Other
capture applies to loans that: Dispositions of Assets, before completingHow to figure and report the recapture. The Schedule D.1. Came from the proceeds of qualified mort- recapture tax is figured on Form 8828. If you sell
gage bonds, or your home and your mortgage is subject to re- Useful Itemscapture rules, you must file Form 8828 even if2. Were based on mortgage credit certifi- You may want to see:you do not owe a recapture tax. Attach Formcates. 8828 to your Form 1040. For more information,
PublicationThe recapture also applies to assumptions of see Form 8828 and its instructions.
these loans. ❏ 537 Installment Sales
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofWhen recapture applies. Recapture of the
Assetsfederal mortgage subsidy applies only if you First-Time Homebuyer
meet both of the following conditions. ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
Credit• Within the first 9 years after the date you
Form (and Instructions)close your mortgage loan, you sell or oth- Use Form 5405 and see the instructions forerwise dispose of your home at a gain. ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital GainsForm 1040, line 69, to claim the first-time
and Losses• Your income for the year of disposition is homebuyer credit. The credit may give you a
more than that year's adjusted qualifying refund even if you do not owe any tax. The credit ❏ 4797 Sales of Business Propertyincome for your family size for that year operates much like an interest-free loan. You
❏ 6252 Installment Sale Income(related to the income requirements a per- generally must repay it over a 15-year period.
son must meet to qualify for the federally You (and your spouse if married) are considered ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationssubsidized program). a first-time homebuyer if:
• You purchased your main home in the
When recapture does not apply. Recapture United States after April 8, 2008.
does not apply in any of the following situations. • You did not own any other main home Reporting Capital• Your mortgage loan was a qualified home during the 3-year period ending on the
date of purchase.improvement loan (QHIL) of not more than Gains and Losses$15,000 used for alterations, repairs, and
improvements that protect or improve the Report capital gains and losses on Schedule Dbasic livability or energy efficiency of your (Form 1040). Enter your sales and trades ofhome. stocks, bonds, etc., and real estate (if not re-
• Your mortgage loan was a QHIL of not ported on Form 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, or
more than $150,000 in the case of a QHIL 8824) on line 1 of Part I or line 8 of Part II, as
used to repair damage from Hurricane Ka- appropriate. Include all these transactions even16.trina to homes in the hurricane disaster if you did not receive a Form 1099-B, Proceeds
area; a QHIL funded by a qualified mort- From Broker and Barter Exchange Transac-
gage bond that is a qualified Gulf Opportu- tions, or Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Real
nity Zone Bond; or a QHIL for an Estate Transactions (or substitute statement).Reporting Gainsowner-occupied home in the Gulf Opportu- You can use Schedule D-1 as a continuation
nity Zone (GO Zone), Rita GO Zone, or schedule to report more transactions.
Wilma GO Zone. For more information, Be sure to add all sales price entries in col-and Lossessee Publication 4492, Information for Tax- umn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total onpayers Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, line 3. Also add all sales price entries in columnRita, and Wilma. Also see Publication (d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.4492-B, Information for Affected Taxpay- Then add the following amounts reported to youWhat's Newers in the Midwestern Disaster Areas. for 2008 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-S
(or on substitute statements):• The home is disposed of as a result of Maximum tax rate on qualified dividends andyour death. • Proceeds from transactions involvingnet capital gain reduced. Beginning in 2008, stocks, bonds, and other securities, and• You dispose of the home more than 9 the 5% maximum tax rate on qualified dividendsyears after the date you closed your mort- • Gross proceeds from real estate transac-and net capital gain (the excess of net long-termgage loan. tions (other than the sale of your maincapital gain over net short-term capital loss) is
home if you had no taxable gain) not re-• You transfer the home to your spouse, or reduced to 0 (zero)%. This reduction applies for
ported on another form or schedule.to your former spouse incident to a di- both regular and alternative minimum tax. The
vorce, where no gain is included in your 15% maximum tax rate on qualified dividends If this total is more than the total of lines 3 andincome. and net capital gain has not changed. See Capi- 10, attach a statement to your return explaining
• You dispose of the home at a loss. tal Gain Tax Rates later. the difference.
Page 110 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 113 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Installment sales. You cannot use the install- Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a You also report the following in Part II of
ment method to report a gain from the sale of nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your Schedule D:
stock or securities traded on an established se- name but actually belong to someone else), • Undistributed long-term capital gains fromcurities market. You must report the entire gain report on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only the a mutual fund (or other regulated invest-in the year of sale (the year in which the trade proceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol- ment company) or real estate investmentdate occurs). lowing amounts reported to you for 2008 on trust (REIT),Forms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state-
Passive activity gains and losses. If you ments) that you are not reporting on another • Your share of long-term capital gains orhave gains or losses from a passive activity, you form or schedule included with your return: losses from partnerships, S corporations,may also have to report them on Form 8582. In and fiduciaries,1. Proceeds from transactions involvingsome cases, the loss may be limited under the
stocks, bonds, and other securities, and • All capital gain distributions from mutualpassive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its
separate instructions for more information about funds and REITs not reported directly on2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-reporting capital gains and losses from a pas- line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Formtions (other than the sale of your mainsive activity. 1040, andhome if you are not required to report it).
• Long-term capital loss carryovers.Form 1099-B transactions. If you sold prop- If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total of
erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi- lines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your return  The result after combining these items withties, through a broker, you should receive Form explaining the reason for the difference. your other long-term capital gains and losses is1099-B or equivalent statement from the broker. File Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with the your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 ofUse the Form 1099-B or the equivalent state- IRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi- Schedule D).ment to complete Schedule D. nee in 2008, you must file a Form 1099-B orReport the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of Capital gain distributions only. You doForm 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS.Form 1099-B as the gross sales price in column not have to file Schedule D if both of the follow-Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with a(d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, ing are true.Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal ofwhichever applies. However, if the broker ad- U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve- • The only amounts you would have to re-vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that gross nue Service Center by March 2, 2009 (March 31,proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions port on Schedule D are capital gain distri-2009, if you file Form 1099-B or Form 1099-Sand option premiums were reported to the IRS, butions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (orelectronically). Give the actual owner of the pro-enter that net sales price in column (d) of either substitute statement).ceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or Formline 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies. • You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c,1099-S by February 17, 2009. On Form 1099-B, If the net sales price is entered in column (d), or 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substituteyou should be listed as the ªPayer.º The otherdo not include the commissions and option pre- statement).owner should be listed as the ªRecipient.º Onmiums in column (e). Form 1099-S, you should be listed as the ªFiler.º
The other owner should be listed as the ªTrans-Form 1099-CAP transactions. If a corpora- If both of the above statements are true, reportferor.º You do not, however, have to file a Formtion in which you own stock has had a change in your capital gain distributions directly on line 131099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceeds forcontrol or a substantial change in capital struc- of Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also,your spouse. For more information about theture, you should receive Form 1099-CAP or an use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gainreporting requirements and the penalties for fail-equivalent statement from the corporation. Use Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions toure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,the Form 1099-CAP or equivalent statement to figure your tax.see the General Instructions for Forms 1099,figure the gain to report on Schedule D (Form
1098, 5498, and W-2G.1040). You cannot claim a loss on Schedule D You can report your capital gain distributions
(Form 1040) as a result of this transaction. on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Form
Sale of property bought at various times. IfReport the aggregate amount received 1040, if both of the following are true.you sell a block of stock or other property thatshown in box 2 of Form 1099-CAP as the gross • None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substituteyou bought at various times, report thesales price in column (d) of either line 1 or line 8 statements) you received have an amountshort-term gain or loss from the sale on one lineof Schedule D, whichever applies. in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain or
Form 1099-S transactions. If you sold or loss on one line in Part II. Write ªVariousº in • You do not have to file Form 1040 for anytraded reportable real estate, you generally column (b) for the ªDate acquired.º See the other capital gains or losses.should receive from the real estate reporting Comprehensive Example later in this chapter.
person a Form 1099-S showing the gross pro-
Total net gain or loss. To figure your total netceeds. Sale expenses.  Add to your cost or other
gain or loss, combine your net short-term capitalªReportable real estateº is defined as any basis any expense of sale such as brokers' fees,
gain or loss (line 7) with your net long-termpresent or future ownership interest in any of the commissions, state and local transfer taxes, and
following: option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in capital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result on
column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule Schedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses are• Improved or unimproved land, including air D, whichever applies, unless you reported the more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next.space, net sales price amount in column (d). If both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 of
• Inherently permanent structures, including For more information about adjustments to Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gain
any residential, commercial, or industrial basis, see chapter 13. Tax Rates, later.
building,
Short-term gains and losses. Capital gain or• A condominium unit and its accessory fix- Capital Lossesloss on the sale or trade of investment propertytures and common elements, including held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain orland, and If your capital losses are more than your capitalloss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If the gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.• Stock in a cooperative housing corporation amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show it Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,(as defined in section 216 of the Internal in parentheses. enclosed in parentheses.Revenue Code). You combine your share of short-term capital
gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,
Limit on deduction. Your allowable capitalA ªreal estate reporting personº could include and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital loss
loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is thethe buyer's attorney, your attorney, the title or carryover, with your other short-term capital
lesser of:escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro- gains and losses to figure your net short-term
ker, the buyer's broker, or the person acquiring capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D. • $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and filethe biggest interest in the property. a separate return), orYour Form 1099-S will show the gross pro- Long-term gains and losses. A capital gain
• Your total net loss as shown on line 16 ofceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol- or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-
Schedule D.low the instructions for Schedule D to report erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capital
these transactions and include them on line 1 or gain or loss. You report it in Part II of Schedule
You can use your total net loss to reduce your8 as appropriate. However, report like-kind ex- D. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,
income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.changes on Form 8824 instead. show it in parentheses.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 111

Page 114 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
this situation. The decedent's estate cannot de-Table 16-1. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
duct any of the loss or carry it over to following
years.THEN your 
Joint and separate returns. If you and yourmaximum capital
spouse once filed separate returns and are nowIF your net capital gain is from ... gain rate is ...
filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-
collectibles gain 28% tal loss carryovers. However, if you and your
spouse once filed a joint return and are nowgain on qualified small business stock minus the section filing separate returns, any capital loss carryover1202 exclusion 28% from the joint return can be deducted only on the
return of the spouse who actually had the loss.unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25%
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25%
or higher 15% Capital Gain Tax Rates
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is
The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain arelower than 25% 0% generally lower than the tax rates that apply to
other income. These lower rates are called the1 Other gain means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on qualified small business stock, or maximum capital gain rates.unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
The term ªnet capital gainº means the
amount by which your net long-term capital gain
for the year is more than your net short-term
capital loss.
Capital loss carryover. If you have a total net   Complete the Capital Loss Carryover Work- For 2008, the maximum capital gain rates
loss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more than sheet in Publication 550 to determine the part of are 0%, 15%, 25%, or 28%. See Table 16-1 for
the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you your capital loss for 2008 that you can carry over details.
can carry over the unused part to the next year to 2009. If you figure your tax using the maxi-and treat it as if you had incurred it in that next mum capital gain rates and the regularyear. If part of the loss is still unused, you can Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities in tax computation results in a lower tax,
TIPcarry it over to later years until it is completely 2008. The sales resulted in a capital loss of the regular tax computation applies.used up. $7,000. They had no other capital transactions.
Their taxable income was $26,000. On their jointWhen you figure the amount of any capital Example. All of your net capital gain is fromloss carryover to the next year, you must take 2008 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un- selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate wouldthe current year's allowable deduction into ac- used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000), be 28%. Because you are single and your tax-count, whether or not you claimed it. can be carried over to 2009. able income is $25,000, none of your taxable
income will be taxed above the 15% rate. TheWhen you carry over a loss, it remains long If their capital loss had been $2,000, their
28% rate does not apply.term or short term. A long-term capital loss you capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.
carry over to the next tax year will reduce that They would have no carryover.
year's long-term capital gains before it reduces Investment interest deducted. If you claim aUse short-term losses first. When you fig-that year's short-term capital gains. deduction for investment interest, you may have
ure your capital loss carryover, use your to reduce the amount of your net capital gainFiguring your carryover. The amount of short-term capital losses first, even if you in- that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.your capital loss carryover is the amount of your curred them after a long-term capital loss. If you Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gaintotal net loss that is more than the lesser of: you choose to include in investment incomehave not reached the limit on the capital loss
when figuring the limit on your investment inter-deduction after using the short-term capital1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for
est deduction. This is done on the Schedule Dthe year, or losses, use the long-term capital losses until you
Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends andreach the limit.2. Your taxable income increased by your al- Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa-lowable capital loss deduction for the year Decedent's capital loss. A capital loss tion about the limit on investment interest, seeand your deduction for personal exemp- sustained by a decedent during his or her last Interest Expenses  in chapter 3 of Publicationtions. tax year (or carried over to that year from an 550.
earlier year) can be deducted only on the finalIf your deductions are more than your gross
income tax return filed for the decedent. Theincome for the tax year, use your negative tax- Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain or loss
capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply inable income in computing the amount in item (2). from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,
28% Rate Gain Worksheet for Emily JonesÐLine 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules
D and D-1 ................................................................... . 1. 0
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any section 1202 exclusion
you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 60% of the gain ... . 2. 1,500
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824 ............................ . 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
.............. . 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), 5. ( 500)box 11, code C ................................................................ .
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0- ..................... . 6. ( 550)
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18 ............................................................. . 7. 450
Page 112 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 115 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati- • You do not have to file Schedule D and In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.
num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev- you received capital gain distributions. for $4,100. This was qualified small business
erage held more than 1 year. (See Capital gain distributions only, ear- stock that she had bought in September 2003.
lier.) Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 gainGain on qualified small business stock. If which she enters in column (f) of line 8. Becauseyou realized a gain from qualified small business • Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are both she held the stock more than 5 years, she has astock that you held more than 5 years, you more than zero. $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She claims thegenerally can exclude up to 50% of your gain
exclusion on the line below by entering $1,500from income. The exclusion can be up to 60%
as a loss in column (f). She also enters thefor certain empowerment zone business stock.
exclusion as a positive amount on line 2 of theThe eligible gain minus your section 1202 exclu-
28% Rate Gain Worksheet.sion is a 28% rate gain. See Gains on Qualified Comprehensive
Small Business Stock in chapter 4 of Publication She received a Form 1099-B (not shown)
550. Example from her broker for each of these transactions.
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain.  Generally, Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wages Reconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emilythis is any part of your capital gain from selling from her job, she has income from stocks and makes sure that the total of the amounts re-section 1250 property (real property) that is due other securities. For the 2008 tax year, she had ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched-to depreciation (but not more than your net sec- the following capital gains and losses, which she ule D is not less than the total of the amountstion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the reports on Schedule D. All the Forms 1099 she shown on the Forms 1099-B she received from28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250 received showed net sales prices. Her filled-in her broker. For 2008, the total is $23,100.Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions Schedule D is shown in this chapter.to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Capital loss carryover from 2007. EmilyFor more information about section 1250 prop- has a capital loss carryover to 2008 of $800, ofCapital gains and losses Ð Schedule D.erty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500Emily sold stock in two different companies thatPublication 544. is long-term capital loss. She enters theseshe held for less than a year. In June, she soldTax computation using maximum capital amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. She100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she hadgains rates. Use the Qualified Dividends and also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-bought in February. She had an adjusted basisCapital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule D ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-of $650 in the stock and sold it for $900, for aTax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure sheet. Her filled-in 28% Rate Gain Worksheet isgain of $250. In July, she sold 25 shares ofyour tax if you have qualified dividends or net shown below.Computer Co. stock that she bought in June.capital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched- She had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,500 She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-ule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains. and she sold it for $2,000, for a loss of $500. She over Worksheet (not illustrated) in her 2007 edi-
reports these short-term transactions on line 1 inSchedule D Tax Worksheet. You must use tion of Publication 550, so she could properly
Part I of Schedule D.the Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule report her loss carryover for the 2008 tax year
D instructions to figure your tax if: without refiguring it.Emily had three other stock sales that she
reports as long-term transactions on line 8 in• You have to file Schedule D, and Tax computation. Because Emily hasPart II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60 gains on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D,• Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or line shares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited she checks the ªYesº box on line 17 and goes to19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), is the Car Co. stock from her father. Its fair market line 18. On line 18 she enters $450 from line 7 ofmore than zero. value at the time of his death was $2,500, which the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18became her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.See Comprehensive Example, later, for an ex- is greater than zero, she checks the ªNoº box onBecause she had inherited the stock, her loss isample of how to figure your tax using the Sched- line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax Worksheeta long-term loss, regardless of how long she andule D Tax Worksheet. to figure her tax.her father actually held the stock. She enters theQualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13loss in column (f) of line 8.Worksheet. If you do not have to use the of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofIn June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained Form 1040 through line 43. She enters thestock for $14,000. She had bought 100 of thoseabove) and any of the following apply, use the amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of theshares in 1997, for $1,000. She had bought 100Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work- Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out themore shares in 1999 for $2,200, and an addi-sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax astional 300 shares in 2002 for $1,500. Her total1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax. $2,768. This is less than the $4,103 tax shebasis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $9,300
would have figured without the capital gain tax($14,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she• You received qualified dividends. (See
rates.enters in column (f) of line 8.Qualified Dividends in chapter 8.)
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 113

Page 116 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR) to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b (or Form 1040NR, line 10b);
or
• Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) is zero or less.
 Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41).
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40). (However, if you are filing Form 2555
or 2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned income), enter instead the amount from line 3 of the Foreign Earned Income
Tax Worksheet on page 37 of the Form 1040 Instructions) ...................................... . 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b (or
Form 1040NR, line 10b)* ....................... . 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952 (used to
figure investment interest expense
deduction), line 4g ................ . 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e** 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... . 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0- ................... . 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D ..... . 7. 9,350
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 ................ . 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0- ................... . 9. 9,350
10. Add lines 6 and 9 ..................................................... . 10. 9,350
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D* ............................. . 11. 450
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11 ........................................ . 12. 450
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10. .......................................................... . 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. .......................................... . 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of:
• The amount on line 1 or
}
•  $32,550 if single or married filing separately; ...... . 15. 30,000$65,100 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
$43,650 if head of household
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15 ............................ . 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ..... . 17. 20,100
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 ....................................... . © 18. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip lines 19 and go to line 20. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15 ............................................ . © 19. 8,900
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 20 through 32 and go to line 33. Otherwise, go to line 20.
20. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13 ............................ . 20.
21. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-) ............. . 21.
22. Subtract line 21 from line 20. If zero or less, enter -0- ........................... . © 22.
23. Multiply line 22 by 15% (.15) .......................................................... . 23.
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 24 through 29 and go to line 30. Otherwise, go to line 24.
24. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19 ............... . 24.
25. Add lines 10 and 18 .......................... . 25.
26. Enter the amount from line 1 above ................ . 26.
27. Subtract line 26 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0- ................. . 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 24. If zero or less, enter -0- ........................... . © 28.
29. Multiply line 28 by 25% (.25) .......................................................... . 29.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 30 through 32 and go to line 33. Otherwise, go to line 30.
30. Add lines 18, 19, 22, and 28 .............................................. . 30.
31. Subtract line 30 from line 1 ............................................... . 31.
32. Multiply line 31 by 28% (.28) .......................................................... . 32.
33. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies .. . 33. 2,768
34. Add lines 23, 29, 32, and 33 .......................................................... . 34. 2,768
35. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ... . 35. 4,103
36. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 34 or line
35. Also include this amount on Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41). (If you are filing Form 2555 or
2555-EZ, do not enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44. Instead, enter it on line 4 of the Foreign Earned Income
Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions) .............................................. . 36. 2,768
*If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the footnote in the Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet on page 37
of the Form 1040 instructions before completing this line.
**If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
Page 114 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 117 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G58 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
Emily Jones 1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
Car Co.
60 sh
INHERITED 2-3-08 2,100
20,200
2,500
Trucking Co.
100 sh
2-11-08 6-12-08 900 650
Computer Co.
25 sh
6-30-08 7-30-08 2,000 2,500
300
Furniture Co.
500 sh
VARIOUS 6-30-08 14,000 4,700 9,300
9,900
250
500
550
400
Toy Co.
20 sh
9-28-03 12-15-08 4,100 1,100 3,000
500
Section 1202
exclusion 1,500
()
()
()
()
2,900
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 2 in
column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f)
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts. Add lines 8 and 9 in
column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-2 of the instructions
14
15
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 13 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ()
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to
Part III on the back 15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 or Form 1040NR instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2008Cat. No. 11338H
()
4 4
Part I
Part II
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
7
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
2008
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 115

Page 118 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
9,350
450
/H12011
/H12011
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2008
Summary
Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result16 16
18
Part III
Page 2
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-8 of the
instructions /H17075
Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank?
19
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2008
21
Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on 
page D-9 of the instructions /H17075
20
If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14, the smaller
of:
21
19
● The loss on line 16 or
● ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) /H20854
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR). Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below.
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete the
Schedule D Tax Worksheet on page D-10 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and
22 below.
Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or Form 1040NR, line 10b?22
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR).
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
( )
Are lines 15 and 16 both gains?17
Yes. Go to line 18.
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22.
Note. When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers.
If line 16 is:
● A gain, enter the amount from line 16 on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14. Then
go to line 17 below.
● A loss, skip lines 17 through 20 below. Then go to line 21. Also be sure to complete line 22.
● Zero, skip lines 17 through 21 below and enter -0- on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR,
line 14. Then go to line 22.
Page 116 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 119 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Four.
The three chapters in this part discuss some of the adjustments to income thatAdjustments to you can deduct in figuring your adjusted gross income. These chapters cover:
• Contributions you make to traditional individual retirement arrangementsIncome (IRAs) Ð chapter 17,
• Alimony you pay Ð chapter 18, and
• Student loan interest you payÐchapter 19.
Other adjustments to income are discussed elsewhere. See Table V
below.
Table V. Other Adjustments to Income
Use this table to find information about other adjustments to income not covered in this part of the publication.
IF you are looking for more information about the deduction for... THEN see...
Certain business expenses of reservists, performing artists, and Chapter 26.
fee-basis officials
Contributions to a health savings account Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans.
Moving expenses Publication 521, Moving Expenses.
One-half of self-employment tax Chapter 22.
Self-employed health insurance Chapter 21.
Payments to self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business.
Penalty on the early withdrawal of savings Chapter 7.
Contributions to an Archer MSA Chapter 21.
Reforestation amortization or expense Chapter 9 of Publication 535, Business Expenses.
Contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18)(D) pension Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
plans
Expenses from the rental of personal property Chapter 12.
Certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment benefits Chapter 12.
(sub-pay)
Foreign housing costs Chapter 4 of Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident
Aliens Abroad.
Jury duty pay given to your employer Chapter 12.
Contributions by certain chaplains to Internal Revenue Code section Publication 517, Social Security and Other Information for Members of
403(b) plans the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Attorney fees and certain costs for actions involving certain unlawful Publication 525.
discrimination claims or awards to whistleblowers
Domestic production activities deduction Form 8903.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 117

Page 120 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$159,000 but less than $169,000. If your AGI is home was not purchased or constructed be-
cause of the severe storms, tornadoes, or flood-$169,000 or more, you cannot take a deduction
ing.for contributions to a traditional IRA. See How
17. Much Can You Deduct? later. For more information, see chapter 4 of Publi-
cation 590.Modified AGI limit for Roth IRA contributions
increased. For 2008, your Roth IRA contribu- Qualified settlement income. If you received
Individual tion limit is reduced (phased out) in the following qualified settlement income in connection with
situations. the Exxon Valdez litigation, you may roll over the
amount received, or part of the amount re-• Your filing status is married filing jointly orRetirement ceived, to your traditional or Roth IRA. For morequalifying widow(er) and your modified information, see Qualified settlement income inAGI is at least $159,000. You cannotArrangements chapter 1 of Publication 590.make a Roth IRA contribution if your modi-
fied AGI is $169,000 or more.
(IRAs) • Your filing status is single, head of house-
hold, or married filing separately and you What's New for 2009did not live with your spouse at any time in
2008, and your modified AGI is at leastWhat's New for 2008 Modified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri-$101,000. You cannot make a Roth IRA
butions increased. For 2009, if you are cov-contribution if your modified AGI isTraditional IRA contribution and deduction ered by a retirement plan at work, your$116,000 or more.limit. The contribution limit to your traditional deduction for contributions to a traditional IRA is
• Your filing status is married filing sepa-IRA for 2008 increased to the smaller of the reduced (phased out) if your modified adjusted
rately, you lived with your spouse at anyfollowing amounts: gross income (AGI) is:
time during the year, and your modified• $5,000, or • More than $89,000 but less than $109,000AGI is more than -0-. You cannot make a for a married couple filing a joint return orRoth IRA contribution if your modified AGI• Your taxable compensation for the year. a qualifying widow(er),is $10,000 or more.
If you were age 50 or older before 2009, the • More than $55,000 but less than $65,000See Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA? later.most that can be contributed to your traditional for a single individual or head of house-
IRA for 2008 is the smaller of the following hold, orRollovers from qualified retirement plans.
amounts: Beginning in 2008, you can roll over (convert) • Less than $10,000 for a married individualamounts from a qualified retirement plan to a• $6,000, or filing a separate return.Roth IRA. For more information, see Rollover• Your taxable compensation for the year. from an employer's plan into a Roth IRA, later. If you either live with your spouse or file a joint
return, and your spouse is covered by a retire-For more information, see How Much Can Be Economic stimulus payments.  Economic ment plan at work, but you are not, your deduc-Contributed? later. stimulus payments directly deposited in your tion is phased out if your AGI is more thanIRA or other tax-favored account in 2008 may be $166,000 but less than $176,000. If your AGI isRoth IRA contribution limit. If contributions withdrawn tax-free and penalty-free. For more $176,000 or more, you cannot take a deductionon your behalf are made only to Roth IRAs, your information, see Tax-Free Withdrawals of Eco-contribution limit for 2008 is generally the lesser for contributions to a traditional IRA. See Hownomic Stimulus Payments, later.of: Much Can You Deduct? later.
Military death gratuities and ser-• $5,000, or Modified AGI limit for Roth IRA contributionsvicemembers' group life insurance (SGLI) increased. For 2009, your Roth IRA contribu-• Your taxable compensation for the year. payments.  If you received a military death tion limit is reduced (phased out) in the followinggratuity or SGLI payment with respect to a death situations.If you were age 50 or older before 2009 and from an injury that occurred after October 6,contributions on your behalf were made only to • Your filing status is married filing jointly or2001, you may roll over some or all of theRoth IRAs, your contribution limit for 2008 is qualifying widow(er) and your modifiedamount received to your Roth IRA. For moregenerally the lesser of: AGI is at least $166,000. You cannotinformation, see Military Death Gratuities and
make a Roth IRA contribution if your modi-Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance (SGLI)• $6,000, or
fied AGI is $176,000 or more.Payments in chapter 2 of Publication 590.• Your taxable compensation for the year.
• Your filing status is single, head of house-Tax relief for the Kansas disaster area.However, if your modified adjusted gross in- hold, or married filing separately and youSpecial rules may apply if you received a distri-come (AGI) is above a certain amount, your did not live with your spouse at any time inbution from your IRA and your main home wascontribution limit may be reduced. For more in- 2009 and your modified AGI is at leastlocated in the Kansas disaster area on the dateformation, see How Much Can Be Contributed? $105,000. You cannot make a Roth IRAthe disaster occurred, and you sustained anunder Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA? later. contribution if your modified AGI iseconomic loss due to the storms and tornadoes. $120,000 or more.Modified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri- Special rules may also apply if you received
butions increased. For 2008, if you were cov- • Your filing status is married filing sepa-a distribution to purchase or construct a main
ered by a retirement plan at work, your rately, you lived with your spouse at anyhome in the Kansas disaster area, but the home
deduction for contributions to a traditional IRA is time during the year, and your modifiedwas not purchased or constructed because of
reduced (phased out) if your modified adjusted AGI is more than -0-. You cannot make athe storms and tornadoes.
gross income (AGI) is: Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGIFor more information, see Publication
is $10,000 or more.4492-A, Information for Taxpayers Affected by• More than $85,000 but less than $105,000
the May 4, 2007, Kansas Storms and Torna-for a married couple filing a joint return or See Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA? later.
does.a qualifying widow(er),
• More than $53,000 but less than $63,000 Tax relief for the Midwestern disaster areas.
for a single individual or head of house- Special rules may apply if you received a distri-
hold, or bution from your IRA and your main home was Reminders
located in a Midwestern disaster area on the• Less than $10,000 for a married individual
date the disaster occurred, and you sustained Contributions to both traditional and Rothfiling a separate return.
an economic loss due to the severe storms, IRAs.  For information on your combined con-
tornadoes, or flooding. tribution limit if you contribute to both traditionalIf you either lived with your spouse or file a
Special rules may also apply if you received and Roth IRAs, see Roth IRAs and traditionaljoint return, and your spouse was covered by a
IRAs under How Much Can Be Contributed?a distribution to purchase or construct a mainretirement plan at work, but you were not, your
later.deduction is phased out if your AGI is more than home in a Midwestern disaster area, but the
Page 118 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 121 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Statement of required minimum distribution. • Deferred compensation received (com-
If a minimum distribution is required from your pensation payments postponed from aTraditional IRAsIRA, the trustee, custodian, or issuer that held past year).
the IRA at the end of the preceding year must • Income from a partnership for which youIn this chapter the original IRA (sometimeseither report the amount of the required mini- do not provide services that are a materialcalled an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred tomum distribution to you, or offer to calculate it for income-producing factor.as a ªtraditional IRA.º Two advantages of a tradi-you. The report or offer must include the date by tional IRA are: • Any amounts (other than combat pay) youwhich the amount must be distributed. The re-
exclude from income, such as foreignport is due January 31 of the year in which the • You may be able to deduct some or all of
earned income and housing costs.minimum distribution is required. It can be pro- your contributions to it, depending on your
vided with the year-end fair market value state- circumstances, and
ment that you normally get each year. No report • Generally, amounts in your IRA, including When and How Can ais required for IRAs of owners who have died. earnings and gains, are not taxed until
Traditional IRA Be Set Up?they are distributed.IRA interest. Although interest earned from
your IRA is generally not taxed in the year You can set up a traditional IRA at any time.earned, it is not tax-exempt interest. Do not However, the time for making contributions forWhat Is a Traditional IRA?report this interest on your tax return as any year is limited. See When Can Contributionstax-exempt interest. Be Made, later.A traditional IRA is any IRA that is not a Roth IRA
  You can set up different kinds of IRAs with aForm 8606.  To designate contributions as or a SIMPLE IRA.
variety of organizations. You can set up an IRAnondeductible, you must file Form 8606, Nonde-
at a bank or other financial institution or with aductible IRAs. Who Can Set Up mutual fund or life insurance company. You can
Hurricane tax relief. Special rules apply to also set up an IRA through your stockbroker.a Traditional IRA?
the use of retirement funds (including IRAs) by Any IRA must meet Internal Revenue Code re-
qualified individuals who suffered an economic quirements.You can set up and make contributions to a
loss as a result of Hurricane Katrina, Rita, or traditional IRA if: Kinds of traditional IRAs. Your traditionalWilma. While qualified hurricane distributions • You (or, if you file a joint return, your IRA can be an individual retirement account orcan no longer be made, special rules apply to spouse) received taxable compensation annuity. It can be part of either a simplifiedthe repayments of these distributions. See Hurri- during the year, and employee pension (SEP) or an employer or em-cane-Related Relief in chapter 4 of Publication
ployee association trust account.590. • You were not age 701/2 by the end of the
year.The term ª50 or olderº is used several
How Much Can Betimes in this chapter. It refers to an IRA
owner who is age 50 or older by the What is compensation? Generally, compen-
TIP Contributed?end of the tax year. sation is what you earn from working. Compen-
There are limits and other rules that affect thesation includes wages, salaries, tips,
amount that can be contributed to a traditionalprofessional fees, bonuses, and other amounts
IRA. These limits and other rules are explainedyou receive for providing personal services. The
below.IRS treats as compensation any amount prop-Introduction erly shown in box 1 (Wages, tips, other compen- Community property laws. Except as dis-An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is a sation) of Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, cussed later under Spousal IRA limit , eachpersonal savings plan that gives you tax advan- provided that amount is reduced by any amount spouse figures his or her limit separately, usingtages for setting aside money for your retire- properly shown in box 11 (Nonqualified plans). his or her own compensation. This is the rulement. Scholarship and fellowship payments are even in states with community property laws.This chapter discusses the following topics. compensation for this purpose only if shown in
box 1 of Form W-2. Brokers' commissions. Brokers' commis-• The rules for a traditional IRA (any IRA sions paid in connection with your traditional IRACompensation also includes commissionsthat is not a Roth or SIMPLE IRA). are subject to the contribution limit.and taxable alimony and separate maintenance
• The Roth IRA, which features nondeduct- payments. Trustees' fees. Trustees' administrative feesible contributions and tax-free distribu-
Self-employment income. If you are are not subject to the contribution limit.tions.
self-employed (a sole proprietor or a partner),
Qualified reservist repayments. If you arecompensation is the net earnings from yourSimplified Employee Pensions (SEPs) and
(or were) a member of a reserve component andtrade or business (provided your personal serv-Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employees
you were ordered or called to active duty afterices are a material income-producing factor) re-(SIMPLEs) are not discussed in this chapter. For
September 11, 2001, you may be able to con-duced by the total of:more information on these plans and employ-
tribute (repay) to an IRA amounts equal to anyees' SEP IRAs and SIMPLE IRAs that are part of • The deduction for contributions made on qualified reservist distributions you received.these plans, see Publications 560 and 590. your behalf to retirement plans, and You can make these repayment contributionsFor information about contributions, deduc- even if they would cause your total contributions• The deduction allowed for one-half of yourtions, withdrawals, transfers, rollovers, and to the IRA to be more than the general limit onself-employment taxes.other transactions for 2009, see Publication 590. contributions. To be eligible to make these re-
payment contributions, you must have receivedCompensation includes earnings fromUseful Items a qualified reservist distribution from an IRA orself-employment even if they are not subject to
from a section 401(k) or 403(b) plan or similarYou may want to see: self-employment tax because of your religious
arrangement.beliefs.
For more information, see Qualified reservistPublication Nontaxable combat pay. For IRA pur- repayments under How Much Can Be Contrib-❏ 560 Retirement Plans for Small poses, if you were a member of the U.S. Armed uted in chapter 1 of Publication 590.Business Forces, your compensation includes any non- Contributions on your behalf to a tradi-taxable combat pay you receive.❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements tional IRA reduce your limit for contri-(IRAs) butions to a Roth IRA. (See Roth IRAs,
CAUTION
!What is not compensation? Compensation later.)does not include any of the following items.Form (and Instructions)
• Earnings and profits from property, such❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans General limit. For 2008, the most that can be
as rental income, interest income, and div-(including IRAs) and Other contributed to your traditional IRA generally is
Tax-Favored Accounts idend income. the smaller of the following amounts.
❏ 8606 Nondeductible IRAs • Pension or annuity income. • $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older).
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 119

Page 122 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your taxable compensation (defined ear- must file Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual joint return, the deduction for contributions to the
lier) for the year. Income Tax Return. traditional IRA of the spouse with less compen-
 For more information, see When Can Contri- sation is limited to the lesser of the followingThis is the most that can be contributed regard- butions Be Made in chapter 1 of Publication 590. amounts.less of whether the contributions are to one or
more traditional IRAs or whether all or part of the Age 701/2 rule. Contributions cannot be made 1. $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older in
contributions are nondeductible. (See Nonde- to your traditional IRA for the year in which you 2008, or $8,000 for certain employer bank-
ductible Contributions, later.) Qualified reservist reach age 701/2 or for any later year. ruptcies).
repayments do not affect this limit. You attain age 70 1/2 on the date that is 6 2. The total compensation includible in thecalendar months after the 70th anniversary of gross income of both spouses for the yearExample 1. Betty, who is 34 years old and your birth. If you were born on June 30, 1938, reduced by the following three amounts.single, earned $24,000 in 2008. Her IRA contri- the 70th anniversary of your birth is June 30,
butions for 2008 are limited to $5,000. 2008, and you attained age 70 1/2 on December a. The IRA deduction for the year of the30, 2008. If you were born on July 1, 1938, the spouse with the greater compensation.Example 2. John, an unmarried college stu- 70th anniversary of your birth was July 1, 2008,
b. Any designated nondeductible contribu-dent working part time, earned $3,500 in 2008. and you attained age 701/2 on January 1, 2009.
tion for the year made on behalf of theHis IRA contributions for 2008 are limited to Designating year for which contribution is spouse with the greater compensation.$3,500, the amount of his compensation. made. If an amount is contributed to your
c. Any contributions for the year to a Rothtraditional IRA between January 1 and April 15,Catch-up contributions in certain employer IRA on behalf of the spouse with theyou should tell the sponsor which year (the cur-bankruptcies. If you participated in a 401(k) greater compensation.rent year or the previous year) the contribution isplan and the employer who maintained the plan
for. If you do not tell the sponsor which year it iswent into bankruptcy, you may be able to con- This limit is reduced by any contributions to afor, the sponsor can assume, and report to thetribute an additional $3,000 to your IRA. See 501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse withIRS, that the contribution is for the current yearPublication 590 to see if you qualify to make the lesser compensation.(the year the sponsor received it).these additional contributions. If you qualify and
chose to make these catch-up contributions, the Filing before a contribution is made. You Note. If you were divorced or legally sepa-higher contribution and deduction limits for indi- can file your return claiming a traditional IRA rated (and did not remarry) before the end of theviduals who are age 50 or older do not apply. contribution before the contribution is actually year, you cannot deduct any contributions toThe most that you can contribute to your IRA is made. Generally, the contribution must be made your spouse's IRA. After a divorce or legal sepa-$8,000. by the due date of your return, not including ration, you can deduct only contributions to your
extensions. own IRA. Your deductions are subject to theSpousal IRA limit. For 2008, if you file a joint
rules for single individuals.return and your taxable compensation is less Contributions not required. You do not have
than that of your spouse, the most that can be to contribute to your traditional IRA for every tax Covered by an employer retirement plan. Ifcontributed for the year to your IRA is the year, even if you can. you or your spouse was covered by an employersmaller of the following amounts. retirement plan at any time during the year for
which contributions were made, your deductionHow Much Can You1. $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older).
may be further limited. This is discussed laterDeduct?2. The total compensation includible in the under Limit If Covered by Employer Plan.  Limitsgross income of both you and your spouse on the amount you can deduct do not affect theGenerally, you can deduct the lesser of:for the year, reduced by the following two amount that can be contributed. See Nonde-amounts. • The contributions to your traditional IRA ductible Contributions, later.
for the year, ora. Your spouse's IRA contribution for the
year to a traditional IRA. • The general limit (or the spousal IRA limit, Are You Covered by an Employerif it applies).b. Any contribution for the year to a Roth Plan?IRA on behalf of your spouse. However, if you or your spouse was covered by
an employer retirement plan, you may not be The Form W-2 you receive from your employer
This means that the total combined contribu- able to deduct this amount. See Limit If Covered has a box used to indicate whether you were
tions that can be made for the year to your IRA by Employer Plan, later. covered for the year. The ªRetirement planº box
and your spouse's IRA can be as much as should be checked if you were covered.
$10,000 ($11,000 if only one of you is 50 or You may be eligible to claim a credit for Reservists and volunteer firefighters should
older, or $12,000 if both of you are 50 or older). contributions to your traditional IRA. also see Situations in Which You Are Not Cov-
For more information, see chapter 37. ered, later.
TIP
If you are not certain whether you were cov-When Can Contributions ered by your employer's retirement plan, youTrustees' fees. Trustees' administrative feesBe Made? should ask your employer.that are billed separately and paid in connection
with your traditional IRA are not deductible asAs soon as you set up your traditional IRA, Federal judges. For purposes of the IRA de-IRA contributions. However, they may be de-contributions can be made to it through your duction, federal judges are covered by an em-ductible as a miscellaneous itemized deductionchosen sponsor (trustee or other administrator). ployer retirement plan.on Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28.Contributions must be in the form of money
(cash, check, or money order). Property cannot Brokers' commissions. Brokers' commis-
be contributed. sions are part of your IRA contribution and, as For Which Year(s) Are You
such, are deductible subject to the limits. Covered?Contributions must be made by due date.
Full deduction. If neither you nor your spouseContributions can be made to your traditional Special rules apply to determine the tax yearswas covered for any part of the year by anIRA for a year at any time during the year or by for which you are covered by an employer plan.employer retirement plan, you can take a deduc-the due date for filing your return for that year, These rules differ depending on whether thetion for total contributions to one or more tradi-not including extensions. plan is a defined contribution plan or a definedtional IRAs of up to the lesser of: benefit plan.Nontaxable combat pay. If you received non- • $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older intaxable combat pay in 2004 or 2005, and the Tax year. Your tax year is the annual account-2008, or $8,000 for certain employer bank-treatment of the combat pay as compensation ing period you use to keep records and reportruptcies).means that you can contribute more than you income and expenses on your income tax re-
already have, you can make additional contribu- • 100% of your compensation. turn. For almost all people, the tax year is the
tions to an IRA for 2004 or 2005 by May 28, calendar year.This limit is reduced by any contributions made2009. The contributions will be treated as having to a 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf.been made on the last day of the year you Defined contribution plan. Generally, you
designate. If you have already filed your return Spousal IRA. In the case of a married are covered by a defined contribution plan for a
for a year for which you make a contribution, you couple with unequal compensation who file a tax year if amounts are contributed or allocated
Page 120 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 123 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
reserve unit of the armed forces, you may not beTable 17-1. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are Covered by
covered by the plan. You are not covered by theRetirement Plan at Work plan if both of the following conditions are met.
If you are covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if your modified AGI 1. The plan you participate in is establishedaffects the amount of your deduction. for its employees by:
a. The United States,IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take...
b. A state or political subdivision of a $53,000 or less a full deduction.single state, or
more than $53,000 a partial deduction.or c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)but less than $63,000 above.
head of household $63,000 or more no deduction. 2. You did not serve more than 90 days on
active duty during the year (not counting $85,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly
duty for training).more than $85,000 a partial deduction. or but less than $105,000 Volunteer firefighters. If the only reason youqualifying widow(er) participate in a plan is because you are a volun-$105,000 or more no deduction.
teer firefighter, you may not be covered by theless than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing plan. You are not covered by the plan if both of
separately2
the following conditions are met.$10,000 or more no deduction.
1. The plan you participate in is established1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI).
for its employees by:2If you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year, your filing status is considered Single for this purpose
(therefore, your IRA deduction is determined under the ªSingleº column).
a. The United States,
b. A state or political subdivision of ato your account for the plan year that ends with No vested interest. If you accrue a benefit for state, ora plan year, you are covered by that plan even ifor within that tax year.
you have no vested interest in (legal right to) the c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)A defined contribution plan is a plan that accrual. above.provides for a separate account for each person
covered by the plan. Types of defined contribu- 2. Your accrued retirement benefits at the be-tion plans include profit-sharing plans, stock bo- Situations in Which You Are Not ginning of the year will not provide morenus plans, and money purchase pension plans. than $1,800 per year at retirement.Covered
Unless you are covered under another employerDefined benefit plan. If you are eligible to
plan, you are not covered by an employer plan ifparticipate in your employer's defined benefit Limit If Covered by Employer Planyou are in one of the situations described below.plan for the plan year that ends within your tax
year, you are covered by the plan. This rule If either you or your spouse was covered by anSocial security or railroad retirement. Cov-applies even if you: employer retirement plan, you may be entitled toerage under social security or railroad retire-
only a partial (reduced) deduction or no deduc-ment is not coverage under an employer• Declined to participate in the plan, tion at all, depending on your income and yourretirement plan.• Did not make a required contribution, or filing status.
Benefits from a previous employer's plan. Your deduction begins to decrease (phase• Did not perform the minimum service re- If you receive retirement benefits from a previ- out) when your income rises above a certainquired to accrue a benefit for the year. ous employer's plan, you are not covered by that amount and is eliminated altogether when it
plan. reaches a higher amount. These amounts varyA defined benefit plan is any plan that is not a depending on your filing status.defined contribution plan. Defined benefit plans Reservists. If the only reason you participate To determine if your deduction is subject toinclude pension plans and annuity plans. in a plan is because you are a member of a phaseout, you must determine your modified
adjusted gross income (AGI) and your filing sta-Table 17-2. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are NOT tus. See Filing status  and Modified adjusted
Covered by Retirement Plan at Work gross income (AGI), later. Then use Table 17-1
or 17-2 to determine if the phaseout applies.If you are not covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine
if your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction. Social security recipients. Instead of using
Table 17-1 or Table 17-2, use the worksheets in
Appendix B of Publication 590 if, for the year, allIF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take...
of the following apply.
single, any amount a full deduction. • You received social security benefits.head of household, or
qualifying widow(er) • You received taxable compensation.
• Contributions were made to your tradi-married filing jointly or any amount a full deduction.
tional IRA.separately with a spouse who is
not covered by a plan at work • You or your spouse was covered by an
employer retirement plan.$159,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly with a
spouse who is covered by a plan Use those worksheets to figure your IRA deduc-more than $159,000 a partial deduction.at work tion, your nondeductible contribution, and thebut less than $169,000 taxable portion, if any, of your social security
benefits.$169,000 or more no deduction.
Deduction phaseout. If you were covered byless than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing separately with a
an employer retirement plan and you did notspouse who is covered by a plan $10,000 or more no deduction. receive any social security retirement benefits,at work2
your IRA deduction may be reduced or elimi-
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). nated depending on your filing status and modi-2You are entitled to the full deduction if you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year. fied AGI as shown in Table 17-1.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 121

Page 124 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Also, the instructions for Form 1040 and FormWorksheet 17-1. Figuring Your
1040A include similar worksheets that you mayModified AGI Keep for Your Records
 be able to use instead.
Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for traditional IRA purposes.
Reporting Deductible1. Enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) from Form 1040, line 38; or ContributionsForm 1040A, line 22 ............................... . 1.
If you file Form 1040, enter your IRA deduction2. Enter any traditional IRA deduction from Form 1040, line 32; or
on line 32 of that form. If you file Form 1040A,Form 1040A, line 17 ............................... . 2. enter your IRA deduction on line 17. You cannot
3. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, line 33; deduct IRA contributions on Form 1040EZ.
or Form 1040A, line 18 ............................. . 3.
4. Enter any tuition and fees deduction from Form 1040, line 34; or Nondeductible
Form 1040A, line 19 ............................... . 4. Contributions
5. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from Form 1040,
Although your deduction for IRA contributionsline 35 ........................................ . 5.
may be reduced or eliminated, contributions can
6. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from be made to your IRA up to the general limit or, if
Form 2555, line 45; or Form 2555-EZ, line 18 .............. . 6. it applies, the spousal IRA limit. The difference
between your total permitted contributions and7. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 ... . 7. your IRA deduction, if any, is your nondeductible
contribution.8. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line 14 8.
9. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from Form Example. Mike is 28 years old and single. In
8839, line 30 .................................... . 9. 2008, he was covered by a retirement plan at
work. His salary was $57,312. His modified AGI10. Add lines 1 through 9. This is your Modified AGI for traditional IRA was $65,000. Mike made a $5,000 IRA contribu-purposes ...................................... . 10.  tion for 2008. Because he was covered by a
retirement plan and his modified AGI was over
$63,000, he cannot deduct his $5,000 IRA con-
tribution. He must designate this contribution asIf your spouse is covered. If you are not • Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter-
a nondeductible contribution by reporting it onest shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of In-covered by an employer retirement plan, but
Form 8606, as explained next.terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savingsyour spouse is, and you did not receive any
Bonds Issued After 1989 (For Filers Withsocial security benefits, your IRA deduction may Form 8606. To designate contributions asQualified Higher Education Expenses).be reduced or eliminated entirely depending on nondeductible, you must file Form 8606.your filing status and modified AGI as shown in You do not have to designate a contribution• Exclusion of employer-provided adoptionTable 17-2. as nondeductible until you file your tax return.benefits shown on Form 8839, Qualified
When you file, you can even designate other-Adoption Expenses.
wise deductible contributions as nondeductible.This is your modified AGI.Filing status. Your filing status depends pri- You must file Form 8606 to report nonde-
marily on your marital status. For this purpose, ductible contributions even if you do not have toForm 1040A. If you file Form 1040A,you need to know if your filing status is single or file a tax return for the year.refigure the amount on the page 1 ªadjustedhead of household, married filing jointly or quali- gross incomeº line without taking into account A Form 8606 is not used for the yearfying widow(er), or married filing separately. If any of the following amounts. that you make a rollover from a quali-you need more information on filing status, see fied retirement plan to a traditional IRA• IRA deduction.
CAUTION
!chapter 2. and the rollover includes nontaxable amounts.• Student loan interest deduction.Lived apart from spouse. If you did not live In those situations, a Form 8606 is completed for
with your spouse at any time during the year and the year you take a distribution from that IRA.• Tuition and fees deduction.
you file a separate return, your filing status, for See Form 8606  under Distributions Fully or• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter-this purpose, is single. Partly Taxable, later.est shown on Form 8815.
Failure to report nondeductible contribu-This is your modified AGI.Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). How tions. If you do not report nondeductible con-
Both contributions for 2008 and distribu-you figure your modified AGI depends on tributions, all of the contributions to your
tions in 2008. If all three of the following apply,whether you are filing Form 1040 or Form traditional IRA will be treated as deductible. All
any IRA distributions you received in 2008 may1040A. If you made contributions to your IRA for distributions from your IRA will be taxed unless
be partly tax free and partly taxable.2008 and received a distribution from your IRA you can show, with satisfactory evidence, that
in 2008, see Publication 590. nondeductible contributions were made.• You received distributions in 2008 from
one or more traditional IRAs.Do not assume that your modified AGI Penalty for overstatement. If you over-
is the same as your compensation. state the amount of nondeductible contributions• You made contributions to a traditionalYour modified AGI may include income on your Form 8606 for any tax year, you must
CAUTION
!IRA for 2008.in addition to your compensation (discussed pay a penalty of $100 for each overstatement,
• Some of those contributions may be non-earlier), such as interest, dividends, and income unless it was due to reasonable cause.
deductible contributions.from IRA distributions. Penalty for failure to file Form 8606. You
If this is your situation, you must figure the tax- will have to pay a $50 penalty if you do not file aForm 1040. If you file Form 1040, refigure able part of the traditional IRA distribution before required Form 8606, unless you can prove thatthe amount on the page 1 ªadjusted gross in- you can figure your modified AGI. To do this, you the failure was due to reasonable cause.comeº line without taking into account any of the can use Worksheet 1-5, Figuring the Taxablefollowing amounts. Tax on earnings on nondeductible contribu-Part of Your IRA Distribution, in Publication 590.
tions. As long as contributions are within the• IRA deduction. If at least one of the above does not apply, contribution limits, none of the earnings or gains• Student loan interest deduction. figure your modified AGI using Worksheet 17-1 on contributions (deductible or nondeductible)above. will be taxed until they are distributed. See When• Tuition and fees deduction.
Can You Withdraw or Use IRA Assets, later.How to figure your reduced IRA deduction.• Domestic production activities deduction.
You can figure your reduced IRA deduction for Cost basis. You will have a cost basis in your• Foreign earned income exclusion. either Form 1040 or Form 1040A by using the traditional IRA if you made any nondeductible
worksheets in chapter 1 of Publication 590.• Foreign housing exclusion or deduction. contributions. Your cost basis is the sum of the
Page 122 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 125 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nondeductible contributions to your IRA minus your income). Qualified plans may, but are notCan You Move Retirement required to, accept such rollovers.any withdrawals or distributions of nondeduct-
Plan Assets?ible contributions. Time limit for making a rollover contribution.
You can transfer, tax free, assets (money or You generally must make the rollover contribu-
Inherited IRAs property) from other retirement plans (including tion by the 60th day after the day you receive the
traditional IRAs) to a traditional IRA. You can distribution from your traditional IRA or your em-If you inherit a traditional IRA, you are called a make the following kinds of transfers. ployer's plan.beneficiary. A beneficiary can be any person or  The IRS may waive the 60-day requirement• Transfers from one trustee to another.entity the owner chooses to receive the benefits where the failure to do so would be against
of the IRA after he or she dies. Beneficiaries of a • Rollovers. equity or good conscience, such as in the event
traditional IRA must include in their gross in- of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond• Transfers incident to a divorce. your reasonable control. For more information,come any taxable distributions they receive.
see Publication 590.
Transfers to Roth IRAs. Under certain condi- Extension of rollover period. If an amountInherited from spouse. If you inherit a tradi- tions, you can move assets from a traditional distributed to you from a traditional IRA or ational IRA from your spouse, you generally have IRA or from a designated Roth account to a Roth qualified employer retirement plan is a frozenthe following three choices. IRA. Beginning in 2008, you can also move deposit at any time during the 60-day periodassets from a qualified retirement plan to a Roth allowed for a rollover, special rules extend the1. Treat it as your own IRA by designating IRA. See Can You Move Amounts Into a Roth rollover period. For more information, see Publi-yourself as the account owner. IRA under Roth IRAs, later. cation 590.2. Treat it as your own by rolling it over into
your traditional IRA, or to the extent it is More information. For more information onTrustee-to-Trustee Transfertaxable, into a: rollovers, see Publication 590.
A transfer of funds in your traditional IRA froma. Qualified employer plan, one trustee directly to another, either at your Rollover From One IRA Intob. Qualified employee annuity plan (sec- request or at the trustee's request, is not a rollo-
tion 403(a) plan), Anotherver. Because there is no distribution to you, the
transfer is tax free. Because it is not a rollover, itc. Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of theis not affected by the 1-year waiting period re-403(b) plan), or assets from one traditional IRA if you reinvestquired between rollovers, discussed later under them within 60 days in the same or anotherd. Deferred compensation plan of a state Rollover From One IRA Into Another . For infor- traditional IRA. Because this is a rollover, youor local government (section 457 plan). mation about direct transfers to IRAs from retire- cannot deduct the amount that you reinvest in anment plans other than IRAs, see Publication IRA.3. Treat yourself as the beneficiary rather 590.
than treating the IRA as your own. Waiting period between rollovers. Gener-
ally, if you make a tax-free rollover of any part ofTreating it as your own. You will be con- Rollovers a distribution from a traditional IRA, you cannot,sidered to have chosen to treat the IRA as your within a 1-year period, make a tax-free rolloverGenerally, a rollover is a tax-free distribution toown if: of any later distribution from that same IRA. Youyou of cash or other assets from one retirement also cannot make a tax-free rollover of any• Contributions (including rollover contribu- plan that you contribute (roll over) to another amount distributed, within the same 1-year pe-tions) are made to the inherited IRA, or retirement plan. The contribution to the second riod, from the IRA into which you made theretirement plan is called a ªrollover contribution.º• You do not take the required minimum dis- tax-free rollover.
tribution for a year as a beneficiary of the The 1-year period begins on the date youNote. An amount rolled over tax free fromIRA. receive the IRA distribution, not on the date youone retirement plan to another is generally in- roll it over into an IRA.cludible in income when it is distributed from theYou will only be considered to have chosen to
second plan.treat the IRA as your own if: Example. You have two traditional IRAs,
• You are the sole beneficiary of the IRA, IRA-1 and IRA-2. You make a tax-free rollover ofKinds of rollovers to a traditional IRA. You a distribution from IRA-1 into a new traditionaland can roll over amounts from the following plans IRA (IRA-3). You cannot, within 1 year of theinto a traditional IRA:• You have an unlimited right to withdraw distribution from IRA-1, make a tax-free rolloveramounts from it. • A traditional IRA, of any distribution from either IRA-1 or IRA-3 into
another traditional IRA.• An employer's qualified retirement plan forHowever, if you receive a distribution from However, the rollover from IRA-1 into IRA-3its employees,your deceased spouse's IRA, you can roll that does not prevent you from making a tax-free
distribution over into your own IRA within the • A deferred compensation plan of a state or rollover from IRA-2 into any other traditional
60-day time limit, as long as the distribution is local government (section 457 plan), or IRA. This is because you have not, within the
not a required distribution, even if you are not last year, rolled over, tax free, any distribution• A tax-sheltered annuity plan (sectionthe sole beneficiary of your deceased spouse's from IRA-2 or made a tax-free rollover into403(b) plan). IRA-2.IRA.
Exception. There is an exception to the ruleTreatment of rollovers. You cannot deduct a that amounts rolled over tax free into an IRAInherited from someone other than spouse. rollover contribution, but you must report the cannot be rolled over tax free again within theIf you inherit a traditional IRA from anyone other rollover distribution on your tax return as dis- 1-year period beginning on the date of the origi-than your deceased spouse, you cannot treat cussed later under Reporting rollovers from nal distribution. The exception applies to a distri-IRAs and under Reporting rollovers from em-the inherited IRA as your own. This means that bution which meets all three of the followingployer plans.you cannot make any contributions to the IRA. It requirements.also means you cannot roll over any amounts
Kinds of rollovers from a traditional IRA.into or out of the inherited IRA. However, you 1. It is made from a failed financial institutionYou may be able to roll over, tax free, a distribu-can make a trustee-to-trustee transfer as long by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora-tion from your traditional IRA into a qualifiedas the IRA into which amounts are being moved tion (FDIC) as receiver for the institution.plan. These plans include the federal Thrift Sav-is set up and maintained in the name of the 2. It was not initiated by either the custodialings Fund (for federal employees), deferreddeceased IRA owner for the benefit of you as institution or the depositor.compensation plans of state or local govern-beneficiary. ments (section 457 plans), and tax-sheltered 3. It was made because:For more information, see the discussion of annuity plans (section 403(b) plans). The part of
inherited IRAs  under Rollover From One IRA the distribution that you can roll over is the part a. The custodial institution is insolvent,
Into Another, later. that would otherwise be taxable (includible in and
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 123

Page 126 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. The receiver is unable to find a buyer a. Your lifetime or life expectancy, • You are not a married individual filing a
for the institution. separate return.b. The lifetimes or life expectancies of you
and your beneficiary, or
Partial rollovers. If you withdraw assets from c. A period of 10 years or more. Note. If you did not live with your spouse ata traditional IRA, you can roll over part of the any time during the year and you file a separatewithdrawal tax free and keep the rest of it. The 4. Corrective distributions of excess contribu- return, your filing status, for this purpose, isamount you keep will generally be taxable (ex- tions or excess deferrals, and any income single.cept for the part that is a return of nondeductible allocable to the excess, or of excess an-contributions). The amount you keep may be Required distributions. You cannot convertnual additions and any allocable gains.subject to the 10% additional tax on early distri- amounts that must be distributed from your5. A loan treated as a distribution because itbutions, discussed later under What Acts Result traditional IRA for a particular year (including thedoes not satisfy certain requirements ei-in Penalties or Additional Taxes. calendar year in which you reach age 70 1/2)ther when made or later (such as upon under the required distribution rules (discussedRequired distributions. Amounts that must default), unless the participant's accrued later).be distributed during a particular year under the benefits are reduced (offset) to repay therequired distribution rules (discussed later) are loan. Income. You must include in your gross in-not eligible for rollover treatment.
come distributions from a traditional IRA that6. Dividends on employer securities.Inherited IRAs. If you inherit a traditional IRA you would have had to include in income if you7. The cost of life insurance coverage.from your spouse, you generally can roll it over, had not converted them into a Roth IRA. You door you can choose to make the inherited IRA not include in gross income any part of a distri-Any nontaxable amounts that you rollyour own. See Treating it as your own, earlier. bution from a traditional IRA that is a return ofover into your traditional IRA become your basis, as discussed later.Not inherited from spouse. If you inherit a part of your basis (cost) in your IRAs.
TIP If you must include any amount in your grosstraditional IRA from someone other than your To recover your basis when you take distribu- income, you may have to increase your with-spouse, you cannot roll it over or allow it to tions from your IRA, you must complete Form holding or make estimated tax payments. Seereceive a rollover contribution. You must with- 8606 for the year of the distribution. See Form chapter 4.draw the IRA assets within a certain period. For 8606 under Distributions Fully or Partly Taxable,more information, see Publication 590. later.
Reporting rollovers from IRAs. Report any Recharacterizationsrollover from one traditional IRA to the same or Rollover by nonspouse beneficiary. A directanother traditional IRA on lines 15a and 15b, You may be able to treat a contribution made totransfer from a deceased employee's qualifiedForm 1040, or lines 11a and 11b, Form 1040A. one type of IRA as having been made to apension, profit-sharing or stock bonus plan, an-Enter the total amount of the distribution on different type of IRA. This is called recharacter-nuity plan, tax-sheltered annuity (sectionForm 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a. If izing the contribution. More detailed information403(b)) plan, or governmental deferred compen-the total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or is in Publication 590.sation (section 457) plan to an IRA set up toForm 1040A, line 11a, was rolled over, enter receive the distribution on your behalf can bezero on Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, How to recharacterize a contribution. Totreated as an eligible rollover distribution if youline 11b. If the total distribution was not rolled recharacterize a contribution, you generallyare the designated beneficiary of the plan andover, enter the taxable portion of the part that must have the contribution transferred from thenot the employee's spouse. The IRA is treatedwas not rolled over on Form 1040, line 15b, or first IRA (the one to which it was made) to theas an inherited IRA. For more information aboutForm 1040A, line 11b. Put ªRolloverº next to second IRA in a trustee-to-trustee transfer. If theinherited IRAs, see Inherited IRAs, earlier.Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b. transfer is made by the due date (including ex-
See the forms instructions. tensions) for your tax return for the year duringReporting rollovers from employer plans.If you rolled over the distribution into a quali- which the contribution was made, you can electEnter the total distribution (before income tax orfied plan (other than an IRA) or you make the to treat the contribution as having been originallyother deductions were withheld) on Form 1040,rollover in 2009, attach a statement explaining made to the second IRA instead of to the firstline 16a, or Form 1040A, line 12a. This amountwhat you did. IRA. If you recharacterize your contribution, youshould be shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R. From must do all three of the following.this amount, subtract any contributions (usually
shown in box 5 of Form 1099-R) that were tax- • Include in the transfer any net income allo-Rollover From Employer's Plan able to you when made. From that result, sub- cable to the contribution. If there was aInto an IRA tract the amount that was rolled over either loss, the net income you must transfer
directly or within 60 days of receiving the distri- may be a negative amount.You can roll over into a traditional IRA all or part bution. Enter the remaining amount, even ifof an eligible rollover distribution you receive • Report the recharacterization on your taxzero, on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A,from your (or your deceased spouse's): return for the year during which the contri-line 12b. Also, enter ``Rollover'' next to Form bution was made.• Employer's qualified pension, 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b.profit-sharing or stock bonus plan, • Treat the contribution as having been
made to the second IRA on the date that it• Annuity plan, was actually made to the first IRA.Transfers Incident to Divorce• Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b)
plan), or If an interest in a traditional IRA is transferred No deduction allowed. You cannot deductfrom your spouse or former spouse to you by a• Governmental deferred compensation the contribution to the first IRA. Any net incomedivorce or separate maintenance decree or aplan (section 457 plan). you transfer with the recharacterized contribu-written document related to such a decree, the tion is treated as earned in the second IRA.interest in the IRA, starting from the date of theA qualified plan is one that meets the require- transfer, is treated as your IRA. The transfer is Required notifications. To recharacterizements of the Internal Revenue Code. tax free. For detailed information, see Publica- a contribution, you must notify both the trustee of
Eligible rollover distribution. Generally, an tion 590. the first IRA (the one to which the contribution
eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of was actually made) and the trustee of the sec-
all or part of the balance to your credit in a ond IRA (the one to which the contribution is
qualified retirement plan except the following. being moved) that you have elected to treat theConverting From Any Traditional
contribution as having been made to the secondIRA to a Roth IRA1. A required minimum distribution (explained IRA rather than the first. You must make thelater under When Must You Withdraw IRA You can convert amounts from a traditional IRA notifications by the date of the transfer. Only oneAssets? (Required Minimum Distributions). into a Roth IRA if, for the tax year you make the notification is required if both IRAs are main-
withdrawal from the traditional IRA, both of the tained by the same trustee. The notification(s)2. Hardship distributions.
must include all of the following information.following requirements are met.3. Any of a series of substantially equal peri-
• The type and amount of the contribution to• Your modified AGI (explained later underodic distributions paid at least once a year
the first IRA that is to be recharacterized.Roth IRAs) is not more than $100,000.over:
Page 124 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 127 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The date on which the contribution was Beneficiaries. If you are the beneficiary of aTax-Free Withdrawals of Economic
made to the first IRA and the year for decedent's traditional IRA, the requirements forStimulus Paymentswhich it was made. distributions from that IRA generally depend on
whether the IRA owner died before or after theIf you received an economic stimulus payment• A direction to the trustee of the first IRA to required beginning date for distributions.in 2008 that was directly deposited to your tradi-transfer in a trustee-to-trustee transfer the tional IRA, you can choose to treat the paymentamount of the contribution and any net More information. For more information, in-either as a 2008 contribution (subject to tradi-income (or loss) allocable to the contribu- cluding how to figure your minimum requiredtional IRA contribution and deduction limits), ortion to the trustee of the second IRA. distribution each year and how to figure youryou may choose to withdraw all or part of the required distribution if you are a beneficiary of a• The name of the trustee of the first IRA payment. If you choose to withdraw the pay- decedent's IRA, see Publication 590.and the name of the trustee of the second ment, or a portion of the payment, that portion is
IRA. treated as neither contributed to nor distributed
from your IRA. The amount withdrawn is not Are Distributions Taxable?• Any additional information needed to included in your income and is not subject tomake the transfer. In general, distributions from a traditional IRAadditional tax or penalty. The withdrawal must
are taxable in the year you receive them.be made by the due date for filing your 2008 tax
Reporting a recharacterization. If you elect return, including extensions. For most people Exceptions. Exceptions to distributions fromto recharacterize a contribution to one IRA as a that would be April 15, 2009. traditional IRAs being taxable in the year youcontribution to another IRA, you must report the If you do withdraw all or part of the payment receive them are:recharacterization on your tax return as directed from your IRA, you will receive a Form 1099-R
by Form 8606 and its instructions. You must showing the amount of the distribution. Include • Rollovers,
treat the contribution as having been made to the distribution on Form 1040, line 16a; or Form • Qualified charitable distributions, dis-the second IRA. 1040A, line 12a. Do not make an entry on Form cussed later,1040, line 16b; or Form 1040A, line 12b, but
• Tax-free withdrawals of contributions, dis-enter ªESPº in the space next to the line. ForWhen Can You Withdraw cussed earlier, andmore information see the instructions for your
or Use IRA Assets? tax return. • The return of nondeductible contributions,
discussed later under Distributions Fully orThere are rules limiting use of your IRA assets
Partly TaxableWhen Must You Withdrawand distributions from it. Violation of the rules
generally results in additional taxes in the year of IRA Assets? (Requiredviolation. See What Acts Result in Penalties or Although a conversion of a traditionalMinimum Distributions)Additional Taxes, later. IRA is considered a rollover for Roth
IRA purposes, it is not an exception toContributions returned before the due date
CAUTION
! You cannot keep funds in a traditional IRA indef- the rule that distributions from a traditional IRAof return. If you made IRA contributions in initely. Eventually they must be distributed. If are taxable in the year you receive them. Con-2008, you can withdraw them tax free by the due there are no distributions, or if the distributions version distributions are includible in your grossdate of your return. If you have an extension of are not large enough, you may have to pay a income subject to this rule and the special rulestime to file your return, you can withdraw them 50% excise tax on the amount not distributed as for conversions explained in Publication 590.tax free by the extended due date. You can do required. See Excess Accumulations (Insuffi-
this if, for each contribution you withdraw, both cient Distributions), later. The requirements for Qualified charitable distributions. A quali-of the following conditions apply. distributing IRA funds differ depending on fied charitable distribution (QCD) is a nontax-whether you are the IRA owner or the benefi-• You did not take a deduction for the contri- able distribution made directly by the trustee ofciary of a decedent's IRA.bution. your IRA (other than a SEP or SIMPLE IRA) to
an organization eligible to receive tax-deductibleRequired minimum distribution. The• You withdraw any interest or other income contributions. You must have been at least ageamount that must be distributed each year isearned on the contribution. You can take 701/2 when the distribution was made. Your totalreferred to as the required minimum distribution.into account any loss on the contribution QCDs for the year cannot be more thanwhile it was in the IRA when calculating Required distributions not eligible for rollo- $100,000. If you file a joint return, your spousethe amount that must be withdrawn. If ver. Amounts that must be distributed (re- can also have a QCD of up to $100,000. How-there was a loss, the net income earned quired minimum distributions) during a particular ever, the amount of the QCD is limited to theon the contribution may be a negative year are not eligible for rollover treatment. amount of the distribution that would otherwiseamount. be included in income. If your IRA includes non-IRA owners. If you are the owner of a tradi-
deductible contributions, the distribution is firsttional IRA, you must start receiving distributions
considered to be paid out of otherwise taxablefrom your IRA by April 1 of the year following theNote. To calculate the amount you must income. For more information see Publicationyear in which you reach age 701/2. April 1 of thewithdraw, see Publication 590. 590.year following the year in which you reach ageEarnings includible in income. You must 701/2 is referred to as the required beginning You cannot claim a charitable contribu-include in income any earnings on the contribu- date. tion deduction for any QCD not in-tions you withdraw. Include the earnings in in- cluded in your income.
CAUTION
!come for the year in which you made the Distributions by the required beginning date.
contributions, not in the year in which you with- You must receive at least a minimum amount for
draw them. Ordinary income. Distributions from tradi-each year starting with the year you reach age
tional IRAs that you include in income are taxed701/2 (your 701/2 year). If you do not (or did not)Generally, except for any part of a with- as ordinary income.receive that minimum amount in your 701/2 year,drawal that is a return of nondeductible then you must receive distributions for your 701/2
contributions (basis), any withdrawal of No special treatment. In figuring your tax,
CAUTION
!year by April 1 of the next year.your contributions after the due date (or ex- you cannot use the 10-year tax option or capitalIf an IRA owner dies after reaching age 701/2,tended due date) of your return will be treated as gain treatment that applies to lump-sum distribu-but before April 1 of the next year, no minimuma taxable distribution. Excess contributions can tions from qualified employer plans.distribution is required because death occurredalso be recovered tax free as discussed under before the required beginning date.What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional
Taxes, later. Even if you begin receiving distribu- Distributions Fully or Partly
tions before you attain age 70 1/2, you TaxableEarly distributions tax. The 10% additional must begin calculating and receiving
CAUTION
!
tax on distributions made before you reach age required minimum distributions by your required Distributions from your traditional IRA may be591/2 does not apply to these tax-free withdraw- beginning date. fully or partly taxable, depending on whetherals of your contributions. However, the distribu- your IRA includes any nondeductible contribu-tion of interest or other income must be reported Distributions after the required beginning tions.on Form 5329 and, unless the distribution quali- date. The required minimum distribution for
fies as an exception to the age 59 1/2 rule, it will any year after the year you turn 70 1/2 must be Fully taxable. If only deductible contributions
be subject to this tax. made by December 31 of that later year. were made to your traditional IRA (or IRAs, if
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 125

Page 128 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you have more than one), you have no basis in There are additions to the regular tax for • Antiques,
your IRA. Because you have no basis in your using your IRA funds in prohibited transactions. • Metals,IRA, any distributions are fully taxable when There are also additional taxes for the following
• Gems,received. See Reporting taxable distributions on activities.
your return, later. • Stamps,• Investing in collectibles.
Partly taxable. If you made nondeductible • Coins,• Making excess contributions.contributions or rolled over any after-tax
• Alcoholic beverages, and• Taking early distributions.amounts to any of your traditional IRAs, you
have a cost basis (investment in the contract) • Certain other tangible personal property.• Allowing excess amounts to accumulateequal to the amount of those contributions. (failing to take required distributions).These nondeductible contributions are not taxed Exception. Your IRA can invest in one,
when they are distributed to you. They are a one-half, one-quarter, or one-tenth ounce U.S.There are penalties for overstating thereturn of your investment in your IRA. gold coins, or one-ounce silver coins minted byamount of nondeductible contributions and forOnly the part of the distribution that repre- the Treasury Department. It can also invest infailure to file a Form 8606, if required.sents nondeductible contributions and rolled certain platinum coins and certain gold, silver,
over after-tax amounts (your cost basis) is tax palladium, and platinum bullion.
free. If nondeductible contributions have been Prohibited Transactionsmade or after-tax amounts have been rolled
over to your IRA, distributions consist partly of Generally, a prohibited transaction is any im- Excess Contributionsnondeductible contributions (basis) and partly of proper use of your traditional IRA by you, your
deductible contributions, earnings, and gains (if Generally, an excess contribution is the amountbeneficiary, or any disqualified person.
there are any). Until all of your basis has been contributed to your traditional IRA(s) for the yearDisqualified persons include your fiduciary
distributed, each distribution is partly nontaxable that is more than the smaller of the followingand members of your family (spouse, ancestor,
and partly taxable. amounts.lineal descendent, and any spouse of a lineal
descendent). • The maximum deductible amount for theForm 8606. You must complete Form 8606 The following are examples of prohibited year. For 2008, this is $5,000 ($6,000 ifand attach it to your return if you receive a transactions with a traditional IRA. you are 50 or older, or $8,000 for certaindistribution from a traditional IRA and have ever
employer bankruptcies).• Borrowing money from it.made nondeductible contributions or rolled over
after-tax amounts to any of your traditional IRAs. • Your taxable compensation for the year.• Selling property to it.Using the form, you will figure the nontaxable
• Receiving unreasonable compensation fordistributions for 2008 and your total IRA basis for
Tax on excess contributions. In general, ifmanaging it.2008 and earlier years.
the excess contributions for a year are not with-• Using it as security for a loan. drawn by the date your return for the year is dueNote. If you are required to file Form 8606,
• Buying property for personal use (present (including extensions), you are subject to a 6%but you are not required to file an income tax
or future) with IRA funds. tax. You must pay the 6% tax each year onreturn, you still must file Form 8606. Send it to
excess amounts that remain in your traditionalthe IRS at the time and place you would other-
IRA at the end of your tax year. The tax cannotwise file an income tax return. Effect on an IRA account. Generally, if you or be more than 6% of the combined value of allyour beneficiary engages in a prohibited trans-Distributions reported on Form 1099-R. If your IRAs as of the end of your tax year.action in connection with your traditional IRAyou receive a distribution from your traditional
account at any time during the year, the account Excess contributions withdrawn by due dateIRA, you will receive Form 1099-R, Distributions
stops being an IRA as of the first day of that of return. You will not have to pay the 6% tax ifFrom Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or
year. you withdraw an excess contribution made dur-Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-
ing a tax year and you also withdraw interest ortracts, etc., or a similar statement. IRA distribu- Effect on you or your beneficiary. If your other income earned on the excess contribution.tions are shown in boxes 1 and 2a of Form account stops being an IRA because you or your You must complete your withdrawal by the date1099-R. A number or letter code in box 7 tells beneficiary engaged in a prohibited transaction, your tax return for that year is due, includingyou what type of distribution you received from the account is treated as distributing all its as- extensions.your IRA. sets to you at their fair market values on the first
day of the year. If the total of those values is How to treat withdrawn contributions. DoWithholding. Federal income tax is withheld
more than your basis in the IRA, you will have a not include in your gross income an excessfrom distributions from traditional IRAs unless
taxable gain that is includible in your income. For contribution that you withdraw from your tradi-you choose not to have tax withheld. See chap-
information on figuring your gain and reporting it tional IRA before your tax return is due if bothter 4.
in income, see Are Distributions Taxable,  ear- the following conditions are met.IRA distributions delivered outside the lier. The distribution may be subject to additional • No deduction was allowed for the excessUnited States. In general, if you are a U.S. taxes or penalties. contribution.citizen or resident alien and your home address
Taxes on prohibited transactions. If some-is outside the United States or its possessions, • You withdraw the interest or other incomeone other than the owner or beneficiary of ayou cannot choose exemption from withholding earned on the excess contribution.traditional IRA engages in a prohibited transac-on distributions from your traditional IRA.
You can take into account any loss on the contri-tion, that person may be liable for certain taxes.
Reporting taxable distributions on your re- bution while it was in the IRA when calculatingIn general, there is a 15% tax on the amount of
turn. Report fully taxable distributions, includ- the amount that must be withdrawn. If there wasthe prohibited transaction and a 100% additional
ing early distributions on Form 1040, line 15b, or a loss, the net income you must withdraw maytax if the transaction is not corrected.
Form 1040A, line 11b (no entry is required on be a negative amount.More information. For more information onForm 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a). If How to treat withdrawn interest or otherprohibited transactions, see Publication 590.only part of the distribution is taxable, enter the income. You must include in your gross in-total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or Form come the interest or other income that was1040A, line 11a, and the taxable part on Form earned on the excess contribution. Report it onInvestment in Collectibles1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b. You your return for the year in which the excesscannot report distributions on Form 1040EZ. contribution was made. Your withdrawal of inter-If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles, the
est or other income may be subject to an addi-amount invested is considered distributed to you
What Acts Result in tional 10% tax on early distributions, discussedin the year invested. You may have to pay the
later.10% additional tax on early distributions, dis-Penalties or Additional cussed later. Excess contributions withdrawn after dueTaxes?
date of return. In general, you must include allCollectibles. These include:
The tax advantages of using traditional IRAs for distributions (withdrawals) from your traditional• Artworks,retirement savings can be offset by additional IRA in your gross income. However, if the follow-
taxes and penalties if you do not follow the rules. • Rugs, ing conditions are met, you can withdraw excess
Page 126 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 129 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
contributions from your IRA and not include the • The distributions are not more than the insurance company that is in state insurer delin-
cost of your medical insurance. quency proceedings, the 50% excise tax doesamount withdrawn in your gross income.
not apply if the conditions and requirements of• You are disabled.• Total contributions (other than rollover Revenue Procedure 92-10 are satisfied.contributions) for 2008 to your IRA were • You are the beneficiary of a deceased IRAnot more than $5,000 ($6,000 if you are More information. For more information onowner.50 or older, or $8,000 for certain employer excess accumulations, see Publication 590.• You are receiving distributions in the formbankruptcies).
of an annuity.• You did not take a deduction for the ex-
Reporting Additional Taxes• The distributions are not more than yourcess contribution being withdrawn.
qualified higher education expenses.The withdrawal can take place at any time, even Generally, you must use Form 5329 to report the
• You use the distributions to buy, build, orafter the due date, including extensions, for filing tax on excess contributions, early distributions,
rebuild a first home.your tax return for the year. and excess accumulations. If you must file Form
5329, you cannot use Form 1040A or Form• The distribution is due to an IRS levy ofExcess contribution deducted in an earlier 1040EZ.the qualified plan.year. If you deducted an excess contribution in
• The distribution is a qualified reservist dis- Filing a tax return. If you must file an individ-an earlier year for which the total contributions
tribution. ual income tax return, complete Form 5329 andwere not more than the maximum deductible
attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the total addi-amount for that year ($2,000 for 2001 and earlier Most of these exceptions are explained in Publi- tional taxes due on Form 1040, line 59.years, $3,000 for 2002 through 2004 ($3,500 if cation 590.you were age 50 or older), $4,000 for 2005
Not filing a tax return. If you do not have to($4,500 if you were age 50 or older), $4,000 for
file a tax return but do have to pay one of theNote. Distributions that are timely and prop-2006 or 2007 ($5,000 if you were age 50 or
additional taxes mentioned earlier, file the com-erly rolled over, as discussed earlier, are notolder)), you can still remove the excess from
pleted Form 5329 with the IRS at the time andsubject to either regular income tax or the 10%your traditional IRA and not include it in your
place you would have filed your Form 1040. Beadditional tax. Certain withdrawals of excessgross income. To do this, file Form 1040X for
sure to include your address on page 1 and yourcontributions after the due date of your returnthat year and do not deduct the excess contribu-
signature and date on page 2. Enclose, but doare also tax free and therefore not subject to thetion on the amended return. Generally, you can
not attach, a check or money order payable to10% additional tax. (See Excess contributionsfile an amended return within 3 years after you
the United States Treasury for the tax you owe,withdrawn after due date of return, earlier.) Thisfiled your return, or 2 years from the time the tax
as shown on Form 5329. Enter your social se-also applies to transfers incident to divorce, aswas paid, whichever is later.
curity number and ª2008 Form 5329º on yourdiscussed earlier.
check or money order.Excess due to incorrect rollover information. Receivership distributions. Early distribu-
If an excess contribution in your traditional IRA is tions (with or without your consent) from savings Form 5329 not required. You do not have tothe result of a rollover and the excess occurred institutions placed in receivership are subject to use Form 5329 if either of the following situa-because the information the plan was required this tax unless one of the exceptions listed ear- tions exist.to give you was incorrect, you can withdraw the lier applies. This is true even if the distribution is • Distribution code 1 (early distribution) isexcess contribution. The limits mentioned above from a receiver that is a state agency. correctly shown in box 7 of Form 1099-R.are increased by the amount of the excess that
Additional 10% tax. The additional tax on If you do not owe any other additional taxis due to the incorrect information. You will have
early distributions is 10% of the amount of the on a distribution, multiply the taxable partto amend your return for the year in which the
early distribution that you must include in your of the early distribution by 10% and enterexcess occurred to correct the reporting of the
gross income. This tax is in addition to any the result on Form 1040, line 59. Put ªNoºrollover amounts in that year. Do not include in
regular income tax resulting from including the to the left of the line to indicate that you doyour gross income the part of the excess contri-
distribution in income. not have to file Form 5329. However, ifbution caused by the incorrect information.
you owe this tax and also owe any otherNondeductible contributions. The tax on additional tax on a distribution, do notearly distributions does not apply to the part of a enter this 10% additional tax directly onEarly Distributions distribution that represents a return of your non- your Form 1040. You must file Form 5329deductible contributions (basis).You must include early distributions of taxable to report your additional taxes. 
More information. For more information onamounts from your traditional IRA in your gross • If you rolled over part or all of a distributionearly distributions, see Publication 590.income. Early distributions are also subject to an from a qualified retirement plan, the partadditional 10% tax. See the discussion of Form rolled over is not subject to the tax on5329 under Reporting Additional Taxes, later, to early distributions. figure and report the tax. Excess Accumulations
(Insufficient Distributions)
Early distributions defined. Early distribu-
You cannot keep amounts in your traditional IRAtions generally are amounts distributed from
indefinitely. Generally, you must begin receivingyour traditional IRA account or annuity before Roth IRAsdistributions by April 1 of the year following theyou are age 591/2.
year in which you reach age 701/2. The required Regardless of your age, you may be able tominimum distribution for any year after the yearAge 591/2 rule. Generally, if you are under age establish and make nondeductible contributionsin which you reach age 70 1/2 must be made by591/2, you must pay a 10% additional tax on the to a retirement plan called a Roth IRA.December 31 of that later year.distribution of any assets (money or other prop-
Contributions not reported. You do not re-erty) from your traditional IRA. Distributions Tax on excess. If distributions are less than port Roth IRA contributions on your return.before you are age 591/2 are called early distribu- the required minimum distribution for the year,
tions. you may have to pay a 50% excise tax for that
year on the amount not distributed as required.The 10% additional tax applies to the part of What Is a Roth IRA?
the distribution that you have to include in gross Request to waive the tax. If the excess ac-income. It is in addition to any regular income tax A Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan that,cumulation is due to reasonable error, and youon that amount. except as explained in this chapter, is subject tohave taken, or are taking, steps to remedy the the rules that apply to a traditional IRA (definedExceptions. There are several exceptions insufficient distribution, you can request that the earlier). It can be either an account or an annu-to the age 59 1/2 rule. Even if you receive a tax be waived. If you believe you qualify for this ity. Individual retirement accounts and annuitiesdistribution before you are age 59 1/2, you may relief, attach a statement of explanation and are described in Publication 590.not have to pay the 10% additional tax if you are complete Form 5329 as instructed under Waiver To be a Roth IRA, the account or annuityin one of the following situations. of tax in the Instructions for Form 5329. must be designated as a Roth IRA when it is set
• You have unreimbursed medical expenses Exemption from tax. If you are unable to take up. A deemed IRA can be a Roth IRA, but
that are more than 7.5% of your adjusted required distributions because you have a tradi- neither a SEP IRA nor a SIMPLE IRA can be
gross income. tional IRA invested in a contract issued by an designated as a Roth IRA.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 127

Page 130 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Unlike a traditional IRA, you cannot deduct b. Student loan interest deduction, How Much Can Be Contributed?
contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy c. Tuition and fees deduction, The contribution limit for Roth IRAs generallythe requirements, qualified distributions (dis-
depends on whether contributions are maded. Domestic production activities deduc-cussed later) are tax free. Contributions can be
only to Roth IRAs or to both traditional IRAs andtion,made to your Roth IRA after you reach age 701/2
Roth IRAs.and you can leave amounts in your Roth IRA as e. Foreign earned income exclusion,long as you live.
f. Foreign housing exclusion or deduction, Roth IRAs only. If contributions are made
only to Roth IRAs, your contribution limit gener-g. Exclusion of qualified savings bond in-When Can a Roth IRA Be ally is the lesser of the following amounts.terest shown on Form 8815, andSet Up? • $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older inh. Exclusion of employer-provided adop- 2008).You can set up a Roth IRA at any time. How- tion benefits shown on Form 8839.
ever, the time for making contributions for any • Your taxable compensation.
year is limited. See When Can You Make Contri- You can use Worksheet 17-2 to figure your However, if your modified AGI is above a certainbutions, later under Can You Contribute to a modified AGI. amount, your contribution limit may be reduced,Roth IRA? as explained later under Contribution limit re-
duced.
Can You Contribute to a
Roth IRA? Worksheet 17-2. Modified Adjusted Gross
Generally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA if Income for Roth IRA Purposes Keep for Your Records
you have taxable compensation (defined later)
and your modified AGI (defined later) is less
than: Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for Roth IRA purposes.
• $169,000 for married filing jointly or quali-
fying widow(er), 1. Enter your adjusted gross income from Form 1040, line 38; or
Form 1040A, line 22 ........................... . 1.• $116,000 for single, head of household, or
married filing separately and you did not 2. Enter any income resulting from the conversion of an IRA live with your spouse at any time during (other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA, a rollover from athe year, or qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA, and a minimum
• $10,000 for married filing separately and required distribution from an IRA (for conversions and rollovers
you lived with your spouse at any time from qualified retirement plans only) ................. . 2.
during the year. 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........................ . 3.
4. Enter any traditional IRA deduction from Form 1040, line 32; orYou may be eligible to claim a credit for
Form 1040A, line 17 ........................... . 4.contributions to your Roth IRA. For
more information, see chapter 37.
TIP 5. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, line
33; or Form 1040A, line 18 ....................... . 5.
Is there an age limit for contributions? Con-
6. Enter any tuition and fees deduction from Form 1040, line 34;tributions can be made to your Roth IRA regard-
or Form 1040A, line 19 ......................... . 6.less of your age.
7. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from FormCan you contribute to a Roth IRA for your
1040, line 35 ................................ . 7.spouse? You can contribute to a Roth IRA for
your spouse provided the contributions satisfy 8. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusionthe spousal IRA limit (discussed in How Much from Form 2555, line 45; or Form 2555-EZ, line 18 ....... . 8.Can Be Contributed  under Traditional IRAs ),
you file jointly, and your modified AGI is less 9. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 9.
than $169,000.  10. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815,
Compensation. Compensation includes line 14 .................................... . 10.
wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, bo- 11. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits fromnuses, and other amounts received for providing
Form 8839, line 30 ............................ . 11.personal services. It also includes commissions,
self-employment income, nontaxable combat 12. Add the amounts on lines 3 through 11 ............... . 12.pay, and taxable alimony and separate mainte-
nance payments. 13. Enter:
• $169,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er)Modified AGI. Your modified AGI for Roth IRA • $10,000 if married filing separately and you lived with your purposes is your adjusted gross income (AGI) spouse at any time during the yearas shown on your return modified as follows. • $116,000 for all others 13.
1. Subtract the following. Is the amount on line 12 more than the amount on line 13?
If yes, then see the Note below.a. Roth IRA conversions included on Form If no, then the amount on line 12 is your modified AGI for Roth IRA1040, line 15b; or Form 1040A, line purposes.11b.
Note. If the amount on line 12 is more than the amount on line 13 and you have otherb. Roth IRA rollovers from qualified retire-
income or loss items, such as social security income or passive activity losses, that arement plans included on Form 1040, line
subject to AGI-based phaseouts, you can refigure your AGI solely for the purpose of16b; or Form 1040A, line 12b.
figuring your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. When figuring your modified AGI forc. Minimum required distributions from conversion purposes, refigure your AGI without taking into account any income fromIRAs (for conversions and rollovers conversions or minimum required distributions from IRAs. (If you receive social securityfrom qualified retirement plans only). benefits, use Worksheet 1 in Appendix B of Publication 590 to refigure your AGI.) Then
go to list item (2) under Modified AGI or line 3 above in Worksheet 17-2 to refigure your2. Add the following deductions and exclu- modified AGI. If you do not have other income or loss items subject to AGI-basedsions: phaseouts, your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes is the amount on line 12.
a. Traditional IRA deduction,
Page 128 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 131 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs. If contribu- Table 17-3. Effect of Modified AGI on Roth IRA Contribution
tions are made to both Roth IRAs and traditional
This table shows whether your contribution to a Roth IRA is affected by the amount of yourIRAs established for your benefit, your contribu-
modified adjusted gross income (modified AGI).tion limit for Roth IRAs generally is the same as
your limit would be if contributions were made
only to Roth IRAs, but then reduced by all contri- IF you have taxablebutions for the year to all IRAs other than Roth compensation and your AND your modified IRAs. Employer contributions under a SEP or filing status is... AGI is... THEN...SIMPLE IRA plan do not affect this limit.
less than $159,000 you can contribute up to $5,000married filing jointly, or This means that your contribution limit is the
($6,000 if you are 50 or older inqualifying widow(er)lesser of the following amounts.
2008).• $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older in
2008) minus all contributions (other than at least $159,000 the amount you can contribute is
employer contributions under a SEP or but less than $169,000 reduced as explained under
SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to all IRAs Contribution limit reduced in
other than Roth IRAs. Publication 590.
• Your taxable compensation minus all con- $169,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.tributions (other than employer contribu-
tions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) zero (-0-) you can contribute up to $5,000married filing separately
for the year to all IRAs other than Roth ($6,000 if you are 50 or older inand you lived with your
IRAs. 2008).spouse at any time during
the yearHowever, if your modified AGI is above a certain more than zero (-0-) the amount you can contribute is
amount, your contribution limit may be reduced, but less than $10,000 reduced as explained under
as explained later under Contribution limit re- Contribution limit reduced in
duced. Publication 590.
$10,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.Catch-up contributions in certain employer
bankruptcies. If you participated in a 401(k) less than $101,000 you can contribute up to $5,000single,plan and the employer who maintained the plan ($6,000 if you are 50 or older inhead of household, orwent into bankruptcy, you may be able to con- 2008).married filing separatelytribute an additional $3,000 to your IRA. See and you did not live withPublication 590 to see if you qualify to make at least $101,000 the amount you can contribute isyour spouse at any timethese additional contributions. If you qualify and but less than $116,000 reduced as explained underduring the yearchoose to make these catch-up contributions, Contribution limit reduced inthe higher contribution and deduction limits for Publication 590.individuals who are age 50 or older do not apply.
The most that you can contribute to your Roth $116,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
IRA is $8,000.
Contribution limit reduced. If your modified 2. Any excess contributions for the preceding from a designated Roth account or from one
AGI is above a certain amount, your contribution Roth IRA to another Roth IRA.year, reduced by the total of:
limit is gradually reduced. Use Table 17-3 to
a. Any distributions out of your Roth IRAsdetermine if this reduction applies to you.
for the year, plus ConversionsFiguring the reduction. If the amount you
b. Your contribution limit for the year mi-can contribute to your Roth IRA is reduced, see You can convert a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA.nus your contributions to all your IRAsPublication 590 for how to figure the reduction. The conversion is treated as a rollover, regard-for the year. less of the conversion method used. Most of the
rules for rollovers, described earlier under Rollo-
When Can You Make ver From One IRA Into Another  under Tradi-Withdrawal of excess contributions. For
Contributions? tional IRAs, apply to these rollovers. However,purposes of determining excess contributions,
the 1-year waiting period does not apply.any contribution that is withdrawn on or beforeYou can make contributions to a Roth IRA for a the due date (including extensions) for filing your Conversion methods. You can convertyear at any time during the year or by the due tax return for the year is treated as an amount amounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA indate of your return for that year (not including not contributed. This treatment applies only if any of the following ways.extensions). any earnings on the contributions are also with-
• Rollover. You can receive a distributionYou can make contributions for 2008 drawn. The earnings are considered to have
from a traditional IRA and roll it over (con-by the due date (not including exten- been earned and received in the year the excess
tribute it) to a Roth IRA within 60 dayssions) for filing your 2008 tax return. contribution was made.
TIP
after the distribution.
Applying excess contributions. If contribu- • Trustee-to-trustee transfer. You can di-
tions to your Roth IRA for a year were more than rect the trustee of the traditional IRA toWhat if You Contribute Too Much? the limit, you can apply the excess contribution transfer an amount from the traditional IRA
to the trustee of the Roth IRA.in one year to a later year if the contributions forA 6% excise tax applies to any excess contribu-
that later year are less than the maximum al-tion to a Roth IRA. • Same trustee transfer. If the trustee oflowed for that year. the traditional IRA also maintains the Roth
Excess contributions. These are the contri- IRA, you can direct the trustee to transfer
butions to your Roth IRAs for a year that equal an amount from the traditional IRA to theCan You Move Amounts
the total of: Roth IRA.Into a Roth IRA?
1. Amounts contributed for the tax year to Same trustee. Conversions made with theYou may be able to convert amounts from eitheryour Roth IRAs (other than amounts prop- same trustee can be made by redesignating thea traditional, SEP, or SIMPLE IRA into a Rotherly and timely rolled over from a Roth IRA traditional IRA as a Roth IRA, rather than open-IRA. You may be able to roll amounts over fromor properly converted from a traditional ing a new account or issuing a new contract.a qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA. YouIRA or rolled over from a qualified retire-
may be able to recharacterize contributionsment plan, as described later) that are Rollover from an employer's plan into a Roth
made to one IRA as having been made directlymore than your contribution limit for the IRA. Prior to 2008, you could only roll over
to a different IRA. You can roll amounts overyear, plus (convert) amounts from either a traditional, SEP,
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 129

Page 132 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth IRA. Beginning in from the date of conversion or roll over) into a distributions that are not qualified distributions.
2008, you can roll over into a Roth IRA all or part traditional IRA by the due date (including exten- See Publication 590 for more information.
of an eligible rollover distribution you receive sions) for your tax return for the year during Ordering rules for distributions. If you re-from your (or your deceased spouse's): which you made the conversion or roll over to ceive a distribution from your Roth IRA that isthe Roth IRA. You do not have to include this• Employer's qualified pension, not a qualified distribution, part of it may bedistribution (withdrawal) in income. Seeprofit-sharing or stock bonus plan, taxable. There is a set order in which contribu-Recharacterizations, earlier, for more informa- tions (including conversion contributions and• Annuity plan, tion. rollover contributions from qualified retirement
• Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) plans) and earnings are considered to be distrib-
plan), or uted from your Roth IRA. Regular contributionsRollover From a Roth IRA are distributed first. See Publication 590 for• Governmental deferred compensation more information.You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of theplan (section 457 plan).
assets from one Roth IRA if you contribute them Must you withdraw or use Roth IRA assets?Any amount rolled over is subject to the same within 60 days to another Roth IRA. Most of the You are not required to take distributions fromrules for converting a traditional IRA into a Roth rules for rollovers, explained earlier under Rollo- your Roth IRA at any age. The minimum distri-IRA. Also, the rollover contribution must meet ver From One IRA Into Another  under Tradi- bution rules that apply to traditional IRAs do notthe rollover requirements that apply to the spe- tional IRAs, apply to these rollovers. apply to Roth IRAs while the owner is alive.cific type of retirement plan. However, after the death of a Roth IRA owner,Rollover from designated Roth account. AIncome. You must include in your gross in- certain of the minimum distribution rules thatrollover from a designated Roth account cancome distributions from a qualified retirement apply to traditional IRAs also apply to Roth IRAs.only be made to another designated Roth ac-plan that you would have had to include in in-
count or to a Roth IRA. More information. For more detailed informa-come if you had not rolled them over into a Roth
tion on Roth IRAs, see Publication 590.IRA. You do not include in gross income any part
of a distribution from a qualified retirement plan Are Distributions Taxable?
that is a return of contributions (after-tax contri-
butions) to the plan that were taxable to you You do not include in your gross income quali-
when paid. fied distributions or distributions that are a return
of your regular contributions from your RothIf you must include any amount in your IRA(s). You also do not include distributionsgross income, you may have to in- 18.from your Roth IRA that you roll over tax free intocrease your withholding or make esti-
CAUTION
! another Roth IRA. You may have to include partmated tax payments. See Publication 505, Tax of other distributions in your income. See Order-Withholding and Estimated Tax. ing rules for distributions, later. AlimonyFor more information, see Rollover From
Employer's Plan Into a Roth IRA in chapter 2 of What are qualified distributions? A qualified
Publication 590. distribution is any payment or distribution from
your Roth IRA that meets the following require- IntroductionConverting from a SIMPLE IRA. Generally, ments.you can convert an amount in your SIMPLE IRA This chapter discusses the rules that apply if you
to a Roth IRA under the same rules explained pay or receive alimony. It covers the following1. It is made after the 5-year period beginningearlier under Converting From Any Traditional topics.with the first taxable year for which a con-IRA to a Roth IRA. tribution was made to a Roth IRA set up • What payments are alimony. However, you cannot convert any amount for your benefit, anddistributed from the SIMPLE IRA during the • What payments are not alimony, such as2. The payment or distribution is:2-year period beginning on the date you first child support.
participated in any SIMPLE IRA plan maintained a. Made on or after the date you reach • How to deduct alimony you paid.by your employer. age 591/2, • How to report alimony you received as in-More information. For more detailed informa- b. Made because you are disabled, come.tion on conversions, see Publication 590.
c. Made to a beneficiary or to your estate • Whether you must recapture the tax bene-
after your death, or fits of alimony. Recapture means adding
back in your income all or part of a deduc-Failed Conversions and Rollovers d. To pay up to $10,000 (lifetime limit) of tion you took in a prior year.certain qualified first-time homebuyerIf, when you converted amounts from a tradi- amounts. See Publication 590 for moretional IRA or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth IRA or Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse orinformation.when you rolled over amounts from a qualified former spouse under a divorce or separation
retirement plan into a Roth IRA, you expected to instrument. It does not include voluntary pay-
have modified AGI of less than $100,000 and a ments that are not made under a divorce orAdditional tax on distributions of conversionfiling status other than married filing separately, separation instrument.and certain rollover contributions withinbut your expectations did not come true, you Alimony is deductible by the payer and must5-year period. If, within the 5-year periodhave made a failed conversion or failed rollover. be included in the spouse's or former spouse'sstarting with the first day of your tax year in
income. Although this chapter is generally writ-which you convert an amount from a traditionalResults of failed conversions and failed roll- ten for the payer of the alimony, the recipient canIRA or rollover an amount from a qualified retire-overs. If the converted or rolled over amount use the information to determine whether anment plan to a Roth IRA, you take a distribution(contribution) is not recharacterized (explained amount received is alimony.from a Roth IRA, you may have to pay the 10%earlier), the contribution will be treated as a To be alimony, a payment must meet certainadditional tax on early distributions. You gener-regular contribution to the Roth IRA and subject requirements. Different requirements generallyally must pay the 10% additional tax on anyto the following tax consequences. apply to payments under instruments executedamount attributable to the part of the amount
after 1984 and to payments under instruments• A 6% excise tax per year will apply to any converted or rolled over (the conversion or rollo-
executed before 1985. This chapter discussesexcess contribution not withdrawn from ver contribution) that you had to include in in-
the rules for payments under instruments exe-the Roth IRA. come. A separate 5-year period applies to each
cuted after 1984. If you need the rules for pay-conversion and rollover. See Ordering rules for• The distributions from the traditional IRA ments under pre-1985 instruments, get anddistributions, later, to determine the amount, ifor qualified retirement plan must be in- keep a copy of the 2004 version of Publicationany, of the distribution that is attributable to thecluded in your gross income. 504. That was the last year the information onpart of the conversion or rollover contribution
pre-1985 instruments was included in Publica-• The 10% additional tax on early distribu- that you had to include in income.
tion 504.tions may apply to any distribution.
Additional tax on other early distributions. Use Table 18-1 in this chapter as a guide to
How to avoid. You must move the amount Unless an exception applies, you must pay the determine whether certain payments are con-
converted or rolled over (including all earnings 10% additional tax on the taxable part of any sidered alimony.
Page 130 Chapter 18 Alimony

Page 133 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
taxes or insurance are alimony. But if you item-Table 18-1. Alimony Requirements (Instruments Executed After 1984)
ize deductions, you can claim all of the real
estate taxes and none of the home insurance.Payments ARE alimony if all of the Payments are NOT alimony if any of the
following are true: following are true: Other payments to a third party. If you
made other third-party payments, see Publica-Payments are required by a divorce or Payments are not required by a divorce or
tion 504 to see whether any part of the paymentsseparation instrument. separation instrument.
qualifies as alimony.
Payer and recipient spouse do not file a joint Payer and recipient spouse file a joint return
return with each other. with each other.
Payment is in cash (including checks or Payment is:
Instrumentsmoney orders). • Not in cash,
• A noncash property settlement, Executed After 1984• Spouse's part of community income, or
• To keep up the payer's property. The following rules for alimony apply to pay-
ments under divorce or separation instrumentsPayment is not designated in the instrument Payment is designated in the instrument as
executed after 1984.as not alimony. not alimony.
Spouses legally separated under a decree of Spouses legally separated under a decree of Exception for instruments executed beforedivorce or separate maintenance are not divorce or separate maintenance are 1985. There are two situations where the rulesmembers of the same household. members of the same household. for instruments executed after 1984 apply to
instruments executed before 1985.Payments are not required after death of the Payments are required after death of the
recipient spouse. recipient spouse. 1. A divorce or separation instrument exe-
cuted before 1985 and then modified afterPayment is not treated as child support. Payment is treated as child support.
1984 to specify that the after-1984 rules
will apply.These payments are deductible by the payer These payments are neither deductible by the
and includible in income by the recipient. payer nor includible in income by the recipient. 2. A temporary divorce or separation instru-
ment executed before 1985 and incorpo-
rated into, or adopted by, a final decree
Definitions. The following definitions apply • Payments to keep up the payer's property, executed after 1984 that:
orthroughout this chapter.
a. Changes the amount or period of pay-• Use of the payer's property.Spouse or former spouse. Unless other- ment, orwise stated, the term ªspouseº includes former
b. Adds or deletes any contingency orspouse. Payments to a third party. Cash payments, condition.checks, or money orders to a third party onDivorce or separation instrument. The
behalf of your spouse under the terms of yourterm ªdivorce or separation instrumentº means: For the rules for alimony payments underdivorce or separation instrument can be ali- pre-1985 instruments not meeting these excep-• A decree of divorce or separate mainte- mony, if they otherwise qualify. These include tions, see the 2004 revision of Publication 504nance or a written instrument incident to payments for your spouse's medical expenses, on the IRS website at www.irs.gov.that decree, housing costs (rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition,
etc. The payments are treated as received by• A written separation agreement, or Example 1. In November 1984, you andyour spouse and then paid to the third party. your former spouse executed a written separa-• A decree or any type of court order requir-
Life insurance premiums. Alimony includes tion agreement. In February 1985, a decree ofing a spouse to make payments for the
premiums you must pay under your divorce orsupport or maintenance of the other divorce was substituted for the written separa-
separation instrument for insurance on your lifespouse. This includes a temporary decree, tion agreement. The decree of divorce did not
to the extent your spouse owns the policy.an interlocutory (not final) decree, and a change the terms for the alimony you pay your
decree of alimony pendente lite (while former spouse. The decree of divorce is treatedPayments for jointly-owned home. If yourawaiting action on the final decree or as executed before 1985. Alimony paymentsdivorce or separation instrument states that youagreement). under this decree are not subject to the rules formust pay expenses for a home owned by you
payments under instruments executed afterand your spouse or former spouse, some of your
1984.payments may be alimony.Useful Items
Mortgage payments. If you must pay all theYou may want to see: Example 2. Assume the same facts as inmortgage payments (principal and interest) on a Example 1  except that the decree of divorcejointly-owned home, and they otherwise qualifyPublication changed the amount of the alimony. In this ex-as alimony, you can deduct one-half of the total ample, the decree of divorce is not treated as❏ 504 Divorced or Separated Individuals payments as alimony. If you itemize deductions executed before 1985. The alimony paymentsand the home is a qualified home, you can claim are subject to the rules for payments under in-half of the interest in figuring your deductible struments executed after 1984.interest. Your spouse must report one-half of the
payments as alimony received. If your spouse Alimony requirements. A payment to or for aGeneral Rules itemizes deductions and the home is a qualified spouse under a divorce or separation instrumenthome, he or she can claim one-half of the inter- is alimony if the spouses do not file a joint returnThe following rules apply to alimony regardless est on the mortgage in figuring deductible inter-
with each other and all the following require-of when the divorce or separation instrument est.
ments are met.was executed. Taxes and insurance. If you must pay all
• The payment is in cash.the real estate taxes or insurance on a homePayments not alimony. Not all payments held as tenants in common, you can deduct • The instrument does not designate theunder a divorce or separation instrument are one-half of these payments as alimony. Your payment as not alimony.alimony. Alimony does not include: spouse must report one-half of these payments
• The spouses are not members of theas alimony received. If you and your spouse• Child support, 
same household at the time the paymentsitemize deductions, you can each claim one-half• Noncash property settlements, are made. This requirement applies only ifof the real estate taxes and none of the home
the spouses are legally separated under a• Payments that are your spouse's part of insurance. 
decree of divorce or separate mainte-community income as explained under  If your home is held as tenants by the en-
nance.Community Property in Publication 504, tirety or joint tenants, none of your payments for
Chapter 18 Alimony Page 131

Page 134 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• There is no liability to make any payment Liability for payments after death of recipient The amount of child support may vary over time.
(in cash or property) after the death of the spouse. If any part of payments you make Child support payments are not deductible by
recipient spouse. must continue to be made for any period after the payer and are not taxable to the recipient.
your spouse's death, that part of your payments• The payment is not treated as child sup- Specifically designated as child support.is not alimony, whether made before or after theport. A payment will be treated as specifically desig-death. If all of the payments would continue, nated as child support to the extent that theEach of these requirements is discussed next. then none of the payments made before or after payment is reduced either:the death are alimony.
Cash payment requirement. Only cash pay- • On the happening of a contingency relat-The divorce or separation instrument does
ments, including checks and money orders, ing to your child, ornot have to expressly state that the payments
qualify as alimony. The following do not qualify cease upon the death of your spouse if, for • At a time that can be clearly associatedas alimony. example, the liability for continued payments with the contingency.would end under state law.• Transfers of services or property (includ- A payment may be treated as specifically desig-ing a debt instrument of a third party or an Example. You must pay your former nated as child support even if other separateannuity contract). spouse $10,000 in cash each year for 10 years. payments are specifically designated as child
• Execution of a debt instrument by the Your divorce decree states that the payments support.
payer. will end upon your former spouse's death. You Contingency relating to your child. Amust also pay your former spouse or your former• The use of the payer's property. contingency relates to your child if it depends onspouse's estate $20,000 in cash each year for any event relating to that child. It does not matter10 years. The death of your spouse would notPayments to a third party. Cash payments whether the event is certain or likely to occur.terminate these payments under state law.to a third party under the terms of your divorce or Events relating to your child include the child's:The $10,000 annual payments may qualifyseparation instrument can qualify as cash pay-
as alimony. The $20,000 annual payments that • Becoming employed,ments to your spouse. See Payments to a third
do not end upon your former spouse's death areparty under General Rules, earlier. • Dying,not alimony.Also, cash payments made to a third party at
• Leaving the household,the written request of your spouse may qualify Substitute payments. If you must make
as alimony if all the following requirements are • Leaving school,any payments in cash or property after your
met. spouse's death as a substitute for continuing • Marrying, orotherwise qualifying payments before the death,• The payments are in lieu of payments of • Reaching a specified age or income level.the otherwise qualifying payments are not ali-alimony directly to your spouse.
mony. To the extent that your payments begin,• The written request states that both Clearly associated with a contingency.accelerate, or increase because of the death ofspouses intend the payments to be treated Payments that would otherwise qualify as ali-your spouse, otherwise qualifying payments youas alimony. made may be treated as payments that were not mony are presumed to be reduced at a time
alimony. Whether or not such payments will be clearly associated with the happening of a con-• You receive the written request from your
treated as not alimony depends on all the facts tingency relating to your child only in the follow-spouse before you file your return for the
and circumstances. ing situations.year you made the payments.
• The payments are to be reduced not moreExample 1. Under your divorce decree, you than 6 months before or after the date thePayments designated as not alimony. You must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually. child will reach 18, 21, or local age ofand your spouse can designate that otherwise The payments will stop at the end of 6 years or majority.qualifying payments are not alimony. You do this upon your former spouse's death, if earlier.by including a provision in your divorce or sepa- Your former spouse has custody of your mi- • The payments are to be reduced on two orration instrument that states the payments are nor children. The decree provides that if any more occasions that occur not more thannot deductible as alimony by you and are ex- child is still a minor at your spouse's death, you 1 year before or after a different one ofcludable from your spouse's income. For this must pay $10,000 annually to a trust until the your children reaches a certain age frompurpose, any instrument (written statement) youngest child reaches the age of majority. The 18 to 24. This certain age must be thesigned by both of you that makes this designa- trust income and corpus (principal) are to be same for each child, but need not be ation and that refers to a previous written separa- used for your children's benefit. whole number of years.tion agreement is treated as a written separation These facts indicate that the payments to beagreement (and therefore a divorce or separa- In all other situations, reductions in paymentsmade after your former spouse's death are ation instrument). If you are subject to temporary are not treated as clearly associated with thesubstitute for $10,000 of the $30,000 annualsupport orders, the designation must be made in happening of a contingency relating to yourpayments. Of each of the $30,000 annual pay-the original or a later temporary support order. child.ments, $10,000 is not alimony.Your spouse can exclude the payments from Either you or the IRS can overcome the pre-income only if he or she attaches a copy of the Example 2. Under your divorce decree, you sumption in the two situations just described.instrument designating them as not alimony to must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually. This is done by showing that the time at whichhis or her return. The copy must be attached The payments will stop at the end of 15 years or the payments are to be reduced was determinedeach year the designation applies. upon your former spouse's death, if earlier. The independently of any contingencies relating to
decree provides that if your former spouse dies your children. For example, if you can show thatSpouses cannot be members of the same before the end of the 15-year period, you must the period of alimony payments is customary inhousehold.  Payments to your spouse while pay the estate the difference between $450,000 the local jurisdiction, such as a period equal toyou are members of the same household are not ($30,000 ×  15) and the total amount paid up to one-half of the duration of the marriage, you canalimony if you are legally separated under a that time. For example, if your spouse dies at the overcome the presumption and may be able todecree of divorce or separate maintenance. A end of the tenth year, you must pay the estate treat the amount as alimony.home you formerly shared is considered one $150,000 ($450,000 − $300,000).household, even if you physically separate your- These facts indicate that the lump-sum pay-selves in the home. ment to be made after your former spouse'sYou are not treated as members of the same death is a substitute for the full amount of thehousehold if one of you is preparing to leave the How To Deduct$30,000 annual payments. None of the annualhousehold and does leave no later than 1 month payments are alimony. The result would be theafter the date of the payment. Alimony Paidsame if the payment required at death were to
Exception. If you are not legally separated be discounted by an appropriate interest factor You can deduct alimony you paid, whether orunder a decree of divorce or separate mainte- to account for the prepayment. not you itemize deductions on your return. Younance, a payment under a written separation
must file Form 1040. You cannot use Formagreement, support decree, or other court order Child support. A payment that is specifically
1040A or Form 1040EZ.may qualify as alimony even if you are members designated as child support or treated as specifi-
of the same household when the payment is Enter the amount of alimony you paid oncally designated as child support under your
made. divorce or separation instrument is not alimony. Form 1040, line 31a. In the space provided on
Page 132 Chapter 18 Alimony

Page 135 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
line 31b, enter your spouse's social security • Payments that decrease because of the Form (and Instructions)
number. death of either spouse or the remarriage
❏ 8917 Tuition and Fees Deductionof the spouse receiving the payments If you paid alimony to more than one person,
before the end of the third year.enter the social security number of one of the
recipients. Show the social security number and
amount paid to each other recipient on an at- Figuring the recapture. You can use Work-tached statement. Enter your total payments on sheet 1 in Publication 504 to figure recaptured Educator Expensesline 31a. alimony.
If you do not provide your spouse's If you were an eligible educator in 2008, you canIncluding the recapture in income. If yousocial security number, you may have deduct up to $250 of qualified expenses youmust include a recapture amount in income,to pay a $50 penalty and your deduc- paid in 2008 as an adjustment to gross income,
CAUTION
!show it on Form 1040, line 11 (ªAlimony re-tion may be disallowed. rather than as a miscellaneous itemized deduc-ceivedº). Cross out ªreceivedº and enter ªrecap- tion. If you and your spouse are filing jointly andture.º On the dotted line next to the amount, both of you were eligible educators, the maxi-enter your spouse's last name and social secur- mum deduction is $500. However, neitherity number. spouse can deduct more than $250 of his or herHow To Report qualified expenses.Deducting the recapture. If you can deduct a
Alimony Received recapture amount, show it on Form 1040, line Eligible educator. An eligible educator is a31a (ªAlimony paidº). Cross out ªpaidº and enter kindergarten through grade 12 teacher, instruc-Report alimony you received as income on Form ªrecapture.º In the space provided, enter your tor, counselor, principal, or aide who worked in a1040, line 11. You cannot use Form 1040A or spouse's social security number. school for at least 900 hours during a schoolForm 1040EZ. year.
You must give the person who paid the
Qualified expenses. Qualified expenses in-alimony your social security number. If
clude ordinary and necessary expenses paid inyou do not, you may have to pay a $50
CAUTION
!
connection with books, supplies, equipment (in-penalty.
cluding computer equipment, software, and
19. services), and other materials used in the class-
room. An ordinary expense is one that is com-
mon and accepted in your educational field. ARecapture Rule necessary expense is one that is helpful andEducation- appropriate for your profession as an educator.If your alimony payments decrease or terminate An expense does not have to be required to beduring the first 3 calendar years, you may be considered necessary.Related subject to the recapture rule. If you are subject to Qualified expenses do not include expensesthis rule, you have to include in income in the for home schooling or for nonathletic suppliesthird year part of the alimony payments you Adjustments for courses in health or physical education.previously deducted. Your spouse can deduct in You must reduce your qualified expenses bythe third year part of the alimony payments he or the following amounts.she previously included in income.
What's NewThe 3-year period starts with the first calen- • Tax-free distribution of interest under an
dar year you make a payment qualifying as education savings bond program (Form
Income limits increased. If you are marriedalimony under a decree of divorce or separate 8815). See Figuring the Tax-Free Amount
and file a joint return, the amount of your studentmaintenance or a written separation agreement. in chapter 10 of Publication 970.
loan interest deduction for 2008 is graduallyDo not include any time in which payments were • Tax-free distribution of earnings from areduced (phased out) if your modified adjustedbeing made under temporary support orders. qualified tuition program (QTP). See Figur-gross income (MAGI) is between $115,000 andThe second and third years are the next 2 calen- ing the Taxable Portion of a Distribution in$145,000. You cannot take a deduction if yourdar years, whether or not payments are made chapter 8 of Publication 970.MAGI is $145,000 or more. This is an increaseduring those years.
from the 2007 limits of $110,000 and $140,000.The reasons for a reduction or termination of • Tax-free distribution of earnings from a
See chapter 4 of Publication 970 for more infor-alimony payments that can require a recapture Coverdell education savings account
mation.include: (ESA). See Figuring the Taxable Portion
of a Distribution in chapter 7 of Publication• A change in your divorce or separation Students in Midwestern disaster areas. The 970.instrument, definition of qualified education expenses for the
• Any reimbursements you received fortuition and fees deduction is expanded for stu-• A failure to make timely payments, these expenses that were not reported todents in Midwestern disaster areas. See Stu-
• A reduction in your ability to provide sup- you in box 1 of your Form W-2.dents in Midwestern disaster areas , for more
port, or information.
• A reduction in your spouse's support How the deduction is claimed. To claim the
needs. deduction, enter the allowable amount on Form
1040, line 23, or Form 1040A, line 16.
IntroductionWhen to apply the recapture rule. You are
This chapter discusses the education-relatedsubject to the recapture rule in the third year if
adjustments you can deduct in figuring your ad-the alimony you pay in the third year decreases
justed gross income.by more than $15,000 from the second year or Student Loan Interest
This chapter covers:the alimony you pay in the second and third
years decreases significantly from the alimony Deduction• Educator expenses,you pay in the first year.
• The student loan interest deduction, and Generally, personal interest you pay, other thanWhen you figure a decrease in alimony, do
certain mortgage interest, is not deductible onnot include the following amounts. • The tuition and fees deduction. your tax return. However, if your modified ad-• Payments made under a temporary sup- justed gross income (MAGI) is less thanport order. $70,000 ($145,000 if filing a joint return) there isUseful Items• Payments required over a period of at a special deduction allowed for paying interestYou may want to see:
least 3 calendar years that vary because on a student loan (also known as an education
they are a fixed part of your income from a loan) used for higher education. For most tax-Publication
business or property, or from compensa- payers, MAGI is the adjusted gross income as
❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Educationtion for employment or self-employment. figured on their federal income tax return before
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 133

Page 136 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
subtracting any deduction for student loan inter- Reasonable period of time. Qualified educa- • Other necessary expenses (such as trans-
tion expenses are treated as paid or incurred portation).est. This deduction can reduce the amount of
within a reasonable period of time before or afteryour income subject to tax by up to $2,500 in
The cost of room and board qualifies only toyou take out the loan if they are paid with the2008. Table 19-1 summarizes the features of
the extent that it is not more than the greater of:proceeds of student loans that are part of athe student loan interest deduction.
federal postsecondary education loan program. • The allowance for room and board, as de-Even if not paid with the proceeds of thatTable 19-1. Student Loan Interest termined by the eligible educational institu-type of loan, the expenses are treated as paid orDeduction at a Glance tion, that was included in the cost ofincurred within a reasonable period of time if attendance (for federal financial aid pur-Do not rely on this table alone. both of the following requirements are met. poses) for a particular academic periodRefer to the text for more details.
and living arrangement of the student, or• The expenses relate to a specific aca-
Feature Description demic period. • The actual amount charged if the student
Maximum You can reduce your income is residing in housing owned or operated• The loan proceeds are disbursed within a
benefit subject to tax by up to $2,500. by the eligible educational institution.period that begins 90 days before the start
of that academic period and ends 90 daysYour student loan:Loan after the end of that academic period.qualifications • must have been taken out Eligible educational institution. An eligible
solely to pay qualified educational institution is any college, university,If neither of the above situations applies, theeducation expenses, and vocational school, or other postsecondary edu-reasonable period of time usually is determined• cannot be from a related cational institution eligible to participate in a stu-person or made under a based on all the relevant facts and circum- dent aid program administered by thequalified employer plan. stances. Department of Education. It includes virtually all
The student must be:Student accredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-Academic period. An academic period in-qualifications • you, your spouse, or your vately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or otherdependent, and stitutions. period of study (such as a summer school ses-• enrolled at least half-time in Certain educational institutions locatedsion) as reasonably determined by an educa-a degree program. outside the United States also participate in thetional institution. In the case of an educational
U.S. Department of Education's Federal Stu-institution that uses credit hours or clock hoursTime limit on You can deduct interest paid
dent Aid (FSA) programs.deduction during the remaining period of and does not have academic terms, each pay-
your student loan. For purposes of the student loan interestment period can be treated as an academic
deduction, an eligible educational institutionperiod.Phaseout The amount of your deduction also includes an institution conducting an intern-depends on your income level. Eligible student. This is a student who was ship or residency program leading to a degree orenrolled at least half-time in a program leading certificate from an institution of higher educa- to a degree, certificate, or other recognized edu- tion, a hospital, or a health care facility thatcational credential. offers postgraduate training.Student Loan Interest An educational institution must meet theEnrolled at least half-time. A student was
above criteria only during the academic pe-Defined enrolled at least half-time if the student was
riod(s) for which the student loan was incurred.taking at least half the normal full-time work load
Student loan interest is interest you paid during The deductibility of interest on the loan is notfor his or her course of study.
affected by the institution's subsequent loss ofthe year on a qualified student loan. It includes The standard for what is half of the normal
eligibility.both required and voluntary interest payments. full-time work load is determined by each eligible
educational institution. However, the standard The educational institution should bemay not be lower than any of those established able to tell you if it is an eligible educa-Qualified Student Loan by the Department of Education under the tional institution.
TIPHigher Education Act of 1965.This is a loan you took out solely to pay qualified
Related person. You cannot deduct interest Adjustments to qualified education ex-education expenses (defined later) that were:
on a loan you get from a related person. Related penses. You must reduce your qualified edu-• For you, your spouse, or a person who persons include: cation expenses by certain tax-free items (suchwas your dependent (defined in chapter 3) as the tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-• Your spouse,when you took out the loan, ships). See chapter 4 of Publication 970 for
• Your brothers and sisters, details.• Paid or incurred within a reasonable pe-
riod of time before or after you took out the • Your half brothers and half sisters,
loan, and • Your ancestors (parents, grandparents, Include as Interest• For education provided during an aca- etc.),
demic period for an eligible student. In addition to simple interest on the loan, certain• Your lineal descendants (children, grand- loan origination fees, capitalized interest, inter-children, etc.), andLoans from the following sources are not qual- est on revolving lines of credit, and interest on
ified student loans. refinanced student loans can be student loan• Certain corporations, partnerships, trusts,
interest if all other requirements are met.and exempt organizations.• A related person.
Loan origination fee. In general, this is a• A qualified employer plan. Qualified employer plan. You cannot deduct one-time fee charged by the lender when a loan
interest on a loan made under a qualified em- is made. To be deductible as interest, the feeExceptions. For purposes of the student ployer plan or under a contract purchased under must be for the use of money rather than forloan interest deduction, the following are excep- such a plan. property or services (such as commitment feestions to the general rules for dependents. or processing costs) provided by the lender. A
• An individual can be your dependent even loan origination fee treated as interest accrues
if you are the dependent of another tax- over the life of the loan.Qualified Education Expenses
payer. Capitalized interest.  This is unpaid interestFor purposes of the student loan interest deduc-• An individual can be your dependent even on a student loan that is added by the lender totion, these expenses are the total costs of at-
if the individual files a joint return with a the outstanding principal balance of the loan.tending an eligible educational institution,
spouse. including graduate school. They include Interest on revolving lines of credit. Thisamounts paid for the following items.• An individual can be your dependent even interest, which includes interest on credit card
if the individual had gross income for the debt, is student loan interest if the borrower uses• Tuition and fees.
year that was equal to or more than the the line of credit (credit card) only to pay quali-• Room and board.exemption amount for the year ($3,500 for fied education expenses. See Qualified Educa-
2008). • Books, supplies, and equipment. tion Expenses, earlier.
Page 134 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Page 137 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Interest on refinanced student loans. This any other provision of the tax law (for example, You may be able to take a credit for
includes interest on both: your education expenses instead of ahome mortgage interest).
deduction. You can choose the one
TIP• Consolidated loansÐloans used to refi- that will give you the lower tax. See chapter 35,nance more than one student loan of the How Much Can You Education Credits, for details about the credits.same borrower, and Deduct
• Collapsed loansÐtwo or more loans of
Can You Claim theYour student loan interest deduction for 2008 isthe same borrower that are treated by
generally the smaller of:both the lender and the borrower as one Deduction
loan. • $2,500, or
The following rules will help you determine if you
• The interest you paid in 2008. can claim the tuition and fees deduction.If you refinance a qualified student loan
for more than your original loan and However, the amount determined above isyou use the additional amount for any
CAUTION
! phased out (gradually reduced) if your MAGI is Who Can Claim the Deductionpurpose other than qualified education ex- between $55,000 and $70,000 ($115,000 andpenses, you cannot deduct any interest paid on $145,000 if you file a joint return). You cannot Generally, you can claim the tuition and feesthe refinanced loan. take a student loan interest deduction if your deduction if all three of the following require-
MAGI is $70,000 or more ($145,000 or more if ments are met.Voluntary interest payments. These are
you file a joint return). For details on figuringpayments made on a qualified student loan dur- 1. You paid qualified education expenses ofyour MAGI, see chapter 4 of Publication 970.ing a period when interest payments are not higher education.required, such as when the borrower has been
granted a deferment or the loan has not yet 2. You paid the education expenses for anHow Do You Figure the
entered repayment status. eligible student.Deduction
3. The eligible student is yourself, your
spouse, or your dependent for whom youGenerally, you figure the deduction using theDo Not Include as Interest claim an exemption (defined in chapter 3)Student Loan Interest Deduction Worksheet in
on your tax return.the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions.You cannot claim a student loan interest deduc-
However, if you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ,tion for any of the following items. Qualified education expenses are definedor 4563, or you are excluding income from under What Expenses Qualify. Eligible students• Interest you paid on a loan if, under the sources within Puerto Rico, you must complete are defined later under Who Is an Eligible Stu-terms of the loan, you are not legally obli- Worksheet 4-1 in chapter 4 of Publication 970. dent.gated to make interest payments. To help you figure your student loan interest
• Loan origination fees that are payments deduction, you should receive Form 1098-E,
for property or services provided by the Student Loan Interest Statement. Generally, an Who Cannot Claim the Deductionlender, such as commitment fees or institution (such as a bank or governmental
processing costs. You cannot claim the tuition and fees deductionagency) that received interest payments of $600
if any of the following apply. or more during 2008 on one or more qualified• Interest you paid on a loan to the extent
student loans must send Form 1098-E (or ac-payments were made through your partici- • Your filing status is married filing sepa-ceptable substitute) to each borrower by Febru-pation in the National Health Service rately.ary 2, 2009.Corps Loan Repayment Program (the • Another person can claim an exemptionªNHSC Loan Repayment Programº) or For qualified student loans taken out before
for you as a dependent on his or her taxcertain other loan repayment assistance September 1, 2004, the institution is required to return. You cannot take the deductionprograms. For more information, see Stu- include on Form 1098-E only payments of stated even if the other person does not actuallydent Loan Repayment Assistance in chap- interest. Other interest payments, such as cer- claim that exemption.ter 5 of Publication 970. tain loan origination fees and capitalized inter-
est, may not appear on the form you receive. • Your modified adjusted gross income
However, if you pay qualifying interest that is not (MAGI) is more than $80,000 ($160,000 ifCan You Claim the included on Form 1098-E, you can also deduct filing a joint return).
those amounts. For information on allocatingDeduction • You were a nonresident alien for any partpayments between interest and principal, see of the year and did not elect to be treatedchapter 4 of Publication 970. Generally, you can claim the deduction if all four as a resident alien for tax purposes. Moreof the following requirements are met.  To claim the deduction, enter the allowable information on nonresident aliens can beamount on Form 1040, line 33, or Form 1040A,• Your filing status is any filing status except found in Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guideline 18.married filing separately. for Aliens. 
• No one else is claiming an exemption for • You or anyone else claims a Hope or life-
you on his or her tax return. time learning credit in 2008 with respect to
expenses of the student for whom the• You are legally obligated to pay interest on Tuition and Fees qualified education expenses were paid.a qualified student loan.
Deduction• You paid interest on a qualified student
loan. Table 19-2. Tuition and FeesYou may be able to deduct qualified education Deduction at a Glanceexpenses paid during the year for yourself, your
Interest paid by others. If you are the person Do not rely on this table alone.spouse, or your dependent(s). You cannot claim
Refer to the text for more details.legally obligated to make interest payments and this deduction if your filing status is married filingsomeone else makes a payment of interest on separately or if another person can claim an Question Answeryour behalf, you are treated as receiving the exemption for you as a dependent on his or herpayments from the other person and, in turn, What is the You can reduce your incometax return. The qualified expenses must be forpaying the interest. See chapter 4 of Publication maximum subject to tax by up to $4,000.higher education, as explained later under What970 for more information. benefit?Expenses Qualify.
The tuition and fees deduction can reduce Where is As an adjustment to income on
the Form 1040, line 34, or Formthe amount of your income subject to tax by upNo Double Benefit Allowed deduction 1040A, line 19.to $4,000. taken?Table 19-2 summarizes the features of theYou cannot deduct as interest on a student loan
any amount that is an allowable deduction under tuition and fees deduction.
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 135

Page 138 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
enrollment or attendance at an eligible educa- Tax-free educational assistance.Question Answer
tional institution, qualified education expenses • The tax-free part of scholarships and fel-For whom A student enrolled in an eligible for students in Midwestern disaster areas in- lowships (see chapter 1 of Publicationmust the educational institution who is clude the following. 970),expenses either: 
be paid? • you, 1. Books, supplies, and equipment required • Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publication• your spouse, or for enrollment or attendance at an eligible 970),• your dependent for whom you educational institutionclaim an exemption. • Employer-provided educational assistance
2. For a special needs student, expenses that (see chapter 11 of Publication 970),What tuition Tuition and fees required for are necessary for that person's enrollmentand fees enrollment or attendance at an • Veterans' educational assistance (seeor attendance at an eligible educational in-are eligible postsecondary chapter 1 of Publication 970), anddeductible? educational institution, but not stitution.
including personal, living, or • Any other nontaxable (tax-free) payments3. For a student who is at least a half-timefamily expenses, such as room (other than gifts or inheritances) receivedstudent, the reasonable costs of room andand board. as educational assistance.board, but only to the extent that the costs
are not more than the greater of the follow- Refunds. Qualified education expenses doing two amounts. not include expenses for which you, or someoneWhat Expenses Qualify else who paid qualified education expenses ona. The allowance for room and board, as behalf of a student, receive a refund. (For infor-The tuition and fees deduction is based on quali- determined by the eligible educational mation on expenses paid by a dependent stu-fied education expenses you pay for yourself, institution, that was included in the cost dent or third party, see Who Can Claim ayour spouse, or your dependent(s) for whom of attendance (for federal financial aid Dependent's Expenses, later.)you claim an exemption on your tax return. Gen- purposes) for a particular academic pe-erally, the deduction is allowed for qualified edu- If a refund of expenses paid in 2008 is re-riod and living arrangement of the stu-cation expenses paid in 2008 in connection with ceived before you file your tax return for 2008,dent.enrollment at an institution of higher education simply reduce the amount of the expenses paid
b. The actual amount charged if the stu-during 2008 or for an academic period (defined by the amount of the refund received. If the
dent is residing in housing owned orearlier under Student Loan Interest Deduction ) refund is received after you file your 2008 tax
operated by the eligible educational in-beginning in 2008 or in the first 3 months of return, see When Must the Deduction Be Repaid
stitution.2009. (Recaptured), in chapter 6 of Publication 970.
You are considered to receive a refund ofPayments with borrowed funds. You can You will need to contact the eligible educa- expenses when an eligible educational institu-claim a tuition and fees deduction for qualified tional institution for qualified room and board tion refunds loan proceeds to the lender on be-education expenses paid with the proceeds of a costs. half of the borrower. Follow the aboveloan. You use the expenses to figure the deduc- instructions according to when you are consid-tion for the year in which the expenses are paid, ered to receive the refund.not the year in which the loan is repaid. Treat No Double Benefit Allowedloan payments sent directly to the educational Amounts that do not reduce qualified educa-institution as paid on the date the institution  You cannot do any of the following. tion expenses. Do not reduce qualified edu-credits the student's account. cation expenses by amounts paid with funds the• Deduct qualified education expenses you
student receives as:deduct under any other provision of theStudent withdraws from class(es). You can
law, for example, as a business expense.claim a tuition and fees deduction for qualified • Payment for services, such as wages,
education expenses not refunded when a stu- • Deduct qualified education expenses for a • A loan,dent withdraws. student on your income tax return if you or
• A gift,anyone else claims a Hope or lifetime
learning credit for that same student for • An inheritance, orQualified Education Expenses the same year. • A withdrawal from the student's personalFor purposes of the tuition and fees deduction, • Deduct qualified education expenses that savings.qualified education expenses are tuition and have been used to figure the tax-free por-
certain related expenses required for enrollment tion of a distribution from a Coverdell edu- Do not reduce the qualified education ex-or attendance at an eligible educational institu- cation savings account (ESA) or a penses by any scholarship or fellowship re-tion. qualified tuition program (QTP). For a ported as income on the student's tax return in
QTP, this applies only to the amount of the following situations.Eligible educational institution. An eligible tax-free earnings that were distributed, noteducational institution is any college, university, • The use of the money is restricted to coststo the recovery of contributions to the pro-vocational school, or other postsecondary edu- of attendance (such as room and board)gram. See Figuring the Taxable Portion ofcational institution eligible to participate in a stu- other than qualified education expenses.a Distribution in chapter 7 (Coverdell ESA)dent aid program administered by the • The use of the money is not restricted andand in chapter 8 (QTP) of Publication 970.Department of Education. It includes virtually all is used to pay education expenses thataccredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri- • Deduct qualified education expenses that are not qualified (such as room andvately owned profit-making) postsecondary in- have been paid with tax-free interest on board).stitutions. The educational institution should be U.S. savings bonds (Form 8815). See Fig-
able to tell you if it is an eligible educational uring the Tax-Free Amount in chapter 10
institution. of Publication 970. Expenses That Do Not Qualify
Certain educational institutions located • Deduct qualified education expenses thatoutside the United States also participate in the Qualified education expenses do not includehave been paid with tax-free scholarship,U.S. Department of Education's Federal Stu- amounts paid for:
grant, or employer-provided educationaldent Aid (FSA) programs. • Insurance,assistance. See the following section on
Related expenses. Student-activity fees and Adjustments to qualified education ex- • Medical expenses (including student
expenses for course-related books, supplies, penses. health fees),
and equipment are included in qualified educa-
• Room and board (but see Students in Mid-tion expenses only if the fees and expenses Adjustments to qualified education ex- western disaster areas under Qualifiedmust be paid to the institution as a condition of penses. If you pay qualified education ex- Education Expenses, earlier, for an excep-enrollment or attendance. penses with certain tax-free funds, you cannot tion,
claim a deduction for those amounts. You mustStudents in Midwestern disaster areas. The • Transportation, orreduce the qualified education expenses by thedefinition of qualified education expenses is ex-
amount of any tax-free educational assistancepanded for students in Midwestern disaster ar- • Similar personal, living, or family ex-
eas. In addition to tuition and fees required for and refunds you received. penses.
Page 136 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Page 139 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This is true even if the amount must be paid to To help you figure your tuition and fees de-
the institution as a condition of enrollment or duction, you should receive Form 1098-T, Tui-
attendance. tion Statement. Generally, an eligible
educational institution (such as a college or uni-
Sports, games, hobbies, and noncredit versity) must send Form 1098-T (or acceptable
courses. Qualified education expenses gen- substitute) to each enrolled student by February
erally do not include expenses that relate to any 2, 2009.
course of instruction or other education that in- To claim the deduction, enter the allowable
volves sports, games or hobbies, or any non- amount on Form 1040, line 34, or Form 1040A,
credit course. However, if the course of line 19, and attach your completed Form 8917.
instruction or other education is part of the stu-
dent's degree program, these expenses can Table 19-3. Who Can Claim a
qualify. Dependent's Expenses
Comprehensive or bundled fees. Some eli- Do not rely on this table alone.
See Who Can Claim agible educational institutions combine all of their
Dependent's Expenses in chapterfees for an academic period into one amount. If
6 of Publication 970.you do not receive, or do not have access to, an
allocation showing how much you paid for quali- IF yourfied education expenses and how much you dependent ispaid for personal expenses, such as those listed an eligible
above, contact the institution. The institution is student and
required to make this allocation and provide you you... AND... THEN...
with the amount you paid (or were billed) for claim an you paid only you canqualified education expenses on Form 1098-T, exemption for all deduct theTuition Statement. See How Do You Figure the your qualified qualifiedDeduction, later, for more information about dependent education education
Form 1098-T. expenses expenses that you
for your paid. Your
dependent dependent cannotWho Is an Eligible Student take a deduction.
For purposes of the tuition and fees deduction, claim an your no one is allowed
exemption for dependent to take aan eligible student is a student who is enrolled in
your paid all deduction.one or more courses at an eligible educational
dependent qualifiedinstitution (defined earlier). The student must educationhave either a high school diploma or a General expensesEducational Development (GED) credential.
do not claim you paid no one is allowed
an exemption all to take aWho Can Claim a for your qualified deduction.
dependent, educationDependent's Expenses
but are expenses
eligible toGenerally, to claim the tuition and fees deduc-
tion for qualified education expenses for a de- do not claim your no one is allowed
pendent, you must: an exemption dependent to take a
for your paid all deduction.• Have paid the expenses, and dependent, qualified
but are education• Claim an exemption for the student as a
eligible to expensesdependent.
are not you paid only yourTable 19-3 summarizes who can claim the de-
eligible to all dependent canduction. claim an qualified deduct the
exemption for education amount you paid.
your expenses The amount youHow Much Can You
dependent paid is treated asDeduct a gift to your
dependent.The maximum tuition and fees deduction in
are not your only your2008 is $4,000, $2,000, or $0, depending on the
eligible to dependent dependent canamount of your MAGI. For details on figuring claim an paid all take a deduction.your MAGI, see chapter 6 of Publication 970. exemption for qualified
your education
dependent expenses
How Do You Figure the Deduction
Figure the deduction using Form 8917.
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 137

Page 140 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Five.
After you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to subtractStandard the deductions used to figure taxable income. You can subtract either the
standard deduction or itemized deductions. Itemized deductions are deduc-Deduction and tions for certain expenses that are listed on Schedule A (Form 1040). The ten
chapters in this part discuss the standard deduction, each itemized deduction,
Itemized and the limit on some of your itemized deductions if your adjusted gross
income exceeds certain amounts. See chapter 20 for the factors to consider
when deciding whether to subtract the standard deduction or itemized deduc-Deductions
tions.
• Have a net disaster loss from a federally the higher standard deduction for age cannot be
declared disaster. claimed.   
20. You benefit from the standard deduc- Higher Standard Deductiontion if your standard deduction is more
for Age (65 or Older)than the total of your allowable item-
TIP
ized deductions.Standard If you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled
to a higher standard deduction if you are age 65Persons not eligible for the standard deduc- or older at the end of the year. You are consid-Deduction tion. Your standard deduction is zero and you ered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday.should itemize any deductions you have if: Therefore, you can take a higher standard de-
• You are married and filing a separate re- duction for 2008 if you were born before January
turn, and your spouse itemizes deduc- 2, 1944.What's New tions,
• You are filing a tax return for a short taxStandard deduction increased. The stan-
Higher Standard Deductionyear because of a change in your annualdard deduction for most taxpayers who do not
accounting period, or for Blindnessitemize their deductions on Schedule A of Form
1040 is higher in 2008 than it was in 2007. The • You are a nonresident or dual-status alien If you are blind on the last day of the year andamount depends on your filing status. In addition during the year. You are considered a you do not itemize deductions, you are entitledto the annual increase due to inflation adjust- dual-status alien if you were both a nonresi- to a higher standard deduction. You qualify forments, your 2008 standard deduction is in- dent and resident alien during the year. this benefit if you are totally or partly blind.creased by: Note. If you are a nonresident alien who is
married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at• Any state or local real estate taxes you the end of the year, you can choose to be Partly blind. If you are partly blind, you mustpaid that would be deductible on Schedule treated as a U.S. resident. (See Publication get a certified statement from an eye doctor orA if you were itemizing deductions, up to 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.) If you registered optometrist that:$500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly), and make this choice, you can take the stan-
• You cannot see better than 20/200 in the• Any net disaster loss from a federally de- dard deduction.
better eye with glasses or contact lenses,clared disaster.
orYou can use the 2008 Standard Deduction If an exemption for you can be claimed
• Your field of vision is not more than 20Worksheet in this chapter to figure your stan- on another person's return (such as
degrees.dard deduction. your parents' return), your standard
CAUTION
!
deduction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-
If your eye condition will never improve be-tion for Dependents, later.
yond these limits, the statement should include
this fact. You must keep the statement in yourIntroduction records.
This chapter discusses the following topics. If your vision can be corrected beyond theseStandard Deduction
limits only by contact lenses that you can wear• How to figure the amount of your standard
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,deduction. Amount
you can take the higher standard deduction for• The standard deduction for dependents. blindness if you otherwise qualify.
• Who should itemize deductions.
The standard deduction amount depends onMost taxpayers have a choice of either taking Spouse 65 or Older or Blind
your filing status, whether you are 65 or older ora standard deduction or itemizing their deduc-
You can take the higher standard deduction ifblind, whether an exemption can be claimed fortions. If you have a choice, you can use the
you by another taxpayer, whether you pay state your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:method that gives you the lower tax. The stan-
or local real estate taxes, and whether you havedard deduction is a dollar amount that reduces • You file a joint return, ora net disaster loss from a federally declaredthe amount of income on which you are taxed. It • You file a separate return and can claimdisaster. Generally, the standard deductionis a benefit that eliminates the need for many amounts are adjusted each year for inflation. an exemption for your spouse becausetaxpayers to itemize actual deductions, such as Use Worksheet 20-1 to figure your standard your spouse had no gross income and anmedical expenses, charitable contributions, and deduction amount. exemption for your spouse could not betaxes, on Schedule A of Form 1040. The stan-
claimed by another taxpayer.dard deduction is higher for taxpayers who: Decedent's final return. The amount of the
• Are 65 or older, standard deduction for a decedent's final tax You cannot claim the higher standardreturn is the same as it would have been had the• Are blind, deduction for an individual other thandecedent continued to live. However, if the de- yourself and your spouse.• Pay state or local real estate taxes, or
CAUTION
! cedent was not 65 or older at the time of death,
Page 138 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

Page 141 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 5. The facts are the same as in and blind. She has interest income of $1,300Higher Standard Deduction for
Example 4 except that Bill and Lisa had a net and wages of $2,900. She did not pay real es-Real Estate Taxes disaster loss from a federally declared disaster tate taxes or have a net disaster loss. She has
of $8,000. That is the amount on line 18a of their no itemized deductions. Amy finds her standardYour standard deduction is increased by any
Form 4684. They enter $8,000 on line 6 of their deduction by using Worksheet 20-1. Becausestate and local real estate taxes you paid in
Standard Deduction Worksheet. On line 10 of she is single, she enters $5,450 on line 1. She2008, up to $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly).
the worksheet, they enter $22,000 ($10,900 + checks the ªYesº box on line 2, enters $3,200The taxes must be state or local real estate
$2,100 + $8,000 + $1,000), which is their stan- ($2,900 + $300) on line 3, and also enterstaxes that would be deductible on Form 1040
dard deduction. $3,200 (the smaller of line 1 and line 3) on line 4.(Schedule A) if you were itemizing your deduc-
Because she is blind, she enters $1,350 on linetions. Taxes deductible in arriving at adjusted
5. Because she did not pay real estate taxes orgross income, such as taxes on business real
have a net disaster loss, she does not fill outestate and taxes on foreign real estate, cannot
lines 6, 7, 8, and 9. She enters $4,550 ($3,200 +be used to increase your standard deduction. Standard Deduction $1,350) on line 10. Her standard deduction isIf you are increasing your standard deduc- $4,550.tion by the amount of real estate taxes you paid, for Dependents
be sure to check the box on line 39c of Form
1040 or line 23c of Form 1040A. The standard deduction for an individual for
whom an exemption can be claimed on another
Who Should Itemizeperson's tax return is generally limited to the
greater of:Higher Standard Deduction for Net
You should itemize deductions if your total de-Disaster Loss • $900, or ductions are more than the standard deduction
amount. Also, you should itemize if you do not• The individual's earned income for theYour standard deduction is increased by any net
qualify for the standard deduction, as discussedyear + $300 (but not more than the regulardisaster loss from a federally declared disaster
earlier under Persons not eligible for the stan-standard deduction amount, generallythat occurred in 2008. This amount is on Form
dard deduction.$5,450).4684, line 18a.
 You should first figure your itemized deduc-If you are increasing your standard deduc-
However, the standard deduction may be tions and compare that amount to your standardtion by the amount of your net disaster loss, be
higher if the individual is 65 or older or blind, paid deduction to make sure you are using thesure to check the box on line 39c of Form 1040.
state or local real estate taxes, or had a net method that gives you the greater benefit.See the instructions for Form 4684, Casual- disaster loss from a federally declared disaster.ties and Thefts, and Publication 4492-B, Infor- You may be subject to a limit on someIf an exemption for you (or your spouse if youmation for Affected Taxpayers in the Midwestern of your itemized deductions if your ad-are filing jointly) can be claimed on someoneDisaster Areas, for more information. justed gross income (AGI) is more than
CAUTION
!else's return, use Worksheet 20-1 to determine $159,950 ($79,975 if you are married filing sep-your standard deduction. arately). See chapter 29 and the instructions for
Examples Schedule A (Form 1040), line 29, for more infor-Earned income defined. Earned income is
mation on figuring the correct amount of yoursalaries, wages, tips, professional fees, andThe following examples illustrate how to deter- itemized deductions.other amounts received as pay for work youmine your standard deduction using Worksheet actually perform. When to itemize. You may benefit from20-1.  For purposes of the standard deduction, itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Formearned income also includes any part of a schol- 1040) if you:Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are arship or fellowship grant that you must includefiling a joint return for 2008. Neither is blind, and in your gross income. See Scholarships and • Do not qualify for the standard deduction,neither can be claimed as a dependent. They did Fellowships in chapter 1 of Publication 970 for or the amount you can claim is limited,not pay real estate taxes or have a net disaster more information on what qualifies as a scholar- • Had large uninsured medical and dentalloss. They decide not to itemize their deduc- ship or fellowship grant. expenses during the year,tions. Because they are married filing jointly,
they enter $10,900 on line 1 of Worksheet 20-1. Example 1. Michael is single. His parents • Paid interest and taxes on your home,They check the ªNoº box on line 2, so they also claim an exemption for him on their 2008 tax • Had large unreimbursed employee busi-enter $10,900 on lines 4 and 10. Their standard return. He has interest income of $780 and ness expenses or other miscellaneous de-deduction is $10,900. wages of $150. He did not pay real estate taxes ductions,or have a net disaster loss. He has no itemized
Example 2. The facts are the same as in deductions. Michael uses Worksheet 20-1 to • Had large uninsured casualty or theftExample 1, except that Larry is blind at the end find his standard deduction. Because he is sin- losses,of 2008, so he and Donna enter $1,050 on line 5 gle, he enters $5,450 on line 1. He checks the • Made large contributions to qualified chari-of Worksheet 20-1. They then enter $11,950 ªYesº box on line 2, enters $900 on line 3, and ties, or($10,900 + $1,050) on line 10, so their standard also enters $900 (the smaller of line 1 and line 3)
deduction is $11,950. on line 4. He leaves lines 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 blank • Have total itemized deductions that are
and enters $900 on line 10. His standard deduc- more than the standard deduction to which
Example 3. Bill and Lisa are filing a joint tion is $900. you otherwise are entitled.
return for 2008. Both are over age 65. Neither is
These deductions are explained in chaptersblind, and neither can be claimed as a depen- Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time col- 21±28.dent. They did not pay real estate taxes or have lege student, is claimed on his parents' 2008 tax
a net disaster loss. They do not itemize deduc- return. Joe is married and files a separate return. If you decide to itemize your deductions, com-
tions, so they use Worksheet 20-1. Because His wife does not itemize deductions on her plete Schedule A and attach it to your Form
they are married filing jointly, they enter $10,900 separate return. Joe has $1,500 in interest in- 1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, line
on line 1. They check the ªNoº box on line 2, so come and wages of $3,800. He did not pay real 29, on Form 1040, line 40.
they also enter $10,900 on line 4. Because they estate taxes or have a net disaster loss. He has
are both over age 65, they enter $2,100 ($1,050 Electing to itemize for state tax or other pur-no itemized deductions. Joe finds his standard
×  2) on line 5. They enter $13,000 ($10,900 + poses. Even if your itemized deductions arededuction by using Worksheet 20-1. Because
$2,100) on line 10, so their standard deduction is less than the amount of your standard deduc-he is married filing a separate return, he enters
$13,000. tion, you can elect to itemize deductions on your$5,450 on line 1. He checks the ªYesº box on
federal return rather than take the standard de-line 2, enters $4,100 ($3,800 + $300) on line 3,
Example 4. The facts are the same as in duction. You may want to do this, for example, ifand also enters $4,100 (the smaller of line 1 and
Example 3 except that Bill and Lisa paid $3,000 the tax benefit of being able to itemize yourline 3) on line 4. He leaves lines 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9
in local real estate taxes on their home in 2008, deductions on your state tax return is greaterblank and enters $4,100 on line 10. His standard
so they enter $3,000 on line 7 of the worksheet. than the tax benefit you lose on your federaldeduction is $4,100.
They then enter $1,000 on lines 8 and 9 and return by not taking the standard deduction. To
$14,000 ($10,900 + $2,100 + $1,000) on line 10. Example 3. Amy, who is single, is claimed make this election, you must check the box on
Their standard deduction is $14,000. on her parents' 2008 return. She is 18 years old line 30 of Schedule A.
Chapter 20 Standard Deduction Page 139

Page 142 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Changing your mind. If you do not itemize Married persons who filed separate re- one of you may pay more tax than you would
your deductions and later find that you should have paid by using the other method. You bothturns. You can change methods of taking de-
have itemized Ð or if you itemize your deduc- must use the same method of claiming deduc-ductions only if you and your spouse both make
tions and later find you should not have Ð you tions. If one itemizes deductions, the otherthe same changes. Both of you must file a con-can change your return by filing Form 1040X, should itemize because he or she will not qualifysent to assessment for any additional tax eitherAmended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. for the standard deduction. See Persons notone may owe as a result of the change.See Amended Returns and Claims for Refund eligible for the standard deduction, earlier.
You and your spouse can use the methodin chapter 1 for more information on amended
returns. that gives you the lower total tax, even though
Worksheet 20-1. 2008 Standard Deduction Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Caution. If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, do not complete this
worksheet. You cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before January 2, 1944, are blind, pay real estate taxes, or have a net
disaster loss.
1. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status.
• Single or married filing separately Ð $5,450
...................... . 1.• Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er) Ð
$10,900 }
• Head of household Ð $8,000
2. Can you (or your spouse if filing jointly) be claimed as a dependent?
 No. Skip line 3; enter the amount from line 1 on line 4.
 Yes. Go to line 3.
3. Is your earned income* more than $600?
 Yes. Add $300 to your earned income. Enter the total } ...................... . 3.
 No. Enter $900
4. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 3 .................................................... . 4.
5. If born before January 2, 1944, or blind, multiply the number on Form 1040, line 39a (or Form 1040A, line
23a**) by $1,050 ($1,350 if single or head of household). Otherwise, enter -0- ..................... . 5.
6. Enter any net disaster loss from Form 4684, line 18a. If more than zero, check the box on Form 1040, line
39c ** ........................................................................ . 6.
7. Enter the state and local real estate taxes you paid that would be deductible on Schedule A
(Form 1040), line 6, if you were itemizing your deductions. See the instructions for Schedule
A (Form 1040), line 6. Do not include foreign real estate taxes .................... . 7.
8. Enter $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly) ................................... . 8.
9. Enter the smaller of line 7 or line 8. If more than zero, check the box on Form 1040, line 39c (or Form
1040A, line 23c**) ................................................................ . 9.
10. Add lines 4, 5, 6, and 9. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 40 (or Form 1040A, line 24**) ...... . 10.
* Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also
includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must include in your income. Generally, your earned income is the total of the amount(s)
you reported on Form 1040, lines 7, 12, and 18, minus the amount, if any, on line 27 (or the amount you reported on Form 1040A, line 7).
**If the amount on line 6 of this worksheet is more than zero, you cannot file Form 1040A; you must file Form 1040.
Page 140 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

Page 143 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form (and Instructions)
How Much of the❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
21. Deductions Expenses Can You
Deduct?Medical and
You can deduct only the amount of your medical
What Are Medical and dental expenses that is more than 7.5% of
Dental Expenses your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, line
Expenses? 38).
In this chapter, the term ª7.5% limitº is used
Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, to refer to 7.5% of your adjusted gross income.What's New cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of dis- The phrase ªsubject to the 7.5% limitº is also
used. This phrase means that you must subtractease, and the costs for treatments affecting anyStandard mileage rate. The standard mile- 7.5% (.075) of your adjusted gross income frompart or function of the body. They include theage rate allowed for operating expenses for a your medical expenses to figure your medicalcosts of equipment, supplies, and diagnosticcar when you use it for medical reasons is: expense deduction.devices needed for these purposes. They also
• 19 cents per mile from January 1±June include dental expenses. Example. Your adjusted gross income is30, and Medical care expenses must be primarily to $40,000, 7.5% of which is $3,000. You paid• 27 cents per mile from July 1±December alleviate or prevent a physical or mental defect medical expenses of $2,500. You cannot deduct31, 2008. any of your medical expenses because they areor illness. Do not include expenses that are
not more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross in-See Transportation under What Medical Ex- merely beneficial to general health, such as vita-
come.penses Are Includible. mins or a vacation.
Medical expenses include the premiums youDiagnostic medical tests. The following
pay for insurance that covers the expenses ofmedical procedures and devices have been de-
termined to be medical expenses: medical care, and the amounts you pay for Whose Medicaltransportation to get medical care. Medical ex-• An annual physical examination.
penses also include amounts paid for qualified Expenses• A full-body electronic scan. long-term care services and limited amounts
• A pregnancy test kit. paid for any qualified long-term care insurance Can You Include?
contract.
You can generally include medical expenses
you pay for yourself as well as those you pay for
someone who was your spouse or your depen-
Reminders dent either when the services were provided or
What Expenses Can when you paid for them. There are different rules
for decedents and for individuals who are theHealth coverage tax credit. There is a credit
You Include This Year? subject of multiple support agreements. Seefor health insurance premiums paid by certain
Support claimed under a multiple support agree-workers who are displaced by foreign trade or
You can include only the medical and dental ment, later.who are receiving a pension from the Pension
expenses you paid this year, regardless of whenBenefit Guaranty Corporation. For more infor- What if you are claimed as a dependent onmation, see Health Coverage Tax Credit  in the services were provided. If you pay medical someone else's return? Even if you, or yourchapter 37. expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver spouse if you are filing a joint return, are claimedthe check generally is the date of payment. If as a dependent on someone else's tax return,you use a ªpay-by-phoneº or ªonlineº account to you can include the medical expenses of any
pay your medical expenses, the date reported person you could have claimed as a dependentIntroduction on the statement of the financial institution if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, were not
being claimed as a dependent on someoneshowing when payment was made is the date ofThis chapter will help you determine the follow-
else's return.payment. If you use a credit card, include medi-ing.
cal expenses you charge to your credit card in• What medical expenses are. the year the charge is made, not when you Yourself• What expenses you can include this year. actually pay the amount charged.
You can include medical expenses you paid for• How much of the expenses you can de- yourself.duct. Separate returns. If you and your spouse live
• Whose medical expenses you can include. in a noncommunity property state and file sepa- Spouserate returns, each of you can include only the• What medical expenses are includible.
medical expenses you actually paid. Any medi- You can include medical expenses you paid for• How to treat reimbursements. cal expenses paid out of a joint checking ac- your spouse. To include these expenses, you
• How to report the deduction on your tax must have been married either at the time yourcount in which you and your spouse have the
return. spouse received the medical services or at thesame interest are considered to have been paid
time you paid the medical expenses.equally by each of you, unless you can show• How to report impairment-related work ex-
otherwise.penses. Example 1. Mary received medical treat-
Community property states. If you and• How to report health insurance costs if you ment before she married Bill. Bill paid for the
are self-employed. your spouse live in a community property state treatment after they married. Bill can include
these expenses in figuring his medical expenseand file separate returns, any medical expenses
deduction even if Bill and Mary file separatepaid out of community funds are divided equally.Useful Items returns.Each of you should include half the expenses. IfYou may want to see: If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could notmedical expenses are paid out of the separate include Mary's expenses in his separate return.funds of one spouse, only the spouse who paidPublications Mary would include the amounts she paid duringthe medical expenses can include them. If you the year in her separate return. If they filed a❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses live in a community property state, are married, joint return, the medical expenses both paid
and file a separate return, see Publication 555,❏ 969 Health Savings Accounts and Other during the year would be used to figure their
Community Property.Tax-Favored Health Plans medical expense deduction.
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 141

Page 144 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. This year, John paid medical You may be able to take an adoption For rules regarding what expenses you can
credit for other expenses related to an include this year, see What Expenses Can Youexpenses for his wife Louise, who died last year.
adoption. See the Instructions for Form Include This Year, earlier.John married Belle this year and they file a joint
TIP
8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses,  for morereturn. Because John was married to Louise Any medical expenses paid by others who
information. joined you in the agreement cannot be includedwhen she received the medical services, he can
as medical expenses by anyone. However, youinclude those expenses in figuring his medical
can include the entire unreimbursed amount youdeduction for this year. Child of divorced or separated parents. For
paid for medical expenses.purposes of the medical and dental expenses
deduction, a child of divorced or separated par-Dependent Example. You and your three brothers eachents can be treated as a dependent of both
provide one-fourth of your mother's total sup-parents. Each parent can include the medicalYou can include medical expenses you paid for port. Under a multiple support agreement, youexpenses he or she pays for the child, even if theyour dependent. For you to include these ex- treat your mother as your dependent. You paidother parent claims the child's dependency ex-penses, the person must have been your depen- all of her medical expenses. Your brothers reim-emption, if:dent either at the time the medical services were bursed you for three-fourths of these expenses.provided or at the time you paid the expenses. A 1. The child is in the custody of one or both In figuring your medical expense deduction, youperson generally qualifies as your dependent for parents for more than half the year, can include only one-fourth of your mother's
purposes of the medical expense deduction if medical expenses. Your brothers cannot include2. The child receives over half of his or herboth of the following requirements are met. any part of the expenses. However, if you andsupport during the year from his or her your brothers share the nonmedical supportparents, and1. The person was a qualifying child (defined items and you separately pay all of yourlater) or a qualifying relative (defined later), 3. The child's parents: mother's medical expenses, you can include theand unreimbursed amount you paid for her medicala. Are divorced or legally separated under expenses in your medical expenses.2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national, a decree of divorce or separate mainte-or a resident of the United States, Canada, nance,or Mexico. If your qualifying child was Decedentb. Are separated under a written separa-adopted, see Exception for adopted child,
tion agreement, ornext. Medical expenses paid before death by the de-
cedent are included in figuring any deduction forc. Live apart at all times during the last 6 medical and dental expenses on the decedent'smonths of the year. final income tax return. This includes expensesException for adopted child. If you are a
for the decedent's spouse and dependents asU.S. citizen or U.S. national and your adopted This does not apply if the child's exemption is
well as for the decedent.child lived with you as a member of your house- being claimed under a multiple support agree-
The survivor or personal representative of ahold for 2008, that child does not have to be a ment (discussed later).
decedent can choose to treat certain expensesU.S. citizen or national or a resident of the
paid by the decedent's estate for the decedent'sUnited States, Canada, or Mexico.
medical care as paid by the decedent at the timeQualifying Relative
the medical services were provided. The ex-
A qualifying relative is a person: penses must be paid within the 1-year periodQualifying Child
beginning with the day after the date of death. If1. Who is your:A qualifying child is a child who: you are the survivor or personal representative
making this choice, you must attach a statementa. Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster to the decedent's Form 1040 (or the decedent'sa descendant of any of them (for exam-child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis- amended return, Form 1040X) saying that theple, your grandchild),ter, or a descendant of any of them (for expenses have not been and will not be claimed
example, your grandchild, niece, or b. Brother, sister, or a son or daughter of on the estate tax return.
nephew), either of them, Qualified medical expenses paid
2. At the end of 2008 was: c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sib- before death by the decedent are not
ling of either of them (for example, your deductible if paid with a tax-free distri-
CAUTION
!a. Under age 19, grandmother, grandfather, aunt, or un- bution from any Archer MSA or health savings
cle), account.b. Under age 24 and a full-time student, or
Amended returns and claims for refund ared. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather,c. Permanently and totally disabled, discussed in chapter 1.stepmother, son-in-law, daugh-
ter-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law,3. Lived with you for more than half of 2008, What if you pay medical expenses of a de-brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, orand ceased spouse or dependent? If you paide. Any other person (other than your4. Did not provide over half of his or her own medical expenses for your deceased spouse orspouse) who lived with you all year as asupport for 2008. dependent, include them as medical expensesmember of your household if your rela- on your Form 1040 in the year paid, whethertionship did not violate local law, they are paid before or after the decedent's
Adopted child. A legally adopted child is death. The expenses can be included if the2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Quali- person was your spouse or dependent either attreated as your own child. This includes a child fying Child earlier) of any other person for the time the medical services were provided orlawfully placed with you for legal adoption. 2008, and at the time you paid the expenses.You can include medical expenses that you 3. For whom you provided over half of thepaid for a child before adoption if the child quali- support in 2008. But see Child of divorcedfied as your dependent when the medical serv- or separated parents, earlier, and Supportices were provided or when the expenses were claimed under a multiple support agree- What Medicalpaid. ment, next.
If you pay back an adoption agency or other Expenses Arepersons for medical expenses they paid under Support claimed under a multiple supportan agreement with you, you are treated as hav- Includible?agreement. If you are considered to have pro-ing paid those expenses provided you clearly vided more than half of a qualifying relative'ssubstantiate that the payment is directly attribu- Use Table 21-1 below, as a guide to determinesupport under a multiple support agreement,table to the medical care of the child. which medical and dental expenses you canyou can include medical expenses you pay for
include on Schedule A (Form 1040).But if you pay the agency or other person for that person. A multiple support agreement is
medical care that was provided and paid for used when two or more people provide more This table does not include all possible medi-
before adoption negotiations began, you cannot than half of a person's support, but no one alone cal expenses. To determine if an expense not
include them as medical expenses. provides more than half. listed can be included in figuring your medical
Page 142 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 145 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expense deduction, see What Are Medical Ex- Note. When figuring the amount of insur- qualified long-term care services under a flexible
ance premiums you can include in medical ex- spending or similar arrangement must be in-penses, earlier.
penses on Schedule A, do not include any cluded in your income. This amount will be re-
health coverage tax credit advance payments ported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.Insurance Premiums shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H, Health Cover-
age Tax Credit (HCTC) Advance Payments. Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).You can include in medical expenses insurance
If you have medical expenses that are reim-premiums you pay for policies that cover medi- Employer-sponsored health insurance plan. bursed by a health reimbursement arrange-cal care. Medical care policies can provide pay- Do not include in your medical and dental ex- ment, you cannot include those expenses inment for treatment that includes: penses any insurance premiums paid by an em- your medical expenses. This is because an HRAployer-sponsored health insurance plan unless• Hospitalization, surgical services, X-rays, is funded solely by the employer.the premiums are included in box 1 of your Form
• Prescription drugs and insulin, W-2. Also, do not include any other medical and Retired public safety officers. If you are adental expenses paid by the plan unless the• Dental Care, retired public safety officer, do not include asamount paid is included in box 1 of your Form medical expenses any health or long-term care• Replacement of lost or damaged contact W-2. premiums that you elect to have paid withlenses, or
tax-free distributions from your retirement plan.Example. You are a federal employee par-• Long-term care (subject to additional limi- This applies only to distributions that would oth-ticipating in the premium conversion plan of thetations). See Qualified Long-term Care In- erwise be included in income.Federal Employee Health Benefits (FEHB) pro-surance Contracts in Publication 502. gram. Your share of the FEHB premium is paid
Medicare A. If you are covered under socialby making a pre-tax reduction in your salary.If you have a policy that provides payments for security (or if you are a government employeeBecause you are an employee whose insuranceother than medical care, you can include the who paid Medicare tax), you are enrolled inpremiums are paid with money that is neverpremiums for the medical care part of the policy Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare Aincluded in your gross income, you cannot de-if the charge for the medical part is reasonable. is not a medical expense. If you are not coveredduct the premiums paid with that money.The cost of the medical part must be separately under social security (or were not a government
stated in the insurance contract or given to you Long-term care services. Contributions employee who paid Medicare tax), you can vol-
in a separate statement. made by your employer to provide coverage for untarily enroll in Medicare A. In this situation you
Table 21-1. Medical and Dental Expenses Checklist See Publication 502 for more information for these and other
expenses.
You can include: You cannot include:
• Bandages • Medical and hospital • Baby sitting and childcare • Medical insurance included
• Birth control pills prescribed insurance premiums in a car insurance policy• Bottled water
by your doctor covering all persons• Oxygen equipment and • Contributions to Archer MSAs
injured in or by your car• Body scan oxygen (see Publication 969)
• Medicine you buy without a• Capital expenses for • Part of life-care fee paid to • Diaper service
prescriptionequipment or improvements retirement home designated • Expenses for your general
to your home needed for for medical care • Nursing care for a healthyhealth (even if following your
medical care (see the baby• Physical examination doctor's advice) such asÐ
worksheet in Publication • Prescription drugs you• Pregnancy test kit ÐHealth club dues
502) brought in (or orderedÐHousehold help (even if• Prescription medicines
• Diagnostic devices shipped) from anotherrecommended by a doctor)(prescribed by a doctor) and
country, in most cases• Expenses of an organ ÐSocial activities, such asinsulin
donor dancing or swimming lessons • Nutritional supplements,• Psychiatric and
ÐTrip for general health vitamins, herbal• Eye surgeryÐto promote psychological treatment
improvement supplements, ªnaturalthe correct function of the • Social security tax, medicines,º etc., unlesseye • Flexible spending accountMedicare tax, FUTA, and recommended by areimbursements for medical• Fertility enhancement, state employment tax for medical practitioner as aexpenses (if contributionscertain procedures worker providing medical treatment for a specificwere on a pre-tax basis)• Guide dogs or other care (see Wages for medical condition• Funeral, burial, or cremationanimals aiding the blind, nursing services, below) diagnosed by a physicianexpensesdeaf, and disabled • Special items (artificial • Surgery for purely• Health savings account• Hospital services fees (lab limbs, false teeth, cosmetic reasonspayments for medicalwork, therapy, nursing eye-glasses, contact
• Toothpaste, toiletries,expenses services, surgery, etc.) lenses, hearing aids,
cosmetics, etc.crutches, wheelchair, etc.) • Illegal operation or treatment• Lead-based paint removal
• Teeth whitening• Special education for • Life insurance or income• Legal abortion
• Weight-loss expenses notmentally or physically protection policies, or policies• Legal operation to prevent for the treatment of obesitydisabled persons providing payment for loss ofhaving children such as a or other diseaselife, limb, sight, etc.• Stop-smoking programsvasectomy or tubal ligation
• Maternity clothes• Transportation for needed• Long-term care contracts,
medical carequalified
• Treatment at a drug or• Meals and lodging provided
alcohol center (includesby a hospital during medical
meals and lodging providedtreatment
by the center)• Medical services fees (from
• Wages for nursing servicesdoctors, dentists, surgeons,
specialists, and other • Weight-loss, certain
medical practitioners) expenses for obesity
• Medicare Part D premiums
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 143

Page 146 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can include the premiums you paid for Medicare included as a medical expense for lodging. Bill includes the $776 of car expenses with
A as a medical expense. Meals are not included. his other medical expenses for the year because
the $776 is more than the $530 he figured using
Medicare B. Medicare B is supplemental Nursing home. You can include in medical actual expenses.
medical insurance. Premiums you pay for Medi- expenses the cost of medical care in a nursing
care B are a medical expense. If you applied for home, home for the aged, or similar institution, Transportation expenses you cannot in-it at age 65 or after you became disabled, you for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents. clude. You cannot include in medical ex-can include in medical expenses the monthly This includes the cost of meals and lodging in penses the cost of transportation expenses inpremiums you paid. Check the information you the home if a principal reason for being there is the following situations.received from the Social Security Administration to get medical care.
• Going to and from work, even if your con-to find out your premium. Do not include the cost of meals and lodging dition requires an unusual means of trans-if the reason for being in the home is personal. portation.Medicare D.  Medicare D is a voluntary pre- You can, however, include in medical expensesscription drug insurance program for persons the part of the cost that is for medical or nursing • Travel for purely personal reasons to an-with Medicare A or B. You can include as a care. other city for an operation or other medicalmedical expense premiums you pay for Medi- care.care D.
Physical Examination • Travel that is merely for the general im-
Prepaid insurance premiums. Premiums provement of one's health.You can include in medical expenses theyou pay before you are age 65 for insurance for • The costs of operating a speciallyamount you pay for an annual physical examina-medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your equipped car for other than medical rea-tion and diagnostic test by a physician. You dodependents after you reach age 65 are medical sons.not have to be ill at the time of the examination.care expenses in the year paid if they are:
• Payable in equal yearly installments, or
Transportationmore often, and Disabled Dependent
• Payable for at least 10 years, or until you You can include in medical expenses amounts Care Expenses
reach age 65 (but not for less than 5 paid for transportation primarily for, and essen-
years). Some disabled dependent care expenses maytial to, medical care.
qualify as either:
You can include:Unused sick leave used to pay premiums. • Medical expenses or
You must include in gross income cash pay- • Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares, or ambu- • Work-related expenses for purposes ofments you receive at the time of retirement for lance service, taking a credit for dependent care. (Seeunused sick leave. You also must include in • Transportation expenses of a parent who chapter 32.)gross income the value of unused sick leave must go with a child who needs medicalthat, at your option, your employer applies to the You can choose to apply them either way ascare,cost of your continuing participation in your em- long as you do not use the same expenses to
ployer's health plan after you retire. You can • Transportation expenses of a nurse or claim both a credit and a medical expense de-
include this cost of continuing participation in the other person who can give injections, duction.
health plan as a medical expense. medications, or other treatment required
If you participate in a health plan where your by a patient who is traveling to get medical
employer automatically applies the value of un- care and is unable to travel alone, and
used sick leave to the cost of your continuing • Transportation expenses for regular visits How Do You Treatparticipation in the health plan (and you do not to see a mentally ill dependent, if thesehave the option to receive cash), do not include visits are recommended as a part of treat- Reimbursements?the value of the unused sick leave in gross ment.income. You cannot include this cost of continu- You can include in medical expenses only thoseing participation in that health plan as a medical amounts paid during the taxable year for whichexpense. Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocket you received no insurance or other reimburse-expenses, such as the cost of gas and oil, when ment.you use your car for medical reasons. You can-Meals and Lodging not include depreciation, insurance, general re-
pair, or maintenance expenses. Insurance ReimbursementYou can include in medical expenses the cost of
If you do not want to use your actual ex-meals and lodging at a hospital or similar institu- You must reduce your total medical expensespenses for 2008, you can use a standard rate oftion if a principal reason for being there is to get for the year by all reimbursements for medical19 cents a mile for use of a car for medicalmedical care. See Nursing home, later. expenses that you receive from insurance orreasons from January 1 ±June 30. Use the rateYou may be able to include in medical ex-
other sources during the year. This includesof 27 cents a mile for miles driven from Julypenses the cost of lodging not provided in a
payments from Medicare.1±December 31, for medical reasons.hospital or similar institution. You can include
Even if a policy provides reimbursement forthe cost of such lodging while away from home if  You can also include parking fees and tolls.
only certain specific medical expenses, youall of the following requirements are met. You can add these fees and tolls to your medical
must use amounts you receive from that policyexpenses whether you use actual expenses or• The lodging is primarily for and essential to reduce your total medical expenses, includinguse the standard mileage rate.to medical care. those it does not provide reimbursement for.
• The medical care is provided by a doctor Example. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for
in a licensed hospital or in a medical care Example. You have insurance policies thatmedical reasons during the year. Bill drove
facility related to, or the equivalent of, a cover your hospital and doctors' bills but not1,000 from January 1±June 30 and 1,800 miles
licensed hospital. from July 1 ±December 31. He spent $400 for your nursing bills. The insurance you receive for
gas, $30 for oil, and $100 for tolls and parking. the hospital and doctors' bills is more than their• The lodging is not lavish or extravagant He wants to figure the amount he can include in charges. In figuring your medical deduction, youunder the circumstances. medical expenses both ways to see which gives must reduce the total amount you spent for med-
• There is no significant element of personal him the greater deduction. ical care by the total amount of insurance you
pleasure, recreation, or vacation in the received, even if the policies do not cover someHe figures the actual expenses first. He addstravel away from home. of your medical expenses.the $400 for gas, the $30 for oil, and the $100 for
tolls and parking for a total of $530.The amount you include in medical expenses for
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).lodging cannot be more than $50 for each night He then figures the standard mileage
A health reimbursement arrangement is an em-for each person. You can include lodging for a amount. He multiplies the 1,000 miles by 19
ployer-funded plan that reimburses employeesperson traveling with the person receiving the cents a mile and 1,800 miles by 27 cents a mile
for medical care expenses and allows unusedmedical care. For example, if a parent is travel- for a total of $676. He then adds the $100 in tolls
amounts to be carried forward. An HRA ising with a sick child, up to $100 per night can be and parking for a total of $776.
Page 144 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 147 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Last year, you had medical ex-
penses of $500. You cannot deduct the $500
because it is less than 7.5% of your adjusted
gross income. If, in a later year, you are reim-
bursed for any of the $500 in medical expenses,
you do not include the amount reimbursed in
your gross income.
Damages for Personal
Injuries
If you receive an amount in settlement of a
personal injury suit, part of that award may be for
medical expenses that you deducted in an ear-
lier year. If it is, you must include that part in your
income in the year you receive it to the extent it
reduced your taxable income in the earlier year.
See Reimbursement in a Later Year, discussed
under How Do You Treat Reimbursements.
Future medical expenses. If you receive an
amount in settlement of a damage suit for per-
sonal injuries, part of that award may be for
future medical expenses. If it is, you must re-
duce any future medical expenses for these
injuries until the amount you received has been
completely used.
How Do You Figure
and Report the
Deduction on Your 
Figure 21-A. Is Your Excess Medical Reimbursement Taxable?
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this chapter.
Was any part of your
premiums paid by
your employer?
Were your employer’s
contributions to your
premiums included in
your income?
Did you pay any part
of the premiums?
NONE of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Tax Return?
funded solely by the employer and the reim- reimbursement. You generally do not include
bursements for medical expenses, up to a maxi- the excess reimbursement in your gross in- Once you have determined which medical care
mum dollar amount for a coverage period, are come. expenses you can include, you figure and report
not included in your income. the deduction on your tax return.
Premiums paid by you and your employer.Other reimbursements. Generally, you do If both you and your employer contribute to your What Tax Form Do Younot reduce medical expenses by payments you medical insurance plan and your employer'sreceive for: Use?contributions are not included in your gross in-
come, you must include in your gross income• Permanent loss or loss of use of a mem- You figure your medical expense deduction onthe part of your excess reimbursement that isber or function of the body (loss of limb, lines 1 ±4 of Schedule A, Form 1040. You can-from your employer's contribution.sight, hearing, etc.) or disfigurement to the not claim medical expenses on Form 1040A, orextent the payment is based on the nature See Publication 502 to figure the amount of Form 1040EZ. If you need more information onof the injury without regard to the amount the excess reimbursement you must include in itemized deductions or you are not sure if youof time lost from work, or gross income. can itemize, see chapters 20 and 29.
• Loss of earnings. Enter the amount you paid for medical andReimbursement in a later year. If you are dental expenses on line 1, Schedule A (Formreimbursed in a later year for medical expensesYou must, however, reduce your medical ex- 1040). This should be your expenses that wereyou deducted in an earlier year, you generallypenses by any part of these payments that is not reimbursed by insurance or any othermust report the reimbursement as income up todesignated for medical costs. See How Do You sources.the amount you previously deducted as medicalFigure and Report the Deduction on Your Tax You can deduct only the amount of yourexpenses.Return, later. medical and dental expenses that is more thanHowever, do not report as income theFor how to treat damages received for per- 7.5% of your adjusted gross income shown onamount of reimbursement you received up to thesonal injury or sickness, see Damages for Per- line 38, Form 1040. For an example, see theamount of your medical deductions that did notsonal Injuries, later. partial Schedule A, above.reduce your tax for the earlier year. For moreYou do not have a medical deduction if you
information about the recovery of an amountare reimbursed for all of your medical expenses
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in anfor the year.
earlier year, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries
Excess reimbursement. If you are reim- in chapter 12.  Impairment-Relatedbursed more than your medical expenses, you
may have to include the excess in income. You Work ExpensesMedical expenses not deducted. If you didmay want to use Figure 21-A to help you decide not deduct a medical expense in the year youif any of your reimbursement is taxable. If you are disabled, you can take a businesspaid it because your medical expenses were not
deduction for expenses that are necessary forPremiums paid by you. If you pay either more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income,
you to be able to work. If you take a businessthe entire premium for your medical insurance or or because you did not itemize deductions, do
deduction for these impairment-related work ex-all of the costs of a plan similar to medical not include the reimbursement up to the amount
penses, they are not subject to the 7.5% limitinsurance and your insurance payments or other of the expense in income. However, if the reim-
that applies to medical expenses.reimbursements are more than your total medi- bursement is more than the expense, see Ex-
You are disabled if you have:cal expenses for the year, you have an excess cess reimbursement, earlier.
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 145

Page 148 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3,434
2,475
959
33,000
Bill and Helen Jones 000000 000
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and 
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-1)1
22
3Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 38
(99) /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A&B (Form 1040).
2008
• A physical or mental disability (for exam- For those purposes, you were self-employed
ple, blindness or deafness) that function- if you were a general partner (or a limited partner
ally limits your being employed, or receiving guaranteed payments) or you re- 22.ceived wages from an S corporation in which• A physical or mental impairment (for ex-
you were more than a 2% shareholder.ample, a sight or hearing impairment) that
substantially limits one or more of your The insurance plan must be established
Taxesmajor life activities, such as performing under your trade or business and the deduction
manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath- cannot be more than your earned income from
ing, learning, or working. that trade or business.
What's NewYou cannot deduct payments for medical
Impairment-related expenses defined. Im- insurance for any month in which you were eligi-
pairment-related expenses are those ordinary ble to participate in a health plan subsidized by Limit on itemized deductions. The amount
and necessary business expenses that are: of adjusted gross income allowed without limit-your employer or your spouse's employer. You
ing your itemized deductions has increased. Forcannot deduct payments for a qualified• Necessary for you to do your work satis- 2008, if your adjusted gross income is more thanlong-term care insurance contract for any monthfactorily, $159,950 ($79,975 if you are married filing sep-in which you were eligible to participate in a• For goods and services not required or arately), you may have to reduce the amount oflong-term care insurance plan subsidized byused, other than incidentally, in your per- certain itemized deductions, including most mis-your employer or your spouse's employer.sonal activities, and cellaneous deductions. For more informationIf you qualify to take the deduction, use the and a worksheet, see the instructions for Sched-• Not specifically covered under other in- Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction ule A (Form 1040), line 29.come tax laws. Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to fig-
Deduction for general sales taxes extended.ure the amount you can deduct. But if any of the
The deduction for state and local general salesWhere to report. If you are self-employed, following applies, do not use the worksheet.
taxes that you can elect to take as an itemizeddeduct the business expenses on the appropri- • You had more than one source of income deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040) instead ofate form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E, or F) used to subject to self-employment tax. state and local income taxes was extendedreport your business income and expenses.
through 2009.• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-If you are an employee, complete Form come, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned2106, Employee Business Expenses, or Form Income Exclusion.2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Employee Business
• You are using amounts paid for qualifiedExpenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form 1040), Introductionline 28, that part of the amount on Form 2106, long-term care insurance to figure the de-
line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, that is related to duction. This chapter discusses which taxes you can
your impairment. Enter the amount that is unre- deduct if you itemize deductions on Schedule AIf you cannot use the worksheet in the Formlated to your impairment on Schedule A (Form (Form 1040). It also explains which taxes you1040 instructions, use the worksheet in Publica-1040), line 21. Your impairment-related work can deduct on other schedules or forms andtion 535, Business Expenses, to figure your de-expenses are not subject to the which taxes you cannot deduct.duction.2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies This chapter covers the following topics.
to other employee business expenses. • Income taxes (federal, state, local, andNote. When figuring the amount you can foreign).Example. You are blind. You must use a deduct for insurance premiums, do not include
reader to do your work. You use the reader both • General sales taxes (state and local).any advance payments shown in box 1 of Formduring your regular working hours at your place 1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) • Real estate taxes (state, local, and for-of work and outside your regular working hours Advance Payments. Also, if you are claiming the eign).away from your place of work. The reader's health coverage tax credit, subtract the amountservices are only for your work. You can deduct • Personal property taxes (state and local).shown on Form 8885, line 4, from the total insur-your expenses for the reader as business ex- ance premiums you paid. • Taxes and fees you cannot deduct.penses.
Also, do not include amounts paid for health Use Table 22-1 as a guide to determine whichinsurance coverage with retirement plan distri- taxes you can deduct.butions that were tax-free because you are a The end of the chapter contains a sectionretired public safety officer. that explains which forms you use to deductHealth Insurance Costs different types of taxes.
Where to report. You take this deduction onfor Self-Employed Form 1040, line 29. If you itemize your deduc- Business taxes. You can deduct certain
tions and do not claim 100% of your taxes only if they are ordinary and necessaryPersons self-employed health insurance on line 29, in- expenses of your trade or business or of produc-
clude any remaining premiums with all other ing income. For information on these taxes, seeIf you were self-employed and had a net profit
Publication 535, Business Expenses.medical care expenses on Schedule A (Formfor the year, you may be able to deduct, as an
1040), subject to the 7.5% limit. See chapter 6 ofadjustment to income, amounts paid for medical
Publication 535, Business Expenses, for moreand qualified long-term care insurance on behalf State or local taxes. These are taxes im-
information.of yourself, your spouse, and your dependents. posed by the 50 states, U.S. possessions, or
Page 146 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 149 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any of their political subdivisions (such as a separate federal returns, each of you can deduct
county or city), or by the District of Columbia. on your separate federal return a part of the totalIncome Taxes state and local income taxes paid during the taxIndian tribal government. An Indian tribal year. You can deduct only the amount of theThis section discusses the deductibility of stategovernment that is recognized by the Secretary total taxes that is proportionate to your grossand local income taxes (including employeeof the Treasury as performing substantial gov- income compared to the combined gross in-contributions to state benefit funds), and foreignernment functions will be treated as a state for come of you and your spouse. However, youincome taxes.purposes of claiming a deduction for taxes. In- cannot deduct more than the amount you actu-come taxes, real estate taxes, and personal ally paid during the year. You can avoid thisproperty taxes imposed by that Indian tribal gov- State and Local Income calculation if you and your spouse are jointly andernment (or by any of its subdivisions that are individually liable for the full amount of the stateTaxestreated as political subdivisions of a state) are and local income taxes. If so, you and yourdeductible. spouse can deduct on your separate federalYou can deduct state and local income taxes.
returns the amount you each actually paid.However, you can elect to deduct state and localGeneral sales taxes. These are taxes im- general sales taxes instead of state and localposed at one rate on retail sales of a broad Joint federal return. If you file a joint federalincome taxes. But you cannot deduct both taxesrange of classes of items. return, you can deduct the total of the state andin the same year. local income taxes both of you paid.
Foreign taxes. These are taxes imposed by a Exception.  You cannot deduct state and local Contributions to state benefit funds. As anforeign country or any of its political subdivi- income taxes you pay on income that is exempt employee, you can deduct mandatory contribu-sions. from federal income tax, unless the exempt in- tions to state benefit funds withheld from yourcome is interest income. For example, you can- wages that provide protection against loss ofnot deduct the part of a state's income tax that isUseful Items wages. For example, certain states require em-on a cost-of-living allowance that is exempt fromYou may want to see: ployees to make contributions to state fundsfederal income tax. providing disability or unemployment insurance
Publication benefits. Mandatory payments made to the fol-
lowing state benefit funds are deductible as❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals What To Deduct state income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040),
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Time line 5a.Your deduction may be for withheld taxes, esti-Homeowners mated tax payments, or other tax payments as • Alaska Unemployment Compensation
follows. Fund.Form (and Instructions)
• California Nonoccupational Disability Ben-Withheld taxes. You can deduct state and❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized efit Fund.local income taxes withheld from your salary inDeductions the year they are withheld. For 2008, these • New Jersey Nonoccupational Disability❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental taxes will be shown in boxes 17 and 19 of your Benefit Fund.Income and Loss Form W-2. You may also have state or local
• New Jersey Unemployment Compensa-income tax withheld on Form W-2G (box 14),❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit tion Fund.Form 1099-MISC (box 16), or Form 1099-R
(boxes 10 and 13). • New York Nonoccupational Disability Ben-
efit Fund.Estimated tax payments. You can deduct es-
timated tax payments you made during the year • Pennsylvania Unemployment Compensa-Tests To Deduct to a state or local government. However, you tion Fund.must have a reasonable basis for making the
Any Tax • Rhode Island Temporary Disability Benefitestimated tax payments. Any estimated state or
Fund.local tax payments that are not made in good
The following two tests must be met for you to faith at the time of payment are not deductible. • Washington State Supplemental Work-deduct any tax. For example, you made an estimated state in- men's Compensation Fund.come tax payment. However, the estimate of• The tax must be imposed on you.
your state tax liability shows that you will get a• You must pay the tax during your tax year. Employee contributions to private orrefund of the full amount of your estimated pay-
voluntary disability plans are not de-ment. You had no reasonable basis to believe
ductible.you had any additional liability for state income
CAUTION
!The tax must be imposed on you. Generally,
taxes and you cannot deduct the estimated taxyou can deduct only taxes that are imposed on
payment. Refund (or credit) of state or local incomeyou.
taxes. If you receive a refund of (or credit for)Generally, you can deduct property taxes Refund applied to taxes. You can deduct any state or local income taxes in a year after theonly if you are an owner of the property. If your part of a refund of prior-year state or local in- year in which you paid them, you may have tospouse owns the property and pays the real come taxes that you chose to have credited to include the refund in income on Form 1040, lineestate taxes, the taxes are deductible on your your 2008 estimated state or local income taxes. 10, in the year you receive it. This includesspouse's separate return or on your joint return.  Do not reduce your deduction by either of refunds resulting from taxes that werethe following items. overwithheld, applied from a prior year return,You must pay the tax during your tax year. • Any state or local income tax refund (or not figured correctly, or figured again because ofIf you are a cash basis taxpayer, you can deduct credit) you expect to receive for 2008. an amended return. If you did not itemize youronly those taxes you actually paid during your
deductions in the previous year, do not includetax year. If you pay your taxes by check, the day • Any refund of (or credit for) prior-year the refund in income. If you deducted the taxesyou mail or deliver the check is the date of state and local income taxes you actually in the previous year, include all or part of thepayment, provided the check is honored by the received in 2008. refund on Form 1040, line 10, in the year youfinancial institution. If you use a pay-by-phone However, part or all of this refund (or credit) may receive the refund. For a discussion of howaccount (such as a credit card or electronic be taxable. See Refund (or credit) of state or much to include, see Recoveries in chapter 12.funds withdrawal), the date reported on the local income taxes, later.statement of the financial institution showing
when payment was made is the date of pay- Foreign Income TaxesSeparate federal returns. If you and yourment. If you contest a tax liability and are a cash spouse file separate state, local, and federalbasis taxpayer, you can deduct the tax only in Generally, you can take either a deduction or aincome tax returns, you each can deduct on yourthe year you actually pay it (or transfer money or credit for income taxes imposed on you by afederal return only the amount of your own stateother property to provide for satisfaction of the foreign country or a U.S. possession. However,and local income tax that you paid during the taxcontested liability). See Publication 538, Ac- you cannot take a deduction or credit for foreignyear.counting Periods and Methods, for details. income taxes paid on income that is exempt
If you use an accrual method of accounting, Joint state and local returns. If you and from U.S. tax under the foreign earned income
see Publication 538, for more information. your spouse file joint state and local returns and exclusion or the foreign housing exclusion. For
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 147

Page 150 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
information on these exclusions, see Publication for services (such as trash collection) assessed Example 1. Dennis and Beth White's real
54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident against specific property or certain people, even property tax year for both their old home and
Aliens Abroad. For information on the foreign tax if the charge is paid to the taxing authority. For their new home is the calendar year, with pay-
credit, see Publication 514. more information about taxes and charges that ment due August 1. The tax on their old home,
are not deductible, see Real Estate-Related sold on May 7, was $620. The tax on their new
Items You Cannot Deduct, later. home, bought on May 3, was $732. Dennis and
Beth are considered to have paid a proportion-Tenant-shareholders in a cooperative hous- ate share of the real estate taxes on the oldGeneral Sales Taxes ing corporation. Generally, if you are a ten- home even though they did not actually payant-stockholder in a cooperative housing them to the taxing authority. On the other hand,You can elect to deduct state and local general corporation, you can deduct the amount paid to they can claim only a proportionate share of thesales taxes, instead of state and local income the corporation that represents your share of the taxes they paid on their new property eventaxes, as an itemized deduction on Schedule A real estate taxes the corporation paid or incurred though they paid the entire amount.(Form 1040), line 5b. Generally, you can use for your dwelling unit. The corporation should Dennis and Beth owned their old home dur-either your actual expenses or the state and provide you with a statement showing your ing the real property tax year for 127 days (Janu-local sales tax tables to figure your sales tax share of the taxes. For more information, see ary 1 to May 6, the day before the sale). Theydeduction. Special Rules for Cooperatives in Publication figure their deduction for taxes on their old home530.Actual expenses. Generally, you can deduct as follows.
the actual state and local general sales taxes Division of real estate taxes between buyers Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estate(including compensating use taxes) if the tax and sellers. If you bought or sold real estate Tax Deduction Ð Taxes on Old Homerate was the same as the general sales tax rate. during the year, the real estate taxes must be
However, sales taxes on food, clothing, medical divided between the buyer and the seller. 1. Enter the total real estate taxes forsupplies, and motor vehicles are deductible as a The buyer and the seller must divide the real the real property tax year .... . $620general sales tax even if the tax rate was less estate taxes according to the number of days in
than the general sales tax rate. If you paid sales 2. Enter the number of days in thethe real property tax year (the period to which
tax on a motor vehicle at a rate higher than the real property tax year that youthe tax is imposed relates) that each owned the owned the property ........ . 127general sales tax rate, you can deduct only the property. The seller is treated as paying the
amount of tax that you would have paid at the taxes up to, but not including, the date of sale. 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leapgeneral sales tax rate on that vehicle. If you use The buyer is treated as paying the taxes begin- years, divide line 2 by 366) ... . .347the actual expenses method, you must have ning with the date of sale. This applies regard- 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This isreceipts to show the general sales taxes paid. less of the lien dates under local law. Generally, your deduction. Enter it onthis information is included on the settlement Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $215Optional sales tax tables. Instead of using statement provided at the closing.your actual expenses, you can figure your state If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes until Since the buyers of their old home paid all of theand local general sales tax deduction using the they are paid because you use the cash method taxes, Dennis and Beth also include the $215 instate and local sales tax tables in the Instruc- of accounting, and the buyer of your property is the selling price of the old home. (The buyerstions for Schedule A (Form 1040). You may also personally liable for the tax, you are considered add the $215 to their cost of the home.)be able to add the state and local general sales to have paid your part of the tax at the time of the Dennis and Beth owned their new home dur-taxes paid on certain specified items, such as sale. This lets you deduct the part of the tax to ing the real property tax year for 243 days (Maymotor vehicles (purchased or leased), aircraft, the date of sale even though you did not actually 3 to December 31, including their date ofboats, homes (including mobile and prefabri- pay it. However, you must also include the purchase). They figure their deduction for taxescated homes) and home building materials. amount of that tax in the selling price of the on their new home as follows.Your applicable table amount is based on the property. The buyer must include the samestate where you live, your income, and the num- amount in his or her cost of the property. Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estateber of exemptions claimed on your tax return. You figure your deduction for taxes on each Tax Deduction Ð Taxes on New HomeYour income is your adjusted gross income plus property bought or sold during the real propertyany nontaxable items such as the following. tax year as follows. 1. Enter the total real estate taxes for
• Tax-exempt interest. the real property tax year .... . $732
Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your 2. Enter the number of days in the• Veterans' benefits. Real Estate Tax Deduction real property tax year that youKeep for Your Records
• Nontaxable combat pay. owned the property ........ . 243
• Workers' compensation. 1. Enter the total real estate taxes for 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap
the real property tax year .... . years, divide line 2 by 366) ... . .664• Nontaxable part of social security and rail-
2. Enter the number of days in theroad retirement benefits. 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is
real property tax year that you your deduction. Enter it on• Nontaxable part of IRA, pension, or annu- owned the property ........ . Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $486ity distributions, excluding rollovers.
3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap Since Dennis and Beth paid all of the taxes on• Public assistance payments. years, divide line 2 by 366) ... . . the new home, they add $246 ($732 paid less
If you lived in different states during the same 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is $486 deduction) to their cost of the new home.
tax year, you must prorate your applicable table your deduction. Enter it on (The sellers add this $246 to their selling price
amount for each state based on the days you Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 and deduct the $246 as a real estate tax.)
lived in each state. See the instructions for Dennis and Beth's real estate tax deductionNote. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property youSchedule A (Form 1040), line 5, for details. bought or sold during the real property tax year. Your for their old and new homes is the sum of $215
total deduction is the sum of the line 4 amounts for all and $486, or $701. They will enter this amountof the properties. on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6.
Real estate taxes for prior years. Do not Example 2. George and Helen BrownReal Estate Taxes divide delinquent taxes between the buyer and bought a new home on May 3, 2008. Their realseller if the taxes are for any real property tax property tax year for the new home is the calen-Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local, year before the one in which the property is sold. dar year. Real estate taxes for 2007 were as-or foreign taxes on real property levied for the Even if the buyer agrees to pay the delinquent sessed in their state on January 1, 2008. Thegeneral public welfare. You can deduct these taxes, the buyer cannot deduct them. The buyer taxes became due on May 31, 2008, and Octo-taxes only if they are based on the assessed must add them to the cost of the property. The ber 31, 2008.value of the real property and charged uniformly seller can deduct these taxes paid by the buyer.against all property under the jurisdiction of the The Browns agreed to pay all taxes due afterHowever, the seller must include them in thetaxing authority. the date of purchase. Real estate taxes for 2007selling price.Deductible real estate taxes generally do not were $680. They paid $340 on May 31, 2008,
include taxes charged for local benefits and im- Examples. The following examples illus- and $340 on October 31, 2008. These taxes
provements that increase the value of the prop- trate how real estate taxes are divided between were for the 2007 real property tax year. The
erty. They also do not include itemized charges buyer and seller. Browns cannot deduct them since they did not
Page 148 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 151 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 22-1.  Which Taxes Can You Deduct?
Type of Tax You Can Deduct You Cannot Deduct
Fees and Charges Fees and charges that are expenses of your trade or Fees and charges that are not expenses of your trade
business or of producing income. or business or of producing income, such as fees for
driver's licenses, car inspections, parking, or charges
for water bills (see Taxes and Fees You Cannot
Deduct).
Fines and penalties.
General Sales Taxes State and local general sales taxes, including State and local income taxes if you choose to deduct
compensating use taxes. state and local general sales taxes.
Income Taxes State and local income taxes. Federal income taxes.
Foreign income taxes. Employee contributions to private or voluntary
Employee contributions to state funds listed disability plans.
under Contributions to state benefit funds. State and local general sales taxes if you choose to
 deduct state and local income taxes.
Other Taxes Taxes that are expenses of your trade or business. Federal excise taxes, such as tax on gasoline, that are
Taxes on property producing rent or royalty not expenses of your trade or business or of
income. producing income.
Occupational taxes. See chapter 28. Per capita taxes.
One-half of self-employment tax paid.
Personal Property State and local personal property taxes. Customs duties that are not expenses of your trade or
Taxes business or of producing income.
Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. Real estate taxes that are treated as imposed on
Foreign real estate taxes. someone else (see Division of real estate taxes
Tenant's share of real estate taxes paid by between buyers and sellers).
cooperative housing corporation. Taxes for local benefits (with exceptions). See Real
Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct.
Trash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions). See
Real Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct.
Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
Homeowners' association charges.
own the property until 2008. Instead, they must Form 1099-S. For certain sales or ex- Divorced individuals. If your divorce or sepa-
changes of real estate, the person responsible ration agreement states that you must pay theadd $680 to the cost of their new home.
for closing the sale (generally the settlement real estate taxes for a home owned by you andIn January 2009, the Browns receive their agent) prepares Form 1099-S, Proceeds From your spouse, part of your payments may be2008 property tax statement for $752, which Real Estate Transactions, to report certain infor- deductible as alimony and part as real estatethey will pay in 2009. The Browns owned their mation to the IRS and to the seller of the prop- taxes. See Taxes and insurance  in chapter 18new home during the 2008 real property tax year erty. Box 2 of the form is for the gross proceeds for more information.for 243 days (May 3 to December 31). They will from the sale and should include the portion offigure their 2009 deduction for taxes as follows. Ministers' and military housing allowances.the seller's real estate tax liability that the buyer If you are a minister or a member of the uni-will pay after the date of sale. The buyer includesWorksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estate formed services and receive a housing allow-these taxes in the cost basis of the property, andTax Deduction Ð Taxes on New Home ance that you can exclude from income, you stillthe seller both deducts this amount as a tax paid can deduct all of the real estate taxes you pay onand includes it in the sales price of the property.1. Enter the total real estate taxes for your home.For a real estate transaction that involves athe real property tax year .... . $752
home, any real estate tax the seller paid in Refund (or rebate). If you received a refund2. Enter the number of days in the advance but that is the liability of the buyer or rebate in 2008 of real estate taxes you paid inreal property tax year that you appears on Form 1099-S, box 5. The buyer 2008, you must reduce your deduction by theowned the property ........ . 243 deducts this amount as a real estate tax, and the amount refunded to you. If you received a refund3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap seller reduces his or her real estate tax deduc- or rebate in 2008 of real estate taxes you de-years, divide line 2 by 366) ... . .664 tion (or includes it in income) by the same ducted in an earlier year, you generally mustamount. See Refund (or rebate), later.4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is include the refund or rebate in income in the
your deduction. Claim it on year you receive it. However, the amount youTaxes placed in escrow. If your monthlySchedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $499 include in income is limited to the amount of themortgage payment includes an amount placed deduction that reduced your tax in the earlierin escrow (put in the care of a third party) for realThe remaining $253 ($752 paid less $499 de- year. For more information, see Recoveries inestate taxes, you may not be able to deduct theduction) of taxes paid in 2009, along with the chapter 12.total amount placed in escrow. You can deduct$680 paid in 2008, is added to the cost of their If you did not itemize deductions in theonly the real estate tax that the third party actu-new home. year you paid the tax, do not report theally paid to the taxing authority. If the third partyBecause the taxes up to the date of sale are refund as income.does not notify you of the amount of real estate
TIP
considered paid by the seller on the date of sale, tax that was paid for you, contact the third party
the seller is entitled to a 2008 tax deduction of or the taxing authority to find the proper amount
$933. This is the sum of the $680 for 2007 and to show on your return. Real Estate-Related Itemsthe $253 for the 123 days the seller owned the
You Cannot Deducthome in 2008. The seller must also include the Tenants by the entirety. If you and your
$933 in the selling price when he or she figures spouse held property as tenants by the entirety Payments for the following items generally arethe gain or loss on the sale. The seller should and you file separate federal returns, each of not deductible as real estate taxes.contact the Browns in January 2009 to find out you can deduct only the taxes each of you paid
how much real estate tax is due for 2008. on the property. • Taxes for local benefits.
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 149

Page 152 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Itemized charges for services (such as of a personal home are not deductible. If they credit. For more information, see chapters
trash and garbage pickup fees). are paid by the seller, they are expenses of the 21 and 32. 
sale and reduce the amount realized on the sale.• Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes). • Estate, inheritance, legacy, or succes-If paid by the buyer, they are included in the cost sion taxes. However, you can deduct the• Rent increases due to higher real estate basis of the property. estate tax attributable to income in respecttaxes. of a decedent if you, as a beneficiary,Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.• Homeowners' association charges. must include that income in your grossIf your landlord increases your rent in the form of income. In that case, deduct the estate taxa tax surcharge because of increased real es- as a miscellaneous deduction that is notTaxes for local benefits. Deductible real es- tate taxes, you cannot deduct the increase as subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-tate taxes generally do not include taxes taxes. income limit. For more information, seecharged for local benefits and improvements Publication 559. tending to increase the value of your property. Homeowners' association charges. These
These include assessments for streets, side- charges are not deductible because they are • Federal income taxes. This includes in-
walks, water mains, sewer lines, public parking imposed by the homeowners' association, come taxes withheld from your pay.
facilities, and similar improvements. You should rather than the state or local government. • Fines and penalties. You cannot deductincrease the basis of your property by the fines and penalties paid to a governmentamount of the assessment. for violation of any law, including relatedLocal benefit taxes are deductible only if they amounts forfeited as collateral deposits. are for maintenance, repair, or interest charges Personal Propertyrelated to those benefits. If only a part of the • Gift taxes. 
taxes is for maintenance, repair, or interest, you • License fees. You cannot deduct licenseTaxesmust be able to show the amount of that part to fees for personal purposes (such as mar-claim the deduction. If you cannot determine Personal property tax is deductible if it is a state riage, driver's, and dog license fees). what part of the tax is for maintenance, repair, or or local tax that is: • Per capita taxes. You cannot deductinterest, none of it is deductible.
• Charged on personal property, state or local per capita taxes.Taxes for local benefits may be included in
your real estate tax bill. If your taxing authority • Based only on the value of the personal Many taxes and fees other than those listed(or mortgage lender) does not furnish you a copy property, and above are also nondeductible, unless they areof your real estate tax bill, ask for it. You should
• Charged on a yearly basis, even if it is ordinary and necessary expenses of a businessuse the rules above to determine if the local
collected more or less than once a year. or income producing activity. For other nonde-benefit tax is deductible.
ductible items, see Real Estate-Related ItemsItemized charges for services.  An itemized A tax that meets the above requirements can You Cannot Deduct, earlier.charge for services assessed against specific be considered charged on personal propertyproperty or certain people is not a tax, even if the even if it is for the exercise of a privilege. Forcharge is paid to the taxing authority. For exam- example, a yearly tax based on value qualifiesple, you cannot deduct the charge as a real as a personal property tax even if it is called a Where To Deductestate tax if it is: registration fee and is for the privilege of regis-
tering motor vehicles or using them on the high-• A unit fee for the delivery of a service You deduct taxes on the following schedules.ways.(such as a $5 fee charged for every 1,000
gallons of water you use), If the tax is partly based on value and partly State and local income taxes.  These taxesbased on other criteria, it may qualify in part. are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line• A periodic charge for a residential service
5a, even if your only source of income is from(such as a $20 per month or $240 annual Example. Your state charges a yearly mo- business, rents, or royalties. Check box a on linefee charged to each homeowner for trash tor vehicle registration tax of 1% of value plus 50 5 to indicate income taxes.collection), or cents per hundredweight. You paid $32 based
• A flat fee charged for a single service pro- on the value ($1,500) and weight (3,400 lbs.) of General sales taxes. Sales taxes are de-vided by your government (such as a $30 your car. You can deduct $15 (1% ×  $1,500) as ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5b. Youcharge for mowing your lawn because it a personal property tax because it is based on must check box b on line 5. If you elect to deductwas allowed to grow higher than permitted the value. The remaining $17 ($.50 ×  34), based sales taxes, you cannot deduct state and localunder your local ordinance). on the weight, is not deductible. income taxes.
Foreign income taxes. Generally, incomeYou must look at your real estate tax
taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S. pos-bill to determine if any nondeductible
session can be claimed as an itemized deduc-itemized charges, such as those listed Taxes and Fees
CAUTION
! tion on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8, or as aabove, are included in the bill. If your taxing
credit against your U.S. income tax on Formauthority (or mortgage lender) does not furnish You Cannot Deduct 1040, line 47. To claim the credit, you may haveyou a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it.
to complete and attach Form 1116. For moreMany federal, state, and local government taxesException. Service charges used to main- information, see chapter 37, the Form 1040 in-are not deductible because they do not fall withintain or improve services (such as trash collec- structions, or Publication 514.the categories discussed earlier. Other taxestion or police and fire protection) are deductible and fees, such as federal income taxes, are notas real estate taxes if: Real estate taxes and personal propertydeductible because the tax law specifically pro- taxes.  These taxes are deducted on Sched-hibits a deduction for them. See Table 22-1.• The fees or charges are imposed at a like ule A (Form 1040), lines 6 and 7, respectively,Taxes and fees that are generally not de-rate against all property in the taxing juris- unless they are paid on property used in yourductible include the following items.diction, business, in which case they are deducted on
• Employment taxes. This includes social• The funds collected are not earmarked; Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Schedule F
security, Medicare, and railroad retirementinstead, they are commingled with general (Form 1040). Taxes on property that produces
taxes withheld from your pay. However,revenue funds, and rent or royalty income are deducted on Sched-
one-half of self-employment tax you pay is ule E (Form 1040).• Funds used to maintain or improve serv- deductible. In addition, the social securityices are not limited to or determined by the and other employment taxes you pay on Self-employment tax. Deduct one-half ofamount of these fees or charges collected. the wages of a household worker may be your self-employment tax on Form 1040, line 27.
included in medical expenses that you can
Other taxes. All other deductible taxes arededuct or child care expenses that allowTransfer taxes (or stamp taxes). Transfer
deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8.you to claim the child and dependent caretaxes and similar taxes and charges on the sale
Page 150 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 153 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The mortgage is a secured debt on a qual- service performed in connection with your mort-
ified home in which you have an owner- gage loan.
ship interest. (Generally, your mortgage is
Mortgage prepayment penalty. If you pay off23. a secured debt if you put your home up as
your home mortgage early, you may have to paycollateral to protect the interest of the
a penalty. You can deduct that penalty as homelender. The term ªqualified homeº means
mortgage interest provided the penalty is not foryour main home or second home. For de-
a specific service performed or cost incurred inInterest tails, see Publication 936.)
connection with your mortgage loan.
Sale of home. If you sell your home, you canYou cannot deduct interest you pay for someoneExpense
deduct your home mortgage interest (subject toelse if you are not legally liable to pay it. Both
any limits that apply) paid up to, but not includ-you and the lender must intend that the loan be
ing, the date of sale.repaid.
What's New
Example. John and Peggy Harris sold theirAmount Deductible home on May 7. Through April 30, they madeLimit on itemized deductions.  If your ad-
home mortgage interest payments of $1,220.justed gross income is more than $159,950 In most cases, you can deduct all of your home The settlement sheet for the sale of the home($79,975 if you are married filing separately), the mortgage interest. How much you can deduct showed $50 interest for the 6-day period in Maydepends on the date of the mortgage, theoverall amount of your itemized deductions may up to, but not including, the date of sale. Theiramount of the mortgage, and how you use thebe limited. See chapter 29 for more information mortgage interest deduction is $1,270 ($1,220 +mortgage proceeds.about this limit. $50).
Fully deductible interest. If all of your mort- Prepaid interest. If you pay interest in ad-gages fit into one or more of the following three vance for a period that goes beyond the end ofcategories at all times during the year, you can the tax year, you must spread this interest overIntroduction deduct all of the interest on those mortgages. (If the tax years to which it applies. You can deductany one mortgage fits into more than one cate-This chapter discusses interest. Interest is the in each year only the interest that qualifies asgory, add the debt that fits in each category toamount you pay for the use of borrowed money. home mortgage interest for that year. However,your other debt in the same category.) there is an exception that applies to points, dis-The following are types of interest you can The three categories are as follows: cussed later.deduct as itemized deductions on Schedule A
(Form 1040). 1. Mortgages you took out on or before Octo- Mortgage interest credit. You may be able tober 13, 1987 (called grandfathered debt).• Home mortgage interest, including certain claim a mortgage interest credit if you were
issued a mortgage credit certificate (MCC) by a2. Mortgages you took out after October 13,points and mortgage insurance premiums.
state or local government. Figure the credit on1987, to buy, build, or improve your home• Investment interest. Form 8396, Mortgage Interest Credit. If you take(called home acquisition debt), but only if
this credit, you must reduce your mortgage inter-throughout 2008 these mortgages plus anyThis chapter explains these deductions. It also
est deduction by the amount of the credit.grandfathered debt totaled $1 million orexplains where to deduct other types of interest
For more information on the credit, see chap-less ($500,000 or less if married filing sep-and lists some types of interest you cannot de-
ter 37.arately).duct.
3. Mortgages you took out after October 13,Use Table 23-1 to find out where to get more Ministers' and military housing allowance.
1987, other than to buy, build, or improveinformation on various types of interest, includ- If you are a minister or a member of the uni-
your home (called home equity debt), but formed services and receive a housing allow-ing investment interest.
only if throughout 2008 these mortgages ance that is not taxable, you can still deduct your
totaled $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if home mortgage interest.Useful Items married filing separately) and totaled no
You may want to see: Mortgage assistance payments. If you qual-more than the fair market value of your
ify for mortgage assistance payments forhome reduced by (1) and (2).
Publication lower-income families under section 235 of theThe dollar limits for the second and third catego- National Housing Act, part or all of the interest❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction ries apply to the combined mortgages on your on your mortgage may be paid for you. Youmain home and second home.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses cannot deduct the interest that is paid for you.See Part II of Publication 936 for more de-
No other effect on taxes. Do not includetailed definitions of grandfathered, home acqui-
these mortgage assistance payments in yoursition, and home equity debt.
income. Also, do not use these payments toYou can use Figure 23-A to check whether
reduce other deductions, such as real estateyour home mortgage interest is fully deductible.Home Mortgage taxes.
Limits on deduction. You cannot fully deductInterest Divorced or separated individuals. If a di-interest on a mortgage that does not fit into any
vorce or separation agreement requires you orof the three categories listed above. If this ap-Generally, home mortgage interest is any inter- your spouse or former spouse to pay homeplies to you, see Part II of Publication 936 toest you pay on a loan secured by your home mortgage interest on a home owned by both offigure the amount of interest you can deduct.(main home or a second home). The loan may you, the payment of interest may be alimony.
be a mortgage to buy your home, a second See the discussion of Payments for
mortgage, a line of credit, or a home equity loan. jointly-owned home in chapter 18.Special Situations
You can deduct home mortgage interest if all Redeemable ground rents. If you make an-This section describes certain items that can bethe following conditions are met. nual or periodic rental payments on a redeem-included as home mortgage interest and others• You file Form 1040 and itemize deduc- able ground rent, you can deduct them asthat cannot. It also describes certain specialtions on Schedule A (Form 1040). mortgage interest.situations that may affect your deduction.
Payments made to end the lease and to buy• You are legally liable for the loan. Late payment charge on mortgage payment. the lessor's entire interest in the land are not
• There is a true debtor-creditor relationship You can deduct as home mortgage interest a deductible as mortgage interest. For more infor-
between you and the lender. late payment charge if it was not for a specific mation, see Publication 936.
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 151

Page 154 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 23-A. Is My Home Mortgage Interest Fully Deductible?
Were your total mortgage balances $100,000 or less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at all
times during the year?
Start Here:
No
/H17075
Were all of your home mortgages taken out on or
before 10-13-87?
Were all of your home mortgages taken out after
10-13-87 used to buy, build, or improve the main
home secured by that main home mortgage or
used to buy, build, or improve the second home
secured by that second home mortgage, or both?
Were the mortgage balances $1,000,000 or less
($500,000 or less if married filing separately) at 
all times during the year?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
Yes
(Instructions: Include balances of ALL mortgages secured by your main home and second home.)
Yes
/H17073
Yes
/H17076
/H17076
Your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
You do not need Publication 936.
Go to Part II of Publication 936 to determine the
limits on your deductible home mortgage interest.
Were your grandfathered debt plus home
acquisition debt balances $1,000,000 or less
3
($500,000 or less if married filing separately)
at all times during the year?
Were your home equity debt balances $100,000 or
less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at
all times during the year?
If all mortgages on your main or second home exceed the home’s fair market value, a lower limit may apply. See Home equity debt limit under Home Equity
Debt in Part II of Publication 936.
Amounts over the $1,000,000 limit ($500,000 if married filing separately) qualify as home equity debt if they are not more than the total home equity debt
limit. See Publication 936 for more information about grandfathered debt, home acquisition debt, and home equity debt.
Do you meet the conditions to deduct home
mortgage interest?
/H17074
Yes
You cannot deduct the interest payments as home
mortgage interest.
4/H17075
No
You must itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) and be legally liable for the loan. The loan must be a secured debt on a qualified home. See Home
Mortgage Interest.
See Table 23-1 for where to deduct other types of interest payments.
4
3
2
1
1
Page 152 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 155 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonredeemable ground rents. Payments 6. The funds you provided at or before clos-General Rule
ing, plus any points the seller paid, were aton a nonredeemable ground rent are not mort-
You generally cannot deduct the full amount of least as much as the points charged. Thegage interest. You can deduct them as rent if
points in the year paid. Because they are pre- funds you provided do not have to havethey are a business expense or if they are for
paid interest, you generally deduct them ratably been applied to the points. They can in-rental property.
over the life (term) of the mortgage. See Deduc- clude a down payment, an escrow deposit,
earnest money, and other funds you paidtion Allowed Ratably, next.Reverse mortgages. A reverse mortgage is a
at or before closing for any purpose. YouFor exceptions to the general rule, see De-loan where the lender pays you (in a lump sum,
cannot have borrowed these funds fromduction Allowed in Year Paid, later.a monthly advance, a line of credit, or a combi-
your lender or mortgage broker.nation of all three) while you continue to live in
your home. With a reverse mortgage, you retain 7. You use your loan to buy or build your
Deduction Allowed Ratablytitle to your home. Depending on the plan, your main home.
reverse mortgage becomes due with interest 8. The points were computed as a percent-If you do not meet the tests listed under Deduc-when you move, sell your home, reach the end age of the principal amount of the mort-tion Allowed in Year Paid, later, the loan is not aof a pre-selected loan period, or die. Because gage.home improvement loan, or you choose not toreverse mortgages are considered loan ad- deduct your points in full in the year paid, you 9. The amount is clearly shown on the settle-vances and not income, the amount you receive can deduct the points ratably (equally) over the ment statement (such as the Settlementis not taxable. Any interest (including original life of the loan if you meet all the following tests. Statement, Form HUD-1) as pointsissue discount) accrued on a reverse mortgage
charged for the mortgage. The points mayis not deductible until the loan is paid in full. Your 1. You use the cash method of accounting. be shown as paid from either your funds ordeduction may be limited because a reverse This means you report income in the year the seller's.mortgage loan generally is subject to the limit on you receive it and deduct expenses in the
Home Equity Debt discussed in Publication 936. year you pay them. Most individuals use
this method. Note. If you meet all of these tests, you can
Rental payments. If you live in a house before choose to either fully deduct the points in the2. Your loan is secured by a home. (Thefinal settlement on the purchase, any payments year paid, or deduct them over the life of thehome does not need to be your mainyou make for that period are rent and not inter- loan.home.)est. This is true even if the settlement papers call Home improvement loan. You can also fully3. Your loan period is not more than 30them interest. You cannot deduct these pay- deduct in the year paid points paid on a loan toyears.ments as home mortgage interest. improve your main home, if tests (1) through (6)
4. If your loan period is more than 10 years, are met.Mortgage proceeds invested in tax-exempt the terms of your loan are the same as
Second home.  You cannot fully de-securities. You cannot deduct the home mort- other loans offered in your area for the
duct in the year paid points you pay ongage interest on grandfathered debt or home same or longer period.
loans secured by your second home.equity debt if you used the proceeds of the
CAUTION
! 5. Either your loan amount is $250,000 or You can deduct these points only over the life ofmortgage to buy securities or certificates that less, or the number of points is not more the loan.produce tax-free income. ªGrandfathered debtº than:and ªhome equity debtº are defined earlier under
Refinancing. Generally, points you pay toAmount Deductible. a. 4, if your loan period is 15 years or less, refinance a mortgage are not deductible in full inor the year you pay them. This is true even if theRefunds of interest. If you receive a refund of new mortgage is secured by your main home.b. 6, if your loan period is more than 15interest in the same tax year you paid it, you However, if you use part of the refinancedyears.must reduce your interest expense by the mortgage proceeds to improve your main homeamount refunded to you. If you receive a refund and you meet the first 6 tests listed under De-of interest you deducted in an earlier year, you duction Allowed in Year Paid,  you can fully de-generally must include the refund in income in duct the part of the points related to theDeduction Allowed in Year Paidthe year you receive it. However, you need to improvement in the year you paid them with yourinclude it only up to the amount of the deduction You can fully deduct points in the year paid if you own funds. You can deduct the rest of the points
that reduced your tax in the earlier year. This is meet all the following tests. (You can use Figure over the life of the loan.
true whether the interest overcharge was re- 23-B as a quick guide to see whether your points
funded to you or was used to reduce the out- are fully deductible in the year paid.) Example 1. In 1994, Bill Fields got a mort-
standing principal on your mortgage. gage to buy a home. In 2008, Bill refinanced that
1. Your loan is secured by your main home.If you received a refund of interest you over- mortgage with a 15-year $100,000 mortgage
(Your main home is the one you ordinarilypaid in an earlier year, you generally will receive loan. The mortgage is secured by his home. To
live in most of the time.) get the new loan, he had to pay three pointsa Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement,
($3,000). Two points ($2,000) were for prepaidshowing the refund in box 3. For information 2. Paying points is an established business
interest, and one point ($1,000) was charged forabout Form 1098, see Form 1098, Mortgage practice in the area where the loan was
services, in place of amounts that ordinarily areInterest Statement, later. made.
stated separately on the settlement statement.For more information on how to treat refunds 3. The points paid were not more than the Bill paid the points out of his private funds, ratherof interest deducted in earlier years, see Recov- points generally charged in that area. than out of the proceeds of the new loan. Theeries in chapter 12.
payment of points is an established practice in4. You use the cash method of accounting.
the area, and the points charged are not moreThis means you report income in the yearPoints than the amount generally charged there. Bill'syou receive it and deduct expenses in the
first payment on the new loan was due July 1.year you pay them. (If you want more infor-The term ªpointsº is used to describe certain He made six payments on the loan in 2008 andmation about this method, see Accountingcharges paid, or treated as paid, by a borrower is a cash basis taxpayer.Methods in chapter 1.)to obtain a home mortgage. Points may also be Bill used the funds from the new mortgage to
called loan origination fees, maximum loan 5. The points were not paid in place of repay his existing mortgage. Although the new
charges, loan discount, or discount points. amounts that ordinarily are stated sepa- mortgage loan was for Bill's continued owner-
A borrower is treated as paying any points rately on the settlement statement, such as ship of his main home, it was not for the
that a home seller pays for the borrower's mort- appraisal fees, inspection fees, title fees, purchase or improvement of that home. He can-
gage. See Points paid by the seller, later. attorney fees, and property taxes. not deduct all of the points in 2008. He can
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 153

Page 156 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 23-B. Are My Points Fully Deductible This Year?
Is the loan secured by your main home?
Start Here:
/H17075
/H17074Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
*The funds you provided do not have to have been applied to the points. They can include a down payment, an escrow deposit, earnest money, and other
funds you paid at or before closing for any purpose.
Is the payment of points an established
business practice in your area?
Were the points paid more than the amount
generally charged in your area?
Do you use the cash method of accounting?
Did you take out the loan to improve your
main home?
Did you take out the loan to buy or build
your main home?
Were the points computed as a percentage of
the principal amount of the mortgage?
Were the funds you provided (other than
those you borrowed from your lender or
mortgage broker), plus any points the seller
paid, at least as much as the points charged?*
Is the amount paid clearly shown as points on
the settlement statement?
You can fully deduct the points this year on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
You cannot fully deduct the points this year. See the
discussion on Points.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
/H17075
Yes
Were the points paid in place of amounts that
ordinarily are separately stated on the
settlement sheet?
/H17074
/H17075
Yes
No
Page 154 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 157 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct two points ($2,000) ratably over the life of Example 1. When you took out a $100,000 the mortgage insurance contract was issued in
the loan. He deducts $67 [($2,000 ÷  180 mortgage loan to buy your home in December, 2008. Contact the mortgage insurance issuer to
months) ×  6 payments] of the points in 2008. you were charged one point ($1,000). You meet determine the deductible amount if it is not re-
The other point ($1,000) was a fee for services all the tests for deducting points in the year paid, ported in box 4 of Form 1098.
and is not deductible. except the only funds you provided were a $750 Special rules for prepaid mortgage insur-down payment. Of the $1,000 charged for ance. If you paid premiums for qualified mort-Example 2. The facts are the same as in points, you can deduct $750 in the year paid. gage insurance that are allocable to periodsExample 1, except that Bill used $25,000 of the You spread the remaining $250 over the life of after the close of the tax year, such premiumsloan proceeds to improve his home and $75,000 the mortgage. are treated as paid in the period to which theyto repay his existing mortgage. Bill deducts 25% are allocated. No deduction is allowed for the($25,000 ÷  $100,000) of the points ($2,000) in Example 2. The facts are the same as in unamortized balance if the mortgage is satisfied2008. His deduction is $500 ($2,000 ×  25%). Example 1, except that the person who sold you before its term (except in the case of qualifiedBill also deducts the ratable part of the re- your home also paid one point ($1,000) to help mortgage insurance provided by the Depart-maining $1,500 ($2,000 − $500) that must be you get your mortgage. In the year paid, you can ment of Veterans Affairs or Rural Housing Serv-spread over the life of the loan. This is $50 deduct $1,750 ($750 of the amount you were ice).[($1,500 ÷  180 months) ×  6 payments] in 2008. charged plus the $1,000 paid by the seller). You At the time this publication went to print,The total amount Bill deducts in 2008 is $550 spread the remaining $250 over the life of the regulations were being considered that would($500 + $50). mortgage. You must reduce the basis of your allow you to allocate qualified mortgage insur-home by the $1,000 paid by the seller. ance premiums paid in connection with a mort-
Excess points. If you meet all the tests in gage obtained after 2006 over the shorter of theSpecial Situations Deduction Allowed in Year Paid, earlier, except stated term of the mortgage or 84 months, be-
that the points paid were more than generally ginning with the month the insurance was ob-This section describes certain special situations
paid in your area (test (3)), you deduct in the tained.that may affect your deduction of points.
year paid only the points that are generally More information can be found in Publication
charged. You must spread any additional pointsOriginal issue discount. If you do not qualify 553, Highlights of 2008 Tax Changes which is
over the life of the mortgage.to either deduct the points in the year paid or available at www.irs.gov/formspubs. Information
deduct them ratably over the life of the loan, or if on this and other changes affecting individualMortgage ending early. If you spread youryou choose not to use either of these methods, taxpayers can also be found at www.irs.gov/deduction for points over the life of the mort-the points reduce the issue price of the loan. formspubs. Click on Highlights of Recent Taxgage, you can deduct any remaining balance inThis reduction results in original issue discount, Changes and then on Individuals.the year the mortgage ends. However, if youwhich is discussed in chapter 4 of Publication refinance the mortgage with the same lender, Limit on deduction. If your adjusted gross535. you cannot deduct any remaining balance of income on Form 1040, line 38, is more than
spread points. Instead, deduct the remaining $100,000 ($50,000 if your filing status is marriedAmounts charged for services. Amounts
balance over the term of the new loan. filing separately), the amount of your mortgagecharged by the lender for specific services con-
A mortgage may end early due to a prepay- insurance premiums that are otherwise deducti-nected to the loan are not interest. Examples of
ment, refinancing, foreclosure, or similar event. ble is reduced and may be eliminated. See Linethese charges are:
13 in the instructions for Schedule A (Form• Appraisal fees, Example. Dan paid $3,000 in points in 1997 1040) and complete the Qualified Mortgage In-
that he had to spread out over the 15-year life of surance Premiums Deduction Worksheet to fig-• Notary fees, and
the mortgage. He deducts $200 points per year. ure the amount you can deduct. If your adjusted• Preparation costs for the mortgage note or Through 2007, Dan has deducted $2,200 of the gross income is more than $109,000 ($54,500 ifdeed of trust. points. married filing separately), you cannot deduct
Dan prepaid his mortgage in full in 2008. He your mortgage insurance premiums.You cannot deduct these amounts as points
can deduct the remaining $800 of points in 2008.either in the year paid or over the life of the
mortgage. Limits on deduction. You cannot fully deduct Form 1098, Mortgage
points paid on a mortgage unless the mortgage Interest StatementPoints paid by the seller. The term ªpointsº fits into one of the categories listed earlier underincludes loan placement fees that the seller Fully deductible interest. See Publication 936 for If you paid $600 or more of mortgage interestpays to the lender to arrange financing for the details. (including certain points and mortgage insur-buyer.
ance premiums) during the year on any one
Treatment by seller. The seller cannot de- mortgage, you generally will receive a FormMortgage Insuranceduct these fees as interest. But they are a selling 1098 or a similar statement from the mortgagePremiumsexpense that reduces the amount realized by holder. You will receive the statement if you pay
the seller. See chapter 15  for information on interest to a person (including a financial institu-You can treat amounts you paid during 2008 forselling your home. tion or a cooperative housing corporation) in thequalified mortgage insurance as home mort- course of that person's trade or business. ATreatment by buyer. The buyer reduces gage interest. The insurance must be in connec- governmental unit is a person for purposes ofthe basis of the home by the amount of the tion with home acquisition debt and the furnishing the statement.seller-paid points and treats the points as if he or insurance contract must have been issued after The statement for each year should be sentshe had paid them. If all the tests under Deduc- 2006. to you by January 31 of the following year. Ation Allowed in Year Paid, earlier, are met, the
Qualified mortgage insurance. Qualified copy of this form will also be sent to the IRS.buyer can deduct the points in the year paid. If
mortgage insurance is mortgage insurance pro- The statement will show the total interest youany of those tests are not met, the buyer deducts
vided by the Department of Veterans Affairs, the paid during the year, any mortgage insurancethe points over the life of the loan.
Federal Housing Administration, or the Rural premiums you paid, and if you purchased a mainFor information about basis, see chapter 13.
Housing Service, and private mortgage insur- home during the year, it also will show the de-
Funds provided are less than points. If you ance (as defined in section 2 of the Homeown- ductible points paid during the year, including
meet all the tests in Deduction Allowed in Year ers Protection Act of 1998 as in effect on seller-paid points. However, it should not show
Paid, earlier, except that the funds you provided December 20, 2006). any interest that was paid for you by a govern-
were less than the points charged to you (test Mortgage insurance provided by the Depart- ment agency.
(6)), you can deduct the points in the year paid, ment of Veterans Affairs is commonly known as As a general rule, Form 1098 will include
up to the amount of funds you provided. In addi- a funding fee. If provided by the Rural Housing only points that you can fully deduct in the year
tion, you can deduct any points paid by the Service, it is commonly known as a guarantee paid. However, certain points not included on
seller. fee. These fees can be deducted fully in 2008 if Form 1098 also may be deductible, either in the
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 155

Page 158 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
year paid or over the life of the loan. See Points, for investment purposes is treated as invest- Child's qualified dividends. If part of the
earlier, to determine whether you can deduct ment interest. The allocation is not affected by amount you report is your child's qualified divi-
points not shown on Form 1098. the use of property that secures the debt. dends, that part (which is reported on Form
1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in-
vestment income. However, you can choose toPrepaid interest on Form 1098. If you pre- Limit on Deduction include all or part of it in investment income, aspaid interest in 2008 that accrued in full by Janu-
explained under Choosing to include qualifiedary 15, 2009, this prepaid interest may be Generally, your deduction for investment inter- dividends, earlier.included in box 1 of Form 1098. However, you est expense is limited to the amount of your net
cannot deduct the prepaid amount for January Your investment income also includes theinvestment income.
2009 in 2008. (See Prepaid interest, earlier.) amount on Form 8814, line 12, (or, if applicable,You can carry over the amount of investment
You will have to figure the interest that accrued the reduced amount figured next under Child'sinterest that you could not deduct because of
for 2009 and subtract it from the amount in box Alaska Permanent Fund dividends).this limit to the next tax year. The interest carried
1. You will include the interest for January 2009 over is treated as investment interest paid or Child's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.with the other interest you pay for 2009. See accrued in that next year. If part of the amount you report is your child'sHow To Report, later. You can carry over disallowed investment Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that partinterest to the next tax year even if it is more than does not count as investment income. To figureRefunded interest. If you received a refund of your taxable income in the year the interest was the amount of your child's income that you canmortgage interest you overpaid in an earlier paid or accrued. consider your investment income, start with theyear, you generally will receive a Form 1098 amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply thatshowing the refund in box 3. See Refunds of amount by a percentage that is equal to theinterest, earlier. Net Investment Income Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by
the total amount on Form 8814, line 4. SubtractDetermine the amount of your net investmentMortgage insurance premiums. The amount the result from the amount on Form 8814, lineincome by subtracting your investment ex-of mortgage insurance premiums you paid dur- 12.penses (other than interest expense) from youring 2008 may be shown in box 4 of Form 1098.
investment income. Child's capital gain distributions. If partSee Mortgage Insurance Premiums, earlier.
of the amount you report is your child's capitalInvestment income. This generally includes gain distributions, that part (which is reported onyour gross income from property held for invest- Schedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13)ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and generally does not count as investment income.royalties). Investment income does not includeInvestment Interest However, you can choose to include all or part ofAlaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does it in investment income, as explained in Choos-not include qualified dividends or net capital gainThis section discusses interest expenses you ing to include net capital gain, earlier.unless you choose to include them.may be able to deduct as an investor. Your investment income also includes theIf you borrow money to buy property you hold Choosing to include qualified dividends. amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable,for investment, the interest you pay is invest- Investment income generally does not include the reduced amount figured under Child'sment interest. You can deduct investment inter- qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 8. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier).est subject to the limit discussed later. However, However, you can choose to include all or part ofyou cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro- your qualified dividends in investment income. Investment expenses. Investment expensesduce tax-exempt income. Nor can you deduct You make this choice by completing Form are your allowed deductions (other than interestinterest expenses on straddles. 4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. expense) directly connected with the productionInvestment interest does not include any If you choose to include any amount of your of investment income. Investment expensesqualified home mortgage interest or any interest qualified dividends in investment income, you that are included as a miscellaneous itemizedtaken into account in computing income or loss must reduce your qualified dividends that are deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), are al-from a passive activity. eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by lowable deductions after applying the 2% limit
the same amount. that applies to miscellaneous itemized deduc-
Investment Property tions. Use the smaller of:Choosing to include net capital gain. In-
vestment income generally does not include net • The investment expenses included onProperty held for investment includes property capital gain from disposing of investment prop- Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, orthat produces interest, dividends, annuities, or erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-royalties not derived in the ordinary course of a • The amount on Schedule A, line 27.tual funds). However, you can choose to includetrade or business. It also includes property that all or part of your net capital gain in investmentproduces gain or loss (not derived in the ordi- income. Losses from passive activities. Income ornary course of a trade or business) from the sale You make this choice by completing Form expenses that you used in computing income oror trade of property producing these types of 4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. loss from a passive activity are not included inincome or held for investment (other than an If you choose to include any amount of your determining your investment income or invest-interest in a passive activity). Investment prop- net capital gain in investment income, you must ment expenses (including investment interesterty also includes an interest in a trade or busi- reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for expense). See Publication 925 for informationness activity in which you did not materially the lower capital gains tax rates by the same about passive activities.participate (other than a passive activity). amount.
Before making either choice, considerPartners, shareholders, and beneficiaries. Form 4952the overall effect on your tax liability.To determine your investment interest, combine
Compare your tax if you make one oryour share of investment interest from a partner-
TIP Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expenseboth of these choices with your tax if you do not.ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest-other investment interest. ment interest.Investment income of child reported on par-
ent's return. Investment income includes the Exception to use of Form 4952. You do notAllocation of Interest part of your child's interest and dividend income have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to yourthat you choose to report on your return. If theExpense return if you meet all of the following tests.child does not have qualified dividends, Alaska
If you borrow money for business or personal Permanent Fund dividends, or capital gain distri- • Your investment interest expense is not
purposes as well as for investment, you must butions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form more than your investment income from
allocate the debt among those purposes. Only 8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter- interest and ordinary dividends minus any
the interest expense on the part of the debt used est and Dividends. qualified dividends.
Page 156 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 159 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You do not have any other deductible in- Table 23-1.  Where To Deduct Your Interest Expense
vestment expenses.
AND for more• You have no carryover of investment inter-
IF you have ... THEN deduct it on ... information go to ...est expense from 2007.
deductible student loan interest Form 1040, line 33, or Publication 970.If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct all
Form 1040A, line 18of your investment interest.
deductible home mortgage interest and Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.
More Information points reported on Form 1098 line 10
deductible home mortgage interest not Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.For more information on investment interest,
reported on Form 1098 line 11see Interest Expenses in chapter 3 of Publica-
tion 550. deductible points not reported on Form Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.
1098 line 12
deductible mortgage insurance Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.
premiums line 13
Items You deductible investment interest (other Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 550.
than incurred to produce rents or line 14Cannot Deduct royalties)
deductible business interest (non-farm) Schedule C or C-EZ (Form Publication 535.Some interest payments are not deductible.
1040)Certain expenses similar to interest also are not
deductible. Nondeductible expenses include the deductible farm business interest Schedule F (Form 1040) Publications 225 and 535.
following items.
deductible interest incurred to produce Schedule E (Form 1040) Publications 527 and 535.
• Personal interest (discussed later). rents or royalties
• Service charges (however, see Other Ex- personal interest not deductible.
penses in chapter 28). 
• Annual fees for credit cards. 
to each use. However, you do not have to allo- security number, an individual taxpayer identifi-
• Loan fees. cate home mortgage interest if it is fully deducti- cation number (issued by the Internal Revenue
ble, regardless of how the funds are used. Service), or an employer identification number.• Credit investigation fees. 
See Social Security Number in chapter 1 forYou allocate interest (other than fully deduct-• Interest to purchase or carry tax-exempt ible home mortgage interest) on a loan in the more information about TINs.securities. same way as the loan itself is allocated. You do If you can take a deduction for points thatthis by tracing disbursements of the debt pro- were not reported to you on Form 1098, deductceeds to specific uses. For details on how to doPenalties. You cannot deduct fines and pen- those points on Schedule A (Form 1040), linethis, see chapter 4 of Publication 535.alties paid to a government for violations of law, 12.regardless of their nature. Deduct mortgage insurance premiums on
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 13.
Personal Interest
More than one borrower. If you and atHow To Report
least one other person (other than your spouse ifPersonal interest is not deductible. Personal in-
you file a joint return) were liable for and paidYou must file Form 1040 to deduct any hometerest is any interest that is not home mortgage
mortgage interest expense on your tax return. interest on a mortgage that was for your home,interest, investment interest, business interest,
Where you deduct your interest expense gener- and the other person received a Form 1098or other deductible interest. It includes the fol-
ally depends on how you use the loan proceeds. showing the interest that was paid during thelowing items.
See Table 23-1 for a summary of where to de- year, attach a statement to your return explain-• Interest on car loans (unless you use the duct your interest expense. ing this. Show how much of the interest each ofcar for business). you paid, and give the name and address of the
Home mortgage interest and points. Deduct• Interest on federal, state, or local income person who received the form. Deduct yourthe home mortgage interest and points reported share of the interest on Schedule A (Formtax. to you on Form 1098 on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 11, and print ªSee attachedº next to• Finance charges on credit cards, retail in- 1040), line 10. If you paid more deductible inter- the line. Also, deduct your share of any qualifiedest to the financial institution than the amountstallment contracts, and revolving charge mortgage insurance premiums on Schedule Ashown on Form 1098, show the larger deducti-accounts incurred for personal expenses. (Form 1040), line 13.ble amount on line 10. Attach a statement ex-• Late payment charges by a public utility. plaining the difference and print ªSee attachedº Similarly, if you are the payer of record on a
next to line 10. mortgage on which there are other borrowers
You may be able to deduct interest you entitled to a deduction for the interest shown on Deduct home mortgage interest that was not
pay on a qualified student loan. For the Form 1098 you received, deduct only yourreported to you on Form 1098 on Schedule A
details, see  Publication 970, Tax Ben- (Form 1040), line 11. If you paid home mortgage share of the interest on Schedule A (Form
TIP
efits for Education. interest to the person from whom you bought 1040), line 10. You should let each of the other
your home, show that person's name, address, borrowers know what his or her share is.
and taxpayer identification number (TIN) on the Mortgage proceeds used for business ordotted lines next to line 11. The seller must give
investment. If your home mortgage interestyou this number and you must give the seller
deduction is limited, but all or part of the mort-Allocation of Interest your TIN. A Form W-9, Request for Taxpayer
gage proceeds were used for business, invest-Identification Number and Certification, can be
If you use the proceeds of a loan for more than ment, or other deductible activities, see Tableused for this purpose. Failure to meet any of
one purpose (for example, personal and busi- 23-1. It shows where to deduct the part of yourthese requirements may result in a $50 penalty
ness), you must allocate the interest on the loan for each failure. The TIN can be either a social excess interest that is for those activities.
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 157

Page 160 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Investment interest. Deduct investment in- • Organizations that are qualified to receive or under the laws of the United States, any
terest, subject to certain limits discussed in Pub- deductible charitable contributions. state, the District of Columbia, or any pos-
lication 550, on Schedule A (Form 1040), line session of the United States (including• The types of contributions you can deduct.14. Puerto Rico). It must be organized and op-
• How much you can deduct. erated only for one or more of the followingAmortization of bond premium. There are purposes.• What records to keep.various ways to treat the premium you pay to
buy taxable bonds. See Bond Premium Amorti- a. Religious.• How to report your charitable contribu-zation in Publication 550. tions. b. Charitable.Income-producing rental or royalty interest.
c. Educational.A charitable contribution is a donation or giftDeduct interest on a loan for income-producing
to, or for the use of, a qualified organization. It isrental or royalty property that is not used in your d. Scientific.voluntary and is made without getting, or expect-business in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040).
ing to get, anything of equal value. e. Literary.
Example. You rent out part of your home f. The prevention of cruelty to children orForm 1040 required. To deduct a charitableand borrow money to make repairs. You can animals.contribution, you must file Form 1040 and item-deduct only the interest payment for the rented
ize deductions on Schedule A. The amount ofpart in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). Deduct Certain organizations that foster nationalyour deduction may be limited if certain rulesthe rest of the interest payment on Schedule A or international amateur sports competitionand limits explained in this chapter apply to you.(Form 1040) if it is deductible home mortgage also qualify.
interest.
2. War veterans' organizations, includingUseful Items posts, auxiliaries, trusts, or foundations, or-You may want to see: ganized in the United States or any of its
possessions.Publication
3. Domestic fraternal societies, orders, and❏ 78 Cumulative List of Organizations associations operating under the lodge sys-
24. ❏ 526 Charitable Contributions tem.
Note. Your contribution to this type of❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated
organization is deductible only if it is to beProperty
used solely for charitable, religious, scien-Contributions
tific, literary, or educational purposes, or forForm (and Instructions)
the prevention of cruelty to children or ani-
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized mals. 
DeductionsWhat's New
4. Certain nonprofit cemetery companies or❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions corporations.Midwestern disaster areas. If you make a  Note. Your contribution to this type ofcharitable contribution for relief efforts related to organization is not deductible if it can bethe storms, tornadoes, or flooding in a Midwest- used for the care of a specific lot or mauso-ern disaster area, you may be able to: leum crypt. Organizations That• Use a higher standard mileage rate to fig-
5. The United States or any state, the Districture any out-of-pocket expenses you had in Qualify To Receive of Columbia, a U.S. possession (includinggiving services,
Puerto Rico), a political subdivision of a
• Exclude any mileage reimbursements Deductible state or U.S. possession, or an Indian tribal
from income, and government or any of its subdivisions that
Contributions perform substantial government functions.• Claim a deduction in excess of the usual
Note. To be deductible, your contributionlimits described under Limits on Deduc- You can deduct your contributions only if you to this type of organization must be madetions in this chapter. make them to a qualified organization. To be- solely for public purposes. See Publication 4492-B for details about all the come a qualified organization, most organiza-
tax benefits related to Midwestern disaster ar- tions other than churches and governments, as
Examples.   The following list gives some ex-eas, or see Publication 526 for more details described below, must apply to the IRS. 
amples of qualified organizations.about charitable contributions for relief efforts in You can ask any organization whetherMidwestern disaster areas. • Churches, a convention or association ofit is a qualified organization, and most
churches, temples, synagogues,will be able to tell you. Or you can
TIP
mosques, and other religious organiza-check IRS Publication 78, which lists most quali-
tions.fied organizations. You may find Publication 78
Reminders in your local library's reference section. Or you • Most nonprofit charitable organizations
can find it on the Internet at apps.irs.gov/app/ such as the Red Cross and the UnitedLimit on itemized deductions. If your ad- pub78 . You can also call the IRS at Way. justed gross income is more than $159,950 1-877-829-5500 to find out if an organization is
• Most nonprofit educational organizations,($79,975 if you are married filing separately), the qualified. (For TTY/TDD help, call
including the Boy (and Girl) Scouts ofoverall amount of your itemized deductions may 1-800-829-4059).
America, colleges, museums, and daycarebe limited. See chapter 29 for more information
centers if substantially all the child careabout this limit.
Types of Qualified provided is to enable individuals (the par-
ents) to be gainfully employed and theOrganizations services are available to the general pub-
lic. However, if your contribution is a sub-Generally, only the five following types of organi-Introduction stitute for tuition or other enrollment fee, itzations can be qualified organizations.
This chapter explains how to claim a deduction is not deductible as a charitable contribu-
for your charitable contributions. It discusses the 1. A community chest, corporation, trust, tion, as explained later under Contribu-
following topics. fund, or foundation organized or created in tions You Cannot Deduct. 
Page 158 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 161 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you pay more than fair market value to aTable 24-1. Examples of Charitable ContributionsÐA Quick Check
qualified organization for merchandise, goods,
or services, the amount you pay that is moreUse the following lists for a quick check of contributions you can or cannot deduct. See the
than the value of the item can be a charitablerest of this chapter for more information and additional rules and limits that may apply.
contribution. For the excess amount to qualify,
Deductible As Not Deductible you must pay it with the intent to make a charita-
Charitable Contributions As Charitable Contributions ble contribution.
Money or property you give to: Money or property you give to: Example 1. You pay $65 for a ticket to a• Churches, synagogues, temples, • Civic leagues, social and sports clubs, dinner-dance at a church. All of the proceeds ofmosques, and other religious labor unions, and chambers of the function go to the church. The ticket to theorganizations commerce dinner-dance has a fair market value of $25.
• Federal, state, and local governments, if • Foreign organizations (except certain When you buy your ticket, you know that its
your contribution is solely for public Canadian, Israeli, and Mexican value is less than your payment. To figure the
purposes (for example, a gift to reduce charities) amount of your charitable contribution, you sub-
the public debt) • Groups that are run for personal profit tract the value of the benefit you receive ($25)
• Nonprofit schools and hospitals from your total payment ($65). You can deduct• Groups whose purpose is to lobby for
• Public parks and recreation facilities $40 as a contribution to the church.law changes
• Salvation Army, Red Cross, CARE, • Homeowners' associations
Example 2. At a fund-raising auction con-Goodwill Industries, United Way, Boy • Individuals ducted by a charity, you pay $600 for a week'sScouts, Girl Scouts, Boys and Girls • Political groups or candidates for stay at a beach house. The amount you pay isClubs of America, etc. public office no more than the fair rental value. You have not• War veterans groups
made a deductible charitable contribution.• Charitable organizations listed in
Publication 78 Athletic events. If you make a payment to, or
for the benefit of, a college or university and, asExpenses paid for a student living with you, Cost of raffle, bingo, or lottery tickets a result, you receive the right to buy tickets to ansponsored by a qualified organization athletic event in the athletic stadium of the col-
Out-of-pocket expenses when you serve a Dues, fees, or bills paid to country clubs, lege or university, you can deduct 80% of the
qualified organization as a volunteer lodges, fraternal orders, or similar payment as a charitable contribution.
groups If any part of your payment is for tickets
(rather than the right to buy tickets), that part isTuition
not deductible. In that case, subtract the price ofValue of your time or services the tickets from your payment. 80% of the re-
maining amount is a charitable contribution.Value of blood given to a blood bank
Example 1. You pay $300 a year for mem-
bership in an athletic scholarship program main-
tained by a university (a qualified organization).
The only benefit of membership is that you have
the right to buy one season ticket for a seat in a• Nonprofit hospitals and medical research use of, a qualified organization. A gift or contri- designated area of the stadium at the univer-organizations. bution is ªfor the use ofº a qualified organization sity's home football games. You can deductwhen it is held in a legally enforceable trust for• Utility company emergency energy pro- $240 (80% of $300) as a charitable contribution.the qualified organization or in a similar legalgrams, if the utility company is an agent arrangement. The contributions must be madefor a charitable organization that assists Example 2. The facts are the same as into a qualified organization and not set aside forindividuals with emergency energy needs. Example 1 except that your $300 payment in-use by a specific person.
cluded the purchase of one season ticket for the• Nonprofit volunteer fire companies. If you give property to a qualified organiza- stated ticket price of $120. You must subtracttion, you generally can deduct the fair market• Public parks and recreation facilities. the usual price of a ticket ($120) from your $300value of the property at the time of the contribu- payment. The result is $180. Your deductible• Civil defense organizations. tion. See Contributions of Property, later in this charitable contribution is $144 (80% of $180).chapter.
Certain foreign charitable organizations.  Charity benefit events. If you pay a qualifiedYour deduction for charitable contributions is
Under income tax treaties with Canada, Israel, organization more than fair market value for thegenerally limited to 50% of your adjusted gross
and Mexico, you may be able to deduct contribu- right to attend a charity ball, banquet, show,income, but in some cases 20% and 30% limits
tions to certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican sporting event, or other benefit event, you canmay apply. See Limits on Deductions, later.
charitable organizations. Generally, you must deduct only the amount that is more than theIn addition, the total of your charitable contri-
value of the privileges or other benefits youhave income from sources in that country. For butions deduction and certain other itemized
receive.additional information on the deduction of contri- deductions may be limited. See chapter 29. If there is an established charge for thebutions to Canadian charities, see Publication Table 24-1 lists some examples of contribu- event, that charge is the value of your benefit. If597, Information on the United States ±Canada tions you can deduct and some that you cannot there is no established charge, your contributionIncome Tax Treaty. If you need more informa- deduct. is that part of your payment that is more than thetion on how to figure your contribution to Mexi-
reasonable value of the right to attend the event.can and Israeli charities, see Publication 526.
Whether you use the tickets or other privilegesContributions From
has no effect on the amount you can deduct.Which You Benefit However, if you return the ticket to the qualified
organization for resale, you can deduct the en-If you receive a benefit as a result of making aContributions tire amount you paid for the ticket.contribution to a qualified organization, you can
deduct only the amount of your contribution that Even if the ticket or other evidence ofYou Can Deduct
is more than the value of the benefit you receive. payment indicates that the payment is
Also, see Contributions From Which You BenefitGenerally, you can deduct your contributions of a ªcontribution,º this does not mean
CAUTION
!
under Contributions You Cannot Deduct, later.money or property that you make to, or for the you can deduct the entire amount. If the ticket
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 159

Page 162 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 24-2. Volunteers' Questions and Answers
If you do volunteer work for a qualified organization, the following questions and answers may apply to you. All of the rules explained in
this chapter also apply. See, in particular, Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services.
Question Answer
I do volunteer work 6 hours a week in the office of a qualified No, you cannot deduct the value of your time or services.
organization. The receptionist is paid $10 an hour to do the same
work I do. Can I deduct $60 a week for my time? 
The office is 30 miles from my home. Can I deduct any of my car Yes, you can deduct the costs of gas and oil that are directly related
expenses for these trips? to getting to and from the place where you are a volunteer. If you
don't want to figure your actual costs, you can deduct 14 cents for
each mile.
I volunteer as a Red Cross nurse's aide at a hospital. Can I deduct Yes, you can deduct the cost of buying and cleaning your uniforms
the cost of uniforms that I must wear? if the hospital is a qualified organization, the uniforms are not
suitable for everyday use, and you must wear them when
volunteering.
I pay a babysitter to watch my children while I do volunteer work for No, you cannot deduct payments for child care expenses as a
a qualified organization. Can I deduct these costs? charitable contribution, even if they are necessary so you can do
volunteer work for a qualified organization. (If you have child care
expenses so you can work for pay, see chapter 32.)
shows the price of admission and the amount of Token items. You can deduct your entire pay- Expenses Paid for Studentment to a qualified organization as a charitablethe contribution, you can deduct the contribution
Living With Youcontribution if both of the following are true.amount.
• You get a small item or other benefit of You may be able to deduct some expenses ofExample. You pay $40 to see a special token value. having a student live with you. You can deductshowing of a movie for the benefit of a qualified qualifying expenses for a foreign or American• The qualified organization correctly deter-organization. Printed on the ticket is ªContribu- student who:mines that the value of the item or benefittionÐ$40.º If the regular price for the movie is
you received is not substantial and informs 1. Lives in your home under a written agree-$8, your contribution is $32 ($40 payment − $8 you that you can deduct your payment in ment between you and a qualified organi-regular price). full. zation as part of a program of the
organization to provide educational oppor-
Membership fees or dues. You may be able tunities for the student,Written statement. A qualified organizationto deduct membership fees or dues you pay to a must give you a written statement if you make a 2. Is not your relative or dependent, andqualified organization. However, you can deduct payment to it that is more than $75 and is partlyonly the amount that is more than the value of 3. Is a full-time student in the twelfth or anya contribution and partly for goods or services.the benefits you receive. You cannot deduct lower grade at a school in the UnitedThe statement must tell you that you can deduct States.dues, fees, or assessments paid to country only the amount of your payment that is moreclubs and other social organizations. They are than the value of the goods or services you You can deduct up to $50 a month fornot qualified organizations. received. It must also give you a good faith each full calendar month the studentCertain membership benefits can be disre- estimate of the value of those goods or services. lives with you. Any month when condi-
TIP
garded. Both you and the organization can The organization can give you the statement tions (1) through (3) above are met for 15 days
disregard certain membership benefits you get either when it solicits or when it receives the or more counts as a full month.
in return for an annual payment of $75 or less to payment from you. For additional information, see Expensesthe qualified organization. The benefits that can Paid for Student Living With You in PublicationException. An organization will not have tobe disregarded are: 526.give you this statement if one of the following is
true.1. Any rights or privileges, other than those Mutual exchange program. You cannot de-discussed under Athletic events, earlier, duct the costs of a foreign student living in your1. The organization is:that you can use frequently while you are a home under a mutual exchange program
member, such as: a. The type of organization described in through which your child will live with a family in
(5) under Types of Qualified Organiza- a foreign country.a. Free or discounted admission to the or- tions, earlier, organization's facilities or events,
b. Formed only for religious purposes, and Out-of-Pocket Expenses inb. Free or discounted parking, the only benefit you receive is an intan- Giving Servicesgible religious benefit (such as admis-c. Preferred access to goods or services,
sion to a religious ceremony) thatand Although you cannot deduct the value of yourgenerally is not sold in commercial services given to a qualified organization, youd. Discounts on the purchase of goods transactions outside the donative con- may be able to deduct some amounts you pay inand services. text. giving services to a qualified organization. The
amounts must be:2. Admission, while you are a member, to 2. You receive only items whose value is notevents that are open only to members of • Unreimbursed,substantial as described underTokenthe organization, if the organization rea- items, earlier. • Directly connected with the services,sonably projects that the cost per person
(excluding any allocated overhead) is not 3. You receive only membership benefits that • Expenses you had only because of the
more than $9.10. can be disregarded, as described earlier. services you gave, and
Page 160 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 163 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Not personal, living, or family expenses. Travel. Generally, you can claim a charitable • The cost of meals.
contribution deduction for travel expenses nec- Because these travel expenses are not busi-Table 24-2 contains questions and answers essarily incurred while you are away from home ness-related, they are not subject to the samethat apply to some individuals who volunteer performing services for a charitable organization limits as business-related expenses. For infor-their services. only if there is no significant element of personal mation on business travel expenses, see Travelpleasure, recreation, or vacation in the travel. Expenses in chapter 26.Conventions. If you are a chosen representa- This applies whether you pay the expenses di-
tive attending a convention of a qualified organi- rectly or indirectly. You are paying the expenses
zation, you can deduct actual unreimbursed indirectly if you make a payment to the charita-
expenses for travel and transportation, including ble organization and the organization pays for
a reasonable amount for meals and lodging, Contributionsyour travel expenses.
while away from home overnight in connection The deduction for travel expenses will not be
with the convention. However, see Travel, later. You Cannot Deductdenied simply because you enjoy providing
You cannot deduct personal expenses for services to the charitable organization. Even if
There are some contributions you cannot de-sightseeing, fishing parties, theater tickets, or you enjoy the trip, you can take a charitable
duct, such as those made to specific individualsnightclubs. You also cannot deduct transporta- contribution deduction for your travel expenses
and those made to nonqualified organizations.tion, meals and lodging, and other expenses for if you are on duty in a genuine and substantial
(See Contributions to Individuals and Contribu-your spouse or children. sense throughout the trip. However, if you have
tions to Nonqualified Organizations, next.) You cannot deduct your expenses in attend- only nominal duties, or if for significant parts of
There are others you can deduct only part of, asing a church convention if you go only as a the trip you do not have any duties, you cannot
discussed later under Contributions From Whichmember of your church rather than as a chosen deduct your travel expenses.
You Benefit.representative. You can deduct unreimbursed
Example 1. You are a troop leader for aexpenses that are directly connected with giving
tax-exempt youth group and you help take theservices for your church during the convention. Contributions to
group on a camping trip. You are responsible for
IndividualsUniforms. You can deduct the cost and up- overseeing the setup of the camp and for provid-
keep of uniforms that are not suitable for every- ing adult supervision for other activities during You cannot deduct contributions to specific indi-day use and that you must wear while the entire trip. You participate in the activities of viduals, including the following.performing donated services for a charitable or- the group and really enjoy your time with them.
ganization. You oversee the breaking of camp and you help • Contributions to fraternal societies made
transport the group home. You can deduct your for the purpose of paying medical or burial
Foster parents. You may be able to deduct as travel expenses. expenses of deceased members. 
a charitable contribution some of the costs of
• Contributions to individuals who are needybeing a foster parent (foster care provider) if you Example 2. You sail from one island to an- or worthy. This includes contributions to ahave no profit motive in providing the foster care other and spend 8 hours a day counting whales qualified organization if you indicate thatand are not, in fact, making a profit. A qualified and other forms of marine life. The project is your contribution is for a specific person.organization must designate the individuals you sponsored by a charitable organization. In most But you can deduct a contribution that youtake into your home for foster care. circumstances, you cannot deduct your ex- give to a qualified organization that in turnYou can deduct expenses that meet both of penses. helps needy or worthy individuals if you dothe following requirements. not indicate that your contribution is for aExample 3. You work for several hours specific person.1. They are unreimbursed out-of-pocket ex- each morning on an archaeological dig spon- Example. You can deduct contributionspenses to feed, clothe, and care for the sored by a charitable organization. The rest of for flood relief, hurricane relief, or otherfoster child. the day is free for recreation and sightseeing. disaster relief to a qualified organization.You cannot take a charitable contribution deduc-2. They must be mainly to benefit the quali- However, you cannot deduct contributionstion even though you work very hard duringfied organization. earmarked for relief of a particular individ-those few hours. ual or family.Unreimbursed expenses that you cannot de-
duct as charitable contributions may be consid- Example 4. You spend the entire day at- • Payments to a member of the clergy thatered support provided by you in determining tending a charitable organization's regional can be spent as he or she wishes, such aswhether you can claim the foster child as a meeting as a chosen representative. In the eve- for personal expenses. dependent. For details, see chapter 3. ning you go to the theater. You can claim your • Expenses you paid for another person whotravel expenses as charitable contributions, but provided services to a qualified organiza-Example.  You cared for a foster child be- you cannot claim the cost of your evening at the tion.cause you wanted to adopt her, not to benefit the theater.
Example. Your son does missionary work.agency that placed her in your home. Your un-
Daily allowance (per diem). If you provide You pay his expenses. You cannot claim areimbursed expenses are not deductible as
services for a charitable organization and re- deduction for your son's unreimbursed ex-charitable contributions.
ceive a daily allowance to cover reasonable penses related to his contribution of serv-
travel expenses, including meals and lodgingCar expenses. You can deduct unreimbursed ices.
while away from home overnight, you must in-out-of-pocket expenses, such as the cost of gas • Payments to a hospital that are for a spe-clude in income the amount of the allowanceand oil, that are directly related to the use of your cific patient's care or for services for athat is more than your deductible travel ex-car in giving services to a charitable organiza- specific patient. You cannot deduct thesepenses. You can deduct your necessary traveltion. You cannot deduct general repair and payments even if the hospital is operatedexpenses that are more than the allowance.maintenance expenses, depreciation, registra- by a city, a state, or other qualified organi-tion fees, or the costs of tires or insurance. Deductible travel expenses. These in- zation.   If you do not want to deduct your actual clude:
expenses, you can use a standard mileage rate
• Air, rail, and bus transportation,of 14 cents a mile to figure your contribution. Contributions to
You can deduct parking fees and tolls • Out-of-pocket expenses for your car, Nonqualifiedwhether you use your actual expenses or the • Taxi fares or other costs of transportationstandard mileage rate. Organizationsbetween the airport or station and yourYou must keep reliable written records of hotel,your car expenses. For more information, see You cannot deduct contributions to organiza-
Car expenses under Records To Keep, later. • Lodging costs, and tions that are not qualified to receive
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 161

Page 164 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax-deductible contributions, including the fol- dues, earlier, under Contributions You Exception. You can take a deduction for a
lowing. contribution of an item of clothing or householdCan Deduct. 
item that is not in good used condition or better if• Tuition, or amounts you pay instead of tui-1. Certain state bar associations if: you deduct more than $500 for it and include ation, even if you pay them for children to qualified appraisal of it with your return.a. The state bar is not a political subdivi- attend parochial schools or qualifying non-
sion of a state, Household items. Household items in-profit day-care centers. You also cannot
clude:deduct any fixed amount you may be re-b. The bar has private, as well as public,
quired to pay in addition to the tuition feepurposes, such as promoting the pro- • Furniture,to enroll in a private school, even if it isfessional interests of members, and • Furnishings,designated as a ªdonation.º 
c. Your contribution is unrestricted and • Electronics,can be used for private purposes.
• Appliances,Value of Time or Services
2. Chambers of commerce and other busi- • Linens, andness leagues or organizations (but see You cannot deduct the value of your time or
chapter 28). • Other similar items.services, including:
3. Civic leagues and associations. • Blood donations to the Red Cross or to Household items do not include:blood banks, and4. Communist organizations. • Food,• The value of income lost while you work
5. Country clubs and other social clubs. • Paintings, antiques, and other objects ofas an unpaid volunteer for a qualified or-
art,ganization. 6. Foreign organizations other than:
• Jewelry and gems, and
a. A U.S. organization that transfers funds
• Collections.Personal Expensesto a charitable foreign organization if
the U.S. organization controls the use
You cannot deduct personal, living, or familyof the funds or if the foreign organiza- Cars, boats, and airplanes. The followingexpenses, such as the following items.tion is only an administrative arm of the rules apply to any donation of a qualified vehicle.
U.S. organization, or • The cost of meals you eat while you per- A qualified vehicle is:
form services for a qualified organizationb. Certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican • A car or any motor vehicle manufacturedunless it is necessary for you to be awaycharitable organizations. See Certain mainly for use on public streets, roads,from home overnight while performing theforeign charitable organizations under and highways,services.Organizations That Qualify To Receive
• A boat, orDeductible Contributions, earlier. • Adoption expenses, including fees paid to
• An airplane.an adoption agency and the costs of keep-7. Homeowners' associations. ing a child in your home before adoption is
final (but see Adoption Credit in chapter8. Labor unions (but see chapter 28). Deduction more than $500. If you donate a37, and the instructions for Form 8839, qualified vehicle to a qualified organization and9. Political organizations and candidates. Qualified Adoption Expenses). You also you claim a deduction of more than $500, you
may be able to claim an exemption for the can deduct the smaller of:
child. See Adopted child in chapter 3. 
• The gross proceeds from the sale of theContributions From
vehicle by the organization, orWhich You Benefit Appraisal Fees • The vehicle's fair market value on the date
If you receive or expect to receive a financial or of the contribution. If the vehicle's fair mar-Fees that you pay to find the fair market value ofeconomic benefit as a result of making a contri- ket value was more than your cost or otherdonated property are not deductible as contribu-bution to a qualified organization, you cannot basis, you may have to reduce the fairtions (but see chapter 28).deduct the part of the contribution that repre- market value to figure the deductible
sents the value of the benefit you receive. See amount, as described under Giving Prop-
Contributions From Which You Benefit  under erty That Has Increased in Value, later.
Contributions You Can Deduct,  earlier. These
contributions include the following. Form 1098-C. You must attach to your re-Contributions
turn the copy of the Form 1098-C, Contributions• Contributions for lobbying. This includes of Motor Vehicles, Boats, and Airplanes, (orof Propertyamounts that you earmark for use in, or in other statement containing the same informa-connection with, influencing specific legis- tion as Form 1098-C) you received from theIf you contribute property to a qualified organiza-lation. organization. The Form 1098-C (or other state-tion, the amount of your charitable contribution
• Contributions to a retirement home that ment) will show the gross proceeds from theis generally the fair market value of the propertyare clearly for room, board, maintenance, sale of the vehicle.at the time of the contribution. However, if theor admittance. Also, if the amount of your If you do not attach Form 1098-C (or otherproperty has increased in value, you may havecontribution depends on the type or size of statement), you cannot deduct your contribu-to make some adjustments to the amount ofapartment you will occupy, it is not a chari- tion. You must get Form 1098-C (or other state-your deduction. See Giving Property That Hastable contribution. ment) within 30 days of the sale of the vehicle.Increased in Value, later.
But if exception 1 or 2 (described next) applies,• Costs of raffles, bingo, lottery, etc. You For information about the records you must
you must get Form 1098-C (or other statement)cannot deduct as a charitable contribution keep and the information you must furnish with within 30 days of your donation.amounts you pay to buy raffle or lottery your return if you donate property, see Records
tickets or to play bingo or other games of To Keep and How To Report, later.
Exceptions. There are two exceptions to thechance. For information on how to report
rules just described for deductions of more thangambling winnings and losses, see chap- Clothing and household items. You cannot $500.ters 12 and 28. take a deduction for clothing or household items
you donate unless the clothing or household Exception 1Ðvehicle used or improved by• Dues to fraternal orders and similar
organization. If the qualified organizationgroups. However, see Membership fees or items are in good used condition or better.
Page 162 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 165 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
makes a significant intervening use of or mate- Future interests in tangible personal prop- is only $750. The fair market value of the car is
rial improvement to the vehicle before transfer- considered to be $750.erty. You may be able to deduct the value of a
ring it, and you claim a deduction of more than charitable contribution of a future interest in tan-
Large quantities. If you contribute a large$500, you generally can deduct the vehicle's fair gible personal property only after all intervening
number of the same item, fair market value is themarket value at the time of the contribution. But interests in and rights to the actual possession
price at which comparable numbers of the itemif the vehicle's fair market value was more than or enjoyment of the property have either expired
are being sold.your cost or other basis, you may have to reduce or been turned over to someone other than your-
the fair market value to get the deductible self, a related person, or a related organization.
amount, as described under Giving Property Giving Property ThatTangible personal property. This is anyThat Has Increased in Value, later. The Form property, other than land or buildings, that can Has Decreased in Value1098-C (or other statement) will show whether be seen or touched. It includes furniture, books,this exception applies. jewelry, paintings, and cars. If you contribute property with a fair market value
Exception 2 Ðvehicle given or sold to that is less than your basis in it, your deduction isFuture interest. This is any interest that isneedy individual. If the qualified organization limited to its fair market value. You cannot claimto begin at some future time, regardless ofwill give the vehicle, or sell it for a price well a deduction for the difference between the prop-whether it is designated as a future interestbelow fair market value, to a needy individual to erty's basis and its fair market value.under state law.further the organization's charitable purpose,
and you claim a deduction of more than $500,
Giving Property Thatyou generally can deduct the vehicle's fair mar- Determining
ket value at the time of the contribution. But if the Has Increased in ValueFair Market Valuevehicle's fair market value was more than your
cost or other basis, you may have to reduce the If you contribute property with a fair market valueThis section discusses general guidelines forfair market value to get the deductible amount, that is more than your basis in it, you may havedetermining the fair market value of variousas described under Giving Property That Has to reduce the fair market value by the amount oftypes of donated property. Publication 561 con-Increased in Value, later. The Form 1098-C (or appreciation (increase in value) when you figuretains a more complete discussion.other statement) will show whether this excep- your deduction.Fair market value is the price at which prop-tion applies. Your basis in property is generally what youerty would change hands between a willingThis exception does not apply if the organi- paid for it. See chapter 13  if you need morebuyer and a willing seller, neither having to buyzation sells the vehicle at auction. In that case, information about basis.or sell, and both having reasonable knowledgeyou cannot deduct the vehicle's fair market Different rules apply to figuring your deduc-of all the relevant facts.value. tion, depending on whether the property is:
Used clothing and household items. Gener- • Ordinary income property, orExample. Anita donates a used car to a ally, the fair market value of used clothing andqualified organization. She bought it 3 years ago • Capital gain property.household goods is far less than its original cost.for $9,000. A used car guide shows the fair For used clothing, you should claim as themarket value for this type of car is $6,000. How- value the price that buyers of used items actually Ordinary income property. Property is ordi-ever, Anita gets a Form 1098-C from the organi- pay in used clothing stores, such as consign- nary income property if its sale at fair marketzation showing the car was sold for $2,900. ment or thrift shops. See Household Goods in value on the date it was contributed would haveNeither exception 1 nor exception 2 applies. If Publication 561 for information on the valuation resulted in ordinary income or in short-term capi-Anita itemizes her deductions, she can deduct of household goods, such as furniture, appli- tal gain. Examples of ordinary income property$2,900 for her donation. She must attach Form ances, and linens. are inventory, works of art created by the donor,1098-C and Form 8283 to her return. manuscripts prepared by the donor, and capital
Deduction $500 or less. If the qualified or- Example. Dawn Greene donated a coat to a assets (defined in chapter 14) held 1 year or
ganization sells the vehicle for $500 or less and thrift store operated by her church. She paid less.
exceptions 1 and 2 do not apply, you can deduct $300 for the coat 3 years ago. Similar coats in Amount of deduction. The amount youthe smaller of: the thrift store sell for $50. The fair market value can deduct for a contribution of ordinary incomeof the coat is reasonably determined to be $50.• $500, or property is its fair market value minus theDawn's donation is limited to $50. amount that would be ordinary income or• The vehicle's fair market value on the date short-term capital gain if you sold the propertyof the contribution. But if the vehicle's fair Cars, boats, and airplanes. If you contribute for its fair market value. Generally, this rule limitsmarket value was more than your cost or a car, boat, or airplane to a charitable organiza- the deduction to your basis in the property.other basis, you may have to reduce the tion, you must determine its fair market value. 
fair market value to get the deductible Certain commercial firms and trade organiza- Example. You donate stock that you heldamount, as described under Giving Prop- tions publish used car pricing guides, commonly for 5 months to your church. The fair marketerty That Has Increased in Value later. called ªblue books,º containing complete dealer value of the stock on the day you donate it issale prices or dealer average prices for recent $1,000, but you paid only $800 (your basis).If the vehicle's fair market value is at least model years. The guides may be published Because the $200 of appreciation would be$250 but not more than $500, you must have a monthly or seasonally and for different regions short-term capital gain if you sold the stock, yourwritten statement from the qualified organization of the country. These guides also provide esti- deduction is limited to $800 (fair market valueacknowledging your donation. The statement mates for adjusting for unusual equipment, unu- minus the appreciation).must contain the information and meet the tests sual mileage, and physical condition. The prices
for an acknowledgment described under Deduc- are not ªofficialº and these publications are not Capital gain property. Property is capitaltions of At Least $250 But Not More Than $500 considered an appraisal of any specific donated gain property if its sale at fair market value onunder Records To Keep, later. property. But they do provide clues for making the date of the contribution would have resultedan appraisal and suggest relative prices forPartial interest in property. Generally, you in long-term capital gain. It includes capital as-comparison with current sales and offerings incannot deduct a charitable contribution of less sets held more than 1 year, as well as certainyour area.than your entire interest in property. real property and depreciable property used in
your trade or business and, generally, held moreExample. You donate a used car in poorRight to use property. A contribution of the than 1 year.condition to a local high school for use by stu-right to use property is a contribution of less than
dents studying car repair. A used car guideyour entire interest in that property and is not Amount of deduction Ð general rule.
shows the dealer retail value for this type of cardeductible. For exceptions and more informa- When figuring your deduction for a gift of capital
in poor condition is $1,600. However, the guidetion, see Partial Interest in Property Not in Trust gain property, you generally can use the fair
shows the price for a private party sale of the carin Publication 561. market value of the gift.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 163

Page 166 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exceptions. In certain situations, you must need to read this section. The limits discussed However, if these gifts are of capital gain prop-
reduce the fair market value by any amount that here do not apply to you. erty, they are subject to the 20% limit, described
would have been long-term capital gain if you later, rather than the 30% limit.The amount of your deduction is limited to
had sold the property for its fair market value. 50% of your adjusted gross income and may be
Generally, this means reducing the fair market Student living with you. Amounts you spendlimited to 30% or 20% of your adjusted gross
value to the property's cost or other basis. on behalf of a student living with you are subjectincome, depending on the type of property you
give and the type of organization you give it to. A to the 30% limit. These amounts are consideredBargain sales. A bargain sale of property to a
different limit applies to certain qualified conser- a contribution for the use of a qualified organiza-qualified organization (a sale or exchange for
vation contributions. These limits are described tion. See Expenses Paid for Student Living Withless than the property's fair market value) is
here.partly a charitable contribution and partly a sale You, earlier.
or exchange. A bargain sale may result in a If your contributions are more than any of the
taxable gain. limits that apply, see Carryovers, later. Special 30% Limit for
More information. For more information on Capital Gain Property50% Limitdonated appreciated property, see Giving Prop-
erty That Has Increased in Value in Publication A special 30% limit applies to gifts of capital gainThis limit applies to the total of all charitable526. property to 50% limit organizations. (For gifts ofcontributions you make during the year. This
capital gain property to other organizations, seemeans that your deduction for charitable contri-
20% Limit, later.) However, the special 30% limitbutions cannot be more than 50% of your ad-
does not apply when you choose to reduce thejusted gross income for the year.When To Deduct fair market value of the property by the amountGenerally, the 50% limit is the only limit that
that would have been long-term capital gain ifapplies to gifts to organizations listed belowYou can deduct your contributions only in the you had sold the property. Instead, only the 50%under 50% limit organizations. But there is oneyear you actually make them in cash or other
limit applies.exception. A special 30% limit also applies toproperty (or in a later carryover year, as ex-
these gifts if they are gifts of capital gain prop-plained later under Carryovers). This applies
erty for which you figure your deduction usingwhether you use the cash or an accrual method Two separate 30% limits. This special 30%
of accounting. fair market value without reduction for apprecia- limit for capital gain property is separate from the
tion. (See Special 30% Limit for Capital Gain other 30% limit. Therefore, the deduction of aTime of making contribution. Usually, you Property, later.) contribution subject to one 30% limit does notmake a contribution at the time of its uncondi-
reduce the amount you can deduct for contribu-tional delivery. 50% limit organizations. You can ask any tions subject to the other 30% limit. However,Checks. A check that you mail to a charity is organization whether it is a 50% limit organiza- the total you deduct cannot be more than 50% ofconsidered delivered on the date you mail it. tion and most will be able to tell you. Or you may your adjusted gross income.check IRS Publication 78 or call the IRS atCredit card.  Contributions charged on your
1-877-829-5500 (TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059).credit card are deductible in the year you make Example. Your adjusted gross income isThe following is a partial list of the types ofthe charge. $50,000. During the year, you gave capital gainorganizations that are 50% limit organizations. property with a fair market value of $15,000 to aPay-by-phone account.  If you use a
• Churches and conventions or associationspay-by-phone account, the date you make a 50% limit organization. You do not choose to
of churches. contribution is the date the financial institution reduce the property's fair market value by its
pays the amount. This date should be shown on appreciation in value. You also gave $10,000• Educational organizations with a regularthe statement the financial institution sends to cash to a qualified organization that is not a 50%faculty and curriculum that normally haveyou. limit organization. The $15,000 gift of property isa regularly enrolled student body attending
subject to the special 30% limit. The $10,000Stock certificate. A gift to a charity of a classes on site. 
properly endorsed stock certificate is completed cash gift is subject to the other 30% limit. Both• Hospitals and certain medical research or-on the date of mailing or other delivery to the gifts are fully deductible because neither is moreganizations associated with these hospi-charity or to the charity's agent. However, if you than the 30% limit that applies ($15,000 in eachtals. give a stock certificate to your agent or to the case) and together they are not more than the
issuing corporation for transfer to the name of • Publicly supported charities. 50% limit ($25,000).the charity, your gift is not completed until the • Private operating foundations. For more information, see the rules for elect-date the stock is transferred on the books of the
ing the 50% limit for capital gain property undercorporation. • Private nonoperating foundation. Private
How To Figure Your Deduction When Limitsnonoperating foundations that make quali-Promissory note. If you issue and deliver a Apply in Publication 526.fying distributions of 100% of contributionspromissory note to a charitable organization as
within 21/2 months following the year theya contribution, it is not a contribution until you
receive the contributions. 20% Limitmake the note payments.
• Private foundation. Certain private founda-Option.  If you grant an option to buy real This limit applies to all gifts of capital gain prop-tions whose contributions are pooled in aproperty at a bargain price to a charitable organi- erty to or for the use of qualified organizationscommon fund, the income and principal ofzation, you cannot take a deduction until the (other than gifts of capital gain property to 50%which are paid to public charities.organization exercises the option. limit organizations).
Borrowed funds. If you make a contribu-
tion with borrowed funds, you can deduct the 30% Limit Qualified Conservationcontribution in the year you make it, regardless
of when you repay the loan. ContributionA 30% limit applies to the following gifts.
• Gifts to all qualified organizations other The special 30% limit does not apply to qualified
than 50% limit organizations. This includes conservation contributions (QCCs). Instead, a
gifts to veterans' organizations, fraternal 50% limit applies. For qualified farmers andLimits on Deductions societies, nonprofit cemeteries, and cer- ranchers, QCCs are deductible up to 100% oftain private nonoperating foundations. adjusted gross income. See Publication 526 forIf your total contributions for the year are 20% or
• Gifts for the use of any organization. details.less of your adjusted gross income, you do not
Page 164 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 167 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your employer withheld $250 or more from a Payroll deductions. If you make a contribu-Carryovers single paycheck, see Contributions of $250 or tion by payroll deduction and your employer
More, next. withheld $250 or more from a single paycheck,You can carry over your contributions that you
you must keep:are not able to deduct in the current year be-
cause they exceed your adjusted-gross-income 1. A pay stub, Form W-2, or other documentContributions of $250 or Morelimits. You can deduct the excess in each of the furnished by your employer that shows thenext 5 years until it is used up, but not beyond amount withheld as a contribution, andYou can claim a deduction for a contribution ofthat time. For more information, see Carryovers $250 or more only if you have an acknowledg- 2. A pledge card or other document preparedin Publication 526. ment of your contribution from the qualified or- by or for the qualified organization thatganization or certain payroll deduction records. shows the name of the organization andIf you made more than one contribution of states the organization does not provide$250 or more, you must have either a separate goods or services in return for any contri-acknowledgment for each or one acknowledg-Records To Keep bution made to it by payroll deduction.ment that lists each contribution and the date of
each contribution and shows your total contribu- A single pledge card may be kept for all contribu-You must keep records to prove the amount of
tions. tions made by payroll deduction regardless ofthe contributions you make during the year. The
amount as long as it contains all the requiredkind of records you must keep depends on the Amount of contribution. In figuring whether information.amount of your contributions and whether they your contribution is $250 or more, do not com-are: If the pay stub, Form W-2, pledge card, orbine separate contributions. For example, if you other document does not show the date of the• Cash contributions, gave your church $25 each week, your weekly contribution, you must also have another docu-payments do not have to be combined. Each• Noncash contributions, or ment that does show the date of the contribution.payment is a separate contribution. If the pay stub, Form W-2, pledge card, or other• Out-of-pocket expenses when donating If contributions are made by payroll deduc- document does show the date of the contribu-your services. tion, the deduction from each paycheck is tion, you do not need any other records excepttreated as a separate contribution. those just described in (1) and (2).If you made a payment that is partly for
Note. An organization generally must give goods and services, as described earlier under
you a written statement if it receives a payment Noncash ContributionsContributions From Which You Benefit , your
from you that is more than $75 and is partly a contribution is the amount of the payment that is
For a contribution not made in cash, the recordscontribution and partly for goods or services. more than the value of the goods and services.
you must keep depend on whether your deduc-(See Contributions From Which You Benefit
Acknowledgment. The acknowledgment tion for the contribution is:under Contributions You Can Deduct, earlier.)
must meet these tests.Keep the statement for your records. It may 1. Less than $250,satisfy all or part of the recordkeeping require- 1. It must be written.ments explained in the following discussions. 2. At least $250 but not more than $500,
2. It must include: 3. Over $500 but not more than $5,000, or
Cash Contributions a. The amount of cash you contributed, 4. Over $5,000.
b. Whether the qualified organization gaveCash contributions include those paid by cash,
you any goods or services as a result ofcheck, electronic funds transfer, credit card, or Amount of deduction. In figuring whetheryour contribution (other than certain to-payroll deduction. your deduction is $500 or more, combine yourken items and membership benefits),You cannot deduct a cash contribution, re- claimed deductions for all similar items of prop-
gardless of the amount, unless you keep one of erty donated to any charitable organization dur-c. A description and good faith estimate of
the following. ing the year.the value of any goods or services de-
scribed in (b) (other than intangible re- If you received goods or services in return,1. A bank record that shows the name of the ligious benefits), and as described earlier in Contributions Fromqualified organization, the date of the con- Which You Benefit, reduce your contribution byd. A statement that the only benefit youtribution, and the amount of the contribu- the value of those goods or services. If youreceived was an intangible religioustion. Bank records may include: figure your deduction by reducing the fair marketbenefit, if that was the case. The ac- value of the donated property by its apprecia-a. A canceled check, knowledgment does not need to de- tion, as described earlier in Giving Property Thatscribe or estimate the value of anb. A bank or credit union statement, or Has Increased in Value, your contribution is theintangible religious benefit. An intangi- reduced amount.c. A credit card statement. ble religious benefit is a benefit that
generally is not sold in commercial
2. A receipt (or a letter or other written com- transactions outside a donative (gift)
Deductions of Less Than $250munication) from the qualified organization context. An example is admission to a
showing the name of the organization, the religious ceremony. If you make any noncash contribution, you mustdate of the contribution, and the amount of
get and keep a receipt from the charitable organ-the contribution. 3. You must get it on or before the earlier of: ization showing:
3. The payroll deduction records described a. The date you file your return for the 1. The name of the charitable organization,next. year you make the contribution, or
2. The date and location of the charitableb. The due date, including extensions, for contribution, andPayroll deductions. If you make a contribu- filing the return.
tion by payroll deduction, you must keep: 3. A reasonably detailed description of the
property.If the acknowledgment does not show the1. A pay stub, Form W-2, or other document date of the contribution, you must also have afurnished by your employer that shows the A letter or other written communicationbank record or receipt, as described earlier, thatdate and amount of the contribution, and from the charitable organization ac-does show the date of the contribution. If the
2. A pledge card or other document prepared knowledging receipt of the contributionacknowledgment does show the date of the con-
TIP
by or for the qualified organization that and containing the information in (1), (2), and (3)tribution and meets the other tests just de-
will serve as a receipt.shows the name of the organization. scribed, you do not need any other records.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 165

Page 168 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You are not required to have a receipt where written records must include the information services to reimburse you for the ex-
it is impractical to get one (for example, if you penses you incurred,listed in that discussion under Additional rec-
leave property at a charity's unattended drop ords. c. A description and a good faith estimatesite). The acknowledgment must also meet these of the value of any goods or services
tests. (other than intangible religious benefits)Additional records. You must also keep reli- provided to reimburse you, andable written records for each item of donated 1. It must be written.
property. Your written records must include the d. A statement that the only benefit you2. It must include:following information. received was an intangible religious
benefit, if that was the case. The ac-a. A description (but not necessarily the• The name and address of the organization knowledgment does not need to de-value) of any property you contributed,to which you contributed. scribe or estimate the value of an
b. Whether the qualified organization gave• The date and location of the contribution. intangible religious benefit (defined ear-
you any goods or services as a result of lier under Acknowledgment).• A description of the property in detail rea- your contribution (other than certain to-sonable under the circumstances. For a ken items and membership benefits), 3. You must get the acknowledgment on orsecurity, keep the name of the issuer, the and before the earlier of:type of security, and whether it is regularly
c. A description and good faith estimate oftraded on a stock exchange or in an a. The date you file your return for the
over-the-counter market. the value of any goods or services de- year you make the contribution, or
scribed in (b). If the only benefit you• The fair market value of the property at the b. The due date, including extensions, forreceived was an intangible religioustime of the contribution and how you fig- filing the return.benefit (such as admission to a relig-ured the fair market value. If it was deter- ious ceremony) that generally is notmined by appraisal, keep a signed copy of sold in a commercial transactionthe appraisal. Car expenses. If you claim expenses directlyoutside the donative context, the ac- related to use of your car in giving services to a• The cost or other basis of the property if knowledgment must say so and does qualified organization, you must keep reliableyou must reduce its fair market value by not need to describe or estimate the written records of your expenses. Whether yourappreciation. Your records should also in- value of the benefit. records are considered reliable depends on allclude the amount of the reduction and how
the facts and circumstances. Generally, theyyou figured it. If you choose the 50% limit 3. You must get it on or before the earlier of: may be considered reliable if you made theminstead of the special 30% limit on certain
regularly and at or near the time you had thecapital gain property, you must keep a re- a. The date you file your return for the
expenses.cord showing the years for which you year you make the contribution, or
Your records must show the name of themade the choice, contributions for the cur- b. The due date, including extensions, for organization you were serving and the daterent year to which the choice applies, and filing the return. each time you used your car for a charitablecarryovers from preceding years to which
purpose. If you use the standard mileage rate ofthe choice applies. See How To Figure
14 cents a mile, your records must show theYour Deduction When Limits Apply in Pub-
miles you drove your car for the charitable pur-lication 526 for information on how to Deductions Over $500 pose. If you deduct your actual expenses, yourmake the capital gain property election.
records must show the costs of operating the carYou are required to give additional information if• The amount you claim as a deduction for that are directly related to a charitable purpose.you claim a deduction over $500 for noncashthe tax year as a result of the contribution, See Car expenses under Out-of-Pocket Ex-charitable contributions. See Records To Keepif you contribute less than your entire inter- penses in Giving Services, earlier, for the ex-est in the property during the tax year. in Publication 526 for more information. penses you can deduct.Your records must include the amount you
claimed as a deduction in any earlier
years for contributions of other interests in Qualified Conservation
this property. They must also include the Contribution How To Reportname and address of each organization to
which you contributed the other interests, If the gift was a qualified conservation contribu-
Report your charitable contributions on Sched-the place where any such tangible prop- tion, your records must also include the fair
ule A (Form 1040).erty is located or kept, and the name of market value of the underlying property before
any person in possession of the property, If your total deduction for all noncash contri-and after the gift and the conservation purpose
other than the organization to which you butions for the year is over $500, you must alsofurthered by the gift. See Qualified Conservation
contributed. file Form 8283. See How To Report  in Publica-Contribution in Publication 526 for more infor-
tion 526 for more information.mation.• The terms of any conditions attached to
the gift of property.
Out-of-Pocket Expenses
Deductions of At Least $250 If you render services to a qualified organization
But Not More Than $500 and have unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses
related to those services, the following threeIf you claim a deduction of at least $250 but not 25.rules apply.more than $500 for a noncash charitable contri-
bution, you must get and keep an acknowledg- 1. You must have adequate records to prove
ment of your contribution from the qualified the amount of the expenses.
organization. If you made more than one contri- Nonbusiness
2. You must get an acknowledgment from thebution of $250 or more, you must have either a
qualified organization that contains:separate acknowledgment for each or one ac-
Casualty andknowledgment that shows your total contribu- a. A description of the services you pro-tions. vided,The acknowledgment must contain the infor- Theft Losses
b. A statement of whether or not the or-mation in items (1) through (3) listed under De-
ganization provided you any goods orductions of Less Than $250, earlier, and your
Page 166 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 169 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Your personal casualty losses attributa- and figure your loss. It includes schedules to
What's New for 2008 ble to a federally declared disaster and help you figure the loss on your home, its con-
occurring in a disaster area, over tents, and your motor vehicles.
Kansas and Midwestern disaster areas. b. Your personal casualty gains. Other sources of information. For informa-The following paragraphs explain the special tion on a casualty or theft loss of business orrules that apply to casualties and thefts of tax- income-producing property, see Publicationpayers in both the Kansas disaster area (de- Special rules for individuals impacted by 547.fined below) who were affected by storms and Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. If you
tornadoes that began on May 4, 2007, and Mid- claimed a casualty or theft loss deduction and in Useful Itemswestern disaster areas (defined below). In addi- a later year you received more reimbursement You may want to see:tion, you may be entitled to other tax benefits not than you expected, you do not recompute the
covered in this publication. For more informa- tax for the year in which you claimed the deduc- Publicationtion, see Publication 4492-A, Information for tion. Instead, you must include the reimburse-
Taxpayers Affected by the May 4, 2007, Kansas ment in your income for the year in which it was ❏ 544 Sales and Other DispositionsStorms and Tornadoes or Publication 4492-B, received, but only to the extent the original de-  of AssetsInformation for Affected Taxpayers in the Mid- duction reduced your tax for the earlier year. ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and western Disaster Areas. However, an exception applies if you claimed a  TheftsLosses of personal use property that arose in casualty or theft loss deduction for damage to or
these disaster areas are not subject to the $100 destruction of your main home caused by Hurri- ❏ 584 Casualty, Disaster, and Theft 
or 10% of adjusted gross income limitation. cane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma, and in a later year  Loss Workbook (Personal-Use
Qualifying losses include losses from casualties you received a hurricane relief grant. Under this  Property)
and thefts that arose in the disaster area and exception, you can choose to file an amended
that were attributable to the storms and torna- income tax return (Form 1040X) for the tax year Form (and Instructions)
does. If you live in the Kansas disaster area and in which you claimed the deduction and reduce ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemizeddeducted your loss in 2007 or elected to deduct (but not below zero) the amount of the deduction Deductionsthe loss in 2006, see Publication 4492-A for by the amount of the grant.
special instructions on how to complete your tax ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital GainsFor more information, see Reimbursement
forms. If you live in a Midwestern disaster area and LossesReceived After Deducting Loss later.
and you elect to deduct the loss in 2007, see
❏ 4684 Casualties and TheftsPublication 4492-B for special instructions on
how to complete your tax forms.
The replacement period for property in these What's New for 2009disaster areas that was damaged, destroyed or
stolen has been extended from 2 to 5 years. For CasualtyPersonal casualty and theft loss limit. Gen-more information, see Publication 547, Casual-
erally, a personal casualty or theft loss mustties, Disasters and Thefts. A casualty is the damage, destruction, or loss ofexceed $500 to be allowed for 2009. This is inThe Kansas disaster area covers the Kan- property resulting from an identifiable event thataddition to the 10% of AGI limit that generallysas counties of Barton, Clay, Cloud, Comanche, is sudden, unexpected, or unusual.applies to the net loss.Dickinson, Edwards, Ellsworth, Kiowa, Leaven-
• A sudden event is one that is swift, notworth, Lyon, McPherson, Osage, Osborne, Ot-
gradual or progressive.tawa, Phillips, Pottawatomie, Pratt, Reno, Rice,
Riley, Saline, Shawnee, Smith, and Stafford. • An unexpected event is one that is ordi-
For purposes of the special rules discussed Introduction narily unanticipated and unintended.
above, a Midwestern disaster area is an area This chapter explains the tax treatment of per- • An unusual event is one that is not athat has been declared a major disaster by the sonal (not business related) casualty losses, day-to-day occurrence and that is not typi-President, after May 19, 2008, and before Au- theft losses, and losses on deposits. cal of the activity in which you were en-gust 1, 2008, under section 401 of the Robert T. gaged.The chapter also explains the followingStafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assis-
 topics.tance Act because of severe storms, tornadoes,
or flooding that occurred in Arkansas, Illinois, Deductible losses. Deductible casualty• How to figure the amount of your loss.
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, losses can result from a number of different• How to treat insurance and other reim-Missouri, Nebraska, and Wisconsin. causes, including the following.bursements you receive.For a list of counties in Midwestern disaster • Car accidents (but see Nondeductibleareas, see Table 4, in Pub. 547. • The deduction limits. losses, next, for exceptions). 
• When and how to report a casualty orFederally declared disasters. New rules ap- • Earthquakes.theft.ply to losses of personal use property attributa-
• Fires (but see Nondeductible losses, next,ble to federally declared disasters declared in
for exceptions). tax years beginning after 2007 and that occur Forms to file.   When you have a casualty or
before 2010. The new rules discussed below do • Floods.theft, you have to file Form 4684. You will also
not apply to losses in Midwestern disaster ar- have to file one or both of the following forms. • Government-ordered demolition or reloca-eas.
tion of a home that is unsafe to use be-• Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deduc-
1. The net disaster loss (defined in (3) below) cause of a disaster as discussed undertions
is not subject to the 10% of adjusted gross Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547. • Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gainsincome limit. • Mine cave-ins.and Losses
2. You can deduct a net disaster loss even if • Shipwrecks. you do not itemize your deductions on Condemnations. For information on condem-Schedule A (Form 1040). You do this by • Sonic booms. nations of property, see Involuntary Conver-completing Form 4684 and entering your • Storms, including hurricanes and torna-sions in chapter 1 of Publication 544.net disaster loss on line 6 of the Standard does. Deduction Worksheet-Line 40 in the Form Workbook for casualties and thefts. Publi-1040 instructions. • Terrorist attacks.cation 584 is available to help you make a list of
3. Your net disaster loss is the excess ofÐ your stolen or damaged personal-use property • Vandalism.
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 167

Page 170 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Volcanic eruptions. • Blackmail. without permission from the Internal Revenue
Service.• Burglary. If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as aNondeductible losses. A casualty loss is not • Embezzlement. miscellaneous itemized deduction on Scheduledeductible if the damage or destruction is A (Form 1040), line 23. The maximum amount• Extortion.caused by the following. you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you are
• Kidnapping for ransom.• Accidentally breaking articles such as married filing separately) reduced by any ex-
glassware or china under normal condi- pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss is• Larceny.
subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incometions.
• Robbery. limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinary• A family pet (explained below). loss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.
The taking of money or property through fraud• A fire if you willfully set it or pay someone
or misrepresentation is theft if it is illegal under Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not chooseelse to set it. 
state or local law. to deduct the loss as a casualty loss or as an• A car accident if your willful negligence or ordinary loss, you must wait until the year thewillful act caused it. The same is true if the Decline in market value of stock. You can- actual loss is determined and deduct the loss as
willful act or willful negligence of someone not deduct as a theft loss the decline in market a nonbusiness bad debt in that year.
value of stock acquired on the open market foracting for you caused the accident. 
investment if the decline is caused by disclosure How to report. The kind of deduction you• Progressive deterioration (explained later). of accounting fraud or other illegal misconduct choose for your loss on deposits determines
by the officers or directors of the corporation that how you report your loss. If you choose:Family pet. Loss of property due to damage issued the stock. However, you can deduct as aby a family pet is not deductible as a casualty • Casualty loss Ð report it on Form 4684capital loss the loss you sustain when you sell orloss unless the requirements discussed earlier first and then on Schedule A (Form 1040).exchange the stock or the stock becomes com-
under Casualty are met. pletely worthless. You report a capital loss on • Ordinary loss Ð report it on Schedule A
Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemizedExample. Your antique oriental rug was about stock sales, worthless stock, and capital deduction.damaged by your new puppy before it was losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 550.
• Nonbusiness bad debt Ð report it onhousebroken. Because the damage was not un-
Schedule D (Form 1040).expected and unusual, the loss is not deductible Mislaid or lost property. The simple disap-
pearance of money or property is not a theft.as a casualty loss.
However, an accidental loss or disappearance More information. For more information, seeProgressive deterioration. Loss of prop- of property can qualify as a casualty if it results Special Treatment for Losses on Deposits inerty due to progressive deterioration is not de- from an identifiable event that is sudden, unex- Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institutions inductible as a casualty loss. This is because the pected, or unusual. Sudden, unexpected, and the Instructions for Form 4684 or Deposit indamage results from a steadily operating cause unusual events are defined earlier. Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institution  inor a normal process, rather than from a sudden
Publication 550.event. The following are examples of damage Example. A car door is accidentally
due to progressive deterioration. slammed on your hand, breaking the setting of
your diamond ring. The diamond falls from the• The steady weakening of a building due to ring and is never found. The loss of the diamondnormal wind and weather conditions. Proof of Lossis a casualty.
• The deterioration and damage to a water
heater that bursts. However, the rust and To deduct a casualty or theft loss, you must be
able to prove that you had a casualty or theft.water damage to rugs and drapes caused
You must be able to support the amount youby the bursting of a water heater does Loss on Deposits claim for the loss as discussed next.qualify as a casualty. 
A loss on deposits can occur when a bank, credit• Most losses of property caused by Casualty loss proof. For a casualty loss, yourunion, or other financial institution becomes in-droughts. To be deductible, a records should show all the following.solvent or bankrupt. If you incurred this type ofdrought-related loss generally must be in-
• The type of casualty (car accident, fire,loss, you can choose one of the following wayscurred in a trade or business or in a trans-
storm, etc.) and when it occurred.to deduct the loss.action entered into for profit. 
• That the loss was a direct result of the• As a casualty loss.• Termite or moth damage. casualty.• As an ordinary loss.• The damage or destruction of trees, • That you were the owner of the propertyshrubs, or other plants by a fungus, dis- • As a nonbusiness bad debt. or, if you leased the property from some-ease, insects, worms, or similar pests. one else, that you were contractually liableHowever, a sudden destruction due to an to the owner for the damage.Casualty loss or ordinary loss. You canunexpected or unusual infestation of beet- choose to deduct a loss on deposits as a casu- • Whether a claim for reimbursement existsles or other insects may result in a casu- alty loss or as an ordinary loss for any year in for which there is a reasonable expecta-alty loss. which you can reasonably estimate how much of tion of recovery.your deposits you have lost in an insolvent or
bankrupt financial institution. The choice is gen-
Theft loss proof. For a theft loss, your rec-erally made on the return you file for that year
ords should show all the following.and applies to all your losses on deposits for theTheft year in that particular financial institution. If you • When you discovered that your propertytreat the loss as a casualty or ordinary loss, you was missing.A theft is the taking and removing of money or cannot treat the same amount of the loss as aproperty with the intent to deprive the owner of it. • That your property was stolen.nonbusiness bad debt when it actually becomes
The taking of property must be illegal under the worthless. However, you can take a nonbusi- • That you were the owner of the property.laws of the state where it occurred and it must ness bad debt deduction for any amount of loss
have been done with criminal intent. • Whether a claim for reimbursement existsthat is more than the estimated amount you
Theft includes the taking of money or prop- for which there is a reasonable expecta-deducted as a casualty or ordinary loss. Once
tion of recovery.erty by the following means. you make this choice, you cannot change it
Page 168 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 171 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
 It is important that you have records on the amount to report, see Recoveries in • Replanting necessary to restore the prop-
that will prove your deduction. If you do chapter 12. erty to its approximate value before the
not have the actual records to support casualty.
RECORDS
your deduction, you can use other satisfactory
evidence to support it. Figuring Decrease in FMVÐ Car value.  Books issued by various automo-
Items To Consider bile organizations that list your car may be useful
in figuring the value of your car. You can use theTo figure the decrease in FMV because of a book's retail values and modify them by suchcasualty or theft, you generally need a compe- factors as mileage and the condition of your carFiguring a Loss tent appraisal. But other measures can also be to figure its value. The prices are not official, butused to establish certain decreases. they may be useful in determining value andFigure the amount of your loss using the follow-
suggesting relative prices for comparison withing steps. Appraisal. An appraisal to determine the dif- current sales and offerings in your area. If yourference between the FMV of the property imme-1. Determine your adjusted basis in the prop- car is not listed in the books, determine its valuediately before a casualty or theft anderty before the casualty or theft. from other sources. A dealer's offer for your carimmediately afterward should be made by a as a trade-in on a new car is not usually a2. Determine the decrease in fair market competent appraiser. The appraiser must rec- measure of its true value.value of the property as a result of the ognize the effects of any general market decline
casualty or theft. that may occur along with the casualty. This
information is needed to limit any deduction to3. From the smaller of the amounts you de- Figuring Decrease in FMVÐthe actual loss resulting from damage to thetermined in (1) and (2), subtract any insur- Items Not To Considerproperty.ance or other reimbursement you received Several factors are important in evaluatingor expect to receive. You generally should not consider the followingthe accuracy of an appraisal, including the fol- items when attempting to establish the decreaseFor personal-use property and property used in lowing. in FMV of your property.performing services as an employee, apply the • The appraiser's familiarity with your prop-deduction limits, discussed later, to determine Cost of protection. The cost of protectingerty before and after the casualty or theft.the amount of your deductible loss. your property against a casualty or theft is not
• The appraiser's knowledge of sales of part of a casualty or theft loss. The amount youLeased property. If you are liable for casualty comparable property in the area. spend on insurance or to board up your housedamage to property you lease, your loss is the against a storm is not part of your loss.• The appraiser's knowledge of conditions inamount you must pay to repair the property If you make permanent improvements tothe area of the casualty.minus any insurance or other reimbursement your property to protect it against a casualty oryou receive or expect to receive. • The appraiser's method of appraisal. theft, add the cost of these improvements to
your basis in the property. An example would be
the cost of a dike to prevent flooding.Decrease in You may be able to use an appraisal
that you used to get a federal loan (or a Exception. You cannot increase your basisFair Market Value
federal loan guarantee) as the result of in the property by, or deduct as a business
TIP
Fair market value (FMV) is the price for which a federally declared disaster to establish the expense, any expenditures you made with re-
you could sell your property to a willing buyer amount of your disaster loss. For more informa- spect to qualified disaster mitigation payments.
when neither of you has to sell or buy and both of tion on disasters, see Disaster Area Losses, in See Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.
you know all the relevant facts. Pub. 547. Related expenses. Any incidental expensesThe decrease in FMV used to figure the you have due to a casualty or theft, such asamount of a casualty or theft loss is the differ- Cost of cleaning up or making repairs. The expenses for the treatment of personal injuries,ence between the property's fair market value cost of repairing damaged property is not part of for temporary housing, or for a rental car, are notimmediately before and immediately after the a casualty loss. Neither is the cost of cleaning up part of your casualty or theft loss.casualty or theft. after a casualty. But you can use the cost of
Replacement cost. The cost of replacing sto-cleaning up or making repairs after a casualty asFMV of stolen property. The FMV of property len or destroyed property is not part of a casualtya measure of the decrease in FMV if you meetimmediately after a theft is considered to be or theft loss.all the following conditions.zero, since you no longer have the property.
Sentimental value. Do not consider senti-• The repairs are actually made.
mental value when determining your loss. If aExample. Several years ago, you pur- • The repairs are necessary to bring the family portrait, heirloom, or keepsake is dam-chased silver dollars at face value for $150. This property back to its condition before the aged, destroyed, or stolen, you must base youris your adjusted basis in the property. Your silver casualty. loss on its FMV.dollars were stolen this year. The FMV of the
• The amount spent for repairs is not exces-coins was $1,000 just before they were stolen, Decline in market value of property in or nearsive.and insurance did not cover them. Your theft casualty area. A decrease in the value of your
loss is $150. property because it is in or near an area that• The repairs take care of the damage only.
suffered a casualty, or that might again suffer aRecovered stolen property. Recovered sto- • The value of the property after the repairs casualty, is not to be taken into consideration.len property is your property that was stolen and is not, due to the repairs, more than the You have a loss only for actual casualty damagelater returned to you. If you recovered property value of the property before the casualty. to your property. However, if your home is in aafter you had already taken a theft loss deduc- federally declared disaster area, see Disastertion, you must refigure your loss using the Landscaping. The cost of restoring land- Area Losses in Publication 547.smaller of the property's adjusted basis (ex- scaping to its original condition after a casualty
plained later) or the decrease in FMV from the Costs of photographs and appraisals. Pho-may indicate the decrease in FMV. You may be
time just before it was stolen until the time it was tographs taken after a casualty will be helpful inable to measure your loss by what you spend on
recovered. Use this amount to refigure your total establishing the condition and value of the prop-the following.
loss for the year in which the loss was deducted. erty after it was damaged. Photographs showing• Removing destroyed or damaged treesIf your refigured loss is less than the loss you the condition of the property after it was re-and shrubs minus any salvage you re-deducted, you generally have to report the dif- paired, restored, or replaced may also be help-ceive.ference as income in the recovery year. But ful.
report the difference only up to the amount of the • Pruning and other measures taken to pre-    Appraisals are used to figure the decrease
loss that reduced your tax. For more information serve damaged trees and shrubs. in FMV because of a casualty or theft. See
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 169

Page 172 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appraisal, earlier, under Figuring Decrease in rehabilitate or replace property on which you are • Miscellaneous services.
FMV Ð Items To Consider , for information claiming a casualty loss deduction, you must Normal living expenses consist of these sameabout appraisals. take that money into consideration in computing expenses that you would have incurred but didThe costs of photographs and appraisals the casualty loss deduction. Take into consider- not because of the casualty or the threat of one.used as evidence of the value and condition of ation only the amount you used to replace your
property damaged as a result of a casualty are destroyed or damaged property. Example. As a result of a fire, you vacatednot a part of the loss. You can claim these costs your apartment for a month and moved to aExample. Your home was extensively dam-as a miscellaneous itemized deduction subject motel. You normally pay $525 a month for rent.aged by a tornado. Your loss after reimburse-to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit on None was charged for the month the apartmentment from your insurance company wasSchedule A (Form 1040). For information about was vacated. Your motel rent for this month was$10,000. Your employer set up a disaster reliefmiscellaneous deductions, see chapter 28. $1,200. You normally pay $200 a month forfund for its employees. Employees receiving food. Your food expenses for the month youmoney from the fund had to use it to rehabilitateAdjusted Basis lived in the motel were $400. You receivedor replace their damaged or destroyed property. $1,100 from your insurance company to coverYou received $4,000 from the fund and spentAdjusted basis is your basis in the property (usu- your living expenses. You determine the pay-the entire amount on repairs to your home. Inally cost) increased or decreased by various ment you must include in income as follows.figuring your casualty loss, you must reduceevents, such as improvements and casualty your unreimbursed loss ($10,000) by the $4,000losses. For more information, see chapter 13. 1) Insurance payment for livingyou received from your employer's fund. Your expenses ................. . $1,100casualty loss before applying the deduction lim- 2) Actual expenses during theInsurance and Other its discussed later is $6,000. month you are unable to use
your home because of fire .. . 1,600Reimbursements Cash gifts. If you receive excludable cash 3) Normal living expenses .... . 725gifts as a disaster victim and there are no limits 4) Temporary increase in living If you receive an insurance payment or other on how you can use the money, you do not expenses: Subtract line 3type of reimbursement, you must subtract the reduce your casualty loss by these excludable from line 2 ................. . 875reimbursement when you figure your loss. You cash gifts. This applies even if you use the 5) Amount of payment includible do not have a casualty or theft loss to the extent money to pay for repairs to property damaged in in income: Subtract line 4 you are reimbursed. the disaster. from line 1 ................. . $ 225If you expect to be reimbursed for part or all
of your loss, you must subtract the expected Example. Your home was damaged by a Tax year of inclusion. You include the tax-reimbursement when you figure your loss. You hurricane. Relatives and neighbors made cash able part of the insurance payment in income formust reduce your loss even if you do not receive gifts to you that were excludable from your in- the year you regain the use of your main homepayment until a later tax year. See Reimburse- come. You used part of the cash gifts to pay for or, if later, for the year you receive the taxablement Received After Deducting Loss, later. repairs to your home. There were no limits or part of the insurance payment.
restrictions on how you could use the cash gifts.Failure to file a claim for reimbursement. If
Because it was an excludable gift, the money Example. Your main home was destroyedyour property is covered by insurance, you must
you received and used to pay for repairs to your by a tornado in August 2006. You regained usefile a timely insurance claim for reimbursement
home does not reduce your casualty loss on the of your home in November 2007. The insuranceof your loss. Otherwise, you cannot deduct this
damaged home. payments you received in 2006 and 2007 wereloss as a casualty or theft loss. However, this
$1,500 more than the temporary increase inrule does not apply to the portion of the loss not Insurance payments for living expenses.
your living expenses during those years. Youcovered by insurance (for example, a deducti- You do not reduce your casualty loss by insur-
include this amount in income on your 2007ble). ance payments you receive to cover living ex-
Form 1040. If, in 2008, you receive further pay-penses in either of the following situations.
ments to cover the living expenses you had inExample. You have a car insurance policy
• You lose the use of your main home be- 2006 and 2007, you must include those pay-with a $500 deductible. Because your insurance
cause of a casualty. ments in income on your 2008 Form 1040.did not cover the first $500 of an auto collision,
the $500 would be deductible (subject to the • Government authorities do not allow you Disaster relief. Food, medical supplies, anddeduction limits discussed later). This is true access to your main home because of a other forms of assistance you receive do noteven if you do not file an insurance claim, be- casualty or threat of one. reduce your casualty loss unless they arecause your insurance policy would never have replacements for lost or destroyed property.reimbursed you for the deductible. Inclusion in income. If these insurance
Qualified disaster relief payments youpayments are more than the temporary increaseGain from reimbursement. If your reim- receive for expenses you incurred as ain your living expenses, you must include thebursement is more than your adjusted basis in result of a federally declared disaster
TIPexcess in your income. Report this amount onthe property, you have a gain. This is true even if are not taxable income to you. For more infor-Form 1040, line 21. However, if the casualtythe decrease in the FMV of the property is mation, see Disaster Area Losses in Publicationoccurs in a federally declared disaster area,smaller than your adjusted basis. If you have a 547.none of the insurance payments are taxable.gain, you may have to pay tax on it, or you may Disaster unemployment assistance pay-See Qualified disaster relief payments , underbe able to postpone reporting the gain. See ments are unemployment benefits that are tax-Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.Publication 547 for more information on how to able.A temporary increase in your living expensestreat a gain from a reimbursement for a casualty Generally, disaster relief grants and qualifiedis the difference between the actual living ex-or theft. disaster mitigation payments made under thepenses you and your family incurred during the
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emer-period you could not use your home and your
gency Assistance Act or the National Flood In-normal living expenses for that period. ActualTypes of Reimbursements surance Act (as in effect on April 15, 2005) areliving expenses are the reasonable and neces-
not includible in your income. See Disaster Areasary expenses incurred because of the loss ofThe most common type of reimbursement is an
Losses in Publication 547.your main home. Generally, these expenses in-insurance payment for your stolen or damaged
clude the amounts you pay for the following.property. Other types of reimbursements are
discussed next. Also see the Instructions for • Rent for suitable housing. Reimbursement Received AfterForm 4684.
• Transportation. Deducting Loss
Employer's emergency disaster fund. If you • Food.receive money from your employer's emergency If you figured your casualty or theft loss using
disaster fund and you must use that money to • Utilities. your expected reimbursement, you may have to
Page 170 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 173 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
adjust your tax return for the tax year in which the $850 from the insurance company in 2009, • The due date for filing your tax return for
you receive your actual reimbursement. This do not report it as income. the tax year in which you receive the grant
section explains the adjustment you may have (including extensions), orIndividuals impacted by Hurricanes Katrina,to make. • July 30, 2009.Rita, and Wilma. If you claimed a casualty
loss for damage to or destruction of your mainActual reimbursement less than expected. Solely for purposes of determining whether youhome as a result of Hurricane Katrina, Rita, orIf you later receive less reimbursement than you are eligible for the waiver of penalties and inter-Wilma, and in a later year you receive a qualifiedexpected, include that difference as a loss with est for purposes of the procedure discussedhurricane relief grant as reimbursement, you doyour other losses (if any) on your return for the here, the IRS will treat any amended return filednot have to include the extra reimbursement inyear in which you can reasonably expect no before July 30, 2009, as filed on July 30, 2009.your income as explained earlier under Actualmore reimbursement.
Where to file Form 1040X. Mail Formreimbursement more than expected . Instead,
1040X and attachments to the following ad-you can choose to file an amended return (FormExample. Your personal car had an FMV of
dress.1040X) for the tax year in which you claimed the$2,000 when it was destroyed in a collision with
casualty loss deduction and reduce (but not be-another car in 2007. The accident was due to the Department of the Treasurylow zero) the amount of the deduction by thenegligence of the other driver. At the end of Internal Revenue Service Centeramount of the grant. To qualify, the grant must2007, there was a reasonable prospect that the Austin, TX 73301-0255have been issued under Public Law 109-148,owner of the other car would reimburse you in
109-234, or 110-116. Qualified grants includefull. You did not have a deductible loss in 2007.
Payment of balance due. To avoid interestthe Louisiana Road Home Grant and the Missis-In January 2008, the court awarded you a
and penalties, you must pay the balance due onsippi Development Authority Hurricane Katrinajudgment of $2,000. However, in July it became
Form 1040X within one year of the timely filing ofHomeowner Grant.apparent that you will be unable to collect any
that form. Payments made after you file Formamount from the other driver. You can deduct Form 1040X and required attachments. If 1040X should clearly designate that the pay-the loss in 2008 subject to the limits discussed you choose to file Form 1040X as discussed ment is to be applied to reduce the balance duelater. above, write ªHurricane Grant Reliefº in dark, shown on the Form 1040X per IRS Noticebold letters at the top of the form and attach theActual reimbursement more than expected. 2008-95. The IRS will not take action to collectfollowing items.If you later receive more reimbursement than the balance due reflected on Form 1040X for the
you expected after you claimed a deduction for one year period following the filing of Form• Proof of the amount of the hurricane reliefthe loss, you may have to include the extra 1040X.grant received.reimbursement in your income for the year you
Assessment of balance due. After you file• A completed Form 2848, Power of Attor-receive it. However, if any part of the original
Form 1040X, the IRS immediately will assessney and Declaration of Representative, ifdeduction did not reduce your tax for the earlier
the balance due resulting from the reduction inyou wish to designate a representative.year, do not include that part of the reimburse-
the casualty loss claimed. This assessment will(Do not attach if a valid Form 2848 is onment in your income. You do not refigure your
be reflected on your account as an outstandingfile with the IRS.)tax for the year you claimed the deduction. For
liability.more information, see Recoveries in chapter 12.
Do not include on Form 1040X anyYou do not have to include the extra
Single Casualty onadjustments other than the reduction ofreimbursement in your income for the
the casualty loss deduction if the pe-year you receive it if you make the
CAUTION
!
TIP Multiple Propertiesriod of limitations on assessment is closed forchoice discussed later under Individuals im-
the tax year for those adjustments.pacted by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. Personal property. Personal property is anyIf you previously filed an amended return for property that is not real property. If your personalIf the total of all the reimbursements the casualty loss year that (1) reduced the previ- property is stolen or is damaged or destroyed byyou receive is more than your adjusted ously claimed casualty loss deduction by the a casualty, you must figure your loss separatelybasis in the destroyed or stolen prop-
CAUTION
! grant amount or (2) reported any of the grant for each item of property. Then combine theseerty, you will have a gain on the casualty or theft. amount as income, you must notify the IRS to separate losses to determine your total lossIf you have already taken a deduction for a loss receive the benefits described above. You must from that casualty or theft.and you receive the reimbursement in a later send the following documents to the IRS at theyear, you may have to include the gain in your address given later. Example. A fire in your home destroyed anincome for the later year. Include the gain as
• A copy of the previously filed Form 1040X, upholstered chair, an oriental rug, and an an-ordinary income up to the amount of your deduc-
or submit a Form 843, Claim for Refund tique table. You did not have fire insurance totion that reduced your tax for the earlier year.
and Request for Abatement. These forms cover your loss. (This was the only casualty orSee Publication 547 for more information on
must include your own contact information theft you had during the year.) You paid $750 forhow to treat a gain from the reimbursement of a
as well as a properly executed Form 2848, the chair and you established that it had an FMVcasualty or theft.
if applicable. of $500 just before the fire. The rug cost $3,000
Actual reimbursement same as expected. If and had an FMV of $2,500 just before the fire.• Copies of the original return for the year ofyou receive exactly the reimbursement you ex- You bought the table at an auction for $100the casualty loss deduction and any otherpected to receive, you do not have to include before discovering it was an antique. It had beenamended returns for that year.any of the reimbursement in your income and appraised at $900 before the fire. You figure
you cannot deduct any additional loss. • Copies of the original return and amended your loss on each of these items as follows:
returns, if any, for the year you received
Chair Rug TableExample. In December 2008, you had a col- the grant if any portion of the grant was
lision while driving your personal car. Repairs to previously reported as income in the year 1) Basis (cost) ..... . $750 $3,000 $100the car cost $950. You had $100 deductible you received it.
2) FMV before fire .. . $500 $2,500 $900collision insurance. Your insurance company You must send these documents by the date 3) FMV after fire .... . ±0± ±0± ±0±agreed to reimburse you for the rest of the dam- given later under When to file Form 1040X. The 4) Decrease in FMV . . $500 $2,500 $900age. Because you expected a reimbursement IRS will contact you or your representative, as 5) Loss (smaller of (1) orfrom the insurance company, you did not have a appropriate, to discuss any necessary adjust-casualty loss deduction in 2008. ments. (4)) ........... . $500 $2,500 $100Due to the $100 rule (discussed later under
Deduction Limits), you cannot deduct the $100 When to file Form 1040X. File Form 1040X 6) Total loss ...... . $3,100you paid as the deductible. When you receive and attachments by the later of:
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 171

Page 174 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 25-1. How To Apply the Deduction Limits for Personal-Use Property
$100 Rule1 10% Rule2
General Application You must reduce each casualty or theft loss by You must reduce your total casualty or theft
$100 when figuring your deduction. Apply this loss by 10% of your adjusted gross income.
rule after you have figured the amount of your Apply this rule after you reduce each loss by
loss. $100 (the $100 rule).
Single Event Apply this rule only once, even if many pieces Apply this rule only once, even if many
of property are affected. pieces of property are affected.
More Than One Event Apply to the loss from each event. Apply to the total of all your losses from all
events.
More Than One PersonÐ Apply separately to each person. Apply separately to each person.
With Loss From the
Same Event
(other than a married couple filing jointly)
Filing Jointly Apply as if you were one person. Apply as if you were one person.Married CoupleÐ
With Loss From the Filing Separately Apply separately to each spouse. Apply separately to each spouse.Same Event
More Than One Owner Apply separately to each owner of jointly Apply separately to each owner of jointly
(other than a married owned property. owned property.
couple filing jointly)
1The $100 rule does not apply if your loss arose in the Kansas disaster area or a Midwestern disaster area (defined at the beginning of this chapter under
What's New for 2008).
2The 10% rule does not apply if your loss arose in the Kansas disaster area or a Midwestern disaster area. It also does not apply to a net disaster loss
attributable to a federally declared disaster (defined at the beginning of this chapter under What's New for 2008).
Real property. In figuring a casualty loss on that loss by $100. This reduction applies to each
personal-use real property, treat the entire prop- total casualty or theft loss. It does not matterDeduction Limitserty (including any improvements, such as build- how many pieces of property are involved in an
ings, trees, and shrubs) as one item. Figure the event. Only a single $100 reduction applies.After you have figured your casualty or theftloss using the smaller of the adjusted basis or loss, you must figure how much of the loss you Example. A hailstorm damages your homethe decrease in FMV of the entire property. can deduct. If the loss was to property for your and your car. Determine the amount of loss, aspersonal use or your family's use, there are twoExample. You bought your home a few discussed earlier, for each of these items. Sincelimits on the amount you can deduct for youryears ago. You paid $160,000 ($20,000 for the the losses are due to a single event, you com-casualty or theft loss. land and $140,000 for the house). You also bine the losses and reduce the combined
spent $2,000 for landscaping. This year a fire amount by $100.1. You must reduce each casualty or theft
destroyed your home. The fire also damaged loss by $100 ($100 rule).
Single event. Generally, events closely re-the shrubbery and trees in your yard. The fire 2. You must further reduce the total of all lated in origin cause a single casualty. It is awas your only casualty or theft loss this year. your casualty or theft losses by 10% of single casualty when the damage is from two orCompetent appraisers valued the property as a your adjusted gross income (10% rule). more closely related causes, such as wind andwhole at $200,000 before the fire, but only
flood damage caused by the same storm.$30,000 after the fire. (The loss to your house- You make these reductions on Form 4684.
hold furnishings is not shown in this example. It These rules are explained next and Table
would be figured separately on each item, as 25-1 summarizes how to apply the $100 rule and 10% Rule
explained earlier under Personal property. ) the 10% rule in various situations. For more
Shortly after the fire, the insurance company detailed explanations and examples, see Publi- This rule does not apply to a loss aris-paid you $155,000 for the loss. You figure your cation 547. ing in the Kansas disaster area or acasualty loss as follows: Midwestern disaster area (defined atProperty used partly for business and partly
TIP
the beginning of this chapter under What's Newfor personal purposes. When property is1) Adjusted basis of the entire
for 2008, or a net disaster loss attributable to aused partly for personal purposes and partly forproperty (land, building, and
federally declared disaster.business or income-producing purposes, thelandscaping) ........... . $162,000
casualty or theft loss deduction must be figured You must reduce the total of all your casualty2) FMV of entire property before separately for the personal-use part and for the or theft losses on personal-use property by 10%fire .................. . $200,000 business or income-producing part. You must of your adjusted gross income. Apply this rule3) FMV of entire property after fire 30,000 figure each loss separately because the $100 after you reduce each loss by $100. If you have4) Decrease in FMV of entire rule and the 10% rule apply only to the loss on both gains and losses from casualties or thefts,property .............. . $170,000 the personal-use part of the property. see Gains and losses, later in this discussion.5) Loss (smaller of (1) or (4)) .. . $162,000
6) Subtract insurance ....... . 155,000 Example 1. In June, you discovered that$100 Rule7) Amount of loss after your house had been burglarized. Your lossreimbursement ......... . $7,000 after insurance reimbursement was $2,000.This rule does not apply if your loss Your adjusted gross income for the year youarose in the Kansas disaster area or a discovered the theft is $29,500. You first applyMidwestern disaster area (as defined
TIP the $100 rule and then the 10% rule. Figure yourat the beginning of this chapter under What's theft loss deduction as follows.New for 2008).
After you have figured your casualty or theft 1) Loss after insurance .......... . $2,000
2) Subtract $100 .............. . 100loss on personal-use property, you must reduce
Page 172 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 175 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) Loss after $100 rule .......... . $1,900 in which the casualty occurred. This is true even • Any business entity or sole proprietor
4) Subtract 10% ×  $29,500 AGI .... . 2,950 if you do not repair or replace the damaged whose principal place of business is lo-
5) Theft loss deduction ........ . ±0± property until a later year. cated in a covered disaster area.
You do not have a theft loss deduction be- You can deduct theft losses that are not • Any individual who is a relief worker affili-cause your loss after you apply the $100 rule reimbursable only in the year you discover your ated with a recognized government or phil-($1,900) is less than 10% of your adjusted gross property was stolen. anthropic organization who is assisting inincome ($2,950). If you are not sure whether part of your casu- a covered disaster area.alty or theft loss will be reimbursed, do not de-Example 2. In March, you had a car acci- • Any individual, business entity, or soleduct that part until the tax year when youdent that totally destroyed your car. You did not proprietor whose records are needed tobecome reasonably certain that it will not behave collision insurance on your car, so you did meet a postponed deadline, providedreimbursed.not receive any insurance reimbursement. Your those records are maintained in a coveredloss on the car was $1,200. In November, a fire disaster area. The main home or principalLoss on deposits. If your loss is a loss ondamaged your basement and totally destroyed place of business does not have to bedeposits in an insolvent or bankrupt financialthe furniture, washer, dryer, and other items institution, see Loss on Deposits, earlier. located in the covered disaster area.stored there. Your loss on the basement items
after reimbursement was $1,700. Your adjusted • Any estate or trust that has tax records
gross income for the year that the accident and Disaster Area Loss necessary to meet a postponed tax dead-
fire occurred is $25,000. You figure your casu- line, provided those records are main-
alty loss deduction as follows. You generally must deduct a casualty loss in the tained in a covered disaster area.year it occurred. However, if you have a casualty
• The spouse on a joint return with a tax-Base- loss from a federally declared disaster or a Kan-
Car ment payer who is eligible for postponements.sas disaster that occurred in an area warranting
public or individual assistance (or both) or from a1) Loss ............. . $1,200 $1,700 • Any other person determined by the IRSMidwestern disaster, you can choose to deduct2) Subtract $100 per incident 100 100 to be affected by a federally declared dis-the loss on your tax return or amended return for3) Loss after $100 rule ... . $1,100 $1,600 aster.either of the following years.4) Total loss ............... . $2,700
Covered disaster area. This is an area of a• The year the disaster occurred.5) Subtract 10% ×  $25,000 AGI .. . 2,500
federally declared disaster in which the IRS has6) Casualty loss deduction .... . $200 • The year immediately preceding the year decided to postpone tax deadlines for up to 1the disaster occurred. year.Gains and losses. If you had both gains and
losses from casualties or thefts to personal-use Gains.  Special rules apply if you choose to Abatement of interest and penalties. Theproperty, you must compare your total gains to postpone reporting gain on property damaged or IRS may abate the interest and penalties onyour total losses. Do this after you have reduced destroyed in a federally declared disaster area. underpaid income tax for the length of any post-each loss by any reimbursements and by $100, For those special rules, see Publication 547. ponement of tax deadlines.but before you have reduced the losses by 10%
of your adjusted gross income. Postponed tax deadlines. The IRS may More information. For more information, see
Casualty or theft gains do not include postpone for up to 1 year certain tax deadlines of Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.gains you choose to postpone. See taxpayers who are affected by a federally de-
Publication 547 for information on the clared disaster. The tax deadlines the IRS may
CAUTION
!
postponement of gain. postpone include those for filing income and
employment tax returns, paying income and em-Losses more than gains. If your losses are How To Reportployment taxes, and making contributions to amore than your recognized gains, subtract your traditional IRA or Roth IRA.gains from your losses and reduce the result by Gains and LossesIf any tax deadline is postponed, the IRS will10% of your adjusted gross income. The rest, if publicize the postponement in your area by pub-any, is your deductible loss. Use Form 4684 to report a gain or a deductiblelishing a news release, revenue ruling, revenue loss from a casualty or theft. If you have moreGains more than losses. If your recog- procedure, notice, announcement, or other gui-
than one casualty or theft, use a separate Formnized gains are more than your losses, subtract dance in the Internal Revenue Bulletin (IRB).
4684 to determine your gain or loss for eachyour losses from your gains. The difference is Who is eligible. If the IRS postpones a tax event. Combine the gains and losses on onetreated as capital gain and must be reported on deadline, the following taxpayers are eligible for Form 4684. Follow the form instructions as toSchedule D (Form 1040). The 10% rule does not the postponement. which lines to fill out. In addition, you must useapply to your gains. 
the appropriate schedule to report a gain or loss.• Any individual whose main home is lo-
The schedule you use depends on whether youcated in a covered disaster area (defined
next). have a gain or loss.
When To Report Table 25-2.  When To Deduct a Loss
Gains and Losses IF you have a loss...  THEN deduct it in the year...
from a casualty, the loss occurred.Gains. If you receive an insurance or other
reimbursement that is more than your adjusted in a federally declared disaster area, the disaster occurred or the year immediately before thebasis in the destroyed or stolen property, you disaster.
have a gain from the casualty or theft. You must
from a theft,  the theft was discovered.include this gain in your income in the year you
receive the reimbursement, unless you choose on a deposit treated as a:to postpone reporting the gain as explained in
Publication 547.  • casualty,  • a reasonable estimate can be made.
If you have a loss, see Table 25-2.  • bad debt,  • deposits are totally worthless.
 • ordinary loss,  • a reasonable estimate can be made.Losses. Generally, you can deduct a casualty
loss that is not reimbursable only in the tax year
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 173

Page 176 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you have a: Report it on: trucks and vans the first-year limit has increased If you meet all of these conditions, there is no
need to show the expenses or the reimburse-to $11,160 ($3,160 if you elect not to claim theGain ......... . Schedule D (Form ments on your return. See Reimbursements,special depreciation allowance). For more infor-1040) later, if you would like more information on reim-mation see Depreciation limits  in PublicationLoss ......... . Schedule A (Form
bursements and accounting to your employer.1040) 463.
If you meet these conditions and yourSpecial depreciation allowance. Generally,Note. Do not use Schedule A (Form 1040) if employer included reimbursements onnew cars, trucks, and vans, purchased andyou are deducting a net disaster loss as part of your Form W-2 in error, ask your em-placed in service in 2008 qualify for the special
TIPyour standard deduction. ployer for a corrected Form W-2.depreciation allowance. The special allowance
is a depreciation deduction equal to 50% of theAdjustments to basis. If you have a casualty
or theft loss, you must decrease your basis in adjusted basis of the vehicle. For more informa- Useful Items
the property by any insurance or other reim- tion see Special Depreciation Allowance in Pub- You may want to see:
bursement you receive, and by any deductible lication 463.
loss. Amounts you spend to restore your prop- Publication
Meal expenses when subject to ªhours oferty after a casualty increase your adjusted ba-
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carsis. See Adjusted Basis in chapter 13 for more serviceº limits. Generally, you can deduct
Expensesinformation. 50% of your business-related meal expenses
while traveling away from home for business ❏ 535 Business ExpensesNet operating loss (NOL). If your casualty or purposes. You can deduct a higher percentagetheft loss deduction is more than your income, ❏ 1542 Per Diem Ratesif the meals take place during or incident to theyou may have an NOL. You can use an NOL to
Department of Transportation's (DOT) ªhours oflower your tax in an earlier year, allowing you to Form (and Instructions)
serviceº limits. (These limits apply to certainget a refund for tax you have already paid. Or, ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemizedworkers who are subject to certain federal regu-you can use it to lower your tax in a later year. Deductionslations.) For 2008, the percentage is increasedYou do not have to be in business to have an
❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or LossNOL from a casualty or theft loss. For more to 80%. See Exceptions to the 50% limit, under
From Businessinformation, see Publication 536, Net Operating 50% Limit, later.
Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and ❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) Net ProfitTrusts. From Business
❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss
Introduction From Farming
You may be able to deduct the ordinary and ❏ Form 2106 Employee Business
necessary business-related expenses you have Expenses
for: ❏ Form 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee26.
• Travel, Business Expenses
• Entertainment,
Car Expenses • Gifts, or
• Transportation. Travel Expensesand Other An ordinary expense is one that is common and
If you temporarily travel away from your taxaccepted in your trade or business. A necessary
home, you can use this section to determine ifEmployee expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for
you have deductible travel expenses. This sec-your business. An expense does not have to be
tion discusses:required to be considered necessary.Business • Traveling away from home,This chapter explains the following.
• Tax home,• What expenses are deductible.Expenses
• Temporary assignment or job, and• How to report your expenses on your re-
turn. • What travel expenses are deductible.
What's New • What records you need to prove your ex- It also discusses the standard meal allowance,
penses. rules for travel inside and outside the United
Standard mileage rate. For 2008, the stan- States, and deductible convention expenses.• How to treat any expense reimbursementsdard mileage rate for the cost of operating your
you may receive.car for business use is: Travel expenses defined. For tax purposes,
travel expenses are the ordinary and necessary• 501/2 cents per mile for the period January
Who does not need to use this chapter. If expenses (defined earlier) of traveling away1 through June 30, 2008, and
from home for your business, profession, or job.you are an employee, you will not need to read
• 581/2 cents per mile for the period July 1 this chapter if all of the following are true. You will find examples of deductible travelthrough December 31, 2008. expenses in Table 26-1.• You fully accounted to your employer for
your work-related expenses.Car expenses and use of the standard mile-
Traveling Away Fromage rate are explained under Transportation Ex- • You received full reimbursement for yourpenses, later. Homeexpenses.
Depreciation limits on cars, trucks, and • Your employer required you to return any You are traveling away from home if:vans. For 2008, the first-year limit on the total excess reimbursement and you did so.section 179 deduction, special depreciation al- • Your duties require you to be away from
• There is no amount shown with a code ªLºlowance, and depreciation deduction for cars the general area of your tax home (defined
in box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage andhas increased to $10,960 ($2,960 if you elect not later) substantially longer than an ordinary
to claim the special depreciation allowance). For Tax Statement. day's work, and
Page 174 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 177 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You need to sleep or rest to meet the • The total time you ordinarily spend in each Tax home different from family home. If you
demands of your work while away from place. (and your family) do not live at your tax home
home. (defined earlier), you cannot deduct the cost of• The level of your business activity in each traveling between your tax home and your familyThis rest requirement is not satisfied by merely place. home. You also cannot deduct the cost of mealsnapping in your car. You do not have to be away • Whether your income from each place is and lodging while at your tax home. See Exam-from your tax home for a whole day or from dusk significant or insignificant. ple 1 that follows.to dawn as long as your relief from duty is long
If you are working temporarily in the sameenough to get necessary sleep or rest.
city where you and your family live, you may beExample. You live in Cincinnati where you
considered as traveling away from home. SeeExample 1. You are a railroad conductor. have a seasonal job for 8 months each year and
Example 2 below.You leave your home terminal on a regularly earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months in
scheduled round-trip run between two cities and Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000.
Example 1. You are a truck driver and youreturn home 16 hours later. During the run, you Cincinnati is your main place of work because
and your family live in Tucson. You are em-have 6 hours off at your turnaround point where you spend most of your time there and earn
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal inyou eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get most of your income there.
Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you returnnecessary sleep before starting the return trip.
to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend oneYou are considered to be away from home. No main place of business or work. You night there before returning home. You cannotmay have a tax home even if you do not have a deduct any expenses you have for meals andExample 2. You are a truck driver. You regular or main place of business or work. Your lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling fromleave your terminal and return to it later the tax home may be the home where you regularly Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix issame day. You get an hour off at your turn- live. your tax home.around point to eat. Because you are not off to
Factors used to determine tax home. Ifget necessary sleep and the brief time off is not
you do not have a regular or main place of Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts-an adequate rest period, you are not traveling
business or work, use the following three factors burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. Theaway from home.
to determine where your tax home is. rest of the year you work for the same employer
Members of the Armed Forces. If you are a in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants1. You perform part of your business in themember of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma- and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is thearea of your main home and use thatnent duty assignment overseas, you are not same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-home for lodging while doing business intraveling away from home. You cannot deduct more.the area.your expenses for meals and lodging. You can- Because you spend most of your workingnot deduct these expenses even if you have to 2. You have living expenses at your main time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,maintain a home in the United States for your home that you duplicate because your that city is your tax home. You cannot deductfamily members who are not allowed to accom- business requires you to be away from that any expenses you have for meals and lodgingpany you overseas. If you are transferred from home. there. However, when you return to work inone permanent duty station to another, you may Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax home3. You have not abandoned the area in whichhave deductible moving expenses, which are even though you stay at your family home. Youboth your historical place of lodging andexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses. can deduct the cost of your round trip betweenyour claimed main home are located; youA naval officer assigned to permanent duty Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deducthave a member or members of your familyaboard a ship that has regular eating and living your part of your family's living expenses forfacilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel living at your main home; or you often use meals and lodging while you are living and work-expense purposes. that home for lodging. ing in Pittsburgh. 
If you satisfy all three factors, your tax home
Tax Home is the home where you regularly live. If you Temporary Assignmentsatisfy only two factors, you may have a tax
To determine whether you are traveling away  or Jobhome depending on all the facts and circum-
from home, you must first determine the location stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are an
of your tax home. You may regularly work at your tax home anditinerant; your tax home is wherever you work
Generally, your tax home is your regular also work at another location. It may not beand you cannot deduct travel expenses.
place of business or post of duty, regardless of practical to return to your tax home from this
where you maintain your family home. It in- other location at the end of each work day.Example. You are single and live in Boston
cludes the entire city or general area in which in an apartment you rent. You have worked for
your business or work is located. Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign-your employer in Boston for a number of years.
If you have more than one regular place of ment. If your assignment or job away fromYour employer enrolls you in a 12-month execu-
business, your tax home is your main place of your main place of work is temporary, your taxtive training program. You do not expect to re-
business. See Main place of business or work, home does not change. You are considered toturn to work in Boston after you complete your
later. be away from home for the whole period you aretraining.
If you do not have a regular or a main place away from your main place of work. You canDuring your training, you do not do any workof business because of the nature of your work, deduct your travel expenses if they otherwisein Boston. Instead, you receive classroom andthen your tax home may be the place where you qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporaryon-the-job training throughout the United States.regularly live. See No main place of business or assignment in a single location is one that isYou keep your apartment in Boston and return towork, later. realistically expected to last (and does in factit frequently. You use your apartment to conduct If you do not have a regular or a main place last) for 1 year or less.your personal business. You also keep up yourof business or post of duty and there is no place However, if your assignment or job is indefi-community contacts in Boston. When you com-where you regularly live, you are considered an nite, the location of the assignment or job be-plete your training, you are transferred to Lositinerant (a transient) and your tax home is wher- comes your new tax home and you cannotAngeles.ever you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claim deduct your travel expenses while there. AnYou do not satisfy factor (1) because you dida travel expense deduction because you are assignment or job in a single location is consid-not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-never considered to be traveling away from ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to lastcause you had duplicate living expenses. Youhome. for more than 1 year, whether or not it actuallyalso satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-
lasts for more than 1 year.don your apartment in Boston as your mainMain place of business or work. If you have
If your assignment is indefinite, you musthome, you kept your community contacts, andmore than one place of business or work, con-
include in your income any amounts you receiveyou frequently returned to live in your apartment.sider the following when determining which one
from your employer for living expenses, even ifYou have a tax home in Boston.is your main place of business or work.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 175

Page 178 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you keep your hotel room during your visitTable 26-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you 
room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-travel away from home for business purposes. penses of returning home up to the amount you
would have spent for meals had you stayed at
your temporary place of work.IF you have
expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of...
Probationary work period. If you take a job
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and that requires you to move, with the understand-
ing that you will keep the job if your work isyour business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or
satisfactory during a probationary period, the jobyou are riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar
is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourprogram, your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury
expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-Water Travel and Cruise ships (under Conventions) in
bationary period.Publication 463 for additional rules and limits.
taxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you What Travel Expenses Arebus, and airport between:
Deductible?limousine • The airport or station and your hotel, and
• The hotel and the work location of your customers or Once you have determined that you are travel-clients, your business meeting place, or your temporary ing away from your tax home, you can determine
work location. what travel expenses are deductible.
You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-baggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your
penses you have when you travel away fromshipping regular and temporary work locations.
home on business. The type of expense you can
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from deduct depends on the facts and your circum-
stances.home on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the
standard mileage rate as well as business-related tolls and Table 26-1 summarizes travel expenses you
may be able to deduct. You may have otherparking. If you rent a car while away from home on business,
deductible travel expenses that are not coveredyou can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
there, depending on the facts and your circum-
lodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long stances.
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
When you travel away from home onperform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food,
business, you should keep records ofbeverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals and Incidental all the expenses you have and any
RECORDSExpenses for additional rules and limits. advances you receive from your employer. You
can use a log, diary, notebook, or any othercleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
written record to keep track of your expenses.
telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes The types of expenses you need to record,
business communication by fax machine or other along with supporting documentation, are de-
communication devices. scribed in Table 26-2, later.
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. Separating costs. If you have one expense
that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
and other services (such as lodging or transpor-business travel. These expenses might include transportation
tation), you must allocate that expense betweento or from a business meal, public stenographer's fees,
the cost of meals and entertainment and the costcomputer rental fees, and operating and maintaining a house
of other services. You must have a reasonabletrailer.
basis for making this allocation. For example,
you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-
cludes one or more meals in its room charge.they are called travel allowances and you ac- Determining temporary or indefinite. You
count to your employer for them. You may be must determine whether your assignment is Travel expenses for another individual. If aable to deduct the cost of relocating to your new temporary or indefinite when you start work. If spouse, dependent, or other individual goes withtax home as a moving expense. See Publication you expect an assignment or job to last for 1 you (or your employee) on a business trip or to a521 for more information. year or less, it is temporary unless there are business convention, you generally cannot de-facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise. duct his or her travel expenses.An assignment or job that is initially temporaryException for federal crime investigations or
Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-may become indefinite due to changed circum-prosecutions. If you are a federal employee
penses of someone who goes with you if thatstances. A series of assignments to the sameparticipating in a federal crime investigation or
person:location, all for short periods but that togetherprosecution, you are not subject to the 1-year
cover a long period, may be considered an in-rule. This means you may be able to deduct 1. Is your employee,definite assignment.travel expenses even if you are away from your
tax home for more than 1 year, provided you 2. Has a bona fide business purpose for theGoing home on days off. If you go back tomeet the other requirements for deductibility. travel, andyour tax home from a temporary assignment onFor you to qualify, the Attorney General (or 3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct theyour days off, you are not considered away fromhis or her designee) must certify that you are travel expenses.home while you are in your hometown. Youtraveling: cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-
Business associate. If a business associ-ing there. However, you can deduct your travel• For the federal government,
ate travels with you and meets the conditions inexpenses, including meals and lodging, while• In a temporary duty status, and (2) and (3) above, you can deduct the traveltraveling between your temporary place of work
expenses you have for that person. A business• To investigate or prosecute, or provide and your tax home. You can claim these ex-
associate is someone with whom you could rea-support services for the investigation or penses up to the amount it would have cost you
sonably expect to actively conduct business. Aprosecution of a federal crime. to stay at your temporary place of work.
Page 176 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 179 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business associate can be a current or prospec- Actual cost. You can use the actual cost of whether you are an employee or self-employed,
your meals to figure the amount of your expensetive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier, and whether or not you are reimbursed for your
before reimbursement and application of theemployee, agent, partner, or professional advi- traveling expenses.
50% deduction limit. If you use this method, yousor.
must keep records of your actual cost. Use of the standard meal allowance for otherBona fide business purpose. A bona fide travel. You can use the standard meal allow-business purpose exists if you can prove a real Standard meal allowance. Generally, you ance to figure your meal expenses when youbusiness purpose for the individual's presence. can use the ªstandard meal allowanceº method travel in connection with investment and otherIncidental services, such as typing notes or as- as an alternative to the actual cost method. It income-producing property. You can also use itsisting in entertaining customers, are not allows you to use a set amount for your daily to figure your meal expenses when you travel forenough to make the expenses deductible. meals and incidental expenses (M&IE), instead qualifying educational purposes. You cannotof keeping records of your actual costs. The set
use the standard meal allowance to figure theExample. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi- amount varies depending on where and when
cost of your meals when you travel for medicalness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is you travel. In this chapter, ªstandard meal allow-
or charitable purposes.not Jerry's employee. Linda occasionally types anceº refers to the federal rate for M&IE, dis-
notes, performs similar services, and accompa- cussed later under Amount of standard meal
Amount of standard meal allowance. Thenies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per- allowance. If you use the standard meal allow-
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IEformance of these services does not establish ance, you still must keep records to prove the
rate. For travel in 2008, the rate for most smallthat her presence on the trip is necessary to the time, place, and business purpose of your travel.
localities in the United States is $39 a day fromconduct of Jerry's business. Her expenses are See Recordkeeping, later.
January 1 through December 31, 2008.not deductible. Incidental expenses. The term ªincidental Most major cities and many other localities inJerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A expensesº means: the United States are designated as high-costsingle room costs $149 a day. He can deduct the
• Fees and tips given to porters, baggage areas, qualifying for higher standard meal al-total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,
carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewards lowances. Locations qualifying for these ratesbut only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he uses
or stewardesses and others on ships, andpublic transportation, he can deduct only his are listed in Publication 1542 which is available
hotel servants in foreign countries,fare. on the Internet at www.irs.gov.
• Transportation between places of lodging You can also find this information (or-
Meals and Incidental Expenses or business and places where meals are ganized by state) on the Internet
taken, if suitable meals can be obtained at atwww.gsa.gov. Click on ªPer Diem
You can deduct the cost of meals in either of the the temporary duty site, and Rates,º then select ª2008º for the period Januaryfollowing situations. 1, 2008 ± September 30, 2008, and select• Mailing costs associated with filing travel ª2009º for the period October 1, 2008 ± Decem-• It is necessary for you to stop for substan- vouchers and payment of em- ber 31, 2008. However, you can apply the ratestial sleep or rest to properly perform your ployer-sponsored charge card billings. in effect before October 1, 2008, for expenses ofduties while traveling away from home on
Incidental expenses do not include expenses for all travel within the United States for 2008 in-business.
laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg- stead of the updated rates. You must consist-• The meal is business-related entertain- ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephone ently use either the rates for the first 9 monthsment. calls. for all of 2008 or the updated rates for the period
of October 1, 2008, through December 31,Incidental expenses only method. YouBusiness-related entertainment is discussed 2008.can use an optional method (instead of actualunder Entertainment Expenses,  later. The fol-
If you travel to more than one location in onecost) for deducting incidental expenses only.lowing discussion deals only with meals (and
day, use the rate in effect for the area where youThe amount of the deduction is $3 a day forincidental expenses) that are not busi-
incidental expenses paid or incurred for travel stop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-ness-related entertainment.
away from home in 2008. You can use this tation industry, however, see Special rate for
method only if you did not pay or incur any meal transportation workers, later.Lavish or extravagant. You cannot deduct expenses. You cannot use this method on anyexpenses for meals that are lavish or extrava- Standard meal allowance for areas outsideday that you use the standard meal allowance.gant. An expense is not considered lavish or the continental United States.  The standard
extravagant if it is reasonable based on the facts Federal employees should refer to the meal allowance rates above do not apply to
and circumstances. Expenses will not be disal- Federal Travel Regulations at travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other location
lowed merely because they are more than a www.gsa.gov. Click on ªFederal Travel outside the continental United States. The De-
CAUTION
!
fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res- Regulation (FTR)º for changes affecting claims partment of Defense establishes per diem rates
taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts. for reimbursement of these expenses. for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American Sa-
moa, Guam, Midway, the Northern Mariana Is-50% limit may apply. If you use the stan-50% limit on meals. You can figure your meal lands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake Island, anddard meal allowance method for meal expensesexpenses using either of the following methods. other non-foreign areas outside the continentaland you are not reimbursed or you are reim- United States. The Department of State estab-• Actual cost. bursed under a nonaccountable plan, you can lishes per diem rates for all other foreign areas.generally deduct only 50% of the standard meal• The standard meal allowance. You can access per diem rates forallowance. If you are reimbursed under an ac-
Both of these methods are explained below. But, non-foreign areas outside the conti-countable plan and you are deducting amounts
regardless of the method you use, you generally nental United States at:that are more than your reimbursements, you
can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost http://perdiem.hqda.pentagon.mil/perdiem/can deduct only 50% of the excess amount. The
of your meals. perdiemrates.html. You can access all other for-50% limit is explained later under Entertainment
eign per diem rates at:Expenses. Accountable and nonaccountableIf you are reimbursed for the cost of your
www.state.gov/travelandbusiness.plans are discussed later under Reimburse-meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on
ments.whether your employer's reimbursement plan Special rate for transportation workers.was accountable or nonaccountable. If you are There is no optional standard lodging You can use a special standard meal allowancenot reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether amount similar to the standard meal if you work in the transportation industry. Youthe unreimbursed meal expense is for business allowance. Your allowable lodging ex- are in the transportation industry if your work:
CAUTION
!travel or business entertainment. The 50% limit pense deduction is your actual cost.
• Directly involves moving people or goodsis explained later under Entertainment Ex-
by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, orpenses. Accountable and nonaccountable plans Who can use the standard meal allowance.
are discussed later under Reimbursements. truck, andYou can use the standard meal allowance
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 177

Page 180 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Regularly requires you to travel away from primarily for business and, while at your busi- Private car. Travel by private car in the United
home and, during any single trip, usually ness destination, you extended your stay for a States is travel between points in the United
involves travel to areas eligible for differ- vacation, made a personal side trip, or had other States, even when you are on your way to a
ent standard meal allowance rates. personal activities, you can deduct your busi- destination outside the United States.
ness-related travel expenses. These expensesIf this applies to you, you can claim a standard Example. You travel by car from Denver toinclude the travel costs of getting to and frommeal allowance of $52 a day ($58 for travel Mexico City and return. Your travel from Denveryour business destination and any busi-outside the continental United States) from Jan- to the border and from the border back to Den-ness-related expenses at your business desti-uary 1 through December 31, 2008. ver is travel in the United States, and the rules innation.
Using the special rate for transportation work- this section apply. The rules under Travel
ers eliminates the need for you to determine the Example. You work in Atlanta and take a Outside the United States apply to your trip from
standard meal allowance for every area where business trip to New Orleans. On your way the border to Mexico City and back to the border.
you stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to use home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.
the special rate for any trip, you must use the You spend $1,920 for the 9 days you are away Travel Outsidespecial rate (and not use the regular standard from home for travel, meals, lodging, and other
the United Statesmeal allowance rates) for all trips you take that travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-
year. bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, and
If any part of your business travel is outside theyour total cost would have been $1,620. You can
United States, some of your deductions for thededuct $1,620 for your trip, including the cost ofTravel for days you depart and return. For cost of getting to and from your destination mayround-trip transportation to and from New Orle-both the day you depart for and the day you be limited. For this purpose, the United Statesans. The deduction for your meals is subject toreturn from a business trip, you must prorate the includes the 50 states and the District of Colum-the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.standard meal allowance (figure a reduced bia.
amount for each day). You can do so by one of How much of your travel expenses you can
two methods. deduct depends in part upon how much of yourTrip Primarily for
trip outside the United States was business re-• Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan- Personal Reasons lated.dard meal allowance.
See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for informa-If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,• Method 2: You can prorate using any tion on luxury water travel.such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is amethod that you consistently apply and nondeductible personal expense. However, youthat is in accordance with reasonable busi- can deduct any expenses you have while at yourness practice. Travel Entirely for Businessdestination that are directly related to your busi-
ness. or Considered Entirely
Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans for Business   A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may beas a convention planner. In March, her employer a vacation even if the promoter advertises that it You can deduct all your travel expenses of get-sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to is primarily for business. The scheduling of inci- ting to and from your business destination if yourattend a planning seminar. She left her home in dental business activities during a trip, such as trip is entirely for business or considered entirelyNew Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealing for business.arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After with general subjects, will not change what isspending two nights there, she flew back to New really a vacation into a business trip.Orleans on Friday and arrived back home at Travel entirely for business. If you travel8:00 p.m. Jen's employer gave her a flat amount outside the United States and you spend theto cover her expenses and included it with her entire time on business activities, you can de-Part of Trip Outsidewages. duct all of your travel expenses.the United StatesUnder Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days of
the standard meal allowance for Washington, If part of your trip is outside the United States, Travel considered entirely for business.DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday and use the rules described later under Travel Even if you did not spend your entire time onFriday (the days she departed and returned), Outside the United States for that part of the trip. business activities, your trip is considered en-and the full daily rate for Thursday. For the part of your trip that is inside the United tirely for business if you meet at least one of theUnder Method 2, Jen could also use any States, use the rules for travel in the United following four exceptions.method that she applies consistently and that is States. Travel outside the United States does
in accordance with reasonable business prac- not include travel from one point in the United Exception 1 - No substantial control.
tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of the States to another point in the United States. The Your trip is considered entirely for business if
standard meal allowance even though a federal following discussion can help you determine you did not have substantial control over arrang-
employee would have to use method 1 and be whether your trip was entirely within the United ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing of
limited to only 21/2 days. States. your trip does not, by itself, mean that you have
substantial control over arranging your trip.
You do not have substantial control overTravel in the Public transportation. If you travel by public your trip if you:transportation, any place in the United StatesUnited States
where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a • Are an employee who was reimbursed or
point in the United States. Once the vehicle paid a travel expense allowance,The following discussion applies to travel in the
leaves the last scheduled stop in the UnitedUnited States. For this purpose, the United • Are not related to your employer, andStates on its way to a point outside the UnitedStates includes the 50 states and the District of
States, you apply the rules under Travel Outside • Are not a managing executive.Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-
the United States.penses depends on how much of your trip was
ªRelated to your employerº is defined later inbusiness related and on how much of your trip
Example. You fly from New York to Puerto this chapter under Per Diem and Car Al-occurred within the United States. See Part of
Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return lowances.Trip Outside the United States, later.
to New York nonstop. The flight from New York A ªmanaging executiveº is an employee who
to Miami is in the United States, so only the flight has the authority and responsibility, without be-
from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United ing subject to the veto of another, to decide onTrip Primarily for Business
States. Because there are no scheduled stops the need for the business travel.
You can deduct all your travel expenses if your between Puerto Rico and New York, all of the  A self-employed person generally has sub-
trip was entirely business related. If your trip was return trip is outside the United States. stantial control over arranging business trips.
Page 178 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 181 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception 2 - Outside United States no Your appointment or election as a dele-
more than a week. Your trip is considered gate does not, in itself, determine Entertainmententirely for business if you were outside the whether you can deduct travel ex-
CAUTION
!
United States for a week or less, combining penses. You can deduct your travel expenses Expensesbusiness and nonbusiness activities. One week only if your attendance is connected to your own
means 7 consecutive days. In counting the trade or business. You may be able to deduct business-relateddays, do not count the day you leave the United entertainment expenses you have for entertain-States, but do count the day you return to the ing a client, customer, or employee.United States. Convention agenda. The convention agenda You can deduct entertainment expenses
or program generally shows the purpose of the only if they are both ordinary and necessaryException 3 - Less than 25% of time on
(defined earlier in the Introduction) and meetconvention. You can show your attendance atpersonal activities. Your trip is considered
one of the following tests.the convention benefits your trade or businessentirely for business if:
by comparing the agenda with the official duties • Directly-related test.• You were outside the United States for and responsibilities of your position. The agendamore than a week, and • Associated test.does not have to deal specifically with your offi-
• You spent less than 25% of the total time Both of these tests are explained in chapter 2 ofcial duties and responsibilities; it will be enoughyou were outside the United States on Publication 463.if the agenda is so related to your position that itnonbusiness activities. shows your attendance was for business pur-
The amount you can deduct for enter-For this purpose, count both the day your trip poses.
tainment expenses may be limited.began and the day it ended.
Generally, you can deduct only 50% of
CAUTION
!Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid- your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.Conventions held outside the North Ameri-eration. Your trip is considered entirely for This limit is discussed next.can area. See chapter 1 of Publication 463 forbusiness if you can establish that a personal information on conventions held outside thevacation was not a major consideration, even if North American area.you have substantial control over arranging the
trip.
Travel Primarily for Business
If you travel outside the United States primarily
for business but spend some of your time on
nonbusiness activities, you generally cannot de-
duct all of your travel expenses. You can only
deduct the business portion of your cost of get-
ting to and from your destination. You must
allocate the costs between your business and
nonbusiness activities to determine your de-
ductible amount. These travel allocation rules
are discussed in chapter 1 of Publication 463.
You do not have to allocate your travel
expense deduction if you meet one of
the four exceptions listed earlier under
TIP
Travel considered entirely for business. In those
cases, you can deduct the total cost of getting to
and from your destination.
Travel Primarily for Personal
Reasons
If you travel outside the United States primarily
for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-
tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personal
expense. If you spend some time attending brief
professional seminars or a continuing education
program, you can deduct your registration fees
and other expenses you have that are directly
related to your business.
Conventions
You can deduct your travel expenses when you
attend a convention if you can show that your
attendance benefits your trade or business. You
cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-
ily.
 If the convention is for investment, political,
social, or other purposes unrelated to your trade
or business, you cannot deduct the expenses.
Figure 26-A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. For more information, see
50% Limit.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not include
in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed, count only
reimbursements from clients or customers that are not
included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See How To Report. )
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed. . . For the excess amount. . .
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However,
since the reimbursement was
not treated as wages or as
other taxable income, you
cannot deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
Yes
No
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
/H17074/H17074
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 179

Page 182 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter-50% Limit value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction tainment-related meal, you or your employee
cannot be more than $80 (.50 ×  $160). must be present when the food or beverages areIn general, you can deduct only 50% of your provided.business-related meal and entertainment ex-
penses. (If you are subject to the Department of You cannot claim the cost of your mealExceptions to the 50% LimitTransportation's ªhours of serviceº limits, you both as an entertainment expense and
can deduct a higher percentage. See Individuals as a travel expense.
CAUTION
!Generally, business-related meal and entertain-subject to ªhours of serviceº limits, later.) ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.The 50% limit applies to employees or their Separating costs. If you have one expenseFigure 26-A can help you determine if the 50%employers, and to self-employed persons (in- that includes the costs of entertainment, andlimit applies to you.cluding independent contractors) or their clients, other services (such as lodging or transporta-Your meal or entertainment expense is notdepending on whether the expenses are reim- tion), you must allocate that expense betweensubject to the 50% limit if the expense meetsbursed. the cost of entertainment and the cost of otherone of the following exceptions.
Figure 26-A summarizes the general rules services. You must have a reasonable basis for
explained in this section. Employee's reimbursed expenses. If you making this allocation. For example, you must
The 50% limit applies to business meals or are an employee, you are not subject to the 50% allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-
entertainment expenses you have while: limit on expenses for which your employer reim- tainment in its lounge on the same bill with your
burses you under an accountable plan. Account- room charge.• Traveling away from home (whether eat- able plans are discussed later undering alone or with others) on business, Taking turns paying for meals or entertain-Reimbursements.
ment. If a group of business acquaintances• Entertaining customers at your place of
take turns picking up each others' meal or enter-Individuals subject to ªhours of serviceº lim-business, a restaurant, or other location,
tainment checks without regard to whether anyits. You can deduct a higher percentage ofor
business purposes are served, no member ofyour meal expenses while traveling away from• Attending a business convention or recep- the group can deduct any part of the expense.your tax home if the meals take place during ortion, business meeting, or business lunch- incident to any period subject to the Departmenteon at a club. Lavish or extravagant expenses. You can-of Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits. The
not deduct expenses for entertainment that arepercentage is 80% for 2008.
lavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid-Individuals subject to the Department ofIncluded expenses. Expenses subject to the ered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonableTransportation's ªhours of serviceº limits include50% limit include: considering the facts and circumstances. Ex-the following persons.• Taxes and tips relating to a business meal penses will not be disallowed just because they
• Certain air transportation workers (such asor entertainment activity, are more than a fixed dollar amount or take
pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and place at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs,• Cover charges for admission to a night- control tower operators) who are under or resorts.club, Federal Aviation Administration regula-
Trade association meetings.  You can de-tions.• Rent paid for a room in which you hold a
duct entertainment expenses that are directlydinner or cocktail party, and • Interstate truck operators and bus drivers related to, and necessary for, attending busi-who are under Department of Transporta-• Amounts paid for parking at a sports ness meetings or conventions of certain exempttion regulations.arena. organizations if the expenses of your attend-
ance are related to your active trade or busi-• Certain railroad employees (such as engi-However, the cost of transportation to and from
ness. These organizations include businessneers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-a business meal or a business-related entertain-
leagues, chambers of commerce, real estateers, and control operations personnel)ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit.
boards, trade associations, and professional as-who are under Federal Railroad Adminis-
sociations.tration regulations.Application of 50% limit. The 50% limit on
meal and entertainment expenses applies if the • Certain merchant mariners who are under Entertainment tickets. Generally, you cannotexpense is otherwise deductible and is not cov- Coast Guard regulations. deduct more than the face value of an entertain-ered by one of the exceptions discussed later in ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. Forthis section. example, you cannot deduct service fees youOther exceptions. There are also exceptionsThe 50% limit also applies to certain meal pay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amountfor the self-employed, advertising expenses,and entertainment expenses that are not busi- over the face value of the tickets you pay toselling meals or entertainment, and charitableness-related. It applies to meal and entertain- scalpers.sports events. These are discussed in Publica-ment expenses incurred for the production of
tion 463.income, including rental or royalty income. It
What Entertainmentalso applies to the cost of meals included in
deductible educational expenses. What Entertainment Expenses Are Not
Expenses Are Deductible? Deductible?When to apply the 50% limit. You apply the
50% limit after determining the amount that This section explains different types of entertain- This section explains different types of entertain-would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first ment expenses that you my be able to deduct. ment expenses that you generally may not behave to determine the amount of meal and en-
able to deduct.tertainment expenses that would be deductible Entertainment.  Entertainment includes anyunder the other rules discussed in this chapter. activity generally considered to provide enter- Club dues and membership fees. You can-
tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples not deduct dues (including initiation fees) forExample 1. You spend $200 for a busi- include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so- membership in any club organized for:ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount is not cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; atallowable because it is lavish and extravagant, • Business,sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit. ing, vacation, and similar trips. • Pleasure,Your deduction cannot be more than $45 (.50 ×
A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter-$90). • Recreation, or
tainment includes the cost of a meal you provide • Other social purpose.Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a to a customer or client, whether the meal is a
concert and give them to a client. You pur- part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal This rule applies to any membership organiza-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You expense includes the cost of food, beverages, tion if one of its principal purposes is either:
Page 180 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 183 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• To conduct entertainment activities for you has an independent connection with the • Getting from your home to a temporary
members or their guests, or recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner- workplace when you have one or more
ship and the partners are treated as one tax- regular places of work. These temporary• To provide members or their guests with payer. workplaces can be either within the areaaccess to entertainment facilities. of your tax home or outside that area.Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as
The purposes and activities of a club, not its Transportation expenses do not include ex-engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,
name, will determine whether or not you can penses you have while traveling away fromand mailing, are generally not included in deter-
deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25
to: penses, which are discussed earlier. However, iflimit.
you use your car while traveling away fromA cost is incidental only if it does not add• Country clubs, home overnight, use the rules in this section tosubstantial value to the gift. For example, the
• Golf and athletic clubs, figure your car expense deduction. See Car Ex-cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-
penses, later.ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for• Airline clubs, packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the
• Hotel clubs, and Illustration of transportation expenses.value of the basket is substantial compared to
Figure 26-B illustrates the rules for when youthe value of the fruit.• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir- can deduct transportation expenses when youcumstances generally considered to be Exceptions. The following items are not con- have a regular or main job away from yourconducive to business discussions. sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. home. You may want to refer to it when deciding
whether you can deduct your transportation ex-1. An item that costs $4 or less and:Entertainment facilities. Generally, you can- penses.
not deduct any expense for the use of an enter- a. Has your name clearly and permanently
Temporary work location. If you have one ortainment facility. This includes expenses for imprinted on the gift, and
more regular work locations away from yourdepreciation and operating costs such as rent,
b. Is one of a number of identical items home and you commute to a temporary workutilities, maintenance, and protection.
you widely distribute. Examples include location in the same trade or business, you canAn entertainment facility is any property you
pens, desk sets, and plastic bags and deduct the expenses of the daily round-tripown, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples
cases. transportation between your home and the tem-include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp,
porary location, regardless of distance.swimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car,
2. Signs, display racks, or other promotional If your employment at a work location isairplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a
material to be used on the business prem- realistically expected to last (and does in factvacation resort.
ises of the recipient. last) for one year or less, the employment isOut-of-pocket expenses. You can deduct temporary unless there are facts and circum-out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be stances that would indicate otherwise.beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that considered either a gift or entertainment gener- If your employment at a work location isyou provided during entertainment at a facility. ally will be considered entertainment. However, realistically expected to last for more than 1 yearThese are not expenses for the use of an enter- if you give a customer packaged food or bever- or if there is no realistic expectation that thetainment facility. However, these expenses are ages that you intend the customer to use at a employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-subject to the directly-related and associated later date, treat it as a gift. ployment is not temporary, regardless oftests and to the 50% limit discussed earlier.  If you give a customer tickets to a theater whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.
performance or sporting event and you do not go If employment at a work location initially isAdditional information. For more information with the customer to the performance or event, realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,on entertainment expenses, including discus- you have a choice. You can treat the cost of the but at some later date the employment is realisti-sions of the directly-related and associated tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain- cally expected to last more than 1 year, thattests, see chapter 2 of Publication 463. ment expense, whichever is to your advantage. employment will be treated as temporary (un-
If you go with the customer to the event, you less there are facts and circumstances that
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain- would indicate otherwise) until your expectation
ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case, changes. It will not be treated as temporary after
Gift Expenses to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense. the date you determine it will last more than 1
year.
If you give gifts in the course of your trade or If the temporary work location is beyond the
business, you can deduct all or part of the cost. general area of your regular place of work and
This section explains the limits and rules for you stay overnight, you are traveling away fromTransportationdeducting the costs of gifts. home. You may have deductible travel ex-
penses as discussed earlier in this chapter.Expenses$25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25
for business gifts you give directly or indirectly to No regular place of work. If you have noThis section discusses expenses you can de-each person during your tax year. A gift to a regular place of work but ordinarily work in theduct for business transportation when you arecompany that is intended for the eventual per- metropolitan area where you live, you can de-not traveling away from home as defined earliersonal use or benefit of a particular person or a duct daily transportation costs between homeunder Travel Expenses . These expenses in-limited class of people will be considered an and a temporary work site outside that metropol-clude the cost of transportation by air, rail, bus,indirect gift to that particular person or to the itan area.taxi, etc., and the cost of driving and maintainingindividuals within that class of people who re- Generally, a metropolitan area includes theyour car.ceive the gift. area within the city limits and the suburbs thatTransportation expenses include the ordi-If you give a gift to a member of a customer's are considered part of that metropolitan area.nary and necessary costs of all of the following.family, the gift is generally considered to be an You cannot deduct daily transportation costs
indirect gift to the customer. This rule does not • Getting from one workplace to another in between your home and temporary work sites
apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi- the course of your business or profession within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
ness connection with that family member and when you are traveling within the area of ductible commuting expenses.
the gift is not intended for the customer's even- your tax home. (Tax home is defined ear-
tual use. Two places of work. If you work at two placeslier under Travel Expenses.)
If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of in one day, whether or not for the same em-• Visiting clients or customers.you are treated as one taxpayer. It does not ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting
matter whether you have separate businesses, • Going to a business meeting away from from one workplace to the other. However, if for
are separately employed, or whether each of your regular workplace. some personal reason you do not go directly
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 181

Page 184 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your home is from your regular place of work.
You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if
you work during the commuting trip.
Example. You had a telephone installed in
your car. You sometimes use that telephone to
make business calls while commuting to and
from work. Sometimes business associates ride
with you to and from work, and you have a
business discussion in the car. These activities
do not change the trip from personal to busi-
ness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex-
penses.
Parking fees. Fees you pay to park your car
at your place of business are nondeductible
commuting expenses. You can, however, de-
duct business-related parking fees when visiting
a customer or client.
Advertising display on car. Putting display
material that advertises your business on your
car does not change the use of your car from
personal use to business use. If you use this car
for commuting or other personal uses, you still
cannot deduct your expenses for those uses.
Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of
using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not
include payments you receive from the passen-
gers in your income. These payments are con-
sidered reimbursements of your expenses.
However, if you operate a car pool for a profit,
you must include payments from passengers in
your income. You can then deduct your car
expenses (using the rules in this chapter).
Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling
tools or instruments in your car while commuting
to and from work does not make your car ex-
penses deductible. However, you can deduct
any additional costs you have for hauling tools or
instruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow
with your car).
Union members' trips from a union hall. If
you get your work assignments at a union hall
and then go to your place of work, the costs of
getting from the union hall to your place of work
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-
though you need the union to get your work
assignments, you are employed where you
Figure 26-B.
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible on
a day off from regular
or main job
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home.)
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
work, not where the union hall is located.
from one location to the other, you cannot de- If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-
Office in the home. If you have an office induct more than the amount it would have cost itan area but not at any specific location and the
your home that qualifies as a principal place ofyou to go directly from the first location to the reserve meeting is held at a temporary location
business, you can deduct your daily transporta-second. outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct
your transportation expenses. tion costs between your home and another workTransportation expenses you have in going
If you travel away from home overnight to location in the same trade or business. (Seebetween home and a part-time job on a day off
attend a guard or reserve meeting, you canfrom your main job are commuting expenses. chapter 28 for information on determining if your
deduct your travel expenses. These expensesYou cannot deduct them. home office qualifies as a principal place of
are discussed earlier under Travel Expenses. business.)Armed Forces reservists. A meeting of an If you travel more than 100 miles away fromArmed Forces reserve unit is a second place of home in connection with your performance of Examples of deductible transportation. Thebusiness if the meeting is held on a day on which services as a member of the reserves, you may following examples show when you can deductyou work at your regular job. You can deduct the be able to deduct some of your reserve-related transportation expenses based on the locationexpense of getting from one workplace to the travel costs as an adjustment to income rather of your work and your home.other as just discussed under Two places of than as an itemized deduction. See Armedwork. Forces reservists traveling more than 100 miles Example 1. You regularly work in an officeYou usually cannot deduct the expense if the from home under Special Rules, later. in the city where you live. Your employer sendsreserve meeting is held on a day on which you
you to a one-week training session at a differentdo not work at your regular job. In this case, your Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct
office in the same city. You travel directly fromtransportation generally is a nondeductible com- the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi,
your home to the training location and returnmuting expense. However, you can deduct your or of driving a car between your home and your
each day. You can deduct the cost of your dailytransportation expenses if the location of the main or regular place of work. These costs are
round-trip transportation between your homemeeting is temporary and you have one or more personal commuting expenses. You cannot de-
and the training location.regular places of work. duct commuting expenses no matter how far
Page 182 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 185 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. Your principal place of business If you are a rural mail carrier and re- • Are a rural mail carrier who received a
ceived a qualified reimbursement, you qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mailis in your home. You can deduct the cost of
cannot use the standard mileage rate. carriers, earlier.)round-trip transportation between your qualify-
CAUTION
!
ing home office and your client's or customer's
Five or more cars. If you own or lease fiveplace of business.
or more cars that are used for business at theStandard Mileage Rate same time, you cannot use the standard mile-Example 3. You have no regular office, and
age rate for the business use of any car. How-you do not have an office in your home. In this You may be able to use the standard mileage ever, you may be able to deduct your actualcase, the location of your first business contact rate to figure the deductible costs of operating expenses for operating each of the cars in youris considered your office. Transportation ex- your car for business purposes. For 2008, the business. See Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4penses between your home and this first contact standard mileage rate for each mile of business of Publication 463 for information on how toare nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans- use is: figure your deduction.portation expenses between your last business • 501/2 cents per mile for the period January You are not using five or more cars for busi-contact and your home are also nondeductible 1 through June 30, 2008, and ness at the same time if you alternate using (usecommuting expenses. Although you cannot de-
at different times) the cars for business.duct the costs of these first and last trips, you • 581/2 cents per mile for the period July 1
can deduct the costs of going from one client or through December 31, 2008. Parking fees and tolls. In addition to usingcustomer to another. the standard mileage rate, you can deduct any
business-related parking fees and tolls. (ParkingIf you use the standard mileage rate for
fees that you pay to park your car at your placeCar Expenses a year, you cannot deduct your actual
of work are nondeductible commuting ex-car expenses for that year, but see
CAUTION
!
penses.)If you use your car for business purposes, you Parking fees and tolls, later.
may be able to deduct car expenses. You gener- You generally can use the standard mileageally can use one of the two following methods to rate whether or not you are reimbursed and Actual Car Expensesfigure your deductible expenses. whether or not any reimbursement is more or
less than the amount figured using the standard• Standard mileage rate. If you do not use the standard mileage rate, youmileage rate. See Reimbursements under How may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.• Actual car expenses. To Report, later.
If you qualify to use both methods, you
If you use actual car expenses to figure your may want to figure your deduction bothChoosing the standard mileage rate. If you
deduction for a car you lease, there are rules ways to see which gives you a largerwant to use the standard mileage rate for a car
TIP
that affect the amount of your lease payments deduction.you own, you must choose to use it in the first
that you can deduct. See Leasing a car  under year the car is available for use in your business.
Actual Car Expenses, later. Then in later years, you can choose to use either Actual car expenses include:
In this chapter, ªcarº includes a van, pickup, the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.
or panel truck. If you want to use the standard mileage rate Depreciation Lease Registration
for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire Garage rent payments feesYou may be entitled to a tax credit for Gas Licenses Repairslease period. For leases that began on or beforean alternative motor vehicle that you Insurance Oil TiresDecember 31, 1997, the standard mileage rateplace in service during the year. The
TIP Parking fees Tollsmust be used for the entire portion of the leasevehicle must meet certain requirements, and period (including renewals) that is after 1997.you do not have to use it in your business to Business and personal use. If you use yourYou must make the choice to use the stan-qualify for the credit. For more information, see car for both business and personal purposes,dard mileage rate by the due date (includingchapter 37. you must divide your expenses between busi-extensions) of your return. You cannot revoke
ness and personal use. You can divide yourthe choice. However, in a later year, you can
Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mail expense based on the miles driven for eachswitch from the standard mileage rate to the
carrier, you may be able to treat the amount of purpose.actual expenses method. If you change to the
qualified reimbursement you received as the actual expense method in a later year, but
amount of your allowable expense. Because the Example. You are a contractor and drivebefore your car is fully depreciated, you have to
qualified reimbursement is treated as paid under your car 20,000 miles during the year: 12,000estimate the remaining useful life of the car and
an accountable plan, your employer should not miles for business use and 8,000 miles for per-use straight line depreciation.
include the amount of reimbursement in your sonal use. You can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷For more information about depreciation in-
income. 20,000) of the cost of operating your car as acluded in the standard mileage rate, see the
business expense.exception in Methods of depreciation under De-If your vehicle expenses are more than the
preciation Deduction in chapter 4 of Publicationamount of your reimbursement, you can deduct Interest on car loans. If you are an employee,463.the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de- you cannot deduct any interest paid on a carduction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You must loan. This interest is treated as personal interestStandard mileage rate not allowed. Youcomplete Form 2106 and attach it to your Form and is not deductible. However, if you arecannot use the standard mileage rate if you:1040. self-employed and use your car in that business,
A ªqualified reimbursementº is the reim- • Use the car for hire (such as a taxi), see chapter 4 of Publication 535.
bursement you receive that meets both of the • Use five or more cars at the same time (as If you use a home equity loan tofollowing conditions. in fleet operations), purchase your car, you may be able to
• It is given as an equipment maintenance deduct the interest. See chapter 23 for
TIP• Claimed a depreciation deduction for theallowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S. more information.car using any method other than straightPostal Service. line depreciation, Taxes paid on your car. If you are an em-• It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col- ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes• Claimed a section 179 deduction on thelective bargaining agreement. Any later paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Entercar,agreement cannot increase the qualified the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Formreimbursement amount by more than the • Claimed the special depreciation allow- 1040). (See chapter 22 for more information onrate of inflation. ance on the car, taxes.) If you are not an employee, see your
See your employer for information on your reim- • Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 form instructions for information on how to de-
bursement. for a car you leased, or duct personal property taxes paid on your car.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 183

Page 186 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sales taxes. Generally, sales taxes on your If you keep timely and accurate rec- A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an
car are part of your car's basis and are recov- ords, you will have support to show the expense for a business meal if it has all of the
ered through depreciation, discussed later. IRS if your tax return is ever examined. following information.
RECORDS
However, to the extent the car is not used in your You will also have proof of expenses that your • The name and location of the restaurant.trade or business, you can choose to deduct the employer may require if you are reimbursed
• The number of people served.nonbusiness part of the sales tax deduction on under an accountable plan. These plans are
Schedule A (Form 1040). You can only choose discussed later under Reimbursements. • The date and amount of the expense.to deduct state and local sales taxes as an
If a charge is made for items other than food anditemized deduction if you choose not to deduct
How To Prove Expenses beverages, the receipt must show that this is thestate and local income taxes.
case.
Table 26-2 is a summary of records you need toFines and collateral. You cannot deduct fines
Canceled check. A canceled check, to-prove each expense discussed in this chapter.you pay and forfeited collateral for traffic viola-
gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-You must be able to prove the elements listedtions.
tablishes the cost. However, a canceled checkacross the top portion of the chart. You prove
by itself does not prove a business expenseDepreciation and section 179 deductions. them by having the information and receipts without other evidence to show that it was for aGenerally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and (where needed) for the expenses listed in the business purpose.improvements, is a capital expense. Because first column.
the benefits last longer than 1 year, you gener-
You cannot deduct amounts that youally cannot deduct a capital expense. However, Duplicate information. You do not have to
approximate or estimate.you can recover this cost through the section record information in your account book or other
179 deduction (the deduction allowed by section
CAUTION
! record that duplicates information shown on a
179 of the Internal Revenue Code), special de- receipt as long as your records and receipts
preciation allowance, and depreciation deduc- complement each other in an orderly manner.You should keep adequate records to prove
tions. Depreciation allows you to recover the You do not have to record amounts youryour expenses or have sufficient evidence that
cost over more than 1 year by deducting part of it employer pays directly for any ticket or otherwill support your own statement. You must gen-
each year. The section 179 deduction, special travel item. However, if you charge these itemserally prepare a written record for it to be consid-
depreciation allowance, and the depreciation to your employer, through a credit card or other-ered adequate. This is because written evidencededuction are discussed in more detail in chap- wise, you must keep a record of the amountsis more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-ter 4 of Publication 463. you spend.ever, if you prepare a record on a computer it isGenerally, there are limits on these deduc- considered an adequate record.tions. Special rules apply if you use your car Timely-kept records. You should record the
50% or less in your work or business. elements of an expense or of a business use at
or near the time of the expense or use andWhat Are Adequate Records?Leasing a car. If you lease a car, truck, or van support it with sufficient documentary evidence.that you use in your business, you can use the A timely-kept record has more value than aYou should keep the proof you need in an ac-standard mileage rate or actual expenses to statement prepared later when generally there iscount book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-figure your deductible car expense. a lack of accurate recall.ilar record. You should also keep documentary
You do not need to write down the elementsDeductible payments. If you choose to use evidence that, together with your records, will
of every expense on the day of the expense. Ifactual expenses, you can deduct the part of support each element of an expense.
you maintain a log on a weekly basis whicheach lease payment that is for the use of the car
accounts for use during the week, the log isin your business. You cannot deduct any part of Documentary evidence. You generally must
considered a timely-kept record.a lease payment that is for personal use of the have documentary evidence, such as receipts,
If you give your employer, client, or customercar, such as commuting. canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-
an expense account statement, it can also beYou must spread any advance payments penses.
considered a timely-kept record. This is true ifover the entire lease period. You cannot deduct
Exception. Documentary evidence is not you copy it from your account book, diary, state-any payments you make to buy a car, even if the
needed if any of the following conditions apply. ment of expense, or similar record.payments are called lease payments.
If you lease a car for 30 days or more, you • You have meals or lodging expenses
may have to reduce your lease payment deduc- Proving business purpose. You must gener-while traveling away from home for which
tion by an ªinclusion amount.º For information on ally provide a written statement of the businessyou account to your employer under an
reporting lease inclusion amounts, see Leasing purpose of an expense. However, the degree ofaccountable plan and you use a per diem
a Car in chapter 4 of Publication 463. proof varies according to the circumstances inallowance method that includes meals
each case. If the business purpose of an ex-and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and
pense is clear from the surrounding circum-per diem allowances are discussed later
Sale, Trade-In, or Other Disposition stances, then you do not need to give a writtenunder Reimbursements.)
explanation.
If you sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your • Your expense, other than lodging, is less
car, you may have a taxable gain or a deductible than $75. Confidential information. You do not need toloss. This is true whether you used the standard put confidential information relating to an ele-• You have a transportation expense formileage rate or actual car expenses to deduct ment of a deductible expense (such as thewhich a receipt is not readily available.the business use of your car. Publication 544 place, business purpose, or business relation-has information on sales of property used in a ship) in your account book, diary, or other re-Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-trade or business, and details on how to report cord. However, you do have to record thedence ordinarily will be considered adequate if itthe disposition. information elsewhere at or near the time of theshows the amount, date, place, and essential
expense and have it available to fully prove thatcharacter of the expense.
element of the expense. For example, a hotel receipt is enough to
support expenses for business travel if it has allRecordkeeping of the following information. What if I Have Incomplete
• The name and location of the hotel.If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans- Records?
portation expenses, you must be able to prove • The dates you stayed there.(substantiate) certain elements of the expense. If you do not have complete records to prove an
• Separate amounts for charges such asThis section discusses the records you need to element of an expense, then you must prove the
lodging, meals, and telephone calls.keep to prove these expenses. element with:
Page 184 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 187 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 26-2. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements...
Place or Business Purpose and IF you have
Amount Time Description Business Relationshipexpenses for...
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense for travel, lodging, and returned of your travel (name expense or the business benefit gained or
and meals. Incidental for each trip of city, town, or expected to be gained.
expenses may be totaled in and number of other designation).
reasonable categories such days spent on Relationship: N/A
as taxis, fees and tips, etc. business.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. Incidental entertainment. or location of place expense or the business benefit gained or
expenses such as taxis, (Also see of entertainment. expected to be gained. For entertainment,
telephones, etc., may be Business Type of the nature of the business discussion or
totaled on a daily basis. Purpose.) entertainment if not activity. If the entertainment was directly
otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the
(Also see Business date, place, nature, and duration of the
Purpose.) business discussion, and the identities of
the persons who took part in both theGifts Cost of the gift. Date of the gift. Description of the business discussion and thegift. entertainment activity.
Relationship: Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or
other designations) about the recipients
that shows their business relationship to
you. For entertainment, you must also
prove that you or your employee was
present if the entertainment was a
business meal.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. For car expenses, expense. For destination. expense.
the cost of the car and any car expenses,
improvements, the date you the date of the Relationship: N/A
started using it for business, use of the car.
the mileage for each
business use, and the total
miles for the year.
• Your own written or oral statement, con- Combining items. You can make one daily reliability of information contained in your rec-
taining specific information about the ele- entry in your record for reasonable categories of ords, statements, testimony, or documentary
ment, and expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephone evidence before a deduction is allowed.
calls, or other incidental travel costs. Meals• Other supporting evidence that is sufficient should be in a separate category. You can in-to establish the element. How Long To Keepclude tips for meal-related services with the
Records and Receiptscosts of the meals.
Destroyed records. If you cannot produce a Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur- You must keep records as long as they may bereceipt because of reasons beyond your control, ing the course of a single event are considered a needed for the administration of any provision ofyou can prove a deduction by reconstructing single expense. For example, if during entertain- the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, thisyour records or expenses. Reasons beyond ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately for means you must keep your records that supportyour control include fire, flood, and other casu- each serving of refreshments, the total expense your deduction (or an item of income) for 3 yearsalty. for the refreshments is treated as a single ex- from the date you file the income tax return onpense. which the deduction is claimed. A return filed
early is considered filed on the due date. For aSeparating and Combining Allocating total cost. If you can prove the more complete explanation, get Publication 583,Expenses total cost of travel or entertainment but you can- Starting a Business and Keeping Records.not prove how much it cost for each person whoThis section explains when expenses must be participated in the event, you may have to allo-kept separate and when expenses can be com- Reimbursed for expenses. Employees whocate the total cost among you and your guestsbined. give their records and documentation to theiron a pro rata basis. An allocation would be employers and are reimbursed for their ex-needed, for example, if you did not have a busi-Separating expenses. Each separate pay- penses generally do not have to keep copies ofness relationship with all of your guests.ment is generally considered a separate ex- this information. However, you may have topense. For example, if you entertain a customer prove your expenses if any of the following con-If your return is examined. If your return isor client at dinner and then go to the theater, the ditions apply.examined, you may have to provide additionaldinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-
information to the IRS. This information could be • You claim deductions for expenses thatets are two separate expenses. You must record
needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy or are more than reimbursements.them separately in your records.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 185

Page 188 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your expenses are reimbursed under a expense you are claiming is for gifts, and the Your employer should tell you what method
nonaccountable plan. rules for certain individuals (such as performing of reimbursement is used and what records you
artists) discussed later under Special Rules do must provide.• Your employer does not use adequate ac- not apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 orcounting procedures to verify expense ac- 2106-EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your de-counts. ductible gifts directly on line 21 of Schedule A Accountable Plans
• You are related to your employer, as de- (Form 1040).
To be an accountable plan, your employer'sfined later under Related to employer. Statutory employees.   If you received a reimbursement or allowance arrangement mustForm W-2 and the ªStatutory employeeº box in include all of the following rules.See the next section, How To Report, for a box 13 was checked, report your income anddiscussion of reimbursements, adequate ac- expenses related to that income on Schedule C 1. Your expenses must have a business con-counting, and nonaccountable plans. or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form nection Ð that is, you must have paid or
2106 or 2106-EZ. incurred deductible expenses while per-Additional information. Chapter 5 of Publi-
Statutory employees include full-time life in- forming services as an employee of yourcation 463 has more information on recordkeep-
surance salespersons, certain agent or commis- employer.ing, including examples.
sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain 2. You must adequately account to your em-homeworkers. ployer for these expenses within a reason-
If you are entitled to a reimbursement able period of time.
from your employer but you do notHow To Report 3. You must return any excess reimburse-claim it, you cannot claim a deduction
CAUTION
!
ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-This section explains where and how to report riod of time.bursement applies.the expenses discussed in this chapter. It dis-
cusses reimbursements and how to treat them See Adequate Accounting  and Returning
under accountable and nonaccountable plans. It Reimbursement for personal expenses. If Excess Reimbursements, later.
also explains rules for independent contractors your employer reimburses you for nondeduct- An excess reimbursement or allowance is
and clients, fee-basis officials, certain perform- ible personal expenses, such as for vacation any amount you are paid that is more than theing artists, Armed Forces reservists, and certain trips, your employer must report the reimburse- business-related expenses that you adequatelydisabled employees. This section ends with an ment as wage income in box 1 of your Form accounted for to your employer.illustration of how to report travel, entertainment, W-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses. The definition of a reasonable period of timegift, and car expenses on Form 2106-EZ. depends on the facts and circumstances of your
Reimbursements situation. However, regardless of the facts andSelf-employed. You must report your income
circumstances of your situation, actions thatand expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form
This section explains what to do when you re- take place within the times specified in the fol-1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched-
ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any of lowing list will be treated as taking place within aule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not
the employee business expenses discussed in reasonable period of time.use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. See your form in-
this chapter.structions for information on how to complete • You receive an advance within 30 days ofIf you received an advance, allowance, oryour tax return. You can also find information in the time you have an expense.reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-Publication 535 if you are a sole proprietor, or in
port this amount and your expenses depends on • You adequately account for your ex-Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide, if you are
whether the reimbursement was paid to you penses within 60 days after they were paida farmer.
under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable or incurred.
Both self-employed and an employee.   If plan.
• You return any excess reimbursementyou are both self-employed and an employee, This section explains the two types of plans,
within 120 days after the expense wasyou must keep separate records for each busi- how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-
paid or incurred.ness activity. Report your business expenses for ing the amount of your expenses, and the tax
self-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F treatment of your reimbursements and ex- • You are given a periodic statement (at
(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your penses. least quarterly) that asks you to either re-
business expenses for your work as an em- turn or adequately account for outstandingNo reimbursement. You are not reimbursedployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed advances and you comply within 120 daysor given an allowance for your expenses if younext. of the statement.are paid a salary or commission with the under-
Employees. If you are an employee, you gen- standing that you will pay your own expenses. In
erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your Employee meets accountable plan rules. Ifthis situation, you have no reimbursement or
travel, transportation, and entertainment ex- you meet the three rules for accountable plans,allowance arrangement, and you do not have to
penses. However, you can use the shorter Form your employer should not include any reim-read this section on reimbursements. Instead,
2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all of bursements in your income in box 1 of yoursee Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later,
the following conditions. Form W-2. If your expenses equal your reim-for information on completing your tax return.
bursement, you do not complete Form 2106.• You are an employee deducting expenses Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. A You have no deduction since your expensesattributable to your job. reimbursement or other expense allowance ar- and reimbursement are equal.
rangement is a system or plan that an employer• You were not reimbursed by your em- If your employer included reimburse-uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-ployer for your expenses (amounts in- ments in box 1 of your Form W-2 andpenses, advances, reimbursements, andcluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not you meet all the rules for accountable
TIPamounts charged to the employer for employeeconsidered reimbursements). plans, ask your employer for a corrected Formbusiness expenses. Arrangements include per• If you claim car expenses, you use the W-2.diem and car allowances.standard mileage rate.   A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of
Accountable plan rules not met. Evendaily reimbursement your employer gives youFor more information on how to report your though you are reimbursed under an accounta-for your lodging, meal, and incidental expensesexpenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see ble plan, some of your expenses may not meetwhen you are away from home on business.Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later. all the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet all(The term ªincidental expensesº is defined ear-
three rules for accountable plans are treated asGifts.  If you did not receive any reimburse- lier under Meals and Incidental Expenses.) A car
having been reimbursed under a nonaccount-ments (or the reimbursements were all included allowance is an amount your employer gives
able plan (discussed later).in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only business you for the business use of your car.
Page 186 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 189 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- • Your employer reasonably limits payments available. (Employers can get Publication 1542
of your expenses to those that are ordi- on the Internet, which gives the rates in thepenses. You may be reimbursed under your
nary and necessary in the conduct of the continental United States for the current year.)employer's accountable plan for expenses re-
trade or business.lated to that employer's business, some of which The standard meal allowance. The stan-are deductible as employee business expenses • The allowance is similar in form to and not dard meal allowance (discussed earlier) is theand some of which are not deductible. The reim- more than the federal rate (discussed federal rate for meals and incidental expenses
bursements you receive for the nondeductible later). (M&IE). The rate for most small localities in the
expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountable United States is $39 a day from January 1• You prove the time (dates), place, andplans, and they are treated as paid under a through December 31, 2008. Most major citiesbusiness purpose of your expenses tononaccountable plan. and many other localities qualify for higher rates.your employer (as explained in Table
The rates for all localities within the continental26-2) within a reasonable period of time.Example. Your employer's plan reimburses United States are listed in Publication 1542. You• You are not related to your employer (asyou for travel expenses while away from home can also find this information on the Internet atdefined next). If you are related to youron business and also for meals when you work www.gsa.gov.employer, you must be able to prove yourlate at the office, even though you are not away You receive an allowance only for meals andexpenses to the IRS even if you have al-from home. The part of the arrangement that incidental expenses when your employer doesready adequately accounted to your em-reimburses you for the nondeductible meals one of the following.ployer and returned any excesswhen you work late at the office is treated as
reimbursement. • Provides you with lodging (furnishes it inpaid under a nonaccountable plan.
kind).If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allow-The employer makes the decision ance practices are not based on reasonably • Reimburses you, based on your receipts,whether to reimburse employees accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec- for the actual cost of your lodging.under an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIP ognition of cost differences in different areas forcountable plan. If you are an employee who • Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for yourper diem amounts), you will not be considered toreceives payments under a nonaccountable lodging.have accounted to your employer. In this case,plan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay- you must be able to prove your expenses to the • Does not have a reasonable belief thatments under an accountable plan by voluntarily IRS. you had (or will have) lodging expenses,accounting to your employer for the expenses
such as when you stay with friends or rela-and voluntarily returning excess reimburse- Related to employer. You are related to your tives or sleep in the cab of your truck.ments to the employer. employer if: 
• Figures the allowance on a basis similar to
1. Your employer is your brother or sister, that used in computing your compensa-
half brother or half sister, spouse, ances- tion, such as number of hours worked orAdequate Accounting
tor, or lineal descendant, miles traveled.
One of the rules for an accountable plan is that 2. Your employer is a corporation in whichyou must adequately account to your employer High-low rate. This is a simplified methodyou own, directly or indirectly, more thanfor your expenses. You adequately account by of computing the federal per diem rate for travel10% in value of the outstanding stock, orgiving your employer a statement of expense, within the continental United States. It elimi-
3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-an account book, a diary, or a similar record in nates the need to keep a current list of the per
duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,which you entered each expense at or near the diem rate for each city.
a trust, and your employer.time you had it, along with documentary evi- Under the high-low method, the per diem
dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage, amount for travel during January through Sep-You may be considered to indirectly own stock,
and other employee business expenses. (See tember of 2008 is $237 (including $58 for M&IE)for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in a
Table 26-2, earlier, for details you need to enter corporation, partnership, estate, or trust that for certain high-cost locations. All other areas
in your record and documents you need to prove owns the stock or if a member of your family or have a per diem amount of $152 (including $45
certain expenses.) A per diem or car allowance your partner owns the stock. for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542
satisfies the adequate accounting requirement which gives the areas eligible for the $237 perThe federal rate. The federal rate can be fig-under certain conditions. See Per Diem and Car diem amount under the high-low method for allured using any one of the following methods.Allowances, later. or part of this period.)
You must account for all amounts you re- 1. For per diem amounts: Effective October 1, 2008, the per diemceived from your employer during the year as rate for certain high-cost locations in-a. The regular federal per diem rate.advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This creased to $256 (including $58 for
CAUTION
!
includes amounts you charged to your employer b. The standard meal allowance. M&IE). The rate for all other locations increased
by credit card or other method. You must give to $158 (including $45 for M&IE). However, anc. The high-low rate.your employer the same type of records and employer can continue to use the rates de-
supporting information that you would have to scribed in the preceding paragraph for the re-2. For car expenses:give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deduction mainder of 2008 if those rates and locations are
on your return. You must pay back the amount of used consistently during October, November,a. The standard mileage rate.
any reimbursement or other expense allowance and December for all employees. Employersb. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).for which you do not adequately account or that who did not use the high-low method during the
is more than the amount for which you ac- first 9 months of 2008 cannot begin to use it
counted. For per diem amounts, use the rate in before 2009. See Revenue Procedure 2008-59
effect for the area where you stop for for more information. Also see Publication 1542
sleep or rest. on the Internet at www.irs.gov.
TIP
Per Diem and Car Allowances
Prorating the standard meal allowance onRegular federal per diem rate. The regular
If your employer reimburses you for your ex- partial days of travel. The standard meal al-federal per diem rate is the highest amount that
penses using a per diem or car allowance, you lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If youthe federal government will pay to its employees
can generally use the allowance as proof of the travel for part of a day, such as on the days youfor lodging, meal, and incidental expenses (or
amount of your expenses. A per diem or car depart and return, you must prorate the full-daymeal and incidental expenses only) while they
allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re- M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-are traveling away from home in a particular
quirements for the amount of your expenses ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate orarea. The rates are different for different loca-
the high-low rate.only if all of the following conditions apply. tions. Your employer should have these rates
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 187

Page 190 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can use either of the following methods employer's accountable plan, she accounts for amount for which you did not adequately ac-
to figure the federal M&IE for that day. the time (dates), place, and business purpose of count within a reasonable period of time. For
each trip. Her employer pays her a mileage example, if you received a travel advance and
1. Method 1: allowance of 40 cents a mile. you did not spend all the money on busi-
ness-related expenses, or you do not have proofSince Nicole's $5,491 expense computeda. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the of all your expenses, you have an excess reim-under the standard mileage rate (4,500 miles ×standard meal allowance amount for bursement.501/2 cents + 5,500 miles ×  581/2 cents) is morethat day.
than her $4,000 reimbursement (10,000 miles × ªAdequate accountingº and ªreasonable pe-
b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of the 40 cents), she itemizes her deductions to claim riod of timeº were discussed earlier in this chap-standard meal allowance amount for the excess expense. Nicole completes Form ter.the preceding day. 2106 (showing all of her expenses and reim-
bursements) and enters $1,491 ($5,491 − Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al- $4,000) as an itemized deduction. vance if your employer provides you with anlowance using any method that you con- expense allowance before you actually have theAllowance more than the federal rate. Ifsistently apply and that is in accordance expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-your allowance is more than the federal rate,with reasonable business practice. pected to be no more than your expense. Underyour employer must include the allowance
an accountable plan, you are required to ade-amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of yourThe standard mileage rate. This is a set quately account to your employer for this ad-Form W-2. This amount is not taxable. However,rate per mile that you can use to compute your vance and to return any excess within athe excess allowance will be included in box 1 ofdeductible car expenses. For 2008, the standard reasonable period of time.your Form W-2. You must report this part of yourmileage rate for the cost of operating your car is:
allowance as if it were wage income. If you do not adequately account for or do not• 501/2 cents per mile for the period January return any excess advance within a reasonableIf your actual expenses are less than or1 through June 30, 2008, and period of time, the amount you do not accountequal to the federal rate, you do not complete
for or return will be treated as having been paid• 581/2 cents per mile for the period July 1 Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses on
under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).through December 31, 2008. your return.
However, if your actual expenses are more Unproven amounts. If you do not proveFixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is an than the federal rate, you can complete Form that you actually traveled on each day for whichallowance your employer may use to reimburse 2106 and deduct those excess expenses. You you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-your car expenses. Under this method, your must report on Form 2106 your reimbursements ing the elements described in Table 26-2), youemployer pays an allowance that includes a up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of your must return this unproved amount of the travelcombination of payments covering fixed and va- Form W-2) and all your expenses. You should advance within a reasonable period of time. Ifriable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to be able to prove these amounts to the IRS. you do not do this, the unproved amount will becover your variable operating costs (such as considered paid under a nonaccountable plangas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your Example. Joe lives and works in Austin. In (discussed later).fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay- May his employer sent him to San Diego for 4ments), insurance, etc.). If your employer Per diem allowance more than federal rate.days and paid the hotel directly for Joe's hotelchooses to use this method, your employer will If your employer's accountable plan pays you anbill. The employer reimbursed Joe $75 a day forrequest the necessary records from you. allowance that is higher than the federal rate,his meals and incidental expenses. The federal
you do not have to return the difference betweenrate for San Diego is $64 a day.Reporting your expenses with a per diem or the two rates for the period you can prove busi-Joe can prove that his actual meal expensescar allowance. If your reimbursement is in the ness-related travel expenses. However, the dif-totaled $380. His employer's accountable planform of an allowance received under an ac- ference will be reported as wages on your Formwill not pay more than $75 a day for travel to Sancountable plan, the following facts affect your W-2. This excess amount is considered paidDiego, so Joe does not give his employer thereporting. under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).records that prove that he actually spent $380.
• The federal rate. However, he does account for the time, place, Example. Your employer sends you on aand business purpose of the trip. This is Joe's• Whether the allowance or your actual ex- 5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2008only business trip this year.penses were more than the federal rate. and gives you a $400 ($80 ×  5 days) advance toJoe was reimbursed $300 ($75 ×  4 days), cover your meals and incidental expenses. TheThe following discussions explain where to re- which is $44 more than the federal rate of $256 federal per diem for meals and incidental ex-port your expenses depending upon how the ($64 ×  4 days). His employer includes the $44 as penses for Phoenix is $59. Your trip lasts only 3amount of your allowance compares to the fed- income on Joe's Form W-2 in box 1. His em- days. Under your employer's accountable plan,eral rate. ployer also enters $256 in box 12 of Joe's Form you must return the $160 ($80 ×  2 days) ad-W-2.Allowance less than or equal to the federal vance for the 2 days you did not travel. For the 3rate. If your allowance is less than or equal to Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de- days you did travel you do not have to return thethe federal rate, the allowance will not be in- ductible expenses. He enters the total of his $63 difference between the allowance you re-cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do not actual expenses for the year ($380) on Form ceived and the federal rate for Phoenix (($80 −need to report the related expenses or the allow- 2106. He also enters the reimbursements that $59) ×  3 days). However, the $63 will be re-ance on your return if your expenses are equal were not included in his income ($256). His total ported on your Form W-2 as wages.to or less than the allowance. deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is
 However, if your actual expenses are more $124. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-
than your allowance, you can complete Form reimbursed meals and entertainment, he will Nonaccountable Plans2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched- include the balance, $62, as an itemized deduc-
ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex- tion on Schedule A (Form 1040). A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or
penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the expense allowance arrangement that does not
total amount of your expenses and reimburse- meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier
ments for the entire year. If you are using the Returning Excess under Accountable Plans.
standard meal allowance or the standard mile- Reimbursements In addition, even if your employer has anage rate, you do not have to prove that amount. accountable plan, the following payments will beUnder an accountable plan, you are required to treated as being paid under a nonaccountableExample. Nicole drives 10,000 miles in return any excess reimbursement or other ex- plan.2008 for business (4,500 miles from January 1 pense allowances for your business expenses
• Excess reimbursements you fail to returnthrough June 30, 2008, and 5,500 miles from to the person paying the reimbursement or al-
to your employer.July 1 through December 31, 2008). Under her lowance. Excess reimbursement means any
Page 188 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 191 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 26-3. Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses and Completing FormsReimbursements 2106 and 2106-EZ
IF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee This section briefly describes how employees
other expense allowance) reports on Form reports on complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 26-3
arrangement is under: W-2: Form 2106: * explains what the employer reports on Form
W-2 and what the employee reports on FormAn accountable plan with: 2106. The instructions for the forms have more
information on completing them.Actual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount.
Adequate accounting made and excess If you are self-employed, do not file
returned. Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report your
expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F
CAUTION
!Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount No amount. (Form 1040). See the instructions for the formAdequate accounting and return of as wages in box 1. that you must file.excess both required but excess not
returned. Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use the
shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employeePer diem or mileage allowance up to the No amount. All expenses and business expenses. You can use this form if youfederal rate: reimbursements only meet all of the following conditions.Adequate accounting made and excess if excess expenses
• You are an employee deducting expensesreturned. are claimed.
attributable to your job.Otherwise, form is not
filed. • You were not reimbursed by your em-
ployer for your expenses (amounts in-Per diem or mileage allowance up to the The excess amount No amount. cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are notfederal rate: as wages in box 1. considered reimbursements).Adequate accounting and return of The amount up to
• If you are claiming car expenses, you useexcess both required but excess not the federal rate is
the standard mileage rate.returned. reported only in box
12Ðit is not
reported in box 1. Car expenses. If you used a car to perform
your job as an employee, you may be able toPer diem or mileage allowance exceeds The excess amount All expenses (and deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-the federal rate: as wages in box 1. reimbursement ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and thenAdequate accounting up to the federal The amount up to reported on Form claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A.rate only and excess not returned. the federal rate is W-2, box 12) only if Car expenses using the standard mileage ratereported only in box expenses in excess of can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com-12Ðit is not the federal rate are pleting Part II and Part I, line 1.reported in box 1. claimed. Otherwise,
Transportation expenses. Show your trans-form is not required.
portation expenses that did not involve overnight
A nonaccountable plan with: travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or on
Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on thisEither adequate accounting or return of The entire amount All expenses. line business expenses you have for parkingexcess, or both, not required by plan as wages in box 1. fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-
ating your car or expenses of commuting be-No reimbursement plan: The entire amount All expenses.
tween your home and work.as wages in box 1.
Employee business expenses other than* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.
meals and entertainment. Show your other
employee business expenses on Form 2106,
lines 3 and 4, Column A, or Form 2106-EZ, lines• Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- expenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis-
3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals andcussed earlier under Entertainment Expenses.penses related to your employer's busi-
entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex-Also, your total expenses will be subject to theness. See Reimbursement of
penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui-2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that appliesnondeductible expenses earlier under Ac-
tion and books), office-in-the-home expenses,to most miscellaneous itemized deductions oncountable Plans.
and trade and professional publications.Schedule A (Form 1040).
If you are not sure if the reimbursement or If line 4 expenses are the only ones you
Example. Kim's employer gives her $1,000expense allowance arrangement is an account- are claiming, you received no reim-
a month ($12,000 for the year) for her businessable or nonaccountable plan, ask your em- bursements (or the reimbursements
TIP
expenses. Kim does not have to provide anyployer. were all included in box 1 of your Form W-2),
proof of her expenses to her employer, and Kim and the Special Rules  discussed later do not
can keep any funds that she does not spend. apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 orReporting your expenses under a nonac- Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac- 2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly oncountable plan. Your employer will combine countable plan. Her employer will include the Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. List the typethe amount of any reimbursement or other ex- $12,000 on Kim's Form W-2 as if it were wages. and amount of each expense on the dotted linespense allowance paid to you under a nonac- If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses, and include the total on line 21.countable plan with your wages, salary, or other she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and
pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 itemize her deductions. Meal and entertainment expenses. Showof your Form W-2. the full amount of your expenses for busi-
 You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ ness-related meals and entertainment on Form
and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex- 2106, line 5, Column B. Include meals while
penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en- away from your tax home overnight and other
tertainment. Your meal and entertainment business meals and entertainment. Enter 50%
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 189

Page 192 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the line 8, column B, meal and entertainment After you complete the form. After you have How to report. If you have reserve-related
completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, follow travel that takes you more than 100 miles fromexpenses on line 9, Column B.
the directions on that form to deduct your ex- home, you should first complete Form 2106 orIf you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the full
penses on the appropriate line of your tax return. Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses foramount of your meals and entertainment on the
For most taxpayers, this is line 21 of Schedule A reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up toline to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by
(Form 1040). However, if you are a government the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or50%. Enter the result on line 5.
official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist, Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040,
Hours of service limits. If you are subject an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em- line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on
to the Department of Transportation's ªhours of ployee with impairment-related work expenses, Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, and
serviceº limits, use 80% instead of 50% for see Special Rules, later. deduct the balance as an itemized deduction on
meals while away from your tax home. Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21.
Limits on employee business expenses. You cannot deduct expenses of travel that
Your employee business expenses may be sub-Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line does not take you more than 100 miles from
ject to any of the three limits described next.7, the amounts your employer (or third party) home as an adjustment to gross income. In-
These limits are figured in the following order onreimbursed you that were not included in box 1 stead, you must complete Form 2106 or
the specified form.of your Form W-2. (You cannot use Form 2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040),2106-EZ.) This includes any reimbursement re- 1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer- line 21.ported under code L in box 12 of Form W-2. tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-
ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, youAllocating your reimbursement. If you Officials paid on a fee basis. Certain
figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 ofwere reimbursed under an accountable plan and fee-basis officials can claim their employee busi-
Form 2106-EZ. See 50% Limit under Entertain-want to deduct excess expenses that were not ness expenses whether or not they itemize their
ment Expenses, earlier.reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim- other deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
bursement. This is necessary if your employer Fee-basis officials are persons who are em-2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-
pays your reimbursement in the following man- ployed by a state or local government and whotions. If you are an employee, deduct em-
ner: are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. Theyployee business expenses (as figured on Form
can deduct their business expenses in perform-2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 21 of Schedule A• Pays you a single amount that covers ing services in that job as an adjustment to gross(Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de-meals and/or entertainment, as well as income rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedductions, including employee business ex-other business expenses, and deduction.penses, are subject to a 2% limit. This limit is
If you are a fee-basis official, include your• Does not clearly identify how much is for figured on line 26 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
employee business expenses from Form 2106,deductible meals and/or entertainment. 3. Limit on total itemized deductions. If line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Form 1040,You must allocate that single payment so that your adjusted gross income (line 38 of Form line 24.you know how much to enter on Form 2106, line 1040) is more than $159,950 ($79,975 if you are
7, Column A and Column B. Expenses of certain performing artists. Ifmarried filing separately), the total of certain
you are a performing artist, you may qualify toitemized deductions, including employee busi-
Example. Rob's employer paid him an ex- deduct your employee business expenses as anness expenses, may be limited. See chapter 29
pense allowance of $12,000 this year under an adjustment to gross income rather than as afor more information on this limit.
accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con- miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,
sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for enter- you must meet all of the following requirements. Special Rulestainment and car expenses. Rob's employer did
1. During the tax year, you perform servicesnot clearly show how much of the $7,000 was for This section discusses special rules that apply in the performing arts as an employee forthe cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu- to Armed Forces reservists, government offi- at least two employers.ally spent $14,000 during the year ($5,500 for cials who are paid on a fee basis, performingairfare, $4,500 for entertainment, and $4,000 for 2. You receive at least $200 each from anyartists, and disabled employees with impair-car expenses). two of these employers.ment-related work expenses.
Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden- 3. Your related performing-arts business ex-tified, Rob knows that $5,200 of the payment Armed Forces reservists traveling more than penses are more than 10% of your grossgoes in Column A, line 7 of Form 2106. To 100 miles from home. If you are a member of income from the performance of thosea reserve component of the Armed Forces of theallocate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses the services.United States and you travel more than 100worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.
miles away from home in connection with your 4. Your adjusted gross income is not moreHis completed worksheet follows.
performance of services as a member of the than $16,000 before deducting these busi-
1. Enter the total amount of reserves, you can deduct your travel expenses ness expenses.
reimbursements your employer gave as an adjustment to gross income rather than as
you that were not reported to you in a miscellaneous itemized deduction. The Special rules for married persons. If you
box 1 of Form W-2 ........... . $7,000 amount of expenses you can deduct as an ad- are married, you must file a joint return unless
2. Enter the total amount of your justment to gross income is limited to the regular you lived apart from your spouse at all times
expenses for the periods covered by federal per diem rate (for lodging, meals, and during the tax year.this reimbursement ........... . 8,500 incidental expenses) and the standard mileage If you file a joint return, you must figure re-3. Of the amount on line 2, enter your rate (for car expenses) plus any parking fees, quirements (1), (2), and (3) separately for bothtotal expense for meals and ferry fees, and tolls. The federal rate is explained you and your spouse. However, requirement (4)entertainment .............. . 4,500 earlier under Per Diem and Car Allowances. Any applies to your and your spouse's combined4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the expenses in excess of these amounts can be adjusted gross income.result as a decimal (rounded to at claimed only as a miscellaneous itemized de-least three places) ........... . .529 Where to report.  If you meet all of theduction subject to the 2% limit. above requirements, you should first complete5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter the
Member of a reserve component. You are Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include yourresult here and in Column B, line 7 3,703
a member of a reserve component of the Armed performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 of6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter the
Forces of the United States if you are in the Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106-EZ in the totalresult here and in Column A, line 7 $3,297
Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast on line 24 of Form 1040.
On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297 Guard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the If you do not meet all of the above require-
($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) in United States, the Air National Guard of the ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-
Column A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in Column United States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub- penses as an adjustment to gross income.
B. lic Health Service. Instead, you must complete Form 2106 or
Page 190 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 193 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2106-EZ and deduct your employee business Bill leaves his home on Long Island on Monday be $10,820 (11,000 ×  50 1/2 cents per mile
expenses as an itemized deduction on Schedule morning and drives to Albany to exhibit the ($5,555) + 9,000 ×  581/2 cents per mile ($5,265)).
A (Form 1040), line 21. Fashion line for 3 days to prospective custom- His total employee business expenses are
ers. Then he drives to Troy to show Fashion's shown in the following table.Impairment-related work expenses of dis- new line of merchandise to Town Departmentabled employees. If you are an employee  Type of Expense AmountStore, an old customer. While in Troy, he talkswith a physical or mental disability, your impair- with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for Town Parking fees and tolls ... . $ 520ment-related work expenses are not subject to Department Store, to discuss the new line. He Car expenses ......... . 10,820the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that ap- later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to dinner Meals .............. . 3,861plies to most other employee business ex- to discuss Attire Co.'s buying Fashion's new line Lodging, laundry, dry  penses. After you complete Form 2106 or of clothing. cleaning ............ . 18,3182106-EZ, enter your impairment-related work Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2005. Entertainment ........ . 3,250expenses from Form 2106, line 10, or Form He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex- Gifts, education, etc. .... . 6502106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040), pense purposes. He records his total mileage, Total .............. . $37,419line 28, and identify the type and amount of this business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for theexpense on the dotted line next to line 28. Enter Bill received an allowance of $33,000year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-your employee business expenses that are un- ($2,750 per month) to help offset his expenses.nent information in a travel expense log (notrelated to your disability from Form 2106, line Bill did not have to account to his employer forshown). He obtains receipts for his expenses for10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A, line the reimbursement, and the $33,000 was in-lodging and for any other expenses of $75 or21. cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W-2.more.Impairment-related work expenses are your Because Bill's reimbursement was includedDuring the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000allowable expenses for attendant care at your in his income and he is using the standard mile-miles of which 20,000 miles were for businessworkplace and other expenses you have in con- age rate for his car expenses, he files Form(11,000 miles from January 1 through June 30,nection with your workplace that are necessary 2106-EZ with his tax return. His filled-in form isand 9,000 miles from July 1 through Decemberfor you to be able to work. For more information, shown on the next page.31, 2008). He answers all the questions in Part IIsee chapter 21. of Form 2106-EZ and figures his car expense to
Illustrated Example
Bill Wilson is an employee of Fashion Clothing
Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a typical travel week,
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 191

Page 194 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
520
18,318
33,864
13 2005
20,000 2,600 2,400
3,556
650
7,111
OMB No. 1545-0074
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Attachment
Sequence No. 129A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and then go to line 1a below.1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1c through 3. Do not include meals and
entertainment
4
4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ × 50% (.50). (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred
while away from home on business by 80% (.80) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1c through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line
21 (or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR, line 9) ). (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or
local government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See
the instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2008)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate
for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2008.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements for this purpose).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2008, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2008 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
1c
2008
Multiply business miles driven before July 1, 2008, by 50.5¢ (.505)
Multiply business miles driven after June 30, 2008, by 58.5¢ (.585)
Add lines 1a and 1b
a
b
c
1b
1a
10,820
5,555
5,265
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
Page 192 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 195 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your work-related education expenses may Use Figure 27-A, later, as a quick check to
also qualify you for other tax benefits, such as see if your education qualifies.
the tuition and fees deduction (see chapter 19)
27. and the Hope and lifetime learning credits (see Education Required bychapter 35 ). You may qualify for these other
benefits even if you do not meet the require- Employer or by Law
ments listed earlier.
Tax Benefits for Once you have met the minimum educationalAlso, keep in mind that your work-related
requirements for your job, your employer or theeducation expenses may qualify you to claim
law may require you to get more education. Thismore than one tax benefit. Generally, you mayWork-Related
additional education is qualifying work-relatedclaim any number of benefits as long as you use
education if all three of the following require-different expenses to figure each one.
Education ments are met.When you figure your taxes, you may
• It is required for you to keep your presentwant to compare these tax benefits so
salary, status, or job,you can choose the method(s) that
TIP
give you the lowest tax liability. First, figure yourWhat's New • The requirement serves a business pur-taxes using the expenses as business deduc- pose of your employer, andtions. Then, figure your taxes again using any ofStandard mileage rate. Generally, if you the other deductions and credits for which you • The education is not part of a program thatclaim a business deduction for work-related ed- qualify. You may find that a combination of will qualify you for a new trade or busi-ucation and you drive your car to and from credit(s) and deduction(s) gives you the lowest ness.school, the amount you can deduct for miles tax.driven from January 1, 2008, through June 30,
When you get more education than your em-2008, is 50 1/2 cents per mile. The amount you
ployer or the law requires, the additional educa-can deduct for miles driven from July 1, 2008, Useful Items tion can be qualifying work-related educationthrough December 31, 2008, is 58 1/2 cents per You may want to see: only if it maintains or improves skills required inmile. This is up from 481/2 cents per mile in 2007.
your present work. See Education To MaintainFor more information, see Transportation Ex- Publicationpenses under What Expenses Can Be De- or Improve Skills, below.
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carducted.
Expenses Example. You are a teacher who has satis-
fied the minimum requirements for teaching.❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education
Your employer requires you to take an additional
college course each year to keep your teachingForm (and Instructions)Reminder
job. If the courses will not qualify you for a new
❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses trade or business, they are qualifyingLimit on itemized deductions. If your ad- work-related education even if you eventually❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employeejusted gross income for 2008 is more than receive a master's degree and an increase inBusiness Expenses$159,950 ($79,975 if you are married filing sep-
salary because of this extra education.arately), your itemized deductions may be lim- ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
ited. See chapter 29 for more information about Deductions
this limit. Education To Maintain
or Improve Skills
If your education is not required by your em-
Qualifying Work-Introduction ployer or the law, it can be qualifying work-
related education only if it maintains or improvesThis chapter discusses work-related education Related Education skills needed in your present work. This couldexpenses that you may be able to deduct as
include refresher courses, courses on currentbusiness expenses. You can deduct the costs of qualifying work- developments, and academic or vocationalTo claim such a deduction, you must: related education as business expenses. This is courses.education that meets at least one of the follow-• Be working, ing two tests. Example. You repair televisions, radios,• Itemize your deductions on Schedule A • The education is required by your em- and stereo systems for XYZ Store. To keep up(Form 1040) if you are an employee, ployer or the law to keep your present with the latest changes, you take special• File Schedule C (Form 1040), Schedule salary, status, or job. The required educa- courses in radio and stereo service. TheseC-EZ (Form 1040), or Schedule F (Form tion must serve a bona fide business pur- courses maintain and improve skills required in1040) if you are self-employed, and pose of your employer. your work.
• Have expenses for education that meet • The education maintains or improves skills
the requirements discussed under Qualify- Maintaining skills vs. qualifying for new job.needed in your present work.
ing Work-Related Education. Education to maintain or improve skills needed
However, even if the education meets one or in your present work is not qualifying education if
If you are an employee and able to itemize both of the above tests, it is not qualifying it will also qualify you for a new trade or busi-
your deductions, you may be able to claim a work-related education if it: ness.
deduction for the expenses you pay for your • Is needed to meet the minimum educa- Temporary absence. If you stop workingwork-related education. Your deduction will be tional requirements of your present trade for a year or less in order to get education tothe amount by which your qualifying or business, or maintain or improve skills needed in your pres-work-related education expenses plus other job
ent work and then return to the same generaland certain miscellaneous expenses is greater • Is part of a program of study that will qual-
type of work, your absence is considered tempo-than 2% of your adjusted gross income. See ify you for a new trade or business.
rary. Education that you get during a temporarychapter 28.
absence is qualifying work-related education if itIf you are self-employed, you deduct your You can deduct the costs of qualifying
maintains or improves skills needed in yourexpenses for qualifying work-related education work-related education as a business expense
present work.directly from your self-employment income. even if the education could lead to a degree.
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 193

Page 196 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You quit your biology research If there are no requirements, you will have If you have all the required education except
the fifth year, you have met the minimum educa-met the minimum educational requirementsjob to become a full-time biology graduate stu-
tional requirements. The fifth year of training iswhen you become a faculty member. You gen-dent for one year. If you return to work in biology
qualifying work-related education unless it iserally will be considered a faculty member whenresearch after completing the courses, the edu-
part of a program of study that will qualify you forone or more of the following occurs.cation is related to your present work even if you
a new trade or business.do not go back to work with the same employer. • You have tenure.
Indefinite absence. If you stop work for • Your years of service count toward ob- Example 2. Assume the same facts as inmore than a year, your absence from your job is taining tenure. Example 1 except that you have a bachelor's
considered indefinite. Education during an in- degree and only six professional education• You have a vote in faculty decisions.definite absence, even if it maintains or im- courses. The additional four education courses
proves skills needed in the work from which you • Your school makes contributions for you to can be qualifying work-related education. Al-
are absent, is considered to qualify you for a a retirement plan other than social security though you do not have all the required courses,
new trade or business. Therefore, it is not quali- you have already met the minimum educationalor a similar program.
fying work-related education. requirements.
Example 1. The law in your state requires Example 3. Assume the same facts as inEducation To Meet beginning secondary school teachers to have a Example 1 except that you are hired with only 3bachelor's degree, including 10 professional ed-Minimum Requirements years of college. The courses you take that leaducation courses. In addition, to keep the job a to a bachelor's degree (including those in edu-teacher must complete a fifth year of trainingEducation you need to meet the minimum edu- cation) are not qualifying work-related educa-within 10 years from the date of hire. If thecational requirements for your present trade or tion. They are needed to meet the minimumemploying school certifies to the state Depart-business is not qualifying work-related educa- educational requirements for employment as ament of Education that qualified teachers cannottion. The minimum educational requirements teacher.
be found, the school can hire persons with only 3are determined by:
years of college. However, to keep their jobs, Example 4. You have a bachelor's degree• Laws and regulations, these teachers must get a bachelor's degree and you work as a temporary instructor at a
and the required professional education courses• Standards of your profession, trade, or university. At the same time, you take graduate
within 3 years.business, and courses toward an advanced degree. The rules
Under these facts, the bachelor's degree, of the university state that you can become a• Your employer. whether or not it includes the 10 professional faculty member only if you get a graduate de-
education courses, is considered the minimum gree. Also, you can keep your job as an instruc-Once you have met the minimum educational educational requirement for qualification as a tor only as long as you show satisfactoryrequirements that were in effect when you were teacher in your state. progress toward getting this degree. You havehired, you do not have to meet any new mini-
mum educational requirements. This means
that if the minimum requirements change after
you were hired, any education you need to meet
the new requirements can be qualifying educa-
tion.
You have not necessarily met the mini-
mum educational requirements of your
trade or business simply because you
CAUTION
!
are already doing the work.
Example 1. You are a full-time engineering
student. Although you have not received your
degree or certification, you work part time as an
engineer for a firm that will employ you as a
full-time engineer after you finish college. Al-
though your college engineering courses im-
prove your skills in your present job, they are
also needed to meet the minimum job require-
ments for a full-time engineer. The education is
not qualifying work-related education.
Example 2. You are an accountant and you
have met the minimum educational require-
ments of your employer. Your employer later
changes the minimum educational requirements
and requires you to take college courses to keep
your job. These additional courses can be quali-
fying work-related education because you have
already satisfied the minimum requirements that
were in effect when you were hired.
Requirements for Teachers
States or school districts usually set the mini-
mum educational requirements for teachers.
The requirement is the college degree or the
minimum number of college hours usually re-
quired of a person hired for that position.
EPS File Name: 10311G46 Size: Width = 29.0 picas, Depth = 31.3 picas
Figure 27-A. Does Your Work-Related Education Qualify?
Start Here
Yes
Is the education required
by your employer or the
law to keep your present
salary, status, or job?
Does the requirement
serve a bona fide
business requirement of
your employer?
Is the education needed to meet
the minimum educational
requirements of your present
trade or business?
Is the education part of a
program of study that will
qualify you for a new
trade or business?
Does the education
maintain or improve skills
needed in your present
work?
Your education is not
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Your education is
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
Page 194 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 197 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not met the minimum educational requirements deduct the costs of returning from school toBar or CPA Review Course
home.to qualify you as a faculty member. The gradu-
Review courses to prepare for the bar examina-ate courses are not qualifying work-related edu- Temporary basis. You go to school on ation or the certified public accountant (CPA) ex-cation. temporary basis if either of the following situa-amination are not qualifying work-related tions applies to you.education. They are part of a program of study
Certification in a new state. Once you have that can qualify you for a new profession. 1. Your attendance at school is realisticallymet the minimum educational requirements for expected to last 1 year or less and doesteachers for your state, you are considered to indeed last for 1 year or less.Teaching and Related Dutieshave met the minimum educational require-
2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis-ments in all states. This is true even if you must All teaching and related duties are considered tically expected to last 1 year or less, butget additional education to be certified in an- the same general kind of work. A change in at a later date your attendance is reasona-other state. Any additional education you need duties in any of the following ways is not consid- bly expected to last more than 1 year. Youris qualifying work-related education. You have ered a change to a new business. attendance is temporary up to the date youalready met the minimum requirements for determine it will last more than 1 year.• Elementary school teacher to secondaryteaching. Teaching in another state is not a new school teacher.trade or business.
Note. If you are in either situation (1) or (2)• Teacher of one subject, such as biology,
above, your attendance is not temporary if factsto teacher of another subject, such as art.Example. You hold a permanent teaching
and circumstances indicate otherwise.certificate in State A and are employed as a • Classroom teacher to guidance counselor.
teacher in that state for several years. You move Attendance not on a temporary basis.• Classroom teacher to school administra-to State B and are promptly hired as a teacher. You do not go to school on a temporary basis iftor.You are required, however, to complete certain either of the following situations apply to you.
prescribed courses to get a permanent teaching 1. Your attendance at school is realisticallycertificate in State B. These additional courses expected to last more than 1 year. It doesare qualifying work-related education because not matter how long you actually attend.the teaching position in State B involves the What Expenses Can Be
2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis-same general kind of work for which you were
tically expected to last 1 year or less, butDeductedqualified in State A.
at a later date your attendance is reasona-
bly expected to last more than 1 year. YourIf your education meets the requirements de-Education That attendance is not temporary after the datescribed earlier under Qualifying Work-Related
Education, you can generally deduct your edu- you determine it will last more than 1 year.Qualifies You for a
cation expenses as business expenses. If you
New Trade or Business are not self-employed, you can deduct business
expenses only if you itemize your deductions. Deductible TransportationEducation that is part of a program of study that You cannot deduct expenses related to
will qualify you for a new trade or business is not Expensestax-exempt and excluded income.
qualifying work-related education. This is true
If you are regularly employed and go directlyDeductible expenses. The following educa-even if you do not plan to enter that trade or from home to school on a temporary basis, yoution expenses can be deducted.business. can deduct the round-trip costs of transportation• Tuition, books, supplies, lab fees, and sim-If you are an employee, a change of duties between your home and school. This is trueilar items.that involves the same general kind of work is regardless of the location of the school, the
not a new trade or business. • Certain transportation and travel costs. distance traveled, or whether you attend school
on nonwork days.• Other education expenses, such as costsExample 1. You are an accountant. Your Transportation expenses include the actualof research and typing when writing a pa-employer requires you to get a law degree at costs of bus, subway, cab, or other fares, as wellper as part of an educational program.your own expense. You register at a law school as the costs of using your car. Transportation
for the regular curriculum that leads to a law expenses do not include amounts spent forNondeductible expenses. You cannot de-degree. Even if you do not intend to become a travel, meals, or lodging while you are awayduct personal or capital expenses. For example,lawyer, the education is not qualifying because from home overnight.you cannot deduct the dollar value of vacationthe law degree will qualify you for a new trade or time or annual leave you take to attend classes. Example 1. You regularly work in a nearbybusiness. This amount is a personal expense. town, and go directly from work to home. You
also attend school every work night for 3 monthsExample 2. You are a general practitioner Unclaimed reimbursement. If you do not
to take a course that improves your job skills.claim reimbursement that you are entitled toof medicine. You take a 2-week course to review
receive from your employer, you cannot deduct Since you are attending school on a temporarydevelopments in several specialized fields of
the expenses that apply to the reimbursement. basis, you can deduct your daily round-tripmedicine. The course does not qualify you for a
transportation expenses in going between homenew profession. It is qualifying work-related edu- Example. Your employer agrees to pay and school. This is true regardless of the dis-cation because it maintains or improves skills your education expenses if you file a voucher tance traveled.required in your present profession. showing your expenses. You do not file a
voucher, and you do not get reimbursed. Be- Example 2. Assume the same facts as inExample 3. While working in the private cause you did not file a voucher, you cannot Example 1 except that on certain nights you gopractice of psychiatry, you enter a program to deduct the expenses on your tax return. directly from work to school and then home. Youstudy and train at an accredited psychoanalytic can deduct your transportation expenses frominstitute. The program will lead to qualifying you your regular work site to school and then home.Transportation Expensesto practice psychoanalysis. The psychoanalytic
training does not qualify you for a new profes- Example 3. Assume the same facts as inIf your education qualifies, you can deduct local
sion. It is qualifying work-related education be- Example 1 except that you attend the school fortransportation costs of going directly from work
cause it maintains or improves skills required in 9 months on Saturdays, nonwork days. Sinceto school. If you are regularly employed and go
your present profession. you are attending school on a temporary basis,to school on a temporary basis, you can also
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 195

Page 198 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you can deduct your round-trip transportation Example 2. Sue works in Boston. She went No Double Benefit Allowedexpenses in going between home and school. to a university in Michigan to take a course for
work. The course is qualifying work-related edu- You cannot do either of the following.Example 4. Assume the same facts as in cation. • Deduct work-related education expensesExample 1 except that you attend classes twice She took one course, which is one-fourth of a as business expenses if you benefit froma week for 15 months. Since your attendance in full course load of study. She spent the rest of these expenses under any other provisionschool is not considered temporary, you cannot the time on personal activities. Her reasons for of the law, for example, as a tuition anddeduct your transportation expenses in going taking the course in Michigan were all personal. fees deduction (see chapter 19) or an edu-between home and school. If you go directly Sue's trip is mainly personal because cation credit (see chapter 35). from work to school, you can deduct the
three-fourths of her time is considered personalone-way transportation expenses of going from • Deduct work-related education expensestime. She cannot deduct the cost of herwork to school. If you go from work to home to paid with tax-free scholarship, grant, orround-trip train ticket to Michigan. She can de-school and return home, your transportation ex- employer-provided educational assis-duct one-fourth of the meals (subject to the 50%penses cannot be more than if you had gone tance. See Adjustments to Qualifyinglimit) and lodging costs for the time she attendeddirectly from work to school. Work-Related Education Expenses, be-the university. low.Using your car. If you use your car (whether
you own or lease it) for transportation to school, Example 3. Dave works in Nashville and
you can deduct your actual expenses or use the recently traveled to California to take a 2-week Adjustments to Qualifying
standard mileage rate to figure the amount you seminar. The seminar is qualifying work-related Work-Related Education Expenses
can deduct. The standard mileage rate for miles education.
driven from January 1, 2008, through June 30, If you pay qualifying work-related education ex-While there, he spent an extra 8 weeks on2008, is 50 1/2 cents a mile. The rate for miles penses with certain tax-free funds, you cannotpersonal activities. The facts, including the extradriven from July 1, 2008, through December 31, claim a deduction for those amounts. You must8-week stay, show that his main purpose was to2008, is 58 1/2 cents a mile. Whichever method reduce the qualifying expenses by the amount oftake a vacation.you use, you can also deduct parking fees and any tax-free educational assistance you re-Dave cannot deduct his round-trip airfare ortolls. See chapter 26 for information on deduct- ceived.his meals and lodging for the 8 weeks. He caning your actual expenses of using a car. Tax-free educational assistance includes:deduct only his expenses for meals (subject to
• The tax-free part of scholarships and fel-the 50% limit) and lodging for the 2 weeks he
Travel Expenses lowships (see chapter 1 of Publicationattended the seminar.
970),
You can deduct expenses for travel, meals (see Cruises and conventions. Certain cruises • Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publication50% limit on meals , later), and lodging if you and conventions offer seminars or courses as 970),travel overnight mainly to obtain qualifying
part of their itinerary. Even if the seminars orwork-related education. • Employer-provided educational assistancecourses are work related, your deduction forTravel expenses for qualifying work-related (see chapter 11 of Publication 970),travel may be limited. This applies to:education are treated the same as travel ex-
• Veterans' educational assistance (seepenses for other employee business purposes. • Travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other chapter 1 of Publication 970), andFor more information, see chapter 26. form of luxury water transportation, and
• Any other nontaxable (tax-free) paymentsYou cannot deduct expenses for per- • Conventions outside the North American (other than gifts or inheritances) receivedsonal activities, such as sightseeing, area. for education assistance.visiting, or entertaining.
CAUTION
!
For a discussion of the limits on travel ex-
Amounts that do not reduce qualifyingMainly personal travel. If your travel away pense deductions that apply to cruises and con-
work-related education expenses. Do notfrom home is mainly personal, you cannot de- ventions, see Luxury Water Travel and
reduce the qualifying work-related education ex-duct all of your expenses for travel, meals, and Conventions in chapter 1 of Publication 463.
penses by amounts paid with funds the studentlodging. You can deduct only your expenses for
receives as:lodging and 50% of your expenses for meals 50% limit on meals. You can deduct only
during the time you attend the qualified educa- 50% of the cost of your meals while traveling • Payment for services, such as wages,tional activities. away from home to obtain qualifying • A loan,Whether a trip's purpose is mainly personal work-related education. You cannot have beenor educational depends upon the facts and cir- reimbursed for the meals. • A gift,cumstances. An important factor is the compari- Employees must use Form 2106 or Form • An inheritance, orson of time spent on personal activities with time 2106-EZ to apply the 50% limit.spent on educational activities. If you spend • A withdrawal from the student's personalmore time on personal activities, the trip is con- savings.sidered mainly educational only if you can show Travel as Educationa substantial nonpersonal reason for traveling to Also, do not reduce the qualifyinga particular location. work-related education expenses by any schol-You cannot deduct the cost of travel as a form of
arship or fellowship reported as income on theeducation even if it is directly related to yourExample 1. John works in Newark, New student's return or any scholarship which, by itsduties in your work or business.Jersey. He traveled to Chicago to take a deducti- terms, cannot be applied to qualifyingble 1-week course at the request of his em- work-related education expenses. Example. You are a French languageployer. His main reason for going to Chicago teacher. While on sabbatical leave granted forwas to take the course. travel, you traveled through France to improveWhile there, he took a sightseeing trip, enter- your knowledge of the French language. Youtained some friends, and took a side trip to
chose your itinerary and most of your activities ReimbursementsPleasantville for a day.
to improve your French language skills. YouSince the trip was mainly for business, John
cannot deduct your travel expenses as educa- How you treat reimbursements depends on thecan deduct his round-trip airfare to Chicago. He
tion expenses. This is true even if you spent arrangement you have with your employer.cannot deduct his transportation expenses of
most of your time learning French by visitinggoing to Pleasantville. He can deduct only the There are two basic types of reimbursement
French schools and families, attending moviesmeals (subject to the 50% limit) and lodging arrangementsÐaccountable plans and nonac-
or plays, and engaging in similar activities.connected with his educational activities. countable plans. You can tell the type of plan
Page 196 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 199 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you are reimbursed under by the way the reim- • You are not claiming travel, transportation,
bursement is reported on your Form W-2. meal, or entertainment expenses.
For information about how to treat reim- 28.If you meet both of these requirements, enterbursements under both accountable and nonac-
the expenses directly on Schedule A (Formcountable plans, see Reimbursements  in
1040), line 21. (Special rules for expenses ofchapter 26.
certain performing artists and fee-basis officials Miscellaneousand for impairment-related work expenses are
explained below.)
DeductionsUsing Form 2106-EZ. This form is shorterDeducting Business
and easier to use than Form 2106. Generally,
you can use this form if:Expenses
What's New• All reimbursements, if any, are included inSelf-employed persons and employees report box 1 of your Form W-2, andbusiness expenses differently. Limit on itemized deductions. The amount• You are using the standard mileage rate ifThe following information explains what of adjusted gross income allowed without limit-you are claiming vehicle expenses.forms you must use to deduct the cost of your ing your itemized deductions has increased. Forqualifying work-related education as a business 2008, if your adjusted gross income is more thanIf you do not meet both of these requirements,expense. $159,950 ($79,975 if you are married filing sep-use Form 2106.
arately), you may have to reduce the amount of
certain itemized deductions, including most mis-Self-Employed Persons Performing Artists and cellaneous deductions. For more information
If you are self-employed, you must report the and a worksheet, see the instructions for Sched-Fee-Basis Officials
cost of your qualifying work-related education on ule A (Form 1040), line 29, or chapter 29.
the appropriate form used to report your busi- If you are a qualified performing artist, or a state Standard mileage rate. The 2008 rate forness income and expenses (generally Schedule (or local) government official who is paid in business use of a vehicle is 501/2 cents per mileC, C-EZ, or F). If your educational expenses whole or in part on a fee basis, you can deduct (581/2 cents per mile after June 30, 2008).include expenses for a car or truck, travel, or the cost of your qualifying work-related educa-
meals, report those expenses the same way you tion as an adjustment to gross income rather
report other business expenses for those items. than as an itemized deduction.
See the instructions for the form you file for Include the cost of your qualifyinginformation on how to complete it. Introductionwork-related education with any other employee
business expenses on Form 1040, line 24. You This chapter explains which expenses you cando not have to itemize your deductions onEmployees claim as miscellaneous itemized deductions onSchedule A (Form 1040), and, therefore, the Schedule A (Form 1040). You must reduce theIf you are an employee, you can deduct the cost deduction is not subject to the total of most miscellaneous itemized deductionsof qualifying work-related education only if you: 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. You must by 2% of your adjusted gross income. This chap-complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ to figure your ter covers the following topics.1. Did not receive any reimbursement from deduction, even if you meet the requirements
your employer, • Deductions subject to the 2% limit.described earlier under Form not required.
For more information on qualified performing2. Were reimbursed under a nonaccountable • Deductions not subject to the 2% limit.
artists, see chapter 6 of Publication 463.plan (amount is included in box 1 of Form • Expenses you cannot deduct.W-2), or
Impairment-Related Work3. Received reimbursement under an ac- You must keep records to verify yourcountable plan, but the amount received Expenses deductions. You should keep receipts,was less than your expenses. canceled checks, substitute checks, fi-
RECORDSIf you are disabled and have impairment-relatedIf either (1) or (2) applies, you can deduct the nancial account statements, and other docu-work expenses that are necessary for you to betotal qualifying cost. If (3) applies, you can de- mentary evidence. For more information onable to get qualifying work-related education,duct only the qualifying costs that were more recordkeeping, get Publication 552, Record-you can deduct these expenses on Schedule Athan your reimbursement. keeping for Individuals. (Form 1040), line 28. They are not subject to theIn order to deduct the cost of your qualifying 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. To deductwork-related education as a business expense, Useful Itemsthese expenses, you must complete Form 2106include the amount with your deduction for any You may want to see:or 2106-EZ even if you meet the requirementsother employee business expenses on Sched- described earlier under Form not required.ule A (Form 1040), line 21. (Special rules for PublicationFor more information on impairment-relatedexpenses of certain performing artists and
work expenses, see chapter 6 of Publicationfee-basis officials and for impairment-related ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
463.work expenses are explained later.) Expenses
This deduction is subject to the ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
❏ 535 Business Expensesto most miscellaneous itemized deductions. See
chapter 28. Recordkeeping ❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by DaycareForm 2106 or 2106-EZ. To figure your deduc- Providers)You must keep records as proof of anytion for employee business expenses, including
deduction claimed on your tax return.qualifying work-related education, you generally ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
Generally, you should keep your rec-
RECORDSmust complete Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ.
ords for 3 years from the date of filing the tax Form (and Instructions)Form not required. Do not complete either return and claiming the deduction.
Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ if: ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) ItemizedFor specific information about keeping rec- Deductionsords of business expenses, see Recordkeeping• All reimbursements, if any, are included in
in chapter 26.box 1 of your Form W-2, and ❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 197

Page 200 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee • Travel, transportation, entertainment, and Home Office
Business Expenses gifts related to your work. (See chapter
If you use a part of your home regularly and26.)
exclusively for business purposes, you may be
able to deduct a part of the operating expenses
Business Liability Insurance and depreciation of your home.
Deductions Subject You can claim this deduction for the busi-You can deduct insurance premiums you paid ness use of a part of your home only if you usefor protection against personal liability forto the 2% Limit that part of your home regularly and exclusively:wrongful acts on the job.
• As your principal place of business for anyYou can deduct certain expenses as miscellane-
trade or business,ous itemized deductions on Schedule A
Damages for Breach of(Form 1040). You can claim the amount of ex- • As a place to meet or deal with your pa-
penses that is more than 2% of your adjusted Employment Contract tients, clients, or customers in the normal
gross income. You figure your deduction on course of your trade or business, orIf you break an employment contract, you canSchedule A by subtracting 2% of your adjusted
• In the case of a separate structure notdeduct damages you pay your former employergross income from the total amount of these
attached to your home, in connection withthat are attributable to the pay you received fromexpenses. Your adjusted gross income is the
your trade or business.that employer.amount on Form 1040, line 38.
Generally, you apply the 2% limit after you The regular and exclusive business use mustapply any other deduction limit. For example, be for the convenience of your employer and notDepreciation on Computers or Cellyou apply the 50% (or 80%) limit on busi- just appropriate and helpful in your job. Getness-related meals and entertainment (dis- Phones Publication 587 for more detailed informationcussed in chapter 26) before you apply the 2% and a worksheet.You can claim a depreciation deduction for alimit.
computer or cell phone that you use in your workDeductions subject to the 2% limit are dis-
as an employee if its use is:cussed in the three categories in which you Job Search Expensesreport them on Schedule A (Form 1040). • For the convenience of your employer,
You can deduct certain expenses you have in• Unreimbursed employee expenses (line and
looking for a new job in your present occupation,21). • Required as a condition of your employ- even if you do not get a new job. You cannot• Tax preparation fees (line 22). ment. deduct these expenses if:
• Other expenses (line 23). • You are looking for a job in a new occupa-For more information about the rules and ex-
tion,ceptions to the rules affecting the allowable de-
ductions for a home computer or cell phone, see • There was a substantial break betweenUnreimbursed Employee
Publication 529. the ending of your last job and your look-Expenses (Line 21) ing for a new one, or
Generally, the following expenses are deducti- • You are looking for a job for the first time.Dues to Chambers of Commerceble on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21.
and Professional SocietiesYou can deduct only unreimbursed em- Employment and outplacement agency fees.ployee expenses that are: You may be able to deduct dues paid to profes- You can deduct employment and outplacement
sional organizations (such as bar associations• Paid or incurred during your tax year, agency fees you pay in looking for a new job in
and medical associations) and to chambers of your present occupation.• For carrying on your trade or business of commerce and similar organizations, if member-being an employee, and Employer pays you back. If, in a later year,ship helps you carry out the duties of your job. your employer pays you back for employment• Ordinary and necessary. Similar organizations include: agency fees, you must include the amount you
receive in your gross income up to the amount of• Boards of trade, An expense is ordinary if it is common and your tax benefit in the earlier year. (See Recov-accepted in your trade, business, or profession. • Business leagues, eries in chapter 12.)An expense is necessary if it is appropriate and • Civic or public service organizations,helpful to your business. An expense does not Employer pays the employment agency.
have to be required to be considered necessary. • Real estate boards, and If your employer pays the fees directly to the
Examples of unreimbursed employee ex- employment agency and you are not responsi-• Trade associations.penses are listed next. The list is followed by ble for them, you do not include them in your
discussions of additional unreimbursed em- gross income.
ployee expenses. Lobbying and political activities. You may
not be able to deduct that part of your dues that RÂesumÂe. You can deduct amounts you spend• Business bad debt of an employee. is for certain lobbying and political activities. See for preparing and mailing copies of a r ÂesumÂe to
• Education that is work related. (See chap- Dues used for lobbying under Lobbying Ex- prospective employers if you are looking for a
ter 27.) penses, later. new job in your present occupation.
• Legal fees related to your job.
Travel and transportation expenses. If you• Licenses and regulatory fees. Educator Expenses over Limit travel to an area and, while there, you look for a
new job in your present occupation, you may be• Malpractice insurance premiums. If you were an eligible educator in 2008, and you able to deduct travel expenses to and from the• Medical examinations required by an em- had qualified educator expenses that you can- area. You can deduct the travel expenses if theployer. not take as an adjustment to gross income, you trip is primarily to look for a new job. The amount
can deduct the rest of those expenses that are of time you spend on personal activity compared• Occupational taxes.
ordinary and necessary as an itemized deduc- to the amount of time you spend in looking for• Passport for a business trip. tion subject to the 2% limit. For information on work is important in determining whether the trip
educator expenses that you can take as an is primarily personal or is primarily to look for a• Subscriptions to professional journals and
new job.trade magazines related to your work. adjustment to gross income, see chapter 26.
Page 198 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 201 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Even if you cannot deduct the travel ex- Also, you cannot deduct contributions to a pen- Tax Preparation Fees penses to and from an area, you can deduct the sion fund, even if the union requires you to make
expenses of looking for a new job in your pres- the contributions. (Line 22)
ent occupation while in the area. You may not be able to deduct amounts you
You can usually deduct tax preparation fees inYou can choose to use the standard mileage pay to the union that are related to certain lobby-
the year you pay them. Thus, on your 2008rate to figure your car expenses. The 2008 rate ing and political activities. See Lobbying Ex-
for business use of a vehicle is 50 1/2 cents per penses under Nondeductible Expenses, later. return, you can deduct fees paid in 2008 for
mile (581/2 cents per mile after June 30, 2008). preparing your 2007 return. These fees include
See chapter 26 for more information. the cost of tax preparation software programs
Work Clothes and Uniforms and tax publications. They also include any fee
you paid for electronic filing of your return. How-You can deduct the cost and upkeep of workLicenses and Regulatory Fees ever, if you paid your tax by credit card, youclothes if the following two requirements are cannot deduct the convenience fee you wereYou can deduct the amount you pay each year met.
charged.to state or local governments for licenses and • You must wear them as a condition ofregulatory fees for your trade, business, or pro- your employment.fession. Other Expenses (Line 23)• The clothes are not suitable for everyday
wear. You can deduct certain other expenses as mis-
Occupational Taxes cellaneous itemized deductions subject to the
2% limit. On Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23,It is not enough that you wear distinc-You can deduct an occupational tax charged at you can deduct expenses you pay:tive clothing. The clothing must be spe-a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of working cifically required by your employer. Nor
CAUTION
!or conducting a business in the locality. If you 1. To produce or collect income that must beis it enough that you do not, in fact, wear yourare an employee, you can claim occupational included in your gross income,work clothes away from work. The clothing musttaxes only as a miscellaneous deduction subject not be suitable for taking the place of your regu- 2. To manage, conserve, or maintain prop-to the 2% limit; you cannot claim them as a lar clothing. erty held for producing such income, ordeduction for taxes elsewhere on your return.
Examples of workers who may be able to 3. To determine, contest, pay, or claim a re-deduct the cost and upkeep of work clothes are: fund of any tax.delivery workers, firefighters, health care work-Repayment of Income Aid Payment
ers, law enforcement officers, letter carriers, You can deduct expenses you pay for the pur-
An ªincome aid paymentº is one that is received professional athletes, and transportation work- poses in (1) and (2) above only if they are rea-
under an employer's plan to aid employees who ers (air, rail, bus, etc.). sonably and closely related to these purposes.
lose their jobs because of lack of work. If you Musicians and entertainers can deduct the Some of these other expenses are explained in
repay a lump-sum income aid payment that you cost of theatrical clothing and accessories that the following discussions.received and included in income in an earlier are not suitable for everyday wear. If the expenses you pay produce income thatyear, you can deduct the repayment. However, work clothing consisting of white
is only partially taxable, see Tax-Exempt Incomecap, white shirt or white jacket, white bib over-
Expenses, later, under Nondeductible Ex-alls, and standard work shoes, which a painter is
penses.Research Expenses of a College required by his union to wear on the job, is not
distinctive in character or in the nature of aProfessor
uniform. Similarly, the costs of buying and main-
Appraisal FeesIf you are a college professor, you can deduct taining blue work clothes worn by a welder at the
research expenses, including travel expenses, request of a foreman are not deductible. You can deduct appraisal fees if you pay them tofor teaching, lecturing, or writing and publishing
figure a casualty loss or the fair market value ofProtective clothing. You can deduct the coston subjects that relate directly to your teaching
of protective clothing required in your work, such donated property.duties. You must have undertaken the research
as safety shoes or boots, safety glasses, hardas a means of carrying out the duties expected
hats, and work gloves.of a professor and without expectation of profit
Examples of workers who may be required to Certain Casualty and Theft Lossesapart from salary. However, you cannot deduct
wear safety items are: carpenters, cement work-the cost of travel as a form of education.
You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as aers, chemical workers, electricians, fishing boat
miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to thecrew members, machinists, oil field workers,
pipe fitters, steamfitters, and truck drivers. 2% limit if you used the damaged or stolenTools Used in Your Work
property in performing services as an employee.
Military uniforms. You generally cannot de-Generally, you can deduct amounts you spend First report the loss in Section B of Form 4684,duct the cost of your uniforms if you are onfor tools used in your work if the tools wear out Casualties and Thefts. You may also have tofull-time active duty in the armed forces. How-and are thrown away within 1 year from the date include the loss on Form 4797, Sales of Busi-ever, if you are an armed forces reservist, youof purchase. You can depreciate the cost of ness Property, if you are otherwise required tocan deduct the unreimbursed cost of your uni-tools that have a useful life substantially beyond file that form. To figure your deduction, add allform if military regulations restrict you fromthe tax year. For more information about depre- casualty or theft losses from this type of propertywearing it except while on duty as a reservist. Inciation, see Publication 946. included on Form 4684, lines 32 and 38b, orfiguring the deduction, you must reduce the cost
Form 4797, line 18a. For other casualty and theftby any nontaxable allowance you receive for
losses, see chapter 25.these expenses.Union Dues and Expenses
If local military rules do not allow you to wear
You can deduct dues and initiation fees you pay fatigue uniforms when you are off duty, you can
for union membership. deduct the amount by which the cost of buying Clerical Help and Office Rent
You can also deduct assessments for benefit and keeping up these uniforms is more than the
You can deduct office expenses, such as rentpayments to unemployed union members. How- uniform allowance you receive.
and clerical help, that you have in connectionever, you cannot deduct the part of the assess- You can deduct the cost of your uniforms if
with your investments and collecting the taxablements or contributions that provides funds for you are a civilian faculty or staff member of a
the payment of sick, accident, or death benefits. military school. income on them.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 199

Page 202 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the partnership's operating expenses as miscel- (Schedule C or C-EZ), rentals or royaltiesDepreciation on Home Computer
(Schedule E), or farm income and expenseslaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2%
You can deduct depreciation on your home (Schedule F) on the appropriate schedule. Youlimit. However, if the investment club partner-
computer if you use it to produce income (for deduct expenses of resolving nonbusiness taxship has investments that also produce nontax-
example, to manage your investments that pro- issues on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Taxable income, you cannot deduct your share of
duce taxable income). You generally must de- Preparation Fees, earlier.the partnership's expenses that produce thepreciate the computer using the straight line nontaxable income.method over the Alternative Depreciation Sys-
tem (ADS) recovery period. But if you work as an Loss on Deposits
Publicly offered mutual funds. Publicly of-employee and also use the computer in that
For information on whether, and if so, how, youfered mutual funds do not pass deductions forwork, see Publication 946.
may deduct a loss on your deposit in a qualifiedinvestment expenses through to shareholders.
financial institution, see Loss on Deposits  inA mutual fund is ªpublicly offeredº if it is:
chapter 25.Excess Deductions of an Estate • Continuously offered pursuant to a public
offering,If an estate's total deductions in its last tax year
are more than its gross income for that year, the Repayments of Income• Regularly traded on an established securi-
beneficiaries succeeding to the estate's prop- ties market, or If you had to repay an amount that you includederty can deduct the excess. Do not include de-
• Held by or for at least 500 persons at all in income in an earlier year, you may be able toductions for the estate's personal exemption
times during the tax year. deduct the amount you repaid. If the amount youand charitable contributions when figuring the
had to repay was ordinary income of $3,000 orestate's total deductions. The beneficiaries can
A publicly offered mutual fund will send you a less, the deduction is subject to the 2% limit. If itclaim the deduction only for the tax year in
was more than $3,000, see Repayments UnderForm 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, orwhich, or with which, the estate terminates,
Claim of Right  under Deductions Not Subject toa substitute form, showing the net amount ofwhether the year of termination is a normal year
the 2% Limit, later.or a short tax year. For more information, see dividend income (gross dividends minus invest-
Termination of Estate in Publication 559, Survi- ment expenses). This net figure is the amount
vors, Executors, and Administrators. you report on your return as income. You cannot
Repayments of Social Securitydeduct investment expenses.
Benefits
Fees to Collect Interest and
Information returns. You should receive in- For information on how to deduct your repay-Dividends formation returns from pass-through entities. ments of certain social security benefits, see
Repayments More Than Gross Benefits  inYou can deduct fees you pay to a broker, bank, Partnerships and S corporations. These chapter 11.trustee, or similar agent to collect your taxable entities issue Schedule K-1, which lists the itemsbond interest or dividends on shares of stock. and amounts you must report and identifies theBut you cannot deduct a fee you pay to a broker tax return schedules and lines to use. Safe Deposit Box Rentto buy investment property, such as stocks or
Nonpublicly offered mutual funds. Thesebonds. You must add the fee to the cost of the
You can deduct safe deposit box rent if you useproperty. funds will send you a Form 1099-DIV, or a sub-
the box to store taxable income-producingstitute form, showing your share of gross incomeYou cannot deduct the fee you pay to a stocks, bonds, or investment-related papers andand investment expenses. You can claim thebroker to sell securities. You can use the fee documents. You cannot deduct the rent if youexpenses only as a miscellaneous itemized de-only to figure gain or loss from the sale. See the use the box only for jewelry, other personalduction subject to the 2% limit.instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040), col- items, or tax-exempt securities.
umns (d) and (e), for information on how to
report the fee.
Investment Fees and Expenses Service Charges on Dividend
Reinvestment PlansYou can deduct investment fees, custodial fees,Hobby Expenses trust administration fees, and other expenses You can deduct service charges you pay as ayou paid for managing your investments thatYou can generally deduct hobby expenses, but subscriber in a dividend reinvestment plan.produce taxable income.only up to the amount of hobby income. A hobby These service charges include payments for:is not a business because it is not carried on to
• Holding shares acquired through a plan,make a profit. See Activity not for profit in chap-
Legal Expensester 12 under Other Income. • Collecting and reinvesting cash dividends,
andYou can usually deduct legal expenses that you
incur in attempting to produce or collect taxable • Keeping individual records and providingIndirect Deductions of
income or that you pay in connection with the detailed statements of accounts. Pass-Through Entities determination, collection, or refund of any tax.
Pass-through entities include partnerships, S You can also deduct legal expenses that are: Trustee's Administrative Fees forcorporations, and mutual funds that are not pub-
• Related to either doing or keeping your IRAlicly offered. Deductions of pass-through entities
job, such as those you paid to defendare passed through to the partners or sharehold- Trustee's administrative fees that are billed sep-yourself against criminal charges arisingers. The partners or shareholders can deduct arately and paid by you in connection with yourout of your trade or business,their share of passed-through deductions for individual retirement arrangement (IRA) are de-investment expenses as miscellaneous item- • For tax advice related to a divorce, if the ductible (if they are ordinary and necessary) as aized deductions subject to the 2% limit. bill specifies how much is for tax advice miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to the
and it is determined in a reasonable way, 2% limit. For more information about IRAs, seeExample. You are a member of an invest- or chapter 17.ment club that is formed solely to invest in secur-
• To collect taxable alimony.ities. The club is treated as a partnership. The
partnership's income is solely from taxable divi-
You can deduct expenses of resolving taxdends, interest, and gains from sales of securi-
issues relating to profit or loss from businessties. In this case, you can deduct your share of
Page 200 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 203 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Federal Estate Tax on Income in Loss From Other Activities From
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), Box 2Respect of a DecedentDeductions Not
If the amount reported in Schedule K-1 (FormYou can deduct the federal estate tax attributa-Subject to the 2% Limit 1065-B), box 2, is a loss, report it on Schedule Able to income in respect of a decedent that you
(Form 1040), line 28. It is not subject to theas a beneficiary include in your gross income.You can deduct the items listed below as miscel- passive activity limitations.Income in respect of the decedent is gross in-laneous itemized deductions. They are not sub- come that the decedent would have receivedject to the 2% limit. Report these items on had death not occurred and that was not prop-Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28. Repayments Under Claim of Righterly includible in the decedent's final income tax
return. See Publication 559 for more informa- If you had to repay more than $3,000 that yoution.List of Deductions included in your income in an earlier year be-
cause at the time you thought you had an un-Each of the following items is discussed in detail restricted right to it, you may be able to deductafter the list. Gambling Losses Up to the the amount you repaid or take a credit against
Amount of Gambling Winnings• Amortizable premium on taxable bonds. your tax. See Repayments in chapter 12 for
more information.• Casualty and theft losses from income- You must report the full amount of your gambling
producing property. winnings for the year on Form 1040, line 21. You
deduct your gambling losses for the year on Unrecovered Investment in• Federal estate tax on income in respect of Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28. You cannota decedent. Annuitydeduct gambling losses that are more than your
• Gambling losses up to the amount of gam- winnings. A retiree who contributed to the cost of an annu-
bling winnings. ity can exclude from income a part of eachYou cannot reduce your gambling win-
payment received as a tax-free return of the• Impairment-related work expenses of per- nings by your gambling losses and re-
retiree's investment. If the retiree dies before theport the difference. You must report thesons with disabilities.
CAUTION
!
entire investment is recovered tax free, any un-full amount of your winnings as income and• Loss from other activities from Schedule recovered investment can be deducted on theclaim your losses (up to the amount of winnings)K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 2. retiree's final income tax return. See chapter 10as an itemized deduction. Therefore, your rec- for more information about the tax treatment of• Repayments of more than $3,000 under a ords should show your winnings separately from pensions and annuities.your losses.claim of right.
• Unrecovered investment in an annuity. Diary of winnings and losses. You
must keep an accurate diary or similar
record of your losses and winnings. Nondeductible
RECORDSAmortizable Premium on Taxable Your diary should contain at least the followingBonds information. Expenses
In general, if the amount you pay for a bond is • The date and type of your specific wager
Examples of nondeductible expenses are listedgreater than its stated principal amount, the ex- or wagering activity. next. The list is followed by discussions of addi-cess is bond premium. You can elect to amortize • The name and address or location of the tional nondeductible expenses.the premium on taxable bonds. The amortization gambling establishment.of the premium is generally an offset to interest
• The names of other persons present with List of Nondeductibleincome on the bond rather than a separate de-
you at the gambling establishment.duction item. Expenses
• The amount(s) you won or lost.Part of the premium on some bonds may be
a miscellaneous deduction not subject to the 2% • Broker's commissions that you paid inSee Publication 529 for more information.limit. For more information, see Amortizable connection with your IRA or other invest-
Premium on Taxable Bonds in Publication 529, ment property.
and Bond Premium Amortization in chapter 3 of • Burial or funeral expenses, including theImpairment-Related WorkPublication 550, Investment Income and Ex- cost of a cemetery lot.  Expensespenses.
• Capital expenses.
If you have a physical or mental disability that • Fees and licenses, such as car licenses,limits your being employed, or substantially lim-Certain Casualty and Theft Losses marriage licenses, and dog tags. its one or more of your major life activities, such
as performing manual tasks, walking, speaking,You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as a • Hobby losses, but see Hobby Expenses,
breathing, learning, and working, you can de- earlier.miscellaneous itemized deduction not subject to
duct your impairment-related work expenses.the 2% limit if the damaged or stolen property • Home repairs, insurance, and rent.
Impairment-related work expenses are ordi-was income-producing property (property held
• Illegal bribes and kickbacksÐSee Bribesnary and necessary business expenses for at-for investment, such as stocks, notes, bonds,
and kickbacks in chapter 11 of Publicationtendant care services at your place of work andgold, silver, vacant lots, and works of art). First, 535. for other expenses in connection with your placereport the loss in Form 4684, Section B. You
of work that are necessary for you to be able to • Losses from the sale of your home, furni-may also have to include the loss on Form 4797
work. ture, personal car, etc.if you are otherwise required to file that form. To
figure your deduction, add all casualty or theft Self-employed. If you are self-employed, • Personal disability insurance premiums.
losses from this type of property included on enter your impairment-related work expenses • Personal, living, or family expenses.Form 4684, lines 32 and 38b, or Form 4797, line on the appropriate form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E,
18a. For more information on casualty and theft or F) used to report your business income and • The value of wages never received or lost
losses, see chapter 25. expenses. vacation time.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 201

Page 204 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
physical condition, such as might be required of your diamond ring. The diamond falls from theAdoption Expenses
a law enforcement officer. ring and is never found. The loss of the diamond
You cannot deduct the expenses of adopting a is a casualty.
child, but you may be able to take a credit for
those expenses. See chapter 37. Home Security System
Lunches with Co-workersYou cannot deduct the cost of a home security
system as a miscellaneous deduction. However,Campaign Expenses You cannot deduct the expenses of lunches with
you may be able to claim a deduction for a home co-workers, except while traveling away fromYou cannot deduct campaign expenses of a security system as a business expense if you home on business. See chapter 26 for informa-candidate for any office, even if the candidate is have a home office. See Home Office under tion on deductible expenses while travelingrunning for reelection to the office. These in- Unreimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier, and away from home.clude qualification and registration fees for pri- Security System under Deducting Expenses  in
mary elections. Publication 587.
Legal fees. You cannot deduct legal fees Meals While Working Late
paid to defend charges that arise from partici-
Investment-Related Seminars You cannot deduct the cost of meals while work-pation in a political campaign.
ing late. However, you may be able to claim aYou cannot deduct any expenses for attending a deduction if the cost of meals is a deductibleconvention, seminar, or similar meeting for in-Check-Writing Fees on Personal entertainment expense, or if you are travelingvestment purposes.Account away from home. See chapter 26 for information
on deductible entertainment expenses and ex-If you have a personal checking account, you penses while traveling away from home.Life Insurance Premiumscannot deduct fees charged by the bank for the
privilege of writing checks, even if the account You cannot deduct premiums you pay on yourpays interest. life insurance. You may be able to deduct, as Personal Legal Expenses
alimony, premiums you pay on life insurance
You cannot deduct personal legal expensespolicies assigned to your former spouse. SeeClub Dues such as those for the following.chapter 18 for information on alimony.
Generally, you cannot deduct the cost of mem- • Custody of children.
bership in any club organized for business, plea- • Breach of promise to marry suit.Lobbying Expensessure, recreation, or other social purpose. This
includes business, social, athletic, luncheon, • Civil or criminal charges resulting from aYou generally cannot deduct amounts paid orsporting, airline, hotel, golf, and country clubs. personal relationship.incurred for lobbying expenses. These includeYou cannot deduct dues paid to an organiza- expenses to: • Damages for personal injury, except fortion if one of its main purposes is to: certain unlawful discrimination and• Influence legislation,• Conduct entertainment activities for mem- whistleblower claims.
• Participate or intervene in any politicalbers or their guests, or
• Preparation of a title (or defense or perfec-campaign for, or against, any candidate• Provide members or their guests with ac- tion of a title).for public office,cess to entertainment facilities.
• Preparation of a will.• Attempt to influence the general public, or
 Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon segments of the public, about elections, • Property claims or property settlement in aclubs are not deductible. legislative matters, or referendums, or divorce.
• Communicate directly with covered execu-
You cannot deduct these expenses even if ative branch officials in any attempt to influ-Commuting Expenses result of the legal proceeding is the loss of in-ence the official actions or positions of
those officials. come-producing property.You cannot deduct commuting expenses (the
cost of transportation between your home and Lobbying expenses also include any amounts
your main or regular place of work). If you haul paid or incurred for research, preparation, plan- Political Contributionstools, instruments, or other items, in your car to ning, or coordination of any of these activities.
and from work, you can deduct only the addi- You cannot deduct contributions made to a polit-Dues used for lobbying. If a tax-exempttional cost of hauling the items such as the rent ical candidate, a campaign committee, or aorganization notifies you that part of the dues oron a trailer to carry the items.
other amounts you pay to the organization are newsletter fund. Advertisements in convention
used to pay nondeductible lobbying expenses, bulletins and admissions to dinners or programs
you cannot deduct that part. See Lobbying Ex- that benefit a political party or political candidateFines or Penalties
penses in Publication 529 for information on are not deductible.
exceptions.You cannot deduct fines or penalties you pay to
a governmental unit for violating a law. This
includes an amount paid in settlement of your Professional Accreditation Fees
actual or potential liability for a fine or penalty Lost or Mislaid Cash or Property
(civil or criminal). Fines or penalties include You cannot deduct professional accreditation
You cannot deduct a loss based on the mereparking tickets, tax penalties, and penalties de- fees such as the following.
disappearance of money or property. However,ducted from teachers' paychecks after an illegal • Accounting certificate fees paid for the ini-an accidental loss or disappearance of propertystrike. tial right to practice accounting.can qualify as a casualty if it results from an
identifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or • Bar exam fees and incidental expenses inunusual. See chapter 25.Health Spa Expenses securing initial admission to the bar.
• Medical and dental license fees paid to getExample. A car door is accidentallyYou cannot deduct health spa expenses, even if
there is a job requirement to stay in excellent slammed on your hand, breaking the setting of initial licensing.
Page 202 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 205 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
fund or a private fund. However, you can deductProfessional Reputation
contributions as taxes if state law requires you to Which ItemizedYou cannot deduct expenses of radio and TV make them to a state unemployment fund that
appearances to increase your personal prestige covers you for the loss of wages from unemploy- Deductions or establish your professional reputation. ment caused by business conditions.
Are Limited?
Relief Fund Contributions Wristwatches The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-
tions are subject to the overall limit on itemizedYou cannot deduct contributions paid to a pri- You cannot deduct the cost of a wristwatch, deductions.vate plan that pays benefits to any covered em- even if there is a job requirement that you know
ployee who cannot work because of any injury or the correct time to properly perform your duties. • Taxes paidÐline 9.
illness not related to the job. • Interest paidÐlines 10, 11, 12, and 13.
• Gifts to charity (other than qualified contri-
Residential Telephone Service butions)Ðline 19.
• Job expenses and certain miscellaneousYou cannot deduct any charge (including taxes)
deductionsÐline 27.for basic local telephone service for the first 29.telephone line to your residence, even if it is • Other miscellaneous deductionsÐline 28,
used in a trade or business. excluding gambling and casualty or theft
losses.
Limit onStockholders' Meetings
You cannot deduct transportation and other ex- Itemized
penses you pay to attend stockholders' meet- Which Itemizedings of companies in which you own stock but
Deductionshave no other interest. You cannot deduct these Deductions
expenses even if you are attending the meeting
to get information that would be useful in making Are Not Limited?
further investments.
What's New The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-
tions are not subject to the overall limit on item-Heartland Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2008.Tax-Exempt Income Expenses ized deductions. However, they are still subjectThis act provides tax relief for affected persons to other applicable limits.in the Midwestern disaster areas. Under the Act,You cannot deduct expenses to produce
• Medical and dental expensesÐline 4.you may be able to treat certain gifts made bytax-exempt income. You cannot deduct interest
cash or check as qualified contributions not sub-on a debt incurred or continued to buy or carry • Investment interest expenseÐline 14.ject to the limit on itemized deductions. Seetax-exempt securities.
• Gifts by cash or check that you elect toPublication 4492-B.If you have expenses to produce both tax-
treat as qualified contributionsÐline 16.able and tax-exempt income, but you cannot
identify the expenses that produce each type of • Casualty and theft losses of personal use
income, you must divide the expenses based on propertyÐline 20.
the amount of each type of income to determine Introduction • Casualty and theft losses of in-the amount that you can deduct. come-producing propertyÐline 28.This chapter discusses the overall limit on item-
ized deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).Example. During the year, you received • Gambling lossesÐline 28.
The following topics are included.taxable interest of $4,800 and tax-exempt inter-
est of $1,200. In earning this income, you had • Who is subject to the limit.
total expenses of $500 during the year. You
• Which itemized deductions are limited.cannot identify the amount of each expense item
that is for each income item. Therefore, 80% How Do You Figure • How to figure the limit.
($4,800/$6,000) of the expense is for the taxable
the Limit?interest and 20% ($1,200/$6,000) is for the
tax-exempt interest. You can deduct, subject to Useful Items
If your itemized deductions are subject to thethe 2% limit, expenses of $400 (80% of $500). You may want to see:
limit, the total of all your itemized deductions is
reduced by the smaller of the following reducedForm (and Instructions)
by two-thirds:Travel Expenses for Another
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040), ItemizedIndividual • 80% of your itemized deductions that areDeductions affected by the limit. See Which ItemizedYou generally cannot deduct travel expenses Deductions Are Limited, earlier, oryou pay or incur for a spouse, dependent, or
• 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-other individual who accompanies you (or your
ceeds $159,950 ($79,975 if married filingemployee) on business or personal travel. See
separately).Are You Subjectchapter 26 for more information on deductible
travel expenses.
Before you figure the overall limit on itemizedto the Limit?
deductions, you first must complete Schedule A
(Form 1040), lines 1 through 28, including anyYou are subject to the limit on certain itemizedVoluntary Unemployment
related forms (such as Form 2106, Form 4684,deductions if your adjusted gross income (AGI)Benefit Fund Contributions etc.).is more than $159,950 ($79,975 if you are mar-
You cannot deduct voluntary unemployment ried filing separately). Your AGI is the amount on The overall limit on itemized deductions is
benefit fund contributions you make to a union Form 1040, line 38. figured after you have applied any other limit on
Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions Page 203

Page 206 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the allowance of any itemized deduction. These The Willows' investment interest expenseExampleother limits include charitable contribution limits deduction ($41,000 from Schedule A (Form
(chapter 24), the limit on certain meal and enter- 1040), line 14) is not subject to the overall limitFor tax year 2008, Bill and Terry Willow are filingtainment expenses (chapter 26), and the 2%-of- on itemized deductions.a joint return on Form 1040. Their adjustedadjusted-gross-income limit on certain miscella- The Willows use the Itemized Deductionsgross income on line 38 is $259,600. Theirneous deductions (chapter 28). Worksheet in the Schedule A (Form 1040) in-Schedule A itemized deductions are as follows: structions to figure their overall limit. Their com-Itemized Deductions Worksheet. After you pleted worksheet is shown as Table 29-1.have completed Schedule A (Form 1040) Taxes paidÐline 9 ......... . $ 17,900 Of their $142,140 total itemized deductions,through line 28, you can use the Itemized De- the Willows can deduct only $141,143ductions Worksheet in the Instructions for Interest paidÐlines 10, 11, 12, ($142,140 − $997). They enter $141,143 onSchedule A (Form 1040) to figure your limit. and 13 .................. . 45,000 Schedule A (Form 1040), line 29.Enter the result on Schedule A (Form 1040), line
Investment interest expense29. Keep the worksheet for your records.
Ðline 14 ................ . 41,000You should compare the amount of
your standard deduction to the amount Gifts to charityÐline 19 ...... . 21,000of your itemized deductions after ap-
TIP
plying the limit. Use the greater amount when Job expensesÐline 27 ....... . 17,240
completing Form 1040, line 40. See chapter 20
for information on how to figure your standard Total ................. . $142,140
deduction.
Table 29-1. Itemized Deductions WorksheetÐLine 29
1. Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule A, lines 4, 9, 15, 19, 20, 27, and 28. ................ . 1. 142,140
2. Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule A, lines 4, 14, and 20, plus any gambling and casualty or
theft losses included on line 28. Also include in the total any amount included on Schedule A, line 16,
that you elected to treat as a qualified contribution for relief efforts in a Midwestern disaster area. ..... . 2. 41,000
Be sure your total gambling and casualty or theft losses are clearly identified on the dotted
lines next to line 28.
CAUTION
!
3. Is the amount on line 2 less than the amount on line 1?
 No. Your deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above on Schedule A, line 29.
STOP
/H12011
 Yes. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ................................................ . 3. 101,140
4. Multiply line 3 by 80% (.80) ........................................ . 4. 80,912
5. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38 ............................. . 5. 259,600
6. Enter: $159,950 ($79,975 if married filing separately) ..................... . 6. 159,950
7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the amount on line 5?
 No. Your deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above on
STOP
Schedule A, line 29.
/H12011
 Yes. Subtract line 6 from line 5 ................................. . 7. 99,650
8. Multiply line 7 by 3% (.03) ......................................... . 8. 2,990
9. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 8 ................................................. . 9. 2,990
10. Divide line 9 by 1.5 ............................................................. . 10. 1,993
11. Subtract line 10 from line 9 ....................................................... . 11. 997
12. Total itemized deductions. Subtract line 11 from line 1. Enter the result here and on Schedule A,
line 29 ...................................................................... . 12. 141,143
Page 204 Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions

Page 207 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Six.
The eight chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax and how to figureFiguring Your the tax of certain children who have more than $1,800 of investment income.
They also discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions are subtracted directlyTaxes and from your tax and reduce your tax, dollar for dollar. Chapter 36 discusses the
earned income credit and how you may be able to get part of the credit paid to
Credits you in advance throughout the year.
• Foreign earned income exclusion or the and Indian coal produced at facilities
housing exclusion. (See Form 2555, For- placed in service after August 8, 2005.
eign Earned Income, or Form 2555-EZ, See Form 8835, Section B.30. Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.) • Work opportunity credit. See Form 5884.
• Credit for employer social security andCredits. After you figure your income tax and Medicare taxes paid on certain employeeHow To Figure any alternative minimum tax (discussed later), tips. See Form 8846.determine your tax credits. This chapter does
not explain whether you are eligible for these • New York Liberty Zone business em-Your Tax credits. You can find that information in chapters ployee credit. See Form 5884.
32 through 37 and your form instructions. See • Qualified zone academy bond credit. Seethe following table for credits you may be able to
Form 8860.subtract from your income tax.Introduction
After you have figured your income and deduc- Other taxes. After you subtract your tax cred-CREDITStions as explained in Parts One  through Five, its, determine whether there are any other taxesSeeyour next step is to figure your tax. This chapter For information on: chapter: you must pay. This chapter does not explaindiscusses:
these other taxes. You can find that informationAdoption ................. . 37• The general steps you take to figure your in other chapters of this publication and yourAlternative motor vehicle ...... . 37tax, form instructions. See the following table forAlternative fuel vehicle refueling 
other taxes you may need to add to your incomeproperty ................ . 37• An additional tax you may have to pay
Child and dependent care ..... . 32 tax.called the alternative minimum tax, and
Child tax credit ............. . 34• The conditions you must meet if you want Clean renewable energy bonds .. . 37 OTHER TAXESthe IRS to figure your tax. Education ................ . 35 SeeElderly or disabled .......... . 33 For information on: chapter:Foreign tax ............... . 37
Figuring Your Tax Gulf tax credit bonds ......... . 37 Additional taxes on qualified retirement
Mortgage interest ........... . 37 plans and IRAs ............. . 10, 17
Your income tax is based on your taxable in- Prior year minimum tax ....... . 37 Advance earned income credit
come. After you figure your income tax and any Residential energy .......... . 37 payments ................ . 36
Retirement savings Household employment taxes .... . 32alternative minimum tax, subtract your tax cred-
contributions ............. . 37 Recapture of an education credit .. . 35its and add any other taxes you may owe. The
Social security and Medicare tax onresult is your total tax. Compare your total tax Some credits (such as the earned income wages ................... . 5with your total payments to determine whether credit) are not listed above because they are Social security and Medicare tax onyou are entitled to a refund or owe additional tax. treated as payments. See Payments, later. tips ..................... . 6This section provides a general outline of Uncollected social security andThere are other credits that are not dis-how to figure your tax. You can find step-by-step Medicare tax on tips ......... . 6cussed in this publication. These include thedirections in the instructions for Forms 1040EZ, following credits.1040A, and 1040. If you are unsure of which tax Another tax you may have to pay, the alter-form you should file, see Which Form Should I • General business credit, which is made up native minimum tax, is discussed later in thisUse? in chapter 1. of several separate business-related cred- chapter.its. These generally are reported on Form There are other taxes that are not discussedTax. Most taxpayers use either the Tax Table 3800, General Business Credit, and areor the Tax Computation Worksheet to figure in this publication. These include the followingdiscussed in chapter 4 of Publication 334,their income tax. However, there are special items.Tax Guide for Small Business.methods if your income includes any of the fol-
1. Self-employment tax. You must figure this• Empowerment zone and renewal commu-lowing items.
tax if either of the following applies to younity employment credit. See Publication• A net capital gain. (See chapter 16.) (or your spouse if you file a joint return).954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Com-
• Qualified dividends taxed at the same munities. Also see Form 8844. a. Your net earnings fromrates as a net capital gain. (See chapters • First-time homebuyer credit. See Form self-employment from other than church8 and 16.) 5405. employee income were $400 or more.
• Lump-sum distributions. (See chapter 10.) The term ªnet earnings from• District of Columbia first-time homebuyer
self-employmentº may include certain• Farming or fishing income. (See Schedule credit. See Form 8859.
nonemployee compensation and otherJ (Form 1040), Income Averaging for • Credit for alcohol used as fuel. See Form amounts reported to you on FormFarmers and Fishermen.) 6478. 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. If• Investment income over $1,800 for certain you received a Form 1099-MISC, see• Renewable electricity, refined coal, and In-children. (See chapter 31.) the Instructions for Recipients on thedian coal production credit for electricity
back. Also see the instructions for• Parents' election to report child's interest and refined coal produced at facilities
and dividends. (See chapter 31.) placed in service after October 22, 2004, Schedule SE (Form 1040),
Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax Page 205

Page 208 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Self-Employment Tax; and Publication 15% excise tax on the value of nonstatu- The tax law gives special treatment to some
334, Tax Guide for Small Business. tory stock options and certain other kinds of income and allows special deductions
stock-based compensation held by you or and credits for some kinds of expenses. Taxpay-b. You had church employee income of a member of your family from an expatri- ers who benefit from the law in these ways may$108.28 or more. ated corporation or its expanded affiliated have to pay at least a minimum amount of tax
group in which you were an officer, direc- through an additional tax. This additional tax is2. Recapture taxes. You may have to pay tor, or more-than-10% owner. For more in- called the alternative minimum tax (AMT).these taxes if you previously claimed an formation, see the instructions for Form You may have to pay the alternative mini-investment credit, a low-income housing 1040, line 61.credit, a mortgage interest credit, a new mum tax if your taxable income for regular tax
markets credit, a qualified electric vehicle 11. Additional tax on income you received purposes, combined with certain adjustments
credit, a credit for employer-provided child from a nonqualified deferred compensation and tax preference items, is more than:
care facilities, an Indian employment plan that fails to meet certain require- • $69,950 if your filing status is married filingcredit, or other credit listed in the instruc- ments. This income should be shown in a joint return (or qualifying widow(er) withtions for Form 1040, line 61. For more in- Form W-2, box 12, with code Z, or in Form dependent child),formation, see the instructions for Form 1099-MISC, box 15b. For more informa-
1040, line 61. tion, see the instructions for Form 1040, • $46,200 if your filing status is single or
line 61. head of household, or3. Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax. If
you are (or were) a 5% owner of a busi- 12. Interest on the tax due on installment in- • $34,975 if your filing status is married filing
ness and you received a distribution that come from the sale of certain residential a separate return.
exceeds the benefits provided for you lots and timeshares. For more information,
under the qualified pension or annuity plan see the instructions for Form 1040, line 61.
Adjustments and tax preference items. Theformula, you may have to pay this addi- 13. Interest on the deferred tax on gain from more common adjustments and tax preferencetional tax. See Tax on Excess Benefits in certain installment sales with a sales price items include:chapter 4 of Publication 560, Retirement over $150,000. For more information, seePlans for Small Business (SEP, SIMPLE, • Addition of personal exemptions,the instructions for Form 1040, line 61.and Qualified Plans).
• Addition of the standard deduction (if4. Uncollected social security and Medicare Payments. After you determine your total tax, claimed),tax on group-term life insurance. If your figure the total payments you have already • Addition of itemized deductions claimedformer employer provides you with more made for the year. Include credits that are for state and local taxes, certain interest,than $50,000 of group-term life insurance treated as payments. This chapter does not ex- most miscellaneous deductions, and partcoverage, you must pay the employee part plain these payments and credits. You can find
of medical expenses,of social security and Medicare taxes on that information in other chapters of this publica-
those premiums. The amount should be tion and your form instructions. See the follow- • Subtraction of any refund of state and lo-shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with ing table for amounts you can include in your cal taxes included in gross income,codes M and N. total payments.
• Changes to accelerated depreciation of5. Tax on golden parachute payments. This PAYMENTS certain property,tax applies if you received an ªexcess par- See
achute paymentº (EPP) due to a change in • Difference between gain or loss on theFor information on: chapter:
a corporation's ownership or control. See sale of property reported for regular taxChild tax credit (additional) ..... . 34the instructions for Form 1040, line 61. purposes and AMT purposes,Earned income credit ........ . 36
Estimated tax paid .......... . 46. Tax on accumulation distribution of trusts. • Addition of certain income from incentive
Excess social security This applies if you are the beneficiary of a stock options,and RRTA tax withheld ...... . 37trust that accumulated its income instead • Change in certain passive activity loss de-Federal income tax withheld .... . 4of distributing it currently. See the instruc- Health coverage tax credit ..... . 37 ductions,tions for Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Regulated investment company Distribution of Trusts. • Addition of certain depletion that is morecredit .................. . 37 than the adjusted basis of the property,7. Additional tax on HSAs or MSAs. If Refundable credit for
prior year minimum tax ...... .  37amounts contributed to, or distributed from, • Addition of part of the deduction for certainTax paid with extension ....... . 1your health savings account or medical intangible drilling costs, and
savings account do not meet the rules for Another credit that is treated as a payment is • Addition of tax-exempt interest on certainthese accounts, you may have to pay addi- the credit for federal excise tax paid on fuels. private activity bonds.tional taxes. See Publication 969, Health This credit is for persons who have a nontaxableSavings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored use of certain fuels, such as diesel fuel andHealth Plans; Form 8853, Archer MSAs More information. For more informationkerosene. It is claimed on Form 1040, line 68.and Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts; about the alternative minimum tax, see the in-See Form 4136, Credit for Federal Tax Paid onForm 8889, Health Savings Accounts Fuels. structions for Form 1040, line 45, and Form(HSAs); and Form 5329, Additional Taxes 6251, Alternative Minimum TaxÐIndividuals.on Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) and Refund or balance due. To determine
Other Tax-Favored Accounts. whether you are entitled to a refund or owe
additional tax, compare your total payments with8. Additional tax on Coverdell ESAs. This ap- your total tax. If you are entitled to a refund, seeplies if amounts contributed to, or distrib- Tax Figured by IRSyour form instructions for information on havinguted from, your Coverdell ESA do not meet it directly deposited into one or more of yourthe rules for these accounts. See Publica- If you file by April 15, 2009, you can have theaccounts instead of receiving a paper check.tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education, and IRS figure your tax for you on Form 1040EZ,Form 5329. Form 1040A, or Form 1040.
9. Additional tax on qualified tuition pro- If the IRS figures your tax and you paid too
grams. This applies to amounts distributed much, you will receive a refund. If you did notAlternativefrom qualified tuition programs that do not pay enough, you will receive a bill for the bal-meet the rules for these accounts. See ance. To avoid interest or the penalty for lateMinimum TaxPublication 970 and Form 5329. payment, you must pay the bill within 30 days of
the date of the bill or by the due date for your10. Tax on insider stock compensation from an This section briefly discusses an additional tax
expatriated corporation. You may owe a you may have to pay. return, whichever is later.
Page 206 Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax

Page 209 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
When the IRS cannot figure your tax. The are filing a joint return, both you and your spouse Earned income credit. If you can take this
IRS cannot figure your tax for you if any of the must sign it. Enter your daytime phone number credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS will
following apply. in the space provided. figure it for you. Enter ªEICº to the left of the entry
Attach a copy of each of your Forms W-2 to space for line 40a. Enter the nontaxable combat1. You want your refund directly deposited your return. Also attach any Form 1099-R you pay you elect to include in earned income on lineinto your accounts. received that has withholding tax in box 4. 40b. If you have a qualifying child, you must fill in
Mail your return to the Internal Revenue Schedule EIC, Earned Income Credit, and at-2. You want any part of your refund applied
Service Center for the area where you live. A list tach it to your return.to your 2009 estimated tax.
of Service Center addresses is shown near the If your credit for any year after 1996 was3. You had income for the year from sources end of this publication. reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsoother than wages, salaries, tips, interest, have to file Form 8862, Information To Claimdividends, taxable social security benefits, Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, withunemployment compensation, IRA distri- Form 1040EZ Line Entries your return. For details, see the Form 1040Abutions, pensions, and annuities. instructions.Read lines 1 through 8b and fill in the lines that4. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more. apply to you. Do not complete lines 10 through
5. You itemize deductions. 13. If you are filing a joint return, use the space Form 1040 Line Entriesto the left of line 6 to separately show your6. You file any of the following forms. taxable income and your spouse's taxable in- Read lines 1 through 43 and fill in the lines that
come.a. Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income. apply to you. Do not complete line 44.
If you are filing a joint return, use the spaceb. Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Payments. Enter any federal income tax with-
under the words ªAdjusted Gross Incomeº onExclusion. held on line 7. Federal income tax withheld is
the front of your return to separately show yourshown on Form W-2, box 2.c. Form 4137, Social Security and Medi- taxable income and your spouse's taxable in-care Tax on Unreported Tip Income. Earned income credit. If you can take this come.credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS cand. Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Distri- Read lines 45 through 70. Fill in the lines thatfigure it for you. Enter ªEICº in the space to thebution of Trusts. apply to you, but do not fill in lines 55, 61, andleft of line 8a. Enter the nontaxable combat pay 71. Also, do not complete line 56 and lines 72e. Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum Distribu- you elect to include in earned income on line 8b. through 76. Do not fill in lines 49 and 64a if youtions. If your credit for any year after 1996 was want the IRS to figure the credits shown onreduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsof. Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. those lines.have to file Form 8862, Information To Claim
Fill in any forms or schedules asked for ong. Form 6251, Alternative Minimum TaxÐ Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, with
the lines you completed, and attach them to yourIndividuals. your return. For details, see the Form 1040EZ
return.instructions.h. Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs.
i. Form 8615, Tax for Certain Children Payments. Enter any federal income tax with-
Who Have Investment Income of More held that is shown on Form W-2, box 2, or theForm 1040A Line Entries
Than $1,800. appropriate box of Form 1099, on line 62. Enter
Read lines 1 through 27 and fill in the lines that any estimated tax payments you made onj. Form 8814, Parents' Election To Report apply to you. If you are filing a joint return, use  line 63.Child's Interest and Dividends. the space to the left of the entry space for line 27
k. Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Ex- to separately show your taxable income and Credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses. your spouse's taxable income. Do not complete penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-
line 28. Complete lines 29 through 33, 36, and cussed in chapter 32, complete Form 2441,l. Form 8853, Archer MSAs and 38 through 42 if they apply to you. Do not fill in Child and Dependent Care Expenses, and at-Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts. lines 30 and 40a if you want the IRS to figure the tach it to your return. Enter the amount of the
m. Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts credits shown on those lines. Also, enter any credit on line 47. The IRS will not figure this
(HSAs). write-in information that applies to you in the credit.
space to the left of line 43. Do not complete linesn. Form 8915, Qualified Hurricane Retire- 34, 35, 37, and 44 through 48. Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If youment Plan Distributions and Repay-
can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33,ments. Payments. Enter any federal income tax with-
attach Schedule R, Credit for the Elderly or theheld that is shown on Form W-2, box 2, or theo. Form 8919, Uncollected Social Security Disabled. Enter ªCFEº on the dotted line next toappropriate box of Form 1099, on line 38. Enterand Medicare Tax on Wages. Form 1040, line 49. The IRS will figure the creditany estimated tax payments you made on line
for you. On Schedule R check the box in Part Ip. Form 8930, Qualified Disaster Recov- 39.
for your filing status and age. Complete Part IIery Assistance Retirement Plan Distri-
Credit for child and dependent care ex- and Part III, lines 11 and 13, if they apply.butions and Repayments.
penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-
cussed in chapter 32, complete Schedule 2 Earned income credit. If you can take this(Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care Ex- credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS willFiling the Return penses for Form 1040A Filers, and attach it to figure it for you. Enter ªEICº on the dotted lineyour return. Enter the amount of the credit on next to Form 1040, line 64a. Enter the nontax-After you complete the line entries for the tax line 29. The IRS will not figure this credit. able combat pay you elect to include in earnedform you are filing, as discussed next, attach the
income on line 64b. If you have a qualifyingpeel-off label. If you do not have a peel-off label, Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If you
child, you must fill in Schedule EIC and attach itfill in your name and address. Enter your social can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33,
to your return.security number in the space provided. If you are attach Schedule 3 (Form 1040A), Credit for the
If your credit for any year after 1996 wasmarried, enter the social security numbers of Elderly or the Disabled for Form 1040A Filers.
reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsoyou and your spouse even if you file separately. Enter ªCFEº in the space to the left of line 30.
have to file Form 8862, Information To ClaimComplete the ªThird Party Designeeº area of the The IRS will figure this credit for you. On Sched-
Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, withreturn if you would like another person to dis- ule 3, check the box in Part I for your filing status
your return. For details, see the Form 1040 in-cuss your return with the IRS. Sign and date and age. Complete Part II and Part III, lines 11
structions.your return and enter your occupation(s). If you and 13, if they apply.
Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax Page 207

Page 210 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 8814 Parents' Election To Report Child's
Interest and Dividends Parent's Election
31. To Report Child's
Which Parent's Interest and Dividends
You may be able to elect to include your child'sReturn To UseTax on
interest and dividend income (including capital
If a child's parents are married to each other and gain distributions) on your tax return. If you do,Investment file a joint return, use the joint return to figure the your child will not have to file a return.
tax on the child's investment income. The tax You can make this election only if all therate and other return information from that returnIncome of following conditions are met.are used to figure the child's tax as explained
later under Tax for Certain Children Who Have • Your child was under age 19 (or under
Certain Children Investment Income of More Than $1,800. age 24 if a full-time student) at the end of
the year.
Parents Who Do Not File a • Your child had income only from interest
and dividends (including capital gain distri-Joint ReturnWhat's New
butions and Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
For parents who do not file a joint return, the dends).Increase in age of children whose invest- following discussions explain which parent's taxment income is taxed at parent's rate. The • The child's gross income was less thanreturn must be used to figure the tax.investment income of certain children under age $9,000.Only the parent whose tax return is used can18 at the end of the year continues to be taxed at make the election described under Parent's • The child is required to file a return unlessthe parent's tax rate. But this rule now also Election To Report Child's Interest and Divi- you make this election.applies in certain cases to a child who either: dends. 
• The child does not file a joint return for the• Was age 18 at the end of the year and did
year.not have earned income that was more Parents are married. If the child's parents filethan half of the child's support, or separate returns, use the return of the parent • No estimated tax payment was made for
with the greater taxable income.• Was a full-time student over age 18 and the year, and no overpayment from the
under age 24 at the end of the year and previous year was applied to this yearParents not living together. If the child'sdid not have earned income that was more under your child's name and social secur-parents are married to each other but not livingthan half of the child's support. ity number.together, and the parent with whom the child
lives (the custodial parent) is considered unmar- • No federal income tax was taken out ofried, use the return of the custodial parent. If the your child's income under the backup with-custodial parent is not considered unmarried, holding rules.use the return of the parent with the greater
Introduction taxable income. • You are the parent whose return must be
For an explanation of when a married person used when applying the special tax rulesThis chapter discusses the following two rules living apart from his or her spouse is considered for children. (See Which Parent's Returnthat may affect the tax on investment income of unmarried, see Head of Household in chapter 2. To Use, earlier.)certain children.
These conditions are also shown in Figure 31-A.1. If the child's interest and dividend income Parents are divorced. If the child's parents(including capital gain distributions) total are divorced or legally separated, and the parent Certain January 1 birthdays. A child born onless than $9,000, the child's parent may be who had custody of the child for the greater part January 1, 1990, is considered to be age 19 atable to choose to include that income on of the year (the custodial parent) has not remar- the end of 2008. You cannot make this electionthe parent's return rather than file a return ried, use the return of the custodial parent. for such a child unless the child was a full-timefor the child. (See Parent's Election To Re-
Custodial parent remarried. If the custo- student.port Child's Interest and Dividends, later.)
dial parent has remarried, the stepparent (rather A child born on January 1, 1985, is consid-2. If the child's interest, dividends, and other than the noncustodial parent) is treated as the ered to be age 24 at the end of 2008. You cannotinvestment income total more than $1,800, child's other parent. Therefore, if the custodial make this election for such a child.part of that income may be taxed at the parent and the stepparent file a joint return, useparent's tax rate instead of the child's tax that joint return. Do not use the return of therate. (See Tax for Certain Children Who noncustodial parent. Full-time student. A full-time student is aHave Investment Income of More Than If the custodial parent and the stepparent are child who during any part of 5 calendar months$1,800, later.) married, but file separate returns, use the return of the year was enrolled as a full-time student atof the one with the greater taxable income. If theFor these rules, the term ªchildº includes a le- a school, or took a full-time, on-farm trainingcustodial parent and the stepparent are marriedgally adopted child and a stepchild. These rules course given by a school or a state, county, orbut not living together, the earlier discussionapply whether or not the child is a dependent. local government agency. A school includes aunder Parents not living together applies. technical, trade, or mechanical school. It does
Useful Items not include an on-the-job training course, corre-
Parents never married. If a child's parents spondence school, or school offering coursesYou may want to see: did not marry each other, but lived together all only through the Internet.year, use the return of the parent with thePublication greater taxable income. If the parents did not live
How to make the election. Make the election❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and together all year, the rules explained earlier
Dependents under Parents are divorced apply. by attaching Form 8814 to your Form 1040. (If
you make this election, you cannot file Form
Form (and Instructions) 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) Attach a separateWidowed parent remarried. If a widow or
Form 8814 for each child for whom you make❏ 8615 Tax for Certain Children Who Have widower remarries, the new spouse is treated as
the election. You can make the election for oneInvestment Income of More Than the child's other parent. The rules explained
or more children and not for others.$1,800 earlier under Custodial parent remarried apply.
Page 208 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 211 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Effect of Making the
Election
The federal income tax on your child's income
may be more if you make the Form 8814 elec-
tion.
Rate may be higher. If your child received
qualified dividends or capital gain distributions,
you may pay up to $90 more tax if you make this
election instead of filing a separate tax return for
the child. This is because the tax rate on the
child's income between $900 and $1,800 is 10%
if you make this election. However, if you file a
separate return for the child, the tax rate may be
as low as 0% (zero percent) because of the
preferential tax rates for qualified dividends and
capital gain distributions.
Deductions you cannot take. By making the
Form 8814 election, you cannot take any of the
following deductions that the child would be enti-
tled to on his or her return.
• The additional standard deduction for a
blind child.
• The deduction for a penalty on an early
withdrawal of your child's savings.
• Itemized deductions (such as your child's
investment expenses or charitable contri-
butions).
Reduced deductions or credits. If you use
Form 8814, your increased adjusted gross in-
come may reduce certain deductions or credits
on your return including the following.
• Deduction for contributions to a traditional
individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
• Deduction for student loan interest.
• Itemized deductions for medical expenses,
casualty and theft losses, and certain mis-
cellaneous expenses.
• Total itemized deductions.
• Personal exemptions.
• Credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses.
• Child tax credit.
• Education tax credits.
• Earned income credit.
Penalty for underpayment of estimated tax.
If you make this election for 2008 and did not
have enough tax withheld or pay enough esti-
mated tax to cover the tax you owe, you may be
subject to a penalty. If you plan to make this
election for 2009, you may need to increase your
federal income tax withholding or your estimated
tax payments to avoid the penalty. See chapter
4 for more information. 
Figuring Child's Income
Use Form 8814, Part I, to figure your child's
interest and dividend income to report on your
return. Only the amount over $1,800 is added to
your income. The amount over $1,800 is shown
Figure 31-A. Can You Include Your Child’s Income On Your Tax
Return?
Start Here
/H17074
Was your child under age 19 at the end
of 2008?
No
/H17074
Is your child required to file a tax return
for 2008 if you do not make this
election?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s only income interest and
dividends (including capital gain
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund
dividends)?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s income less than
$9,000?
/H17074
No
Did the child make any estimated tax
payments for 2008?
/H17074
No
Did the child have an overpayment of tax
on his or her 2007 return applied to the
2008 estimated tax?
/H17074
No
Was any federal income tax withheld from
the child’s income (backup withholding)?
/H17074
No
Are you the parent whose return must
be used?*
/H17074
Yes
You can include your child’s income on
your tax return by completing Form 8814
and attaching it to your return. If you do,
your child is not required to file a return.
You cannot include
your child’s income
on your return.
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Is your child filing a joint return for 2008?
/H17074
Yes
Yes
/H17075
Yes
Was your child under age 24 at the end
of 2008?
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17075
Was your child a full-time student in
2008?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
/H17075
on Form 8814, line 6. Unless the child's income
includes qualified dividends or capital gain distri-
butions (discussed next), the same amount is
shown on Form 8814, line 12. Include the
amount from Form 8814, line 12, on Form 1040,
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 209

Page 212 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
line 21. Enter ªForm 8814º on the dotted line
next to line 21. If you file more than one Form
8814, include the total amounts from line 12 of
all your Forms 8814 on Form 1040, line 21.
Capital gain distributions and qualified divi-
dends. If your child's dividend income in-
cluded any capital gain distributions, see Capital
gain distributions under Figuring Child's Income
in Part 2 of Publication 929. If your child's divi-
dend income included any qualified dividends,
see Qualified dividends under Figuring Child's
Income in Part 2 of Publication 929.
Figuring Additional Tax
Use Form 8814, Part II, to figure the tax on the
$1,800 of your child's interest and dividends that
you do not include in your income. This tax is
added to the tax figured on your income.
This additional tax is the smaller of:
1. 10% ×  (your child's gross income − $900),
or
2. $90.
Include the amount from line 15 of all your
Forms 8814 in the total on Form 1040, line 44.
Check box a on Form 1040, line 44.
Illustrated Example
David and Linda Parks are married and will file
separate tax returns for 2008. Their only child,
Philip, is 8. Philip received a Form 1099-INT
showing $1,650 taxable interest income and a
Form 1099-DIV showing $1,150 ordinary divi-
dends. All the dividends were qualified divi-
dends. His parents decide to include that
income on one of their returns so they will not
have to file a return for Philip.
First, David and Linda each figure their tax-
able income (Form 1040, line 43) without regard
to Philip's income. David's taxable income is
$56,700 and Linda's is $74,300. Because her
taxable income is greater, Linda can elect to
include Philip's income on her return. See Which
Parent's Return To Use, earlier.
On Form 8814 (see  illustrated form ), Linda
enters her name and social security number,
then Philip's name and social security number.
She enters Philip's taxable interest income,
$1,650, on line 1a. Philip had no tax-exempt
interest income, so she leaves line 1b blank.
She enters Philip's ordinary dividends, $1,150,
on line 2a. All of Philip's ordinary dividends were
qualified dividends, so Linda also enters $1,150
on line 2b. Philip did not have any capital gain
distributions, so she leaves line 3 blank.
Linda adds lines 1a and 2a and enters the
result, $2,800, on line 4. Because Philip had
qualified dividends, Linda must complete lines 7
through 11 of Form 8814. She includes the
amount from line 9 of Form 8814 ($411) on lines
9a and 9b of her Form 1040. On the dotted lines
next to lines 9a and 9b, she enters ªForm
8814±$411.º
Linda includes $589 in the total on line 21 of
her Form 1040 (not illustrated) and in the space
next to that line writes ªForm 8814 ±$589.º Ad-
EPS File Name: 10311G48 Size: Width = 29.0 picas, Depth = 36.0 picas
Figure 31-B. Do You Have To Use Form 8615 To Figure Your
Child’s Tax?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the child’s investment income more than $1,800?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is the child required to file a tax return for 2008?
/H17074
Yes
Use Form 8615 to figure the child’s tax. Attach it to the
child’s return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
Note: If the child’s parent* chooses to report the child’s income
by filing Form 8814, the child is not required to file a tax return.
Do not use Form 8615. (See Parent’s Election To Report Child’s
Interest and Dividends.)
Do not use
Form 8615 to
figure the
child’s tax.
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Is the child filing a joint return for 2008?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17075
Was the child under age 18 at the end of 2008?
/H17074
No
Was the child age 18 at the end of 2008?
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
Was the child under age 24 at the end of 2008?
No
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Was the child a full-time student in 2008?
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17075
Did the child have earned income that was more than
half of his or her support?
Yes
/H17074
No
/H17075
Was at least one of the child’s parents alive at the end
of 2008?
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17075/H17075
/H17075
ding that amount, plus the $411 of qualified
dividends, to her income increases each of the
amounts on lines 22, 37, 38, 41, and 43 of her
Form 1040 by $1,000. Linda is not claiming any
deductions that are affected by the increase to
Page 210 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 213 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
her income. Therefore, her revised taxable in- care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne- Step 1. Figuring thecome on line 43 is $75,300 ($74,300 + $411 + cessities. To figure your child's support, count
Child's Net Investment$589). support provided by you, your child, and others.
On Form 8814, Linda subtracts the $900 However, a scholarship received by your child is Incomeshown on line 13 from the $2,800 on line 4 and not considered support if your child is a full-time (Form 8615, Part I)enters the result, $1,900, on line 14. Because student. See chapter 3 for details about support.that amount is not less than $900, she enters
The first step in figuring a child's tax using Form$90 on line 15. This is the tax on the first $1,800
8615 is to figure the child's net investment in-Certain January 1 birthdays. Use the follow-of Philip's income, which Linda did not have to
come. To do that, use Form 8615, Part I.ing chart to determine whether certain childrenadd to her income. She must add this additional
with January 1 birthdays meet condition 3 undertax to the tax figured on her revised taxable
Line 1 (investment income). If the child hadincome. When Form 8615 must be filed.
no earned income, enter on this line the adjustedThe tax on her $75,300 revised taxable in-
gross income shown on the child's return. Ad-come, figured using the Qualified Dividends and IF a child was THEN, at the end justed gross income is shown on Form 1040,Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 born on ....... . of 2008, the child line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22. Form 1040EZinstructions, is $15,399. She adds $90, and en- is considered to cannot be used if Form 8615 must be filed.ters the $15,489 total on Form 1040, line 44, and be ........... .checks box a. If the child had earned income, figure the
Linda attaches Form 8814 to her Form 1040. January 1, 1991 18* amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1, by using
the worksheet in the instructions for the form.January 1, 1990 19** However, if the child has excluded any for-
eign earned income or deducted either a lossJanuary 1, 1985 24***
from self-employment or a net operating lossTax for Certain *This child is not under age 18. The child from another year, use the Alternate Worksheetmeets condition 3 only if the child did not for Form 8615, Line 1, in Publication 929 toChildren Who Have have earned income that was more than half figure the amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1.of the child's support.Investment Income of **This child meets condition 3 only if the Investment income defined. Investment
child was a full-time student who did not income is generally all income other than sala-More Than $1,800 have earned income that was more than half ries, wages, and other amounts received as pay
of the child's support. for work actually done. It includes taxable inter-If a child's interest, dividends, and other invest- ***Do not use Form 8615 for this child. est, dividends, capital gains (including capitalment income total more than $1,800, part of that gain distributions), the taxable part of social se-income may be taxed at the parent's tax rate curity and pension payments, and certain distri-instead of the child's tax rate. If the parent does butions from trusts. Investment income includesnot or cannot choose to include the child's in- Providing Parental amounts produced by assets the child obtainedcome on the parent's return, use Form 8615 to with earned income (such as interest on a sav-Information figure the child's tax. Attach the completed form ings account into which the child depositedto the child's Form 1040 or Form 1040A. (Form 8615, lines A±C) wages).
When Form 8615 must be filed. Form 8615 Nontaxable income. For this purpose, in-On Form 8615, lines A and B, enter the parent's
must be filed for a child if all of the following vestment income includes only amounts thename and social security number. (If the parents
statements are true. child must include in total income. Nontaxablefiled a joint return, enter the name and social
investment income, such as tax-exempt interestsecurity number listed first on the joint return.)1. The child's investment income was more and the nontaxable part of social security andOn line C, check the box for the parent's filingthan $1,800. pension payments, is not included.status.
2. The child is required to file a return for Income from property received as a gift.See Which Parent's Return To Use  at the2008. A child's investment income includes all incomebeginning of this chapter for information on produced by property belonging to the child.3. The child either: which parent's return information must be used This is true even if the property was transferredon Form 8615.a. Was under age 18 at the end of the to the child, regardless of when the property was
year, transferred or purchased or who transferred it.Parent with different tax year. If the parent
and the child do not have the same tax year, A child's investment income includes incomeb. Was age 18 at the end of the year and
complete Form 8615 using the information on produced by property given as a gift to the child.did not have earned income that was
This includes gifts to the child from grandparentsthe parent's return for the tax year that ends inmore than half of his or her support, or
or any other person and gifts made under thethe child's tax year.c. Was a full-time student over age 18 and Uniform Gift to Minors Act.Parent's return information not knownunder age 24 at the end of the year and
did not have earned income that was timely. If the information needed from the par- Example. Amanda Black, age 13, receivedmore than half of his or her support. ent's return is not known by the time the child's the following income.
return is due (usually April 15), you can file the
• Dividends Ð $6004. At least one of the child's parents was return using estimates.
alive at the end of 2008. • Wages Ð $2,100You can use any reasonable estimate. This
5. The child does not file a joint return for includes using information from last year's re- • Taxable interest Ð $1,2002008. turn. If you use an estimated amount on Form • Tax-exempt interest Ð $1008615, enter ªEstimatedº on the line next to theThese conditions are also shown in Figure 
amount. • Net capital gains Ð $10031-B.
When you get the correct information, file an The dividends were qualified dividends on stockEarned income. Earned income includes amended return on Form 1040X, Amended U.S. given to her by her grandparents.wages, tips, and other payments received for Individual Income Tax Return. Amanda's investment income is $1,900. Thispersonal services performed. It does not include Instead of using estimates, you can get an is the total of the dividends ($600), taxable inter-investment income as defined later in this chap- automatic 6-month extension of time to file if, by est ($1,200), and net capital gains ($100). Herter.
the date your return is due, you file Form 4868, wages are earned (not investment) income be-
Application for Automatic Extension of Time To cause they are received for work actually done.Support. Your child's support includes all
File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. Exten- Her tax-exempt interest is not included becauseamounts spent to provide the child with food,
sions are discussed in chapter 1. it is nontaxable.lodging, clothing, education, medical and dental
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 211

Page 214 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Draft as of
November 12, 2008
EPS File Name: 10311G61 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
Linda P arks
Philip P arks
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
000 00 0000
1,650
2,800
411
589
90
1,150
/H12011
1,150
1,000
1,900
411
411
1,800 00
OMB No. 1545-0074Parents’ Election To Report
Child’s Interest and Dividends
Form 8814
/H17075See instructions.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 40/H17075Attach to parents’ Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on your return
Child’s social security numberChild’s name (first, initial, and last)
If more than one Form 8814 is attached, check here /H17075
Child’s Interest and Dividends To Report on Your Return
Enter your child’s taxable interest. If this amount is different from the amounts shown on the
child’s Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID, see the instructions
1a
1a
b Enter your child’s tax-exempt interest. Do not include this
amount on line 1a 1b
2a Enter your child’s ordinary dividends, including any Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. If your
child received any ordinary dividends as a nominee, see the instructions
Enter your child’s capital gain distributions. If your child received any capital gain distributions
as a nominee, see the instructions
Add lines 1a, 2a, and 3. If the total is $1,800 or less, skip lines 5 through 12 and go to line 13.
If the total is $9,000 or more, do not file this form. Your child must file his or her own return
to report the income
3
4
Base amount
4
5
Subtract line 5 from line 4 6
Tax on the First $1,800 of Child’s Interest and Dividends
900 00Amount not taxed
15
1313
Subtract line 13 from line 4. If the result is zero or less, enter -0-
No. Enter $90 here and see the Note below.
Tax. Is the amount on line 14 less than $900?
14 14
Yes. Multiply line 14 by 10% (.10). Enter the result here and see the Note below.
Note. If you checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Otherwise, include the amount from line 15 in the tax you enter
on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41. Be sure to check box a on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3. Form 8814 (2008)Cat. No. 10750J
/H20854
A B
C
3
6
2a
5
Part I
Part II
15
Caution. The federal income tax on your child’s income, including qualified dividends and capital gain distributions, may be less
if you file a separate tax return for the child instead of making this election. This is because you cannot take certain tax be nefits
that your child could take on his or her own return. For details, see Tax benefits you cannot take on page 2.
b Enter your child’s qualified dividends included on line 2a. See the
instructions 2b
If both lines 2b and 3 are zero or blank, skip lines 7 through 10, enter -0- on line 11, and
go to line 12. Otherwise, go to line 7.
Divide line 2b by line 4. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded
to at least three places)
7
7
Divide line 3 by line 4. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to
at least three places)
8
8
Multiply line 6 by line 7. Enter the result here. See the instructions
for where to report this amount on your return
9
9
Multiply line 6 by line 8. Enter the result here. See the instructions
for where to report this amount on your return
10
10
Add lines 9 and 10 1111
Subtract line 11 from line 6. Include this amount in the total on Form 1040, line 21, or Form
1040NR, line 21. In the space next to line 21, enter “Form 8814” and show the amount. If you
checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Go to line 13 below
12
12
.
.
(99)
2008
Page 212 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 215 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Trust income. If a child is the beneficiary of Line 5 (net investment income). A child's net skip the discussion for lines 12a and 12b that
a trust, distributions of taxable interest, divi- investment income cannot be more than his or follows.
dends, capital gains, and other investment in- her taxable income. Enter on Form 8615, line 5,
come from the trust are investment income to the smaller of line 3 or line 4. This is the child's Lines 12a and 12b (dividing the tentative
the child. net investment income. tax). If an amount is entered on line 7, divide
However, for purposes of completing Form If zero or less, do not complete the rest of the the tentative tax shown on line 11 among the
8615, a taxable distribution from a qualified disa- form. However, you must still attach Form 8615 children according to each child's share of the
bility trust is considered earned income, not in- to the child's tax return. Figure the tax on the total net investment income. This is done on
vestment income. child's taxable income in the normal manner. lines 12a, 12b, and 13. Add the amount on line 7
to the amount on line 5 and enter the total on lineLine 2 (deductions). If the child does not 12a. Divide the amount on line 5 by the amountStep 2. Figuringitemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), on line 12a and enter the result as a decimal onenter $1,800 on line 2. Tentative Tax at line 12b.If the child does itemize deductions, enter on the Parent's Tax Rateline 2 the larger of: Example. In the earlier example under Line(Form 8615, Part II) 7 (net investment income of other children),1. $900 plus the portion of the child's item- Sharon's Form 8615 shows $1,600 on line 7.ized deductions on Schedule A (Form The next step in completing Form 8615 is to The amount entered on line 12a is $2,400, the1040), line 29, that are directly connected figure a tentative tax on the child's net invest- total of the amounts on lines 5 and 7 ($800 +with the production of investment income ment income at the parent's tax rate. The tenta- $1,600). The decimal on line 12b is .333, figuredentered on line 1, or tive tax at the parent's tax rate is the difference as follows and rounded to three places.between the tax on the parent's taxable income2. $1,800. $800figured with the child's net investment income = .333(plus the net investment income of any otherDirectly connected. Itemized deductions $2,400child whose Form 8615 includes the tax returnare directly connected with the production of information of that parent) and the tax figuredinvestment income if they are for expenses paid without it.to produce or collect taxable income or to man- Step 3. FiguringWhen figuring the tentative tax at the par-age, conserve, or maintain property held for ent's tax rate, do not refigure any of the exclu- the Child's Taxproducing income. These expenses include sions, deductions, or credits on the parent'scustodian fees and service charges, service (Form 8615, Part III)return because of the child's net investment in-fees to collect taxable interest and dividends, come. For example, do not refigure the medical The final step in figuring a child's tax using Formand certain investment counsel fees. expense deduction. 8615 is to determine the larger of:These expenses are added to certain other  Figure the tentative tax on Form 8615, linesmiscellaneous itemized deductions on Schedule 6 through 13. 1. The total of:A (Form 1040). Only the amount greater than
2% of the child's adjusted gross income can be a. The child's share of the tentative taxNote. If the child has any capital gains ordeducted. See chapter 28 for more information. based on the parent's tax rate, pluslosses, get Publication 929 for help in complet-
ing Form 8615, Part II. b. The tax on the child's taxable income inExample 1. Roger, age 12, has investment
excess of net investment income, fig-income of $8,000, no other income, no adjust- Line 7 (net investment income of other chil- ured at the child's tax rate, orments to income, and itemized deductions of dren). If the tax return information of the par-$300 (net of the 2% limit) that are directly con- ent is also used on any other child's Form 8615, 2. The tax on the child's taxable income, fig-nected with his investment income. His adjusted enter on line 7 the total of the amounts from line ured at the child's tax rate.gross income is $8,000, which is entered on 5 of all the other children's Forms 8615. Do notForm 1040, line 38, and on Form 8615, line 1. This is the child's tax. It is figured on Forminclude the amount from line 5 of the Form 8615Line 2 is $1,800 because that is more than the 8615, lines 14 through 18.being completed.sum of $900 and his directly-connected itemized
deductions of $300. Example. Paul and Jane Persimmon have Alternative minimum tax. A child may be
three children, Sharon, Jerry, and Mike, who subject to alternative minimum tax (AMT) if he orExample 2. Eleanor, age 8, has investment must attach Form 8615 to their tax returns. The she has certain items given preferential treat-income of $16,000 and an early withdrawal pen- children's net investment income amounts on ment under the tax law. See Alternative Mini-alty of $100. She has no other income. She has line 5 of their Forms 8615 are: mum Tax in chapter 30.itemized deductions of $1,050 (net of the 2%
For more information on who is liable forlimit) that are directly connected with the produc- • Sharon Ð $800 AMT and how to figure it, see Form 6251, Alter-tion of her investment income. Her adjusted • Jerry Ð $600 native Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. For informa-gross income, entered on line 1, is $15,900
tion on special limits that apply to a child who($16,000 − $100). The amount on line 2 is • Mike Ð $1,000
files Form 6251, see Alternative Minimum Tax in$1,950. This is the larger of:
Publication 929.Line 7 of Sharon's Form 8615 will show1. $900 plus the $1,050 of directly connected $1,600, the total of the amounts on line 5 ofitemized deductions, or Jerry's and Mike's Forms 8615. Illustrated Example
Line 7 of Jerry's Form 8615 will show $1,8002. $1,800.
($800 + $1,000). The following example includes a completed
Line 7 of Mike's Form 8615 will show $1,400 Form 8615. Form 1040A is not shown.Line 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 and enter the ($800 + $600). John and Laura Brown have one child, Sara.result on this line. If zero or less, do not complete She is 13 and has $2,800 taxable interest in-Other children's information not available.the rest of the form. However, you must still come and $1,500 earned income. She does notIf the net investment income of the other childrenattach Form 8615 to the child's tax return. Figure itemize deductions. John and Laura file a jointis not available when the return is due, either filethe tax on the child's taxable income in the return with John's name and social securitythe return using estimates or get an extension ofnormal manner. number listed first. They claim three exemp-time to file. See Parent's return information not
tions, including an exemption for Sara, on theirLine 4 (child's taxable income). Enter on line known timely, earlier.
return.4 the child's taxable income from Form 1040,
Because Sara is under age 18 and has moreline 43, or Form 1040A, line 27. Line 11 (tentative tax). Subtract line 10 from
than $1,800 investment income, part of her in-However, if the child files Form 2555 or line 9 and enter the result on this line. This is the
come may be subject to tax at her parents' rate.2555-EZ to claim the foreign earned income tentative tax.
A completed Form 8615 must be attached to herexclusion or housing exclusion, see the Form If line 7 is blank, skip lines 12a and 12b and
return.8615 instructions. enter the amount from line 11 on line 13. Also
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 213

Page 216 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sara's father, John, fills out Sara's return for John compares lines 3 and 4 and enters the John subtracts line 5 ($1,000) from line 4
her. He completes her Form 1040A through line ($2,500) and enters the result, $1,500, on linesmaller amount, $1,000, on line 5.
27, then begins completing her Form 8615. 14. Using the column for single filing status inJohn enters $48,000 on line 6. This is theJohn enters his name and social security the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $1,500 andtaxable income from line 43 of John and Laura'snumber on Sara's Form 8615 because his name enters this tax, $151, on line 15. He adds linesjoint Form 1040 return. Sara is an only child, soand number are listed first on the joint return he 13 ($150) and 15 ($151) and enters $301 on lineline 7 is blank. He adds line 5 ($1,000), line 6and Laura are filing. He checks the box for 16.($48,000), and line 7 (blank), and entersmarried filing jointly. Using the column for single filing status in the$49,000 on line 8.He enters Sara's investment income, Tax Table, John finds the tax on $2,500 (line 4)$2,800, on line 1. Sara does not itemize deduc- Using the column for married filing jointly in and enters this tax, $251, on line 17.tions, so John enters $1,800 on line 2. He enters the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $49,000. He John compares lines 16 and 17 and enters$1,000 ($2,800 − $1,800) on line 3. enters the tax, $6,551, on line 9. He enters the larger amount, $301, on line 18 of Sara'sSara's taxable income on her Form 1040A, $6,401 on line 10. This is the tax from line 44 of Form 8615. He also enters that amount on lineline 27, is $2,500. This is her total income John and Laura's Form 1040. He enters $150 on 28 of Sara's Form 1040A.($4,300) minus her standard deduction line 11 ($6,551 − $6,401).($1,800). Her standard deduction is limited to John also completes Schedule 1 (FormBecause line 7 is blank, John skips lines 12athe amount of her earned income plus $300. 1040A) for Sara.and 12b and enters $150 on line 13.John enters $2,500 on line 4.  
Page 214 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 217 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Draft as of
November 12, 2008
EPS File Name: 10311G62 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
Sara L. Brown
John J. Brown
1 1 7 00 1 1 1 1
007 00 0001
2,800
1,800
1,000
2,500
1,000
48,000
49,000
6,551
6,401
150
1,500
151
301
251
301
150
OMB No. 1545-0074Tax for Certain Children Who Have Investment 
Income of More Than $1,800
Form 8615
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 33
/H17075Attach only to the child’s Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
Child’s social security numberChild’s name shown on return
Parent’s social security numberParent’s name (first, initial, and last). Caution: See instructions before completing.
Parent’s filing status (check one):
Child’s Net Investment Income
Enter the child’s investment income (see instructions)1 1
If the child did not itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR), enter
$1,800. Otherwise, see instructions
2
2
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero or less, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do
attach it to the child’s return
3
3
4
Enter the child’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; or Form 1040NR,
line 40. If the child files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions
4
Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4. If zero, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do
attach it to the child’s return
5
5
Tentative Tax Based on the Tax Rate of the Parent
Enter the parent’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; Form 1040EZ,
line 6; Form 1040NR, line 40; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14. If zero or less, enter -0-. If the parent
files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions
6
6
Enter the total, if any, from Forms 8615, line 5, of all other children of the parent named
above. Do not include the amount from line 5 above
7
7
8Add lines 5, 6, and 7 (see instructions)8
9
Enter the tax on the amount on line 8 based on the parent’s filing status above (see instructions).
If the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here /H17075
9
10 Enter the parent’s tax from Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A, line 28, minus any alternative
minimum tax; Form 1040EZ, line 11; Form 1040NR, line 41; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 15. Do not
include any tax from Form 4972 or 8814 or any tax from recapture of an education credit. If the
parent files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions. If the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain
Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or Schedule J (Form 1040) was used to figure the tax,
check here
/H17075 10
Subtract line 10 from line 9 and enter the result. If line 7 is blank, also enter this amount on line
13 and go to Part III
11
11
12aAdd lines 5 and 712a
12b .Divide line 5 by line 12a. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at least three places)b
Multiply line 11 by line 12b13 13
Child’s Tax—If lines 4 and 5 above are the same, enter -0- on line 15 and go to line 16.
1414 Subtract line 5 from line 4
15
15 Enter the tax on the amount on line 14 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here /H17075
1616 Add lines 13 and 15
17
17 Enter the tax on the amount on line 4 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here
/H17075
18 Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 here and on the child’s Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A,
line 28; or Form 1040NR, line 41. If the child files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions 18
Form 8615 (2008)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see the instructions.
A B
C
Single
Cat. No. 64113U
/H11003
Part III
Part I
Part II
(99) /H17075See separate instructions.
Before you begin: If the child, the parent, or any of the parent’s other children for whom Form 8615 must be filed must use the Schedule
D Tax Worksheet or has income from farming or fishing, see Pub. 929, Tax Rules for Children and Dependents. It
explains how to figure the child’s tax using the Schedule D Tax Worksheet or Schedule J (Form 1040).
Married filing jointly Married filing separately Head of household Qualifying widow(er)
2008
/H12011
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 215

Page 218 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care if one qualifying person was cared for or
Expenses $6,000 if two or more qualifying persons
were cared for). (If two or more qualifying❏ 926 Household Employer's Tax Guide32. persons were cared for, the amount you
exclude or deduct will always be less thanForm (and Instructions) the dollar limit, since the amount you can
❏ 2441 Child and Dependent Care exclude or deduct is limited to $5,000. SeeChild and Expenses Reduced Dollar Limit under How To Figure
the Credit, later.)❏ Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) Child andDependent Care Dependent Care Expenses for These tests are presented in Figure 32-A and
Form 1040A Filers are also explained in detail in this chapter.
Credit ❏ Schedule H (Form 1040) Household
Employment Taxes Qualifying Person Test
❏ W-7 Application for IRS Individual Your child and dependent care expenses mustReminders Taxpayer Identification Number be for the care of one or more qualifying per-
❏ W-10 Dependent Care Provider's sons.Taxpayer identification number needed for Identification and Certification A qualifying person is:each qualifying person. You must include on
line 2 of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) 1. Your qualifying child who is your depen-the name and taxpayer identification number dent and who was under age 13 when the(generally the social security number) of each care was provided (but see Note later),qualifying person. See Taxpayer identification Tests To Claimnumber under Qualifying Person Test, later. 2. Your spouse who was not physically or
mentally able to care for himself or herselfthe CreditYou may have to pay employment taxes. If and lived with you for more than half theyou pay someone to come to your home and year, orTo be able to claim the credit for child andcare for your dependent or spouse, you may be
dependent care expenses, you must file Form 3. A person who was not physically or men-a household employer who has to pay employ-
1040 or Form 1040A, not Form 1040EZ, and tally able to care for himself or herself,ment taxes. Usually, you are not a household
meet all the following tests. lived with you for more than half the year,employer if the person who cares for your de-
and either:pendent or spouse does so at his or her home or 1. The care must be for one or more qualify-place of business. See Employment Taxes for ing persons who are identified on the form a. Was your dependent, orHousehold Employers, later. you use to claim the credit. (See Qualifying b. Would have been your dependent ex-Person Test.) cept that:
2. You (and your spouse if you are married)
i. He or she received gross income ofmust have earned income during the year.Introduction $3,500 or more,(However, see Rule for student-spouse or
This chapter discusses the credit for child and spouse not able to care for self under ii. He or she filed a joint return, ordependent care expenses and covers the fol- Earned Income Test, later.) iii. You, or your spouse if filing jointly,lowing topics.
3. You must pay child and dependent care could be claimed as a dependent on• Tests you must meet to claim the credit. expenses so you (and your spouse if you someone else's 2008 return.
are married) can work or look for work.• How to figure the credit.
(See Work-Related Expense Test, later.)
• How to claim the credit. Special rules may apply for people who4. You must make payments for child and had to relocate because of the Mid-• Employment taxes you may have to pay dependent care to someone you (and your western storms, tornadoes, or flooding.as a household employer.
TIP spouse) cannot claim as a dependent. If For details, see Pub. 4492-B.you make payments to your child, he orYou may be able to claim the credit if you pay she cannot be your dependent and mustsomeone to care for your dependent who is Note. If you are divorced or separated, seebe age 19 or older by the end of the year.under age 13 or for your spouse or dependent Child of divorced or separated parents or par-You cannot make payments to: who is not able to care for himself or herself. The ents living apart,  later, to determine which par-
credit can be up to 35% of your expenses. To a. Your spouse, or ent may treat the child as a qualifying person.
qualify, you must pay these expenses so you b. The parent of your qualifying person ifcan work or look for work. Dependent defined. A dependent is a per-your qualifying person is your child and
son, other than you or your spouse, for whomThis credit should not be confused with under age 13.
you can claim an exemption. To be your depen-the child tax credit discussed in chapter (See Payments to Relatives or Depen- dent, a person must be your qualifying child (or34.
CAUTION
! dents under Work-Related Expense Test , your qualifying relative).later.)Dependent care benefits. If you received any Qualifying child. To be your qualifying5. Your filing status must be single, head ofdependent care benefits from your employer child, a child must live with you for more thanhousehold, qualifying widow(er) with de-during the year, you may be able to exclude from half the year and meet other requirements.pendent child, or married filing jointly. Youyour income all or part of them. You must com- More information. For more informationmust file a joint return if you are married,plete Part III of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form about who is a dependent or a qualifying child,unless an exception applies to you. (See1040A) before you can figure the amount of your see chapter 3.Joint Return Test, later.)credit. See Dependent Care Benefits under How
To Figure the Credit, later. 6. You must identify the care provider on your Physically or mentally not able to care fortax return. (See Provider Identification oneself. Persons who cannot dress, clean, orTest, later.)Useful Items feed themselves because of physical or mentalYou may want to see: problems are considered not able to care for7. If you exclude or deduct dependent care
themselves. Also, persons who must have con-benefits provided by a dependent carePublication stant attention to prevent them from injuringbenefits plan, the total amount you exclude
themselves or others are considered not able toor deduct must be less than the dollar limit❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction,
care for themselves.for qualifying expenses (generally, $3,000and Filing Information
Page 216 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 219 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G50 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Figure 32-A. Can You Claim the Credit?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the care for one or more qualifying persons?
No
No
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your spouse or to the parent of your
qualifying person who is your qualifying child and under age 13?
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Did you1 have earned income during the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you pay the expenses to allow you 1 to work or look for work?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to someone you or your spouse could
claim as a dependent?
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your child who was under the age of
19 at the end of the year?
No
Yes
/H17075
Are you single? Are you filing a joint return?
Do you meet the requirements
to be considered unmarried?
Do you know the care provider’s name, address,
and identifying number?
Did you make a reasonable effort to get this
information? (See Due diligence.)
Did you pay expenses for more than one
qualifying person?
You may be able to claim the child and
dependent care credit. Fill out Form 2441
or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).
You CANNOT claim the child
and dependent care credit.
2
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
This also applies to your spouse, unless your spouse was disabled or a full-time student.
If you had expenses that met the requirements for 2007, except that you did not pay them until 2008, you may be able to claim those expenses in 2008.
See Expenses not paid until the following year under How To Figure the Credit.
/H17075
Yes
1
2
Are you excluding or deducting at least $3,000 of
dependent care benefits?
Yes
/H17075
/H17074No
/H17074
/H17075
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 217

Page 220 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Person qualifying for part of year. You de- full time. You must have been a full-time studentEarned Income Test for some part of each of 5 calendar monthstermine a person's qualifying status each day.
during the year. (The months need not be con-For example, if the person for whom you pay To claim the credit, you (and your spouse if you secutive.)child and dependent care expenses no longer are married) must have earned income during
the year. qualifies on September 16, count only those School. The term ªschoolº includes high
expenses through September 15. Also see schools, colleges, universities, and technical,Earned income. Earned income includes trade, and mechanical schools. A school doesYearly Limit under Dollar Limit, later. wages, salaries, tips, other taxable employee not include an on-the-job training course, corre-compensation, and net earnings from spondence school, or school offering coursesself-employment. A net loss fromBirth or death of otherwise qualifying per- only through the Internet.self-employment reduces earned income.son. In determining whether a person is a Earned income also includes strike benefits and Special rules may apply for people whoqualifying person, a person who was born or any disability pay you report as wages. had to relocate because of the Mid-died in 2008 is treated as having lived with you Generally, only taxable compensation is in- western storms, tornadoes, or flooding.
TIPfor all of 2008 if your home was the person's cluded. However, you can elect to include non- For details, see Pub. 4492-B.home the entire time he or she was alive in taxable combat pay in earned income. If you are
2008. filing a joint return and both you and your spouse
Work-Related Expensereceived nontaxable combat pay, you can each
make your own election. You should figure your TestTaxpayer identification number. You must credit both ways and make the election if it givesinclude on your return the name and taxpayer you a greater tax benefit. Child and dependent care expenses must beidentification number (generally the social se- work-related to qualify for the credit. ExpensesMembers of certain religious faiths op-curity number) of the qualifying person(s). If the are considered work-related only if both of theposed to social security. Certain incomecorrect information is not shown, the credit may following are true.earned by persons who are members of certainbe reduced or disallowed.
religious faiths that are opposed to participation • They allow you (and your spouse if youIndividual taxpayer identification number in Social Security Act programs and have an are married) to work or look for work.
(ITIN) for aliens. If your qualifying person is a IRS-approved form that exempts certain income • They are for a qualifying person's care.nonresident or resident alien who does not have from social security and Medicare taxes may not
be considered earned income for this purpose.and cannot get a social security number (SSN),
See Earned Income Test in Publication 503.use that person's ITIN. The ITIN is entered Working or Looking for Work
wherever an SSN is requested on a tax return. Not earned income. Earned income does not To be work-related, your expenses must allowTo apply for an ITIN, see Form W-7. include: you to work or look for work. If you are married,An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle generally both you and your spouse must work• Child support payments received by you,the holder to social security benefits or change or look for work. Your spouse is treated as work-• Pensions and annuities,the holder's employment or immigration status ing during any month he or she is a full-time
under U.S. law. • Social security and railroad retirement student or is physically or mentally not able to
benefits, care for himself or herself.Adoption taxpayer identification number
Your work can be for others or in your own(ATIN). If your qualifying person is a child who • Workers' compensation, business or partnership. It can be either full timewas placed in your home for adoption and for • Interest and dividends, or part time.whom you do not have an SSN, you must get an Work also includes actively looking for work.• Unemployment compensation,ATIN for the child. File Form W-7A, Application However, if you do not find a job and have nofor Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending • Scholarship or fellowship grants, except earned income for the year, you cannot take thisU.S. Adoptions. for those reported on a Form W-2 and credit. See Earned Income Test, earlier.
paid to you for teaching or other services, An expense is not considered work-related
merely because you had it while you were work-Child of divorced or separated parents or • Nontaxable workfare payments,
ing. The purpose of the expense must be toparents living apart. Even if you cannot claim • Income of nonresident aliens that is not allow you to work. Whether your expenses allowyour child as a dependent, he or she is treated effectively connected with a U.S. trade or you to work or look for work depends on theas your qualifying person if: business, or facts.
• The child was under age 13 or was not • Any amount received for work while an
physically or mentally able to care for him- Example 1. The cost of a babysitter whileinmate in a penal institution.
you and your spouse go out to eat is not nor-self or herself,
mally a work-related expense.• The child received over half of his or her Rule for student-spouse or spouse not able
to care for self. Your spouse is treated assupport during the calendar year from one Example 2. You work during the day. Yourhaving earned income for any month that he oror both parents who are divorced or legally spouse works at night and sleeps during theshe is:separated under a decree of divorce or day. You pay for care of your 5-year-old child
separate maintenance, are separated during the hours when you are working and your1. A full-time student, or spouse is sleeping. Your expenses are consid-under a written separation agreement, or
2. Physically or mentally not able to care for ered work-related.lived apart at all times during the last 6
himself or herself. (Your spouse also mustmonths of the calendar year. live with you for more than half the year.) Volunteer work.  For this purpose, you are
• The child was in the custody of one or not considered to be working if you do unpaidFigure the earned income of the nonworkingboth parents for more than half the year, volunteer work or volunteer work for a nominalspouse described under (1) or (2) above asand salary.explained under Earned Income Limit, later.
• You were the child's custodial parent (the This rule applies to only one spouse for any Work for part of year. If you work or activelyone month. If, in the same month, both you andparent with whom the child lived for the look for work during only part of the period cov-your spouse do not work and are either full-timegreater part of 2008). ered by the expenses, then you must figure yourstudents or not physically or mentally able to expenses for each day. For example, if you workcare for yourselves, only one of you can beThe noncustodial parent cannot treat the child all year and pay care expenses of $250 a monthtreated as having earned income in that month. as a qualifying person even if that parent is ($3,000 for the year), all the expenses are
entitled to claim the child as a dependent under Full-time student. You are a full-time stu- work-related. However, if you work or look for
the special rules for a child of divorced or sepa- dent if you are enrolled at a school for the num- work for only 2 months and 15 days during the
rated parents. ber of hours or classes that the school considers year and pay expenses of $250 a month, your
Page 218 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 221 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
work-related expenses are limited to $625 (2 1/2 However, expenses for before- or after- pre-school and forfeited the deposit. The for-
months ×  $250). school care of a child in kindergarten or a higher feited deposit is not for care and so is not a
grade may be expenses for care. work-related expense.Temporary absence from work. You do not Summer school and tutoring programs are Household services. Expenses you pay forhave to figure your expenses for each day dur- not for care. household services meet the work-related ex-ing a short, temporary absence from work, such
pense test if they are at least partly for theas for vacation or a minor illness, if you have to Example 1. You take your 3-year-old child well-being and protection of a qualifying person.pay for care anyway. Instead, you can figure to a nursery school that provides lunch and Household services are ordinary and usualyour credit including the expenses you paid for educational activities as a part of its preschool services done in and around your home that arethe period of absence. childcare service. The lunch and educational necessary to run your home. They include theAn absence of 2 weeks or less is a short, activities are incident to the childcare, and their services of a housekeeper, maid, or cook. How-temporary absence. An absence of more than 2 cost cannot be separated from the cost of care. ever, they do not include the services of a chauf-weeks may be considered a short, temporary You can count the total cost when you figure the feur, bartender, or gardener. See Householdabsence, depending on the circumstances. credit. Services in Publication 503 for more informa-
tion.Example. You pay a nanny to care for your Example 2. You place your 10-year-old In this chapter, the term housekeeper refers2-year-old son and 4-year-old daughter so you child in a boarding school so you can work full to any household employee whose services in-can work. You become ill and miss 4 months of time. Only the part of the boarding school ex- clude the care of a qualifying person.work but receive sick pay. You continue to pay pense that is for the care of your child is athe nanny to care for the children while you are work-related expense. You can count that part Taxes paid on wages. The taxes you payill. Your absence is not a short, temporary ab- of the expense in figuring your credit if it can be on wages for qualifying child and dependentsence, and your expenses are not considered separated from the cost of education. You can- care services are work-related expenses. Seework-related. not count any part of the amount you pay the Employment Taxes for Household Employers,
school for your child's education. later.Part-time work. If you work part-time, you
generally must figure your expenses for each Care outside your home. You can count theday. However, if you have to pay for care cost of care provided outside your home if the Payments to Relatives orweekly, monthly, or in another way that includes care is for your dependent under age 13 or any Dependentsboth days worked and days not worked, you can other qualifying person who regularly spends atfigure your credit including the expenses you least 8 hours each day in your home. You can count work-related payments you makepaid for days you did not work. Any day when
to relatives who are not your dependents, even ifDependent care center. You can countyou work at least 1 hour is a day of work.
they live in your home. However, do not countcare provided outside your home by a depen-
any amounts you pay to:dent care center only if the center complies withExample 1. You work 3 days a week. While
all state and local regulations that apply to theseyou work, your 6-year-old child attends a depen- 1. A dependent for whom you (or yourcenters.dent care center, which complies with all state spouse if you are married) can claim anA dependent care center is a place that pro-and local regulations. You can pay the center exemption,vides care for more than six persons (other than$150 for any 3 days a week or $250 for 5 days a
2. Your child who was under age 19 at thepersons who live there) and receives a fee,week. Your child attends the center 5 days a
end of the year, even if he or she is notpayment, or grant for providing services for anyweek. Your work-related expenses are limited to
your dependent,of those persons, even if the center is not run for$150 a week.
profit. 3. A person who was your spouse any timeExample 2. The facts are the same as in during the year, orCamp. The cost of sending your child to anExample 1 except the center does not offer a overnight camp is not considered a work-related 4. The parent of your qualifying person if your3-day option. The entire $250 weekly fee may be expense. The cost of sending your child to a day qualifying person is your child and undera work-related expense. camp may be a work-related expense, even if age 13.the camp specializes in a particular activity,
such as computers or soccer.Care of a Qualifying Person Joint Return TestTransportation. If a care provider takes aTo be work-related, your expenses must be to qualifying person to or from a place where care Generally, married couples must file a joint re-provide care for a qualifying person. is provided, that transportation is for the care of turn to take the credit. However, if you are legallyYou do not have to choose the least expen- the qualifying person. This includes transporta- separated or living apart from your spouse, yousive way of providing care. The cost of a paid tion by bus, subway, taxi, or private car. How- may be able to file a separate return and stillcare provider may be an expense for the care of ever, transportation not provided by a care take the credit.a qualifying person even if another care provider provider is not for the care of a qualifying person.is available at no cost. Also, if you pay the transportation cost for the Legally separated. You are not consideredExpenses are for the care of a qualifying care provider to come to your home, that ex- married if you are legally separated from yourperson only if their main purpose is the person's pense is not for care of a qualifying person. spouse under a decree of divorce or separatewell-being and protection. maintenance. You are eligible to take the creditExpenses for household services qualify if Fees and deposits. Fees you paid to an on a separate return.part of the services is for the care of qualifying agency to get the services of a care provider,persons. See Household services, later. Married and living apart. You are not consid-deposits you paid to an agency or pre-school,
ered married and are eligible to take the credit ifapplication fees, and other indirect expensesExpenses not for care. Expenses for care do all the following apply.are work-related expenses if you have to paynot include amounts you pay for food, lodging, them to get care, even though they are notclothing, education, and entertainment. How- 1. You file a separate return.directly for care. However, a forfeited deposit isever, you can include small amounts paid for not for the care of a qualifying person if care is 2. Your home is the home of a qualifying per-these items if they are incident to and cannot be not provided. son for more than half the year.separated from the cost of caring for the qualify-
ing person. 3. You pay more than half the cost of keepingExample 1. You paid a fee to an agency to up your home for the year.Education. Expenses for a child in nursery get the services of the nanny who cares for your
school, pre-school, or similar programs for chil- 2-year-old daughter while you work. The fee you 4. Your spouse does not live in your home for
dren below the level of kindergarten are ex- paid is a work-related expense. the last 6 months of the year.
penses for care. Expenses to attend
kindergarten or a higher grade are not expenses Example 2. You placed a deposit with a Costs of keeping up a home. The costs of
for care. Do not use these expenses to figure pre-school to reserve a place for your 3-year-old keeping up a home normally include property
your credit. child. You later sent your child to a different taxes, mortgage interest, rent, utility charges,
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 219

Page 222 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
home repairs, insurance on the home, and food Due diligence. If the care provider information reimburse you for some of your child and depen-
eaten at home. dent care expenses, you cannot count the ex-you give is incorrect or incomplete, your credit
penses that are reimbursed as work-relatedmay not be allowed. However, if you can showThe costs of keeping up a home do not
expenses.that you used due diligence in trying to supplyinclude payments for clothing, education, medi-
the information, you can still claim the credit.cal treatment, vacations, life insurance, trans-
Example. You paid work-related expensesportation, or mortgage principal. You can show due diligence by getting and
of $3,000. You are reimbursed $2,000 by a statekeeping the provider's completed Form W-10 orThey also do not include the purchase, per-
social services agency. You can use onlyone of the other sources of information listedmanent improvement, or replacement of prop-
$1,000 to figure your credit.earlier. Care providers can be penalized if theyerty. For example, you cannot include the cost of
do not provide this information to you or if theyreplacing a water heater. However, you can in- Medical expenses. Some expenses for theprovide incorrect information.clude the cost of repairing a water heater. care of qualifying persons who are not able to
Provider refusal. If the provider refuses to care for themselves may qualify as work-relatedDeath of spouse. If your spouse died during give you their identifying information, you should expenses and also as medical expenses. Youthe year and you do not remarry before the end report whatever information you have (such as can use them either way, but you cannot use theof the year, you generally must file a joint return the name and address) on the form you use to same expenses to claim both a credit and ato take the credit. If you do remarry before the claim the credit. Enter ªSee Attached Statementº medical expense deduction.end of the year, the credit can be claimed on in the columns calling for the information you do If you use these expenses to figure the credityour deceased spouse's separate return. not have. Then attach a statement explaining and they are more than the earned income limit
that you requested the information from the care or the dollar limit, discussed later, you can add
Provider provider, but the provider did not give you the the excess to your medical expenses. However,
information. Be sure to write your name and if you use your total expenses to figure yourIdentification Test social security number on this statement. The medical expense deduction, you cannot use any
statement will show that you used due diligence part of them to figure your credit.You must identify all persons or organizations
in trying to furnish the necessary information.that provide care for your child or dependent. Amounts excluded from your incomeUse Part I of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form under your employer's dependent careU.S. citizens and resident aliens living1040A) to show the information. benefits plan cannot be used to claim a
CAUTION
!abroad. If you are living abroad, your care
medical expense deduction.provider may not have, or be required to get, aInformation needed. To identify the care pro-
U.S. taxpayer identification number (for exam-vider, you must give the provider's:
ple, an SSN or EIN). If so, enter ªLAFCPº (Living
1. Name, Abroad Foreign Care Provider) in the space for Dependent Care Benefits
the care provider's identification number.2. Address, and If you receive dependent care benefits, your
dollar limit for purposes of the credit may be3. Taxpayer identification number.
reduced. See Reduced Dollar Limit , later. But,If the care provider is an individual, the tax- even if you cannot take the credit, you may bepayer identification number is his or her social How To Figure able to take an exclusion or deduction for thesecurity number or individual taxpayer identifi- dependent care benefits.cation number. If the care provider is an organi- the Credit
zation, then it is the employer identification Dependent care benefits. Dependent care
number (EIN). Your credit is a percentage of your work-related benefits include:
expenses. Your expenses are subject to theYou do not have to show the taxpayer identi-
1. Amounts your employer paid directly to ei-earned income limit and the dollar limit. Thefication number if the care provider is one of
ther you or your care provider for the carepercentage is based on your adjusted grosscertain tax-exempt organizations (such as a
of your qualifying person while you work,income.church or school). In this case, enter
ªTax-Exemptº in the space where the tax form 2. The fair market value of care in a daycarecalls for the number. facility provided or sponsored by your em-Figuring Total 
If you cannot provide all of the information or ployer, andWork-Related Expensesif the information is incorrect you must be able to 3. Pre-tax contributions you made under ashow that you used due diligence (discussed To figure the credit for 2008 work-related ex- dependent care flexible spending arrange-later) in trying to furnish the necessary informa- penses, count only those you paid by December ment.tion. 31, 2008. Your salary may have been reduced to pay for
Getting the information. You can use Form these benefits. If you received benefits as anExpenses prepaid in an earlier year. If youW-10 to request the required information from employee, they should be shown on your W-2pay for services before they are provided, youthe care provider. If you do not use Form W-10, form. See Statement for employee, later. Bene-can count the prepaid expenses only in the yearyou can get the information from one of the other fits you received as a partner should be shown inthe care is received. Claim the expenses for thesources listed in the instructions for Form W-10 box 13 of your Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) withlater year as if they were actually paid in thatincluding: code N. Enter the amount of these benefits onlater year.
the first line of Part III of Form 2441.1. A copy of the provider's social security
Expenses not paid until the following year.card, Exclusion or deduction. If your employerDo not count 2007 expenses that you paid in
provides dependent care benefits under a quali-2. A copy of the provider's completed Form 2008 as work-related expenses for 2008. You
fied plan, you may be able to exclude theseW-4 if he or she is your household em- may be able to claim an additional credit for
benefits from your income. Your employer canployee, them on your 2008 return, but you must figure it
tell you whether your benefit plan qualifies. Toseparately. See Payments for previous year's3. A copy of the statement furnished by your claim the exclusion, you must complete Part IIIexpenses under Amount of Credit in Publicationemployer if the provider is your employer's of either Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form503.dependent care plan, or 1040A). You cannot use Form 1040EZ.
If you had expenses in 2008 that you If you are self-employed and receive benefits4. A letter or invoice from the provider if it
did not pay until 2009, you cannot from a qualified dependent care benefit plan,shows the information.
count them when figuring your 2008 you are treated as both employer and employee.
TIP
credit. You may be able to claim a credit for themYou should keep this information with Therefore, you would not get an exclusion from
on your 2009 return.your tax records. Do not send Form wages. Instead, you would get a deduction on
W-10 (or other document containing Form 1040, Schedule C, line 14; Schedule E,
RECORDS
Expenses reimbursed. If a state social serv-this information) to the Internal Revenue Serv- line 18 or 28; or Schedule F, line 17. To claim the
ices agency pays you a nontaxable amount toice. deduction, you must use Form 2441.
Page 220 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 223 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
George's Reduced Dollar LimitThe amount you can exclude or deduct is earned income for each month is considered to
limited to the smallest of: be at least $250 if there is one qualifying person 1) Maximum allowable expenses
in your home, or at least $500 if there are two or for one qualifying person .... . $3,0001. The total amount of dependent care bene- more. 2) Minus: Dependent care benefitsfits you received during the year, George excludes from income −1,000Spouse works. If your spouse works during 3) Reduced dollar limit on expenses2. The total amount of qualified expenses you that month, use the higher of $250 (or $500) or George can use for the credit . . $2,000incurred during the year, his or her actual earned income for that month.
3. Your earned income, Spouse qualifies for part of month.  If
Amount of Credit4. Your spouse's earned income, or your spouse is a full-time student or not able to
care for himself or herself for only part of a5. $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately). To determine the amount of your credit, multiplymonth, the full $250 (or $500) still applies for thatSee Earned Income Limit, below. your work-related expenses (after applying themonth.
earned income and dollar limits) by a percent-The definition of earned income for the exclu- Both spouses qualify. If, in the samesion or deduction is the same as the definition age. This percentage depends on your adjusted
month, both you and your spouse are eitherused when figuring the credit except that earned gross income shown on Form 1040, line 38, or
full-time students or not able to care for your-income for the exclusion or deduction does not Form 1040A, line 22. The following table shows
selves, only one spouse can be considered toinclude any dependent care benefits you re- the percentage to use based on adjusted gross
have this earned income of $250 (or $500) forceive. For details or if you or your spouse had income.
that month.nontaxable combat pay, see the instructions for IF your adjusted gross THEN Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A). income is: the
Dollar Limit But not percentageStatement for employee. Your employer
Over over is:must give you a Form W-2 (or similar statement) There is a dollar limit on the amount of yourshowing in box 10 the total amount of dependent $ 0 $15,000 35%work-related expenses you can use to figure thecare benefits provided to you during the year 15,000 17,000 34%credit. This limit is $3,000 for one qualifyingunder a qualified plan. Your employer will also 17,000 19,000 33%person, or $6,000 for two or more qualifyinginclude any dependent care benefits over 19,000 21,000 32%
persons. 21,000 23,000 31%$5,000 in your wages shown on your Form W-2
23,000 25,000 30%in box 10. If you paid work-related expenses for 25,000 27,000 29%the care of two or more qualifying per-Effect of exclusion. If you exclude dependent 27,000 29,000 28%sons, the $6,000 limit does not need to
TIPcare benefits from your income, the amount of 29,000 31,000 27%be divided equally among them. For example, ifthe excluded benefits: 31,000 33,000 26%your work-related expenses for the care of one 33,000 35,000 25%qualifying person are $3,200 and your1. Is not included in your work-related ex- 35,000 37,000 24%
work-related expenses for another qualifyingpenses, and 37,000 39,000 23%
person are $2,800, you can use the total, 39,000 41,000 22%2. Reduces the dollar limit, discussed later. $6,000, when figuring the credit. 41,000 43,000 21%
43,000 No limit 20%
Yearly limit. The dollar limit is a yearly limit.Earned Income Limit
The amount of the dollar limit remains the same
The amount of work-related expenses you use no matter how long, during the year, you have a
to figure your credit cannot be more than: qualifying person in your household. Use the How To Claim $3,000 limit if you paid work-related expenses1. Your earned income for the year if you are for the care of one qualifying person at any timesingle at the end of the year, or the Creditduring the year. Use $6,000 if you paid
2. The smaller of your or your spouse's work-related expenses for the care of more than To claim the credit, you can file Form 1040 orearned income for the year if you are mar- one qualifying person at any time during the Form 1040A. You cannot claim the credit onried at the end of the year. year. Form 1040EZ.
Earned income is defined under Earned Income
Test, earlier. Form 1040. You must complete Form 2441Reduced Dollar Limit
and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the creditFor purposes of item (2), use your
spouse's earned income for the entire If you received dependent care benefits that you on Form 1040, line 48. An example of a filled-in
year, even if you were married for only exclude or deduct from your income, you must Form 2441 is at the end of this chapter.
TIP
part of the year. subtract that amount from the dollar limit that
applies to you. Your reduced dollar limit is fig- Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 2Separated spouse. If you are legally sepa- ured in Part III of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) and attach it to your Form 1040A.rated or married and living apart from your (Form 1040A). See Dependent Care Benefits, Enter the credit on your Form 1040A, line 29.spouse (as described under Joint Return Test, earlier, for information on excluding or deductingearlier), you are not considered married for pur- these benefits. Limit on credit. The amount of credit you canposes of the earned income limit. Use only your claim is limited to your regular tax (after reduc-income in figuring the earned income limit. Example. George is a widower with one tion by any allowable foreign tax credit) plus your
child and earns $24,000 a year. He paysSurviving spouse. If your spouse died during alternative minimum tax, if any.
work-related expenses of $2,900 for the care ofthe year and you file a joint return as a surviving Tax credit not refundable. You cannot gethis 4-year-old child and qualifies to claim thespouse, you are not considered married for pur- a refund for any part of the credit that is morecredit for child and dependent care expenses.poses of the earned income limit. Use only your than this limit.His employer pays an additional $1,000 under aincome in figuring the earned income limit.
dependent care benefit plan. This $1,000 is ex- Recordkeeping. You should keep rec-Community property laws. You should dis- cluded from George's income. ords of your work-related expenses.regard community property laws when you fig- Although the dollar limit for his work-related Also, if your dependent or spouse is
RECORDSure earned income for this credit. not able to care for himself or herself, your rec-expenses is $3,000 (one qualifying person),
ords should show both the nature and the lengthGeorge figures his credit on only $2,000 of theStudent-spouse or spouse not able to care
of the disability. Other records you should keep$2,900 work-related expenses he paid. This isfor self. Your spouse who is either a full-time
because his dollar limit is reduced as shown to support your claim for the credit are describedstudent or not able to care for himself or herself
next.is treated as having earned income. His or her earlier under Provider Identification Test.
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 221

Page 224 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
matched by the employer. Federal unemploy- Joan's younger child (Susan) stays at her
employer's on-site childcare center while shement (FUTA) tax is paid by the employer onlyEmployment Taxes works. The benefits from this childcare centerand provides for payments of unemployment
qualify to be excluded from her income. Hercompensation to workers who have lost theirfor Household employer reports the value of this service asjobs. Federal income tax is withheld from the
$3,000 for the year. This $3,000 is shown on heremployee's total pay if the employee asks you toEmployers Form W-2 in box 10, but is not included in tax-do so and you agree. able wages in box 1.If you pay someone to come to your home and For more information on a household em- A neighbor cares for Joan's older child (Seth)care for your dependent or spouse, you may be ployer's tax responsibilities, see Publication 926 after school, on holidays, and during the sum-a household employer. If you are a household and Schedule H (Form 1040) and its instruc- mer. Joan pays her neighbor $2,400 for thisemployer, you will need an employer identifica- tions. care.tion number (EIN) and you may have to pay Joan figures her credit on Form 2441 asemployment taxes. If the individuals who work in follows.your home are self-employed, you are not liable State employment tax. You may also have to
for any of the taxes discussed in this section. pay state unemployment tax. Contact your state 1) Work-related expenses JoanSelf-employed persons who are in business for unemployment tax office for information. You paid .................. . $ 2,400themselves are not household employees. Usu- should also find out whether you need to pay or 2) Dollar limit (2 or more qualifiedally, you are not a household employer if the collect other state employment taxes or carry individuals) ............. . $ 6,000person who cares for your dependent or spouse workers' compensation insurance. A list of state 3) Minus: Dependent care benefitsdoes so at his or her home or place of business. excluded from Joan's income . . -3,000employment tax agencies, including addressesIf you use a placement agency that exercises 4) Reduced dollar limit ........ . $ 3,000and phone numbers, is in Publication 926.control over what work is done and how it will be 5) Lesser of expenses paid ($2,400)
done by a babysitter or companion who works in or dollar limit ($3,000) ...... . $ 2,400
your home, the worker is not your employee. Percentage for AGI of $29,0006) .28This control could include providing rules of con- (28%) ................. .
7) Multiply the amount on line 5 byduct and appearance and requiring regular re- Example
the percentage on line 6 ($2,400ports. In this case, you do not have to pay
x .28) ................. . $ 672employment taxes. But, if an agency merely The following example shows how to figure the 8) Enter the amount from Formgives you a list of sitters and you hire one from credit for child and dependent care expenses for 1040, line 46 ............ . $ 1,053that list, and pay the sitter directly, the sitter may two children when employer-provided depen- 9) Enter the amount from Formbe your employee. dent care benefits are involved. The filled-in 1040, line 47 ............ . 0If you have a household employee, you may draft Form 2441  is shown at the end of this 10) Subtract line 9 from line 8 .... . $ 1,053be subject to: chapter. 11) Credit (Enter the smaller of line 7
or line 10) .............. . $ 6721. Social security and Medicare taxes,
Illustrated example. Joan Thomas is di-2. Federal unemployment tax, and
vorced and has two children, ages 3 and 9. She3. Federal income tax withholding. works at ACME Computers. Her adjusted gross
income (AGI) is $29,000, and the entire amountSocial security and Medicare taxes are gener-
ally withheld from the employee's pay and is earned income.
Page 222 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 225 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G63 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
Joan Thomas 559 00 3436
P at Green
ACME Computers
12 Ash Avenue
Hometown, TX 75240
(See W-2)
240-00-3811 2,400
2,400
29,000
29,000
2,400
672
Seth
Susan
2,400559 00 1234
559 00 5678
1,053
29,000
672
28
Thomas
Thomas
1,053
-0-
OMB No. 1545-0074Child and Dependent Care Expenses2441Form
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 21/H17075See separate instructions.
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Persons or Organizations Who Provided the Care—You must complete this part. 
(If you have more than two care providers, see the instructions.)
(b) Address
(number, street, apt. no., city, state, and ZIP code)
(d) Amount paid
(see instructions)
(c) Identifying number
(SSN or EIN)1 (a) Care provider’s
name
Credit for Child and Dependent Care Expenses
2
Add the amounts in column (c) of line 2. Do not enter more than $3,000 for one qualifying
person or $6,000 for two or more persons. If you completed Part III, enter the amount from
line 35
Enter your earned income. See instructions
3
3
If married filing jointly, enter your spouse’s earned income (if your spouse was a student
or was disabled, see the instructions); all others, enter the amount from line 4
4 4
Enter the smallest of line 3, 4, or 5
5
5
6
7
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38, or Form
1040NR, line 36
7
/H11003
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
But not
overOver
But not
overOver
.27$29,000—31,000.35$0—15,000
.2631,000—33,000.3415,000—17,000
.2533,000—35,000.3317,000—19,000
.2435,000—37,000.3219,000—21,000
.2337,000—39,000.3121,000—23,000
.3023,000—25,000
Multiply line 6 by the decimal amount on line 8. If you paid 2007 expenses in 2008, see
the instructions
9
Form 2441 (2008)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4 of the instructions. Cat. No. 11862M
Part I
Part II
Enter on line 8 the decimal amount shown below that applies to the amount on line 7
Did you receive
dependent care benefits? Yes
No
8
Complete only Part II below.
Complete Part III on the back next.
/H17075
/H17075
Caution. If the care was provided in your home, you may owe employment taxes. See the instructions for Form 1040, line 60b, or
Form 1040NR, line 56.
.
(99)
Information about your qualifying person(s). If you have more than two qualifying persons, see the instructions.
(a) Qualifying person’s name
First Last
(b) Qualifying person’s social
security number
(c) Qualified expenses you
incurred and paid in 2008 for the
person listed in column (a)
8
6
9
25,000—27,000
27,000—29,000
.29
.28
39,000—41,000
41,000—43,000
43,000—No limit
.22
.21
.20
10
12
10
13
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 46, or 
Form 1040NR, line 43
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 12
here and on Form 1040, line 48, or Form 1040NR, line 45
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 47, or Form
1040NR, line 44
11
12 Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or less, stop. You cannot take the credit
11
13
2008
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 223

Page 226 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G64 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth =page
3,000
3,000
-0-
5,400
3,000
29,000
29,000
3,000
5,000
-0-
3,000
-0-
3,000
2,400
2,400
3,000
3,000
-0-
3,000
6,000
Page 2Form 2441 (2008)
Dependent Care Benefits
Enter the total amount of dependent care benefits you received in 2008. Amounts you
received as an employee should be shown in box 10 of your Form(s) W-2. Do not include
amounts reported as wages in box 1 of Form(s) W-2. If you were self-employed or a partner,
include amounts you received under a dependent care assistance program from your sole
proprietorship or partnership
Enter the amount, if any, you carried over from 2007 and used in 2008 during the grace
period. See instructions
Enter the amount, if any, you forfeited or carried forward to 2009. See instructions
Enter the total amount of qualified expenses incurred
in 2008 for the care of the qualifying person(s)
15
18
19Enter the smaller of line 17 or 18
16
Enter your earned income. See instructions
18
20
Enter the amount shown below that applies
to you.
21
Enter the smallest of line 19, 20, or 21
19
22
Enter the amount from line 14 that you received from your sole proprietorship or partnership.
If you did not receive any such amounts, enter -0-
20
23
Taxable benefits. Subtract line 29 from line 24. If zero or less, enter -0-. Also, include this
amount on Form 1040, line 7, or Form 1040NR, line 8. On the dotted line next to Form
1040, line 7, or Form 1040NR, line 8, enter “DCB”
21
30
Part III
To claim the child and dependent care
credit, complete lines 31 through 35 below.
31
32
33
22
23
30
31 Enter $3,000 ($6,000 if two or more qualifying persons)
Subtract line 32 from line 31. If zero or less, stop. You cannot take the credit. 
Exception. If you paid 2007 expenses in 2008, see the instructions for line 9
Enter the smaller of line 33 or 34. Also, enter this amount on line 3 on the front of this
form and complete lines 4 through 13
Add lines 26 and 29
35
32
33
35
15
16
14
14
Complete line 2 on the front of this form. Do not include in column (c) any benefits shown
on line 32 above. Then, add the amounts in column (c) and enter the total here
34
34
Form 2441 (2008)
● If married filing jointly, enter your
spouse’s earned income (if your spouse
was a student or was disabled, see the
instructions for line 5).
● If married filing separately, see the
instructions for the amount to enter.
● All others, enter the amount from line 20.
/H20854
Subtract line 23 from line 1724
Enter $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately and you were required to enter your
spouse’s earned income on line 21)
25
Deductible benefits. Enter the smallest of line 22, 23, or 25. Also, include this amount
on the appropriate line(s) of your return. See instructions
26
Enter the smaller of line 22 or 2527
Enter the amount from line 2628
Excluded benefits. Subtract line 28 from line 27. If zero or less, enter -0-29
27
28
24
25
26
29
1717 Combine lines 14 through 16. See instructions
()
Page 224 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 227 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and have taxable disability income (discussedQualified Individual later under Disability income). You are retired on
permanent and total disability if:You are a qualified individual for this credit if you33. are a U.S. citizen or resident alien and either of • You were permanently and totally disabled
the following applies. when you retired, and
• You retired on disability before the close of1. You were age 65 or older at the end ofCredit for the the tax year.2008.
2. You were under age 65 at the end of 2008 Even if you do not retire formally, you may beElderly or the and all three of the following statements considered retired on disability when you haveare true. stopped working because of your disability.Disabled If you retired on disability before 1977, anda. You retired on permanent and total dis- were not permanently and totally disabled at theability (explained later). time, you can qualify for the credit if you were
b. You received taxable disability income permanently and totally disabled on January 1,Introduction for 2008. 1976, or January 1, 1977.
If you qualify, you may be able to reduce the tax c. On January 1, 2008, you had not You are considered to be under age 65you owe by taking the credit for the elderly or the reached mandatory retirement age (de- at the end of 2008 if you were borndisabled. fined later under Disability income). after January 1, 1944.
TIPThis chapter explains the following.
• Who qualifies for the credit for the elderly Permanent and total disability. You are per-Age 65. You are considered to be age 65 onor the disabled. manently and totally disabled if you cannot en-the day before your 65th birthday. Therefore, if
gage in any substantial gainful activity because• How to figure the credit. you were born on January 1, 1944, you are
of your physical or mental condition. A physicianconsidered to be age 65 at the end of 2008.
must certify that the condition has lasted or can You may be able to take the credit for the
be expected to last continuously for 12 monthselderly or the disabled if:
or more, or that the condition can be expected toU.S. Citizen or Resident Alien• You are age 65 or older, or result in death. See Physician's statement, later.
You must be a U.S. citizen or resident alien (or• You retired on permanent and total disabil- Substantial gainful activity. Substantialbe treated as a resident alien) to take the credit.ity and have taxable disability income. gainful activity is the performance of significantGenerally, you cannot take the credit if you were duties over a reasonable period of time whilea nonresident alien at any time during the tax working for pay or profit, or in work generallyUseful Items year. done for pay or profit. Full-time work (orYou may want to see: part-time work done at your employer's conve-Exceptions. You may be able to take the
nience) in a competitive work situation for atcredit if you are a nonresident alien who is mar-Publication least the minimum wage conclusively showsried to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end
that you are able to engage in substantial gainfulof the tax year and you and your spouse choose❏ 524 Credit for the Elderly or the
activity.to treat you as a U.S. resident alien. If you makeDisabled
Substantial gainful activity is not work you dothat choice, both you and your spouse are taxed❏ 554 Tax Guide for Seniors to take care of yourself or your home. It is noton your worldwide incomes.
unpaid work on hobbies, institutional therapy orIf you were a nonresident alien at the begin-❏ 967 The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
training, school attendance, clubs, social pro-ning of the year and a resident alien at the end of
grams, and similar activities. However, doingthe year, and you were married to a U.S. citizenForms (and Instructions)
this kind of work may show that you are able toor resident alien at the end of the year, you may
❏ Schedule 3 (Form 1040A) Credit for the engage in substantial gainful activity.be able to choose to be treated as a U.S. resi-
Elderly or the Disabled for Form The fact that you have not worked for somedent alien for the entire year. In that case, you
1040A Filers time is not, of itself, conclusive evidence that youmay be allowed to take the credit.
cannot engage in substantial gainful activity. For information on these choices, see chap-❏ Schedule R (Form 1040) Credit for the ter 1 of Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide forElderly or the Disabled Sheltered employment. Certain work of-Aliens. fered at qualified locations to physically or men-
tally impaired persons is considered sheltered
employment. These qualified locations are inMarried Persons sheltered workshops, hospitals, and similar in-
Are You Eligible stitutions, homebound programs, and Depart-Generally, if you are married at the end of the tax ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) sponsoredyear, you and your spouse must file a joint returnfor the Credit? homes.to take the credit. However, if you and your Compared to commercial employment, payspouse did not live in the same household at anyYou can take the credit for the elderly or the is lower for sheltered employment. Therefore,time during the tax year, you can file either jointdisabled if you meet both of the following re- one usually does not look for sheltered employ-or separate returns and still take the credit.quirements. ment if he or she can get other employment. The
Head of household. You can file as head of fact that one has accepted sheltered employ-• You are a qualified individual. household and qualify to take the credit, even if ment is not proof of that person's ability to en-
• Your income is not more than certain lim- your spouse lived with you during the first 6 gage in substantial gainful activity.
its. months of the year, if you meet all the tests. See Physician's statement. If you are under ageHead of Household in chapter 2 for the tests youYou can use Figure 33-A and Figure 33-B as 65, you must have your physician complete amust meet.guides to see if you are eligible for the credit. statement certifying that you were permanently
and totally disabled on the date you retired. YouUse Figure 33-A first to see if you are an
can use the statement in the instructions foreligible individual. If you are, go to Figure 33-B to Under Age 65 Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (Formmake sure your income is not too high to take
1040A).If you are under age 65 at the end of 2008, youthe credit.
can qualify for the credit only if you are retired onYou can take the credit only if you file permanent and total disability (discussed next)Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot
take the credit if you file Form 1040EZ.
TIP
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Page 225

Page 228 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G52 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 51.1 picas
Figure 33-A. Are You a Qualified Individual?
/H17074
Were you married at the end of the tax
year?
No
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
Did you receive taxable disability
benefits this year?
You are a qualified
individual and may be able
to take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled
unless your income
exceeds the limits in
Figure 33-B.
/H17074
Yes/H17076
You are not a qualified
individual and cannot
take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled.
/H17074
Yes
/H17073
No
/H17076
Yes
If you were a nonresident alien at any time during the tax year and were married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of the tax year, see U.S. Citizen or
Resident Alien under Qualified Individual. If you and your spouse choose to treat you as a U.S. resident alien, answer “Yes” to this question.
Mandatory retirement age is the age set by your employer at which you would have been required to retire, had you not become di sabled.
Figure 33-B. Income Limits
IF your filing status is ...
Your adjusted gross income (AGI)*
is equal to or more than ...
single, head of household, or
qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child
$17,500
married filing a joint return
and both spouses qualify in
Figure 33-A
$25,000
married filing a joint return
and only one spouse qualifies
in Figure 33-A
$20,000
married filing a separate return $12,500
THEN even if you qualify (see Figure 33-A), you CANNOT take the
credit if ...
OR the total of your nontaxable
social security and other nontaxable
pension(s) is equal to or more than ...
$5,000
$7,500
$5,000
$3,750
*AGI is the amount on Form 1040A, line 22, or Form 1040, line 38.
START HERE
/H17073
1
2
Did you live with your
spouse at any time
during the year?
/H17076
Are you a U.S. citizen or resident alien? 1
No
/H17074Yes
Are you filing a joint
return with your spouse?
Yes /H17075
Were you 65 or older at the end of
the tax year?
/H17074
No
Are you retired on permanent and
total disability?
No
/H17074
No
Did you reach mandatory retirement
age before this year?
2
/H17074
No
Page 226 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 229 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 33-1. Initial Amounts Credit Figured for You
THEN enter on line 10 You can figure the credit yourself, or the Internalof Schedule R (Form Revenue Service (IRS) will figure it for you. See1040) or Schedule 3 Figuring the Credit Yourself, next.IF your filing status is ... (Form 1040A)... If you choose to have the IRS figure the
credit for you, read the following discussion forsingle, head of household, or qualifying the form you will file (Form 1040 or 1040A).widow(er) with dependent child and, by the end  If you want the IRS to figure your tax, seeof 2008, you were chapter 30.
• 65 or older .............................. . $5,000
Form 1040. If you want the IRS to figure your• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $5,000
credit, see Form 1040 Line Entries under Tax
Figured by IRS in chapter 30.married filing a joint return and by the end of
2008 Form 1040A. If you want the IRS to figure your• both of you were 65 or older ................. . $7,500 credit, see Form 1040A Line Entries under Tax
• both of you were under 65 and one of you retired on Figured by IRS in chapter 30.$5,000permanent and total disability1 ................. .
• both of you were under 65 and both of you retired on $7,500permanent and total disability2 ................. .
Figuring the Credit• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under $7,50065 and retired on permanent and total disability3 .... .
Yourself• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under $5,00065 and not retired on permanent and total disability .. . If you figure the credit yourself, fill out the front of
either Schedule R (if you are filing Form 1040) ormarried filing a separate return and you did not
Schedule 3 (if you are filing Form 1040A). Next,live with your spouse at any time during the year
fill out Part III of either Schedule R or Scheduleand, by the end of 2008, you were 3.• 65 or older .............................. . $3,750
There are five steps in Part III to deter-• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $3,750
mine the amount of your credit:
1Amount cannot be more than the taxable disability income.
2Amount cannot be more than your combined taxable disability income.
3Amount is $5,000 plus the taxable disability income of the spouse under age 65, but not more than $7,500.
1. Determine your initial amount (lines
10±12).You do not have to file this statement with the time you are absent from work be-
cause of permanent and total disability.your Form 1040 or Form 1040A, but you must 2. Determine the total of any nontaxable so-
keep it for your records. cial security and certain other nontaxable
Payments that are not disability income. pensions and disability benefits you re-Veterans. If the Department of Veterans Af- Any payment you receive from a plan that does ceived (lines 13a, 13b, and 13c).fairs (VA) certifies that you are permanently and not provide for disability retirement is not disabil-totally disabled, you can substitute VA Form 3. Determine your excess adjusted gross in-ity income. Any lump-sum payment for accrued21-0172, Certification of Permanent and Total come (lines 14±17).annual leave that you receive when you retire onDisability, for the physician's statement you are disability is a salary payment and is not disability 4. Determine the total of Steps 2 and 3 (linerequired to keep. VA Form 21-0172 must be income. 18).signed by a person authorized by the VA to do For purposes of the credit for the elderly or 5. Determine your credit (lines 19±24 ofso. You can get this form from your local VA the disabled, disability income does not include Schedule R or lines 19±22 of Schedule 3).regional office. amounts you receive after you reach mandatory
retirement age. Mandatory retirement age is the These steps are discussed in more detail next.Physician's statement obtained in earlier age set by your employer at which you wouldyear. If you got a physician's statement in an have had to retire, had you not become dis-earlier year and, due to your continued disabled abled.condition, you were unable to engage in any
substantial gainful activity during 2008, you may Step 1. Determine Income Limitsnot need to get another physician's statement
Initial Amountfor 2008. For a detailed explanation of the condi-
To determine if you can claim the credit, youtions you must meet, see the instructions for To figure the credit, you must first determinemust consider two income limits. The first limit isPart II of Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 your initial amount using lines 10 through 12.the amount of your adjusted gross income(Form 1040A). If you meet the required condi- See Table 33-1.  Your initial amount is on line(AGI). The second limit is the amount of nontax-tions, check the box on line 2 of Part II of Sched- 12.able social security and other nontaxable pen-ule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (Form 1040A). sions you received. The limits are shown inIf you checked box 4, 5, or 6 in Part I of either Initial amounts for persons under age 65. IfFigure 33-B, earlier.Schedule R or Schedule 3, enter in the space you are a qualified individual under age 65, yourIf both your AGI and nontaxable pensionsabove the box on line 2 in Part II the first name(s) initial amount cannot be more than your taxableare less than the income limits, you may be able disability income.of the spouse(s) for whom the box is checked. to claim the credit. See Figuring the Credit Your-
self, later.Disability income. If you are under age 65, Step 2. Total CertainIf either your AGI or your nontaxableyou must also have taxable disability income to
Nontaxable Pensions pensions are equal to or more than thequalify for the credit. Disability income must
income limits, you cannot take the
CAUTION
!meet both of the following requirements. and Benefitscredit.
• It must be paid under your employer's ac- Step 2 is to figure the total amount of nontaxablecident or health plan or pension plan. social security and certain other nontaxable pay-
• It must be included in your income as ments you received during the year. You must
wages (or payments instead of wages) for reduce your initial amount by these payments.
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Page 227

Page 230 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Enter these nontaxable payments on lines You figure your excess adjusted gross in- You cannot take the credit because your
13a or 13b, and total them on line 13c. If you are nontaxable social security (line 2a) plus yourcome as follows:
married filing a joint return, you must enter the excess adjusted gross income (line 2b) is more
1. Subtract from your adjusted gross incomecombined amount of nontaxable payments both than your initial amount (line 1).
(Form 1040, line 38 or Form 1040A, lineyou and your spouse receive. Limit on credit. The amount of credit you can22) the amount shown for your filing statusWorksheets are provided in the in- claim is generally limited to the amount of yourin the following list.structions for Forms 1040 and 1040A tax. For more information, see the instructions
to help you determine if any of your for Part III, Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedulea. $7,500 if you are single, a head of
TIP
social security benefits (or equivalent railroad 3 (Form 1040A).household, or a qualifying widow(er)
retirement benefits) are taxable. with a dependent child,
Nontaxable payments. Include the following b. $10,000 if you are married filing a joint Examplenontaxable payments in the amounts you enter return, or
on lines 13a and 13b. The following example illustrates the credit forc. $5,000 if you are married filing a sepa- the elderly or the disabled. The initial amount is• Nontaxable social security payments. This rate return and you and your spouse did taken from Table 33-1, shown earlier.is the nontaxable part of the benefits not live in the same household at any
shown in box 5 of Form SSA-1099, Social time during the tax year. James Davis is 58 years old, single, and filesSecurity Benefit Statement, which includes Form 1040A. In 1998 he retired on permanentdisability benefits, before deducting any 2. Divide the result of (1) by 2. and total disability, and he is still permanentlyamounts withheld to pay premiums on and totally disabled. He got the required physi-supplementary Medicare insurance, and cian's statement in 1998, and kept it with hisbefore any reduction because of benefits Step 4. Determine the Total records. His physician signed on line B of thereceived under workers' compensation. statement. This year James checks the box inof Steps 2 and 3(Do not include a lump-sum death benefit Part II of Schedule 3. He does not need to getpayment you may receive as a surviving another statement for 2008.To determine if you can take the credit, you mustspouse, or a surviving child's insurance He received the following income for theadd (on line 18) the amounts you figured in Stepbenefit payments you may receive as a year:2 and Step 3.guardian.)
Nontaxable social security ....... . $1,500• Nontaxable railroad retirement pension IF the total of Steps Interest (taxable) ............. . 100payments treated as social security. This 2 and 3 is ... THEN ... Taxable disability pension ....... . 11,400is the nontaxable part of the benefits equal to or more you cannot take theshown in box 5 of Form RRB-1099, Pay- James' adjusted gross income is $11,500than the amount in credit.ments by the Railroad Retirement Board. ($11,400 + $100). He figures the credit onStep 1
Schedule 3 as follows:• Nontaxable pension or annuity payments less than the you can take theor disability benefits that are paid under a 1) Initial amount ............. . $5,000amount in Step 1 credit.law administered by the Department of 2) Taxable disability pension .... . 11,400
Veterans Affairs (VA). (Do not include 3) Smaller of (1) or (2) ......... . 5,000
amounts received as a pension, annuity, 4) Nontaxable social security
or similar allowance for personal injuries benefits ............ . $1,500Step 5. Determine Youror sickness resulting from active service in 5) Excess adjusted gross
incomethe armed forces of any country or in the Credit
($11,500 ± $7,500) ÷  2 . . 2,000National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin-
6) Add lines 2 and 3 ..... . 3,500If you can take the credit, subtract the amountistration, or the Public Health Service, or
7) Subtract line 6 from line 3determined in Step 4 (line 18) from the amountas a disability annuity under section 808 of
(Do not enter less than -0-) .... . 1,500the Foreign Service Act of 1980.) determined in Step 1(line 12) and multiply the 8) Multiply line 7 by 15% (.15) .... . 225result by 15%.• Pension or annuity payments or disability 9) Enter the amount from
In certain cases, the amount of your creditbenefits that are excluded from income Form 1040A, line 28 ... . 246
may be limited. See Limit on credit, later.under any provision of federal law other 10) Enter any amounts from
Form 1040A, line 29 ... . -0-than the Internal Revenue Code. (Do not
11) Subtract line 10 from line 9 246Example. You are 66 years old and yourinclude amounts that are a return of your
12) Creditcost of a pension or annuity. These spouse is 64. Your spouse is not disabled. You
(Enter the smaller of line 8amounts do not reduce your initial file a joint return on Form 1040. Your adjusted or line 11) .......... . $225amount.) gross income is $14,630. Together you received
$3,200 from social security, which was nontax- His credit is $225. He enters $225 on line 30
of Form 1040A. The Schedule 3 for James Davisable. You figure the credit as follows:You should be sure to take into ac-
is not shown.count all of the nontaxable amounts Applying the 5 Step Process Amountyou receive. These amounts are veri-
CAUTION
! 1)Initial amount ............ . $5,000fied by the IRS through information supplied by 2)Total of social security $3,200other government agencies. and
other nontaxable
pensionsStep 3. Determine Excess 3)Excess adjusted gross
Adjusted Gross Income income
($14,630 − $10,000) ÷  2 2,315
You also must reduce your initial amount by your 4)Add line 2 and line 3 .. . 5,515
excess adjusted gross income. Figure your ex- 5)Subtract line 4 from line 1
cess adjusted gross income on lines 14±17. (Do not enter less than -0-) ... . -0-
Page 228 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 231 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
credit because there is no tax to reduce.
But you may be able to take the additionalQualifying Child child tax credit. See Additional Child Tax
34. Credit, later.A qualifying child for purposes of the child tax
credit is a child who: 2. Your modified adjusted gross income
(AGI) is above the amount shown below1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster for your filing status.Child Tax Credit child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis-
ter, or a descendant of any of them (for a. Married filing jointly - $110,000.
example, your grandchild, niece, or b. Single, head of household, or qualifyingnephew), widow(er) - $75,000.What's New 2. Was under age 17 at the end of 2008, c. Married filing separately - $55,000.
3. Did not provide over half of his or her ownMidwestern disaster tax relief. If your main
support for 2008,home was in a Midwestern disaster area when Modified AGI. For purposes of the child taxthe disaster occurred and your 2008 earned 4. Lived with you for more than half of 2008 credit, your modified AGI is your AGI plus theincome is less than your 2007 earned income, (see Exceptions to time lived with you be- following amounts that may apply to you.you may be able to elect to use your 2007 low), and
earned income to figure your 2008 additional • Any amount excluded from income be-
5. Was a U.S. citizen, a U.S. national, or achild tax credit. See Form 8812, Additional Child cause of the exclusion of income from 
resident of the United States. If the childTax Credit, and Publication 4492-B, Information Puerto Rico. On the dotted line next to line
was adopted, see Adopted child below.for Affected Taxpayers in the Midwestern Disas- 38, Form 1040, enter the amount excluded
ter Areas, for more information. and identify as ªEPRI.º Also attach a copyFor each qualifying child you must either
of any Form(s) 499R-2/W-2PR to your re-check the box on Form 1040 or Form 1040A,Earned income. The earned income thresh- turn.line 6c, column (4), or complete Form 8901 (ifold generally needed to claim the additional the child is not your dependent). • Any amount on line 45 or line 50 of Formchild tax credit has been reduced to $8,500.
2555, Foreign Earned Income.
Example. Your son turned 17 on December
• Any amount on line 18 of Form 2555-EZ,30, 2008. He is a citizen of the United States and
Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.you claimed him as a dependent on your return.
He is not a qualifying child for the child tax creditIntroduction • Any amount on line 15 of Form 4563, Ex-
because he was not under age 17 at the end of clusion of Income for Bona Fide ResidentsThe child tax credit is a credit that may reduce 2008. of American Samoa.your tax by as much as $1,000 for each of your
qualifying children. Exceptions to time lived with you. A child is If you do not have any of the above, yourconsidered to have lived with you for all of 2008The additional child tax credit is a credit you modified AGI is the same as your AGI.if the child was born or died in 2008 and yourmay be able to take if you are not able to claim
home was this child's home for the entire time hethe full amount of the child tax credit. AGI. Your AGI is the amount on line 38,
or she was alive. Temporary absences for spe- Form 1040, or line 22, Form 1040A.This chapter explains the following. cial circumstances, such as for school, vacation,
• Who is a qualifying child. medical care, military service, or detention in a
juvenile facility, count as time lived at home.• How much is the credit. There are also exceptions for kidnapped chil- Claiming the Credit• How to claim the credit. dren and children of divorced or separated par-
ents. For details, see Residency Test, in chapter• Why you should check your tax withhold- To claim the child tax credit, you must file Form3.ing. 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot claim the child
tax credit on Form 1040EZ. You must provideQualifying child of more than one person. A
the name and identification number (usually aspecial rule applies if your qualifying child is theThe child tax credit and the additional social security number) on your tax return (orqualifying child of more than one person. Forchild tax credit should not be confused Form 8901) for each qualifying child.details, see Special Test for Qualifying Child ofwith the child and dependent care
CAUTION
! Answer the Questions in your form instruc-More Than One Person, in chapter 3.credit discussed in chapter 32. tions for line 52, Form 1040, or line 33, FormAdopted child. An adopted child is always 1040A, to find out which child tax credit work-If you have no tax. Credits, such as the child treated as your own child. An adopted child sheet you can use to figure the credit.tax credit, the adoption credit, or the credit for includes a child lawfully placed with you for legal If you answer ªYesº to question 1, 2, or 3 inchild and dependent care expenses, are used to adoption. your Form 1040 instructions or question 1 inreduce tax. If your tax on Form 1040, line 46, or If you are a U.S. citizen or U.S. national and your Form 1040A instructions, you must com-Form 1040A, line 28, is zero, do not figure the your adopted child lived with you as a member of plete the child tax credit worksheet in Publica-child tax credit because there is no tax to re- your household all year, that child meets condi- tion 972. Otherwise, you can use the Child Taxduce. However, you may qualify for the addi- tion (5) above to be a qualifying child for the child Credit Worksheet in your Form 1040 or Formtional child tax credit on line 66 (Form 1040) or tax credit. 1040A instructions. (See the filled-in example ,line 41 (Form 1040A). later.)
Useful Items
Amount of CreditYou may want to see:
Additional Child TaxThe maximum amount you can claim for thePublication
credit is $1,000 for each qualifying child. Credit❏ 972 Child Tax Credit
This credit is for certain individuals who get lessLimits on the CreditForm (and Instructions)
than the full amount of the child tax credit. The❏ 8812 Additional Child Tax Credit You must reduce your child tax credit if either (1) additional child tax credit may give you a refund
or (2) applies. even if you do not owe any tax.❏ 8901 Information on Qualifying Children
Who Are Not Dependents 1. The amount on line 46, Form 1040, or line How to claim the additional child tax credit.
❏ W-4 Employee's Withholding Allowance 28, Form 1040A, is less than the credit. If To claim the additional child tax credit, follow the
Certificate this amount is zero, you cannot take this steps below.
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 229

Page 232 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Make sure you figured the amount, if any,
of your child tax credit. See Claiming the
Credit, earlier.
2. If you answered ªYesº on line 4 or line 5 of
the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in the
Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions, or
line 13 of the Child Tax Credit Worksheet
in Publication 972, use Form 8812 to see if
you can take the additional child tax credit.
3. If you have an additional child tax credit on
line 13 of Form 8812, carry it to line 66,
Form 1040, or line 41, Form 1040A.
Checking Your
Withholding
The child tax credit decreases your tax. You can
check your tax withholding by using Publication
919, How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding.
If you are having too much tax withheld, and
you prefer to have the money during the year,
you may be able to decrease your withholding.
You do this by completing a new Form W-4 and
giving it to your employer.
Example
Amy Brown files as head of household and has
two dependent children under age 17. The chil-
dren are qualifying children for purposes of the
child tax credit. Amy's only income is her salary
of $30,350. Amy chooses to itemize her deduc-
tions and files Form 1040. Her AGI, shown on
line 38 of her Form 1040, is $30,350. This is her
taxable earned income.
Amy does not file Form 2555, 2555-EZ, or
4563. She does not exclude income from Puerto
Rico. Her modified AGI is $30,350.
Amy's tax, shown on line 46 of her Form
1040, is $1,334. She claims a $225 credit for
child and dependent care expenses on line 48.
She claims a $1,029 earned income credit on
line 64a. She has no other credits.
After answering the Questions in the Form
1040 instructions for line 52, she completes the
child tax credit worksheet to figure her child tax
credit of $1,109. Amy's completed questions
and child tax credit worksheet are shown later.
Amy reads the TIP in the worksheet and
finds that she may be able to take the additional
child tax credit. See Additional Child Tax Credit
and Amy's completed Form 8812, later.
Filled-in Questions for Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
Who Must Use
Pub. 972
Questions Pub.
972
Keep this graphic. Ask for text changes. From SGML conversion.
/H12011
3. Are you excluding income from Puerto Rico or are you
filing any of the following forms?
● Form 2555 or 2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned
income).
● Form 4563 (exclusion of income for residents of
American Samoa).
No. Continue
Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
/H17074
STOP
2. Are you claiming any of the following credits?
● Residential energy efficient property credit, Form 5695.
No. Use the
worksheet on
page 43 to figure
your credit.
Yes. 
You must use
Pub. 972 to figure your
child tax credit. You will
also need the form(s) listed
above for any credit(s) you
are claiming.
/H12011
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 38, more than the amount
shown below for your filing status?
● Married filing jointly – $110,000
● Single, head of household, or qualifying widow(er) –
$75,000
● Married filing separately – $55,000
No. Go to question 2.Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
STOP /H12011
● Mortgage interest credit, Form 8396.
● District of Columbia first-time homebuyer credit, 
Form 8859.
● Adoption credit, Form 8839.
STOP
Page 230 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

Page 233 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G99 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
2
2,000
1,334
1,109
225
1,109
225
24811v37 -- 1040 Instructions
/H12011
/H12011
Child Tax Credit Worksheet—Line 52
1040
Yes. STOP
● To be a qualifying child for the child tax credit, the child must be under age 17 at the end
of 2008 and meet the other requirements listed on page 17.
● Do not use this worksheet if you answered “Yes” to question 1, 2, or 3 on page 42. Instead, use Pub. 972.
1.
4.
5.
1/H11003Number of qualifying children: $1,000.
Enter the result.
Are the amounts on lines 2 and 3 the same?
TIP 
Y ou cannot take this credit because there is no tax
to reduce. However, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the below .
No. Subtract line 3 from line 2.
Is the amount on line 1 more than the amount on line 4?
TIP 
Yes. Enter the amount from line 4.
Also, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the
below.
No. Enter the amount from line 1.
This is your child tax
credit.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 52.
You may be able to take the additional child tax credit
on Form 1040, line 66, if you answered “Yes” on line 4 or
line 5 above.
● First, complete your Form 1040 through line 65.
● Then, use Form 8812 to figure any additional child tax
credit.
4
/H20854
5
/H17076
2. 2Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 46.
3. Add the amounts from Form 1040:
3
Keep for Y our Records
TIP
CAUTION
Line 47
+Line 48
+Line 49
Enter the total.+Line 51
+Line 50
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 231

Page 234 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G3A Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
2,000
1,109
891
30,350
Amy Brown 012 00 5678
21,850
3,278
891
Yes. Subtract $8,500 from the amount on line 4a. Enter the result
OMB No. 1545-0074
Additional Child Tax Credit8812Form
Complete and attach to Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 47
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Form 8812 (2008)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form. Cat. No. 10644E
3
2
4a
6
Withheld social security and Medicare taxes from Form(s) W-2, boxes 4 and
6. If married filing jointly, include your spouse’s amounts with yours. If you
worked for a railroad, see instructions on back
Add lines 7 and 8
1
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
27 and 58, plus any taxes that you identified using code
“UT” and entered on the dotted line next to line 61.
Enter -0-.
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
64a and 65.
Enter the total of the amount from Form 1040A, line
40a, plus any excess social security and tier 1 RRTA
taxes withheld that you entered to the left of line 43
(see instructions on back).
Enter the amount from line 1 of your Child Tax Credit Worksheet on page 43 of the Form 1040 instructions,
page 38 of the Form 1040A instructions, or page 19 of the Form 1040NR instructions. If you used Pub.
972, enter the amount from line 8 of the worksheet on page 4 of the publication
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 52, Form 1040A, line 33, or Form 1040NR, line 47
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero, stop; you cannot take this credit
8
9
/H20854
6
/H20854
1040A filers:
1040 filers:
1040 filers:
1040A filers:
1
2
13
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 66,
Form 1040A, line 41, or
Form 1040NR, line 61.
/H17076
/H17076
8812
1040
1040A
. . . . . . . . . .
3
Earned income (see instructions on back). If your main home was in a
Midwestern disaster area when the disaster occurred, and you are electing to
use your 2007 earned income, check here
/H17075
5 Is the amount on line 4a more than $8,500?
No. Leave line 5 blank and enter -0- on line 6.
4a
5
Multiply the amount on line 5 by 15% (.15) and enter the result
7
Next. Do you have three or more qualifying children?
No. If line 6 is zero, stop; you cannot take this credit. Otherwise, skip Part II and enter the
smaller of line 3 or line 6 on line 13.
Ye s .
7
8
9
10
10
11 Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0- 11
12 12Enter the larger of line 6 or line 11
Next, enter the smaller of line 3 or line 12 on line 13.
13 This is your additional child tax credit
Part III
Part I
Part II
All Filers
Certain Filers Who Have Three or More Qualifying Children
Additional Child Tax Credit
If line 6 is equal to or more than line 3, skip Part II and enter the amount from line 3 on
line 13. Otherwise, go to line 7.
(99)
4b
Nontaxable combat pay (see instructions on
back)
b
1040NR
. . . . . . . . . .
1040
1040A. . . . . . . . . .
1040NR. . . . . . . . . .
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040NR, line
53, plus any taxes that you identified using code "UT"
and entered on the dotted line next to line 57.
1040NR filers:
Enter the amount from Form 1040NR, line 60.1040NR filers:
2008
/H12011
/H12011
Page 232 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

Page 235 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 35-1. Comparison of Education Credits
Hope Credit Lifetime Learning Credit
35. Up to $1,800 credit ($3,600 if a student in a Up to $2,000 credit ($4,000 if a student in a 
Midwestern disaster area) per eligible Midwestern disaster area) per return
student
Education Available ONLY until the first 2 years of Available for all years of postsecondary 
postsecondary education are completed education and for courses to acquire or 
improve job skills
Credits
Available ONLY for 2 years per eligible Available for an unlimited number of years
student
Student must be pursuing an undergraduate Student does not need to be pursuing a degree What's New degree or other recognized educational or other recognized education credential
credential
Income limits increased. Beginning in 2008,
Student must be enrolled at least half time for Available for one or more coursesthe amount of your Hope or lifetime learning
at least one academic period beginningcredit is gradually reduced (phased out) if your
during the yearmodified adjusted gross income (MAGI) is be-
tween $48,000 and $58,000 ($96,000 and No felony drug conviction on student's record Felony drug conviction rule does not apply
$116,000 if you file a joint return). You cannot
claim a credit if your MAGI is $58,000 or more
($116,000 or more if you file a joint return). This of years for which you can claim a lifetime learn-
is an increase from the 2007 limits of $47,000 ing credit based on the same student's ex-Introductionand $57,000 ($94,000 and $114,000 if filing a penses. The differences between the two credits
joint return). For more information, see Effect of are summarized in Table 35-1.This chapter discusses two tax credits (referred
the Amount of Your Income on the Amount of to here as education credits) available to per-
Your Credit, later. sons who pay expenses for higher education. Useful Items
They are: You may want to see:Maximum amount of Hope credit increased.
• The Hope credit, andBeginning in 2008, the maximum amount of the PublicationHope credit has increased to $1,800. This is an • The lifetime learning credit.
❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Educationincrease from the 2007 maximum amount of The chapter will do the following.$1,650.
Form (and Instructions)• Give you general information that appliesThe amount of the Hope credit (per eligible
to both of the credits.student) is the sum of 100% of the first $1,200 of ❏ 8863 Education Credits (Hope and
qualified education expenses you paid for the Lifetime Learning Credits)• Give you specific information about each
eligible student and 50% of the next $1,200 of of the credits.
qualified education expenses you paid for that
• Help you choose which of the credits tostudent. For more information, see Figuring the claim.Credit under Information for Only the Hope
Information for BothCredit. • Show you how to figure the credit you
choose. the Hope and LifetimeStudents in Midwestern disaster areas. The
following changes apply only to students attend-
Can you claim both education credits this Learning Creditsing an eligible educational institution in a Mid-
year. For each student, you can elect for anywestern disaster area in the states of Arkansas,
year only one of the credits. For example, if you Several rules are common to both educationIllinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minne-
elect to take the Hope credit for a child on your credits. These are discussed below.sota, Missouri, Nebraska, and Wisconsin. 2008 tax return, you cannot, for that same child,
• Hope credit increased. The Hope credit also claim the lifetime learning credit for 2008. Can You Claim a Creditfor a student in a Midwestern disaster area If you are eligible to claim the Hope credit
is 100% of the first $2,400 of qualified ed- and you are also eligible to claim the lifetime The following rules will help you determine if youucation expenses and 50% of the next learning credit for the same student in the same are eligible to claim an education credit on your$2,400 of qualified education expenses for year, you can choose to claim either credit, but tax return.a maximum credit of $4,800 per student. not both. For 2008, if the total qualified educa-
For more information, see Figuring the tion expenses for a student are less than $9,000,
Credit under Information for Only the Hope it will generally be to your benefit to claim the Who Can Claim a Credit
Credit. Hope credit.
Generally, you can claim an education credit ifIf you pay qualified education expenses for• Lifetime learning credit increased. The all three of the following requirements are met.more than one student in the same year, youlifetime learning credit rate for a student in can choose to take credits on a per-student, • You pay qualified education expenses ofa Midwestern disaster area is 40%. For per-year basis. This means that, for example, higher education. more information, see Figuring the Credit you can claim the Hope credit for one student Note. Qualified education expenses paidunder Information for Only the Lifetime and the lifetime learning credit for another stu- by a dependent for whom you claim anLearning Credit. dent in the same year. exemption, or by a third party for that de-• Definition of qualified expenses ex- pendent, are considered paid by you.panded. The definition of qualified educa- Differences between the Hope and lifetime • You pay the education expenses for antion expenses for the education credits is learning credits. There are several differ- eligible student.expanded for students in a Midwestern ences between these two credits. For example,
disaster area. For more information, see you can claim the Hope credit based on the • The eligible student is either yourself, your
Students in Midwestern disaster areas same student's expenses for no more than 2 spouse, or a dependent for whom you
under Qualified Education Expenses. years. However, there is no limit on the number claim an exemption on your tax return.
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 233

Page 236 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ªQualified education expensesº are defined expenses not refunded when a student with- Students in Midwestern disaster areas. The
later under What Expenses Qualify . A ªdepen- definition of qualified education expenses is ex-draws.
dent for whom you claim an exemptionº is de- panded for students in a Midwestern disaster
fined later under Who Can Claim a Dependent's area. In addition to tuition and fees required for
Expenses. ªEligible studentsº are defined differ- enrollment or attendance at an eligible educa-Qualified Education Expenses
ently for each credit. See Who Is an Eligible tional institution, qualified education expenses
For purposes of an education credit, qualifiedStudent under the specific information for either for a student in a Midwestern disaster area in-
education expenses are tuition and certain re-the Hope or lifetime learning credit. clude the following.
lated expenses required for enrollment or at-You may find Figure 35-A, at the end of the
1. Books, supplies, and equipment requiredtendance at an eligible educational institution.chapter, helpful in determining if you can claim
for enrollment or attendance at an eligiblean education credit on your tax return.
educational institutionEligible educational institution. An eligible
educational institution is any college, university, 2. For a special needs student, expenses that
vocational school, or other postsecondary edu-Who Cannot Claim a Credit are necessary for that person's enrollment
cational institution eligible to participate in a stu- or attendance at an eligible educational in-You cannot claim an education credit for 2008 if dent aid program administered by the stitution.any of the following apply. Department of Education. It includes virtually all 3. For a student who is at least a half-timeaccredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-• Your filing status is married filing sepa- student, the reasonable costs of room andvately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-rately. board, but only to the extent that the costsstitutions. The educational institution should be are not more than the greater of the follow-• You are listed as a dependent in the Ex- able to tell you if it is an eligible educational ing two amounts.emptions section on another person's tax institution.return (such as your parents'). See Who Certain educational institutions located a. The allowance for room and board, asCan Claim a Dependent's Expenses, later. outside the United States also participate in the determined by the eligible educational
• Your MAGI is $58,000 or more ($116,000 U.S. Department of Education's Federal Stu- institution, that was included in the cost
or more in the case of a joint return). dent Aid (FSA) programs. of attendance (for federal financial aid
MAGI is explained later under Effect of the purposes) for a particular academic pe-
Amount of Your Income on the Amount of riod and living arrangement of the stu-Related expenses. Student-activity fees and
Your Credit. dent.expenses for course-related books, supplies,
and equipment are included in qualified educa-• You (or your spouse) were a nonresident b. The actual amount charged if the stu-tion expenses only if the fees and expensesalien for any part of 2008 and the nonresi- dent is residing in housing owned ormust be paid to the institution as a condition ofdent alien did not elect to be treated as a operated by the eligible educational in-enrollment or attendance.resident alien for tax purposes. More infor- stitution.
In the following examples, assume that eachmation on nonresident aliens can be found
student is an eligible student at an eligible edu-in Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for You will need to contact the eligible educa-
cational institution.Aliens. tional institution for qualified room and board
costs.• You claim a tuition and fees deduction for Example 1. Jackson is a sophomore in Uni-the same student in 2008. versity V's degree program in dentistry. This
year, in addition to tuition, he is required to pay a No Double Benefit Allowed
fee to the university for the rental of the dentalWhat Expenses Qualify equipment he will use in this program. Because  You cannot do any of the following.
the equipment rental fee must be paid to Univer-The education credits are based on qualified • Deduct higher education expenses onsity V for enrollment and attendance, Jackson'seducation expenses you pay for yourself, your your income tax return (as, for example, aequipment rental fee is a qualified expense.spouse, or a dependent for whom you claim an business expense) and also claim an edu-
exemption on your tax return. Generally, a credit cation credit based on those same ex-Example 2. Donna and Charles, bothis allowed for qualified education expenses paid penses.first-year students at College W, are required toin 2008 for an academic period beginning in have certain books and other reading materials • Claim an education credit in the same2008 or in the first 3 months of 2009. to use in their mandatory first-year classes. The year you are claiming a tuition and feesFor example, if you paid $1,500 in December college has no policy about how students should deduction for the same student.2008 for qualified tuition for the Spring 2009 obtain these materials, but any student whosemester beginning in January 2009, you may • Claim a Hope credit and a lifetime learningpurchases them from College W's bookstore willbe able to use that $1,500 in figuring your 2008 credit based on the same qualified educa-receive a bill directly from the college. Charlescredit. tion expenses.bought his books from a friend, so what he paid
Academic period. An academic period in- • Claim an education credit based on thefor them is not a qualified education expense.
cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or other same expenses used to figure the tax-freeDonna bought hers at College W's bookstore.
period of study (such as a summer school ses- portion of a distribution from a CoverdellAlthough Donna paid College W directly for her
sion) as reasonably determined by an educa- education savings account (ESA) or quali-first-year books and materials, her payment is
tional institution. In the case of an educational fied tuition program (QTP).not a qualified expense because the books and
institution that uses credit hours or clock hours materials are not required to be purchased from • Claim a credit based on qualified educa-and does not have academic terms, each pay- College W for enrollment or attendance at the tion expenses paid with a tax-free scholar-ment period can be treated as an academic institution. ship, grant, or employer-providedperiod. educational assistance. See AdjustmentsExample 3. When Marci enrolled at College to Qualified Education Expenses, next.Paid with borrowed funds. You can claim an X for her freshman year, she had to pay a sepa-education credit for qualified education ex- rate student activity fee in addition to her tuition.penses paid with the proceeds of a loan. Use the This activity fee is required of all students, and is Adjustments to Qualifiedexpenses to figure the education credit for the used solely to fund on-campus organizations Education Expensesyear in which the expenses are paid, not the and activities run by students, such as the stu-year in which the loan is repaid. Treat loan dent newspaper and the student government. If you pay qualified education expenses withpayments sent directly to the educational institu- No portion of the fee covers personal expenses. certain tax-free funds, you cannot claim a credittion as paid on the date the institution credits the Although labeled as a student activity fee, the for those amounts. You must reduce the quali-student's account. fee is required for Marci's enrollment and attend- fied education expenses by the amount of any
ance at College X. Therefore, it is a qualifiedStudent withdraws from class(es). You can tax-free educational assistance and refund(s)
expense.claim an education credit for qualified education you received.
Page 234 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 237 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax-free educational assistance. This in- allocated to expenses other than qualified edu- IF you... THEN only...cludes: cation expenses. Jackie is treated as paying the
claim an exemption you can claim anentire $3,000 tuition with other funds and can• Tax-free parts of scholarships and fellow- on your tax return for education creditfigure her education credit on the entire $3,000.ships (see chapter 12 of this publication a dependent who is based on thatand chapter 1 of Publication 970), an eligible student dependent's
expenses. The• Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publication Expenses That Do Not Qualify dependent cannot970), claim a credit.Qualified education expenses do not include• Employer-provided educational assistance amounts paid for: do not claim an the dependent can(see chapter 11 of Publication 970),
exemption on your claim an education• Insurance,• Veterans' educational assistance (see tax return for a credit. You cannot• Medical expenses (including studentchapter 1 of Publication 970), and dependent who is an claim a credit based
health fees), eligible student on this dependent's• Any other nontaxable (tax-free) payments (even if entitled to expenses.• Room and board (but see Students in Mid-(other than gifts or inheritances) received the exemption)western disaster areas under Qualifiedas educational assistance.
Education Expenses, earlier, for an excep-
tion), Expenses paid by dependent. If you claimRefunds. Qualified education expenses do
an exemption on your tax return for an eligible• Transportation, ornot include expenses for which you, or someone
student who is your dependent, treat any ex-else who paid qualified education expenses on • Similar personal, living, or family ex- penses paid (or deemed paid) by your depen-behalf of a student, receive a refund. For more penses. dent as if you had paid them. Include theseinformation, see Refunds in chapters 2 and 3 of
expenses when figuring the amount of your edu-This is true even if the amount must be paid toPublication 970.
cation credit.the institution as a condition of enrollment or
Amounts that do not reduce qualified educa- attendance. Qualified education expenses paid di-tion expenses. Do not reduce qualified edu- rectly to an eligible educational institu-cation expenses by amounts paid with funds the Sports, games, hobbies, and noncredit tion for your dependent under a
TIPstudent receives as: courses. Qualified education expenses gen- court-approved divorce decree are treated aserally do not include expenses that relate to any• Payment for services, such as wages, paid by your dependent.course of instruction or other education that in-
• A loan, volves sports, games or hobbies, or any non- Expenses paid by you. If you claim an ex-credit course. However, if the course of• A gift, emption for a dependent who is an eligible stu-instruction or other education is part of the stu- dent, only you can include any expenses you• An inheritance, or dent's degree program, these expenses can paid when figuring the amount of an educationqualify.• A withdrawal from the student's personal credit. If neither you nor anyone else claims an
savings. exemption for the dependent, only the depen-Comprehensive or bundled fees. Some eli-
dent can include any expenses you paid whengible educational institutions combine all of their
Do not reduce the qualified education ex- figuring an education credit.fees for an academic period into one amount. If
penses by any scholarship or fellowship re- you do not receive or do not have access to an Expenses paid by others. Someone otherported as income on the student's tax return in allocation showing how much you paid for quali- than you, your spouse, or your dependent (suchthe following situations. fied education expenses and how much you as a relative or former spouse) may make apaid for personal expenses, such as those listed• The use of the money is restricted to costs payment directly to an eligible educational insti-above, contact the institution. The institution isof attendance (such as room and board) tution to pay for an eligible student's qualifiedrequired to make this allocation and provide youother than qualified education expenses. education expenses. In this case, the student iswith the amount you paid (or were billed) for treated as receiving the payment from the other• The use of the money is not restricted and qualified education expenses on Form 1098-T, person and, in turn, paying the institution. If youis used to pay education expenses that Tuition Statement. See Figuring the Credit , claim an exemption on your tax return for theare not qualified (such as room and under the specific information for either the student, you are considered to have paid theboard). Hope or lifetime learning credit , for more infor- expenses.mation about Form 1098-T. 
Example 1. Jackie paid $3,000 for tuition Example. In 2008, Ms. Allen makes a pay-and $5,000 for room and board at University X. Who Can Claim a ment directly to an eligible educational institutionThe university did not require her to pay any fees for her grandson Todd's qualified education ex-Dependent's Expensesin addition to her tuition in order to enroll in or penses. For purposes of claiming an educationattend classes. To help pay these costs, she credit, Todd is treated as receiving the money asIf there are qualified education expenses forwas awarded a $2,000 scholarship and a $4,000 a gift from his grandmother and, in turn, payingyour dependent for a year, either you or yourstudent loan. his qualified education expenses himself.dependent, but not both of you, can claim anThe terms of the scholarship state that it may Unless an exemption for Todd is claimed oneducation credit for your dependent's expensesbe used to pay any of Jackie's college ex- someone else's 2008 tax return, only Todd canfor that year.penses. Because she applied it toward her tui- use the payment to claim an education credit.For you to claim an education credit for yourtion, the scholarship is tax free. Therefore, for If anyone, such as Todd's parents, claims andependent's expenses, you must also claim anpurposes of figuring an education credit (either exemption for Todd on his or her 2008 tax re-exemption for your dependent. You do this byHope or lifetime learning), she must first use the turn, whoever claims the exemption may be ablelisting your dependent's name and other re-$2,000 scholarship to reduce her tuition (her to use the expenses to claim an educationquired information on Form 1040 (or Formonly qualified education expense). The student credit. If anyone else claims an exemption for1040A), line 6c.loan is not tax-free educational assistance, so Todd, Todd cannot claim an education credit.she does not use it to reduce her qualified ex-
Tuition reduction. When an eligible educa-penses. Jackie is treated as having paid $1,000
tional institution provides a reduction in tuition toin qualified education expenses ($3,000 tuition
an employee of the institution (or spouse or± $2,000 scholarship).
dependent child of an employee), the amount of
Example 2. The facts are the same as in the reduction may or may not be taxable. If it is
Example 1, except that Jackie uses the $2,000 taxable, the employee is treated as receiving a
scholarship to pay room and board, and, there- payment of that amount and, in turn, paying it to
fore, reports her entire scholarship as income on the educational institution on behalf of the stu-
her tax return. In this case, the scholarship is dent. For more information on tuition reductions,
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 235

Page 238 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
see Qualified Tuition Reduction  in chapter 1 of Therefore, the qualified education expensesWho Is an Eligible Student paid for the 2008 Spring semester and the 2008Publication 970. 
Fall semester are taken into account in calculat-To claim the Hope credit, the student for whom
ing any Hope credit for 2008.you pay qualified education expenses must beEffect of the Amount of
an eligible student. This is a student who meets
Your Income on the Example 3. During the 2007 Fall semester,all of the following requirements.
Luis was a high school student who took classesAmount of Your Credit • The student did not have expenses that on a half-time basis at College X. Luis was notwere used to figure a Hope credit in any 2 enrolled as part of a degree program at CollegeThe amount of your education credit is phased earlier tax years. X because College X only admits students to aout (gradually reduced) if your MAGI is between
degree program if they have a high school di-• The student had not completed the first 2$48,000 and $58,000 ($96,000 and $116,000 if
ploma or equivalent. Because Luis was not en-years of postsecondary education (gener-you file a joint return). You cannot claim an ally, the freshman and sophomore years rolled in a degree program at College X duringeducation credit if your MAGI is $58,000 or more of college) before 2008. 2007, Luis was not an eligible student for tax($116,000 or more if you file a joint return). year 2007.• For at least one academic period begin-
ning in 2008, the student was enrolled atModified adjusted gross income (MAGI). Example 4. The facts are the same as inleast half-time in a program leading to a Example 3. During the 2008 Spring semester,For most taxpayers, MAGI is adjusted gross degree, certificate, or other recognized ed- Luis again attended College X but not as part ofincome (AGI) as figured on their federal income ucational credential. a degree program. Luis graduated from hightax return.
• The student was free of any federal or school in June 2008. For the 2008 Fall semes-MAGI when using Form 1040A. If you file state felony conviction for possessing or ter, Luis enrolled as a full-time student in CollegeForm 1040A, your MAGI is the AGI on line 22 of distributing a controlled substance as of X as part of a degree program, and College Xthat form. the end of 2008. awarded Luis credit for his prior coursework at
College X. Because Luis was enrolled in a de-MAGI when using Form 1040. If you file
gree program at College X for the 2008 Fall termForm 1040, your MAGI is the AGI on line 38 of Completion of first 2 years. A student who
on at least a half-time basis, Luis is an eligiblewas awarded 2 years of academic credit forthat form, modified by adding back any:
student for all of tax year 2008. Therefore, thepostsecondary work completed before 2008 has
1. Foreign earned income exclusion, qualified education expenses paid for classescompleted the first 2 years of postsecondary
taken at College X during both the 2008 Springeducation. This student generally would not be2. Foreign housing exclusion,
semester (during which Luis was not enrolled inan eligible student for purposes of the Hope
3. Foreign housing deduction, credit. a degree program) and the 2008 Fall semester
are taken into account in computing any Hope4. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents Exception. Any academic credit awarded credit.of American Samoa, and solely on the basis of the student's performance
on proficiency examinations is disregarded in5. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents Example 5. Diana graduated from highdetermining whether the student has completedof Puerto Rico. school in June 2006. In January 2007, Diana2 years of postsecondary education. enrolled in a one-year postsecondary certificate
program on a full-time basis to obtain a certifi-Enrolled at least half-time. A student wasPhaseout. If your MAGI is within the range of cate as a travel agent. Diana completed theenrolled at least half-time if the student wasincomes where the credit must be reduced, you program in December 2007, and was awarded ataking at least half the normal full-time work loadwill figure your reduced credit using lines 7 ±13 certificate. In January 2008, she enrolled in afor his or her course of study.of Form 8863. one-year postsecondary certificate program onThe standard for what is half of the normal a full-time basis to obtain a certificate as a com-full-time work load is determined by each eligible puter programmer. Diana is an eligible studentWhen Must the Credit Be educational institution. However, the standard for both tax years 2007 and 2008 because shemay not be lower than any of those establishedRepaid (Recaptured) meets the degree requirement, the work loadby the Department of Education under the requirement, and the year of study requirementHigher Education Act of 1965.If, after you file your 2008 tax return, you or for those years. someone else receives tax-free educational as-
Example 1. Marty graduated from highsistance for, or a refund of, an expense you used school in June 2007. In September, he enrolled Figuring the Creditto figure an education credit on that return, you in an undergraduate degree program at Collegemay have to repay all or part of the credit. You The amount of the Hope credit (per eligible stu-U, and attended full time for both the 2007 Fallmust refigure your education credit(s) for 2008 dent) is the sum of:and 2008 Spring semesters. For the 2008 Fallas if the assistance or refund was received in semester, Marty was enrolled less than2008. Subtract the amount of the refigured credit 1. 100% of the first $1,200 ($2,400 if a stu-half-time. Because Marty was enrolled in an dent in a Midwestern disaster area) offrom the amount of the credit you claimed. The undergraduate degree program on at least a qualified education expenses you paid forresult is the amount you must repay. You add half-time basis for at least one academic period
the eligible student, andthe repayment (recapture) to your tax liability for that began during 2007 and at least one aca-
the year in which you receive the assistance or demic period that began during 2008, he is an 2. 50% of the next $1,200 ($2,400 if a stu-
refund. See the instructions for your tax return eligible student for tax years 2007 and 2008 dent in a Midwestern disaster area) of
for that year to find out how to report the recap- (including the 2008 Fall semester when he en- qualified education expenses you paid for
rolled at College U on less than a half-timeture amount. Your original 2008 tax return does that student.
basis).not change. The maximum amount of Hope credit you
can claim in 2008 is $1,800 ($3,600 if a studentExample 2. After taking classes at College
in a Midwestern disaster area) times the numberV on a half-time basis for the 2007 Spring and
of eligible students. You can claim the fullFall semesters, Sharon became a full-time stu-
Information for Only $1,800 ($3,600 if a student in a Midwesterndent for the 2008 Spring semester. College V
disaster area) for each eligible student for whomclassified Sharon as a second-semester sopho-
the Hope Credit you paid at least $2,400 ($4,800 if a student in amore for the 2008 Spring semester and as a
Midwestern disaster area) of qualified educationfirst-semester junior for the 2008 Fall semester.
For the tax year, you may be able to claim a expenses. However, the credit may be reducedBecause College V did not classify Sharon as
Hope credit of up to $1,800 ($3,600 if a student based on your MAGI. See Effect of the Amounthaving completed the first two years of postsec-
in a Midwestern disaster area) for qualified edu- of Your Income on the Amount of Your Credit ,ondary education as of the beginning of 2008,
cation expenses paid for each eligible student. Sharon is an eligible student for tax year 2008. earlier.
Page 236 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 239 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G10 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = PAGE
Figure 35-A. Can You Claim an Education Credit for 2008?
Yes/H17074
Did you* pay qualified education expenses in 2008 for an eligible student?
/H17074
No
Did the academic period for which you paid qualified education
expenses begin in 2008 or the first 3 months of 2009?
Is the eligible student you, your spouse (if married filing jointly), or your
dependent for whom you claim an exemption on your tax return?
Are you listed as a dependent on another person’s tax return?
Is your filing status married filing separately?
Were you (or your spouse) a nonresident alien for any part of 2008 who
did not elect to be treated as a resident alien for tax purposes?
Is your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) less than $58,000
($116,000 if married filing jointly)?Did you use the same expenses to claim a deduction, or to figure
the tax-free portion of a Coverdell ESA or QTP distribution?**
Were the same expenses paid with tax-free scholarship, fellowship,
grant, or employer-provided educational assistance?
Did you, or someone else who paid these expenses on behalf of a
student, receive a refund of all the expenses?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
You cannot
claim an education
credit for 2008
You can claim
an education credit
for 2008***
You cannot use the same expenses to claim both a lifetime learning credit and a Hope credit.**
Qualified education expenses paid by a dependent for whom you claim an exemption, or by a third party for that dependent, are considered paid by you.*
Did you claim a tuition and fees deduction for the same student?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17075
Your education credits are limited to your tax liability minus certain credits. See Form 8863 for more details.***
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 237

Page 240 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Jon and Karen Frost are married Students in Midwestern disaster areas. For
and file a joint tax return. For 2008, they claim an these students, the rate is modified to 40% of Remindersexemption for their dependent daughter on their qualified expenses paid, with a maximum life-
tax return. Their MAGI is $70,000. Their daugh- time learning credit allowed on your return of
Increased EIC on certain joint returns. Ater is in her sophomore (second) year of studies $4,000. If you are claiming a lifetime learning
married person filing a joint return may get moreat the local university. Jon and Karen paid quali- credit for both students in a Midwestern disaster
EIC than someone with the same income but afied education expenses of $4,300 in 2008. area and other students, the qualified education
different filing status. As a result, the EIC tableJon and Karen, their daughter, and the local expenses taken into account for other students
has different columns for married persons filinguniversity meet all of the requirements for the cannot exceed $10,000 reduced by the qualified
jointly than for everyone else. When you look upHope credit. Jon and Karen can claim a $1,800 education expenses of the students in a Mid-
your EIC in the EIC Table, be sure to use theHope credit in 2008. This is 100% of the first western disaster area.
correct column for your filing status and the$1,200 of qualified education expenses, plus
number of children you have.50% of the next $1,200. Form 1098-T. To help you figure your lifetime
learning credit, you should receive FormForm 1098-T. To help you figure your Hope Advance payment of the earned income1098-T. Generally, an eligible educational insti-credit, you should receive Form 1098-T. Gener- credit in your paycheck. If you expect totution (such as a college or university) mustally, an eligible educational institution (such as a qualify for the earned income credit in 2009, yousend Form 1098-T to each enrolled student bycollege or university) must send Form 1098-T to can receive part of it in each paycheck through-February 2, 2009.each enrolled student by February 2, 2009. out the year. See Advance Earned Income
Credit, later, for more information.
Claiming the CreditClaiming the Credit Online help. You can use the EITC Assistant
at www.irs.gov/eitc to find out if you are eligibleYou claim the lifetime learning credit by complet-You claim the Hope credit by completing Parts I for the credit. The EITC Assistant is available ining Parts II and III of Form 8863 and submitting itand III of Form 8863 and submitting it with your English and Spanish.with your Form 1040 or 1040A. Enter the creditForm 1040 or 1040A. Enter the credit on Form on Form 1040, line 50, or Form 1040A, line 31.1040, line 50, or on Form 1040A, line 31. EIC questioned by IRS. The IRS may ask you
to provide documents to prove you are entitled
to claim the EIC. We will tell you what docu-
ments to send us. These may include: birth
certificates, school records, medical records,Information for Only
etc. We will also send you a letter with the name,
address, and telephone number of the IRS em-the Lifetime Learning 36. ployee assigned to your case. The process of
establishing your eligibility will delay your re-Credit
fund.
For the tax year, you may be able to claim a Earned Incomelifetime learning credit of up to $2,000 ($4,000
for students in a Midwestern disaster area) for
qualified education expenses paid for all stu- Credit Introductiondents enrolled in eligible educational institu-
The earned income credit (EIC) is a tax credit fortions. There is no limit on the number of years
certain people who work and have less thanthe lifetime learning credit can be claimed for
What's New $41,646 of earned income. A tax credit usuallyeach student.
means more money in your pocket. It reduces
the amount of tax you owe. The EIC may alsoEarned income amount is more. The maxi-Who Is an Eligible Student give you a refund.mum amount of income you can earn and still
get the credit has increased. You may be able toFor purposes of the lifetime learning credit, an
How do you get the earned income credit?take the credit if:eligible student is a student who is enrolled in
To claim the EIC, you must:one or more courses at an eligible educational • You have more than one qualifying child
institution (as defined under Qualified Education and you earned less than $38,646 1. Qualify by meeting certain rules, andExpenses, earlier. ($41,646 if married filing jointly), 2. File a tax return, even if you:
• You have one qualifying child and youFiguring the Credit a. Do not owe any tax,earned less than $33,995 ($36,995 if mar-
ried filing jointly), or b. Did not earn enough money to file aThe amount of the lifetime learning credit is 20%
return, or• You do not have a qualifying child and youof the first $10,000 of qualified education ex-
earned less than $12,880 ($15,880 if mar-penses you paid for all eligible students. The c. Did not have income taxes withheldried filing jointly).maximum amount of lifetime learning credit you from your pay.can claim for 2008 is $2,000 (20% ×  $10,000). Your adjusted gross income also must be lessHowever, that amount may be reduced based When you complete your return, you canthan the amount in the above list that applies toon your MAGI. See Effect of the Amount of Your figure your EIC by using a worksheet in theyou. For details, see Rules 1 and 15.Income on the Amount of Your Credit, earlier. instructions for Form 1040, Form 1040A, or
Midwestern disaster area. If your main home Form 1040EZ. Or, if you prefer, you can let theExample. Bruce and Toni are married and was in a Midwestern disaster area when the IRS figure the credit for you.file a joint tax return. For 2008, their MAGI is disaster occurred and your 2008 earned income
$75,000. Toni is attending a local college (an is less than your 2007 earned income, you may How will this chapter help you? This chaptereligible educational institution) to earn credits be able to elect to use your 2007 earned income will explain the following.toward a degree in nursing. She already has a to figure your 2008 earned income credit. For
• The rules you must meet to qualify for thebachelor's degree in history and wants to be- details, see Publication 4492-B.
EIC.come a nurse. In August 2008, Toni paid $6,000
Investment income amount is more. Theof qualified education expenses for her Fall • How to figure the EIC.maximum amount of investment income you can2008 semester. Bruce and Toni can claim a
have and still get the credit has increased to • How to get advance payment of the EIC in$1,200 (20% ×  $6,000) lifetime learning credit
$2,950. See Rule 6. your paycheck.on their 2008 joint tax return.
Page 238 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 241 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 36-1. Earned Income Credit in a Nutshell
First, you must meet all the rules in this column. Second, you must meet all the rules in one of Third, you must meet the
these columns, whichever applies. rule in this column.
Part A. Part B. Part C. Part D.
Rules for Everyone Rules If You Have a Rules If You Do Not Figuring and Claiming the
Qualifying Child Have a Qualifying EIC
Child
1. Your adjusted gross 2. You must have a valid 8. Your child must meet 11. You must be at 15. Your earned income must
income (AGI) must be social security number. the relationship, age, and least age 25 but under be less than:
less than: 3. Your filing status residency tests. age 65. •$38,646 ($41,646 for married
•$38,646 ($41,646 for cannot be ªMarried filing 9. Your qualifying child 12. You cannot be the filing jointly) if you have more
married filing jointly) if separately.º cannot be used by more dependent of another than one qualifying child,
you have more than one 4. You must be a U.S. than one person to claim person. 
qualifying child, citizen or resident alien the EIC. 13. You cannot be a •$33,995 ($36,995 for married
all year. 10. You cannot be a qualifying child of filing jointly) if you have one
•$33,995 ($36,995 for 5. You cannot file Form qualifying child of another another person. qualifying child, or
married filing jointly) if 2555 or Form 2555-EZ person. 14. You must have
you have one qualifying (relating to foreign lived in the United •$12,880 ($15,880 for married
child, or earned income). States more than half filing jointly) if you do not have
6. Your investment of the year. a qualifying child.
•$12,880 ($15,880 for income must be $2,950
married filing jointly) if or less. 
you do not have a 7. You must have earned
qualifying child. income.
Useful Items If Improper Claim Rule 1. Your AGI Must Be
You may want to see:
Less Than:Made in Prior Year
Publication If your EIC for any year after 1996 was denied or • $38,646 ($41,646 for married filing jointly)reduced for any reason other than a math or❏ 596 Earned Income Credit (EIC) if you have more than one qualifying child,clerical error, you must attach a completed Form
• $33,995 ($36,995 for married filing jointly)Form (and Instructions) 8862 to your next tax return to claim the EIC.
if you have one qualifying child, orYou must also qualify to claim the EIC by meet-❏ Schedule EIC Earned Income Credit ing all the rules described in this chapter. • $12,880 ($15,880 for married filing jointly)(Qualifying Child Information)
if you do not have a qualifying child.However, if your EIC was denied or reduced❏ W-5 Earned Income Credit Advance as a result of a math or clerical error, do notPayment Certificate attach Form 8862 to your next tax return. For Adjusted gross income (AGI).  AGI is the
❏ 8862 Information To Claim Earned example, if your arithmetic is incorrect, the IRS amount on line 38 (Form 1040), line 22 (FormIncome Credit After Disallowance can correct it. If you do not provide a correct 1040A), or line 4 (Form 1040EZ). If your AGI is
social security number, the IRS can deny the equal to or more than the applicable limit listed
EIC. These kinds of errors are called math or above, you cannot claim the EIC.
clerical errors.
Example. Your AGI is $34,500, you are sin-If your EIC for any year after 1996 was de-Do You Qualify for the gle, and you have one qualifying child. You can-nied and it was determined that your error was
not claim the EIC because your AGI is not lessdue to reckless or intentional disregard of theCredit?
than $33,995. However, if your filing status wasEIC rules, then you cannot claim the EIC for the
married filing jointly, you might be able to claimTo qualify to claim the EIC, you must first meet next 2 years. If your error was due to fraud, then
the EIC because your AGI is less than $36,995.all of the rules explained in Part A, Rules for you cannot claim the EIC for the next 10 years.
Everyone. Then you must meet the rules in Part Community property. If you are married,B, Rules If You Have a Qualifying Child, or Part but qualify to file as head of household underMore information. See chapter 5 in Publica-C, Rules If You Do Not Have a Qualifying Child. special rules for married taxpayers living aparttion 596 for more detailed information about theThere is one final rule you must meet in Part D, (see Rule 3), and live in a state that has commu-disallowance period and Form 8862.Figuring and Claiming the EIC. You qualify for nity property laws, your AGI includes that portionthe credit if you meet all the rules in each part of both your and your spouse's wages that youthat applies to you. are required to include in gross income. This is
• If you have a qualifying child, the rules in different from the community property rules that
Parts A, B, and D apply to you. Part A. Rules for apply under Rule 7.
• If you do not have a qualifying child, the Everyonerules in Parts A, C, and D apply to you. Rule 2. You Must Have a
This part of the chapter discusses Rules 1 Valid Social Security
Table 36-1, Earned Income Credit in a Nut- through 7 . You must meet all seven rules to Number (SSN)shell. Use Table 36-1 as a guide to Parts A, B, qualify for the earned income credit. If you do not
C, and D. The table is a summary of all the rules meet all seven rules, you cannot get the credit To claim the EIC, you (and your spouse if filing ain each part. and you do not need to read the rest of the joint return) must have a valid SSN issued by the
chapter. Social Security Administration (SSA). Any quali-Do you have a qualifying child? You have a
If you meet all seven rules in this part, then fying child listed on Schedule EIC also mustqualifying child only if you have a child who
read either Part B or Part C (whichever applies) have a valid SSN. (See Rule 8  if you have ameets the three tests described in Rule 8 and
for more rules you must meet.illustrated in Figure 36-1. qualifying child.)
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 239

Page 242 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your social security card (or your spouse's information about filing as head of household, Rule 7. You Must Haveif filing a joint return) says ªNot valid for employ- see chapter 2. 
Earned Incomementº and your SSN was issued so that you (or
your spouse) could get a federally funded bene- Rule 4. You Must Be a This credit is called the ªearned incomeº creditfit, you cannot get the EIC. An example of a
because, to qualify, you must work and havefederally funded benefit is Medicaid. U.S. Citizen or Resident 
earned income. If you are married and file a jointIf you have a card with the legend ªNot valid Alien All Year return, you meet this rule if at least one spousefor employmentº and your immigration status
works and has earned income. If you are anhas changed so that you are now a U.S. citizen If you (or your spouse, if married) were a nonres- employee, earned income includes all the tax-or permanent resident, ask the SSA for a new ident alien for any part of the year, you cannotsocial security card without the legend. able income you get from your employer. If youclaim the earned income credit unless your filing are self-employed or a statutory employee, you
status is married filing jointly. You can use thatU. S. citizen. If you were a U. S. citizen when will figure your earned income on EIC Work-
filing status only if one spouse is a U.S. citizen oryou received your SSN, you have a valid SSN. sheet B in the instructions for Form 1040.
resident alien and you choose to treat the non-
Valid for work only with INS or DHS authori- resident spouse as a U.S. resident. If you make
zation. If your social security card reads ªValid this choice, you and your spouse are taxed on Earned Income
for work only with INS authorization,º or ªValid your worldwide income. If you (or your spouse, iffor work only with DHS authorization,º you have Earned income includes all of the followingmarried) were a nonresident alien for any part ofa valid SSN. types of income.the year and your filing status is not married
filing jointly, enter ªNoº on the dotted line next to 1. Wages, salaries, tips, and other taxableSSN missing or incorrect. If an SSN for you
line 64a (Form 1040) or in the space to the left of employee pay. Employee pay is earnedor your spouse is missing from your tax return or
line 40a (Form 1040A). If you need more infor- income only if it is taxable. Nontaxable em-is incorrect, you may not get the EIC.
mation on making this choice, get Publication ployee pay, such as certain dependent
Other taxpayer identification number. You 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens. care benefits and adoption benefits, is not
cannot get the EIC if, instead of an SSN, you (or earned income. But there is an exception
your spouse if filing a joint return) have an indi- for nontaxable combat pay, which you canRule 5. You Cannot Filevidual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). choose to include in earned income, as
ITINs are issued by the Internal Revenue Serv- Form 2555 or Form explained below.
ice to noncitizens who cannot get an SSN. 2555-EZ 2. Net earnings from self-employment.
No SSN. If you do not have a valid SSN, put 3. Gross income received as a statutory em-You cannot claim the earned income credit if youªNoº next to line 64a (Form 1040), line 40a ployee.file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or Form(Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form 1040EZ). You 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.cannot claim the EIC.
You file these forms to exclude income earned in Wages, salaries, and tips. Wages, salaries,Getting an SSN. If you (or your spouse if foreign countries from your gross income, or to and tips you receive for working are reported tofiling a joint return) do not have an SSN, you can deduct or exclude a foreign housing amount. you on Form W-2, in box 1. You should reportapply for one by filing Form SS-5, Application for U.S. possessions are not foreign countries. See these on line 1 (Form 1040EZ) or line 7 (Formsa Social Security Card, with the SSA. You can Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and 1040A and 1040).get Form SS-5 online at www.socialsecurity. Resident Aliens Abroad, for more detailed infor-gov, from your local SSA office, or by calling the
mation. Nontaxable combat pay election. You canSSA at 1-800-772-1213.
elect to include your nontaxable combat pay in
Filing deadline approaching and still no earned income for the earned income credit.Rule 6. Your InvestmentSSN. If the filing deadline is approaching and Electing to include nontaxable combat pay inyou still do not have an SSN, you have two Income Must Be $2,950 or earned income may increase or decrease yourchoices. EIC. Figure the credit with and without yourLess nontaxable combat pay before making the elec-1. Request an automatic 6-month extension
tion. If you make the election, you must includeYou cannot claim the earned income credit un-of time to file your return. You can get this
in earned income all nontaxable combat pay youextension by filing Form 4868, Application less your investment income is $2,950 or less. If
received. If you are filing a joint return and bothfor Automatic Extension of Time to File your investment income is more than $2,950,
you and your spouse received nontaxable com-U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. For you cannot claim the credit. For most people,
bat pay, you can each make your own election.more information, see chapter 1. investment income is the total of the following The amount of your nontaxable combat payamounts.2. File the return on time without claiming the should be shown on your Form W-2, in box 12,EIC. After receiving the SSN, file an • Taxable interest (line 8a of Form 1040 or with code Q.amended return (Form 1040X, Amended 1040A).U.S. Individual Income Tax Return) claim- Self-employed persons and statutory em-• Tax-exempt interest (line 8b of Form 1040ing the EIC. Attach a filled-in Schedule EIC ployees. If you are self-employed or receivedor 1040A).if you have a qualifying child. income as a statutory employee, you must use
• Dividend income (line 9a of Form 1040 or the Form 1040 instructions to see if you qualify
1040A). to get the EIC.Rule 3. Your Filing Status
• Capital gain net income (line 13 of FormCannot Be Married Filing 1040, if more than zero, or line 10 of Form Approved Form 4361 or Form 4029Separately 1040A).
This section is for persons who have an ap-If you file Form 1040EZ, your investment incomeIf you are married, you usually must file a joint
proved:is the total of the amount of line 2 and thereturn to claim the EIC. Your filing status cannot
be ªMarried filing separately.º amount of any tax-exempt interest you wrote to • Form 4361, Application for Exemption
the right of the words ªForm 1040EZº on line 2. From Self-Employment Tax for Use bySpouse did not live with you. If you are mar- Ministers, Members of Religious OrdersHowever, if you are reporting income from theried and your spouse did not live in your home at and Christian Science Practitioners, orrental of personal property on Form 1040, lineany time during the last 6 months of the year,
21, or are filing Schedule E (Form 1040), Form • Form 4029, Application for Exemptionyou may be able to file as head of household,
8814, or Form 4797, see Rule 6 in chapter 1 of From Social Security and Medicare Taxesinstead of married filing separately. In that case,
and Waiver of Benefits.you may be able to claim the EIC. For detailed Publication 596 for more information.
Page 240 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 243 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Each approved form exempts certain income Families (TANF) program in return for certain Relationship Test
from social security taxes. Each form is dis- work activities such as (1) work experience ac-
To be your qualifying child, a child must be your:cussed in this section in terms of what is or is not tivities (including remodeling or repairing public
earned income for purposes of the EIC. housing) if sufficient private sector employment • Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or ais not available, or (2) community service pro- descendant of any of them (for example,Form 4361. Even if you have an approved gram activities. your grandchild), orForm 4361, amounts you received for perform-
ing ministerial duties as an employee count as Community property. If you are married, but • Brother, sister, half brother, half sister,earned income. This includes wages, salaries, qualify to file as head of household under special stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant oftips, and other taxable employee compensation. rules for married taxpayers living apart (see any of them (for example, your niece orAmounts you received for performing ministerial Rule 3), and live in a state that has community nephew).duties, but not as an employee, do not count as property laws, your earned income for the EIC The following definitions clarify the relationshipearned income. Examples include fees for per- does not include any amount earned by yourforming marriages and honoraria for delivering test.spouse that is treated as belonging to you underspeeches. those laws. That amount is not earned income Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaysfor the EIC, even though you must include it inForm 4029. Even if you have an approved treated as your own child. The term ªadoptedyour gross income on your income tax return.Form 4029, all wages, salaries, tips, and other childº includes a child who was lawfully placedYour earned income includes the entire amounttaxable employee compensation count as with you for legal adoption.you earned, even if part of it is treated as belong-earned income. However, amounts you re-
ing to your spouse under your state's communityceived as a self-employed individual do not Foster child. For the EIC, a person is yourproperty laws.count as earned income. Also, in figuring earned
foster child if the child is placed with you by anincome, do not subtract losses on Schedule C, Nontaxable military pay. Nontaxable pay for authorized placement agency or by judgement,C-EZ, or F from wages on line 7 of Form 1040. members of the Armed Forces is not considered decree, or other order of any court of competent
earned income for the EIC. Examples of nontax- jurisdiction. An authorized placement agency in-
able military pay are combat pay, the Basic cludes a state or local government agency. ItDisability Benefits Allowance for Housing (BAH), and the Basic also includes a tax-exempt organization li-
Allowance for Subsistence (BAS). See Publica-If you retired on disability, benefits you receive censed by a state. In addition, it includes an
tion 3, Armed Forces' Tax Guide, for more infor-under your employer's disability retirement plan Indian tribal government or an organization au-
mation.are considered earned income until you reach thorized by an Indian tribal government to place
minimum retirement age. Minimum retirement Indian children.Combat pay. You can elect to includeage generally is the earliest age at which you your nontaxable combat pay in earnedcould have received a pension or annuity if you Example. Debbie, who is 12 years old, wasincome for the EIC. See Nontaxable
TIPwere not disabled. You must report your taxable placed in your care 2 years ago by an authorizedcombat pay election, earlier.disability payments on line 7 of either Form 1040 agency responsible for placing children in foster
or Form 1040A until you reach minimum retire- homes. Debbie is your foster child.
ment age.
Beginning on the day after you reach mini- Married child. If your child was married at themum retirement age, payments you receive are Part B. Rules end of the year, he or she does not meet thetaxable as a pension and are not considered relationship test unless: earned income. Report taxable pension pay- If You Have a
ments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b (or 1. You can claim an exemption for the child,
Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b). Qualifying Child or
Disability insurance payments. Payments 2. The reason you cannot claim an exemp-If you have met all of the rules in Part A, readyou received from a disability insurance policy tion for the child is that you let the child'sPart B to see if you have a qualifying child.that you paid the premiums for are not earned other parent claim the exemption under thePart B  discusses Rules 8  through  10 . Youincome. It does not matter whether you have Special rule for divorced or separated par-must meet all three of these rules, in addition toreached minimum retirement age. If this policy is ents, described later.the rules in Parts A and D, to qualify for thethrough your employer, the amount may be earned income credit with a qualifying child.shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with code ªJ.º
You must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A to
claim the EIC with a qualifying child. (You cannot Age Test
file Form 1040EZ.) You also must completeIncome That Is Not Earned Income Your child must be:Schedule EIC and attach it to your return. If you
meet all the rules in Part A and this part, readExamples of items that are not earned income 1. Under age 19 at the end of 2008,Part D to find out what to do next.include interest and dividends, pensions and
annuities, social security and railroad retirement 2. Under age 24 at the end of 2008 and aIf you do not meet Rule 8, you do notbenefits (including disability benefits), alimony student, orhave a qualifying child. Read Part C toand child support, welfare benefits, workers' find out if you can get the earned in- 3. Permanently and totally disabled at any
CAUTION
!compensation benefits, unemployment com- come credit without a qualifying child. time during 2008, regardless of age.pensation (insurance), nontaxable foster care
payments, and veterans' benefits, including VA The following example and definitions clarify the
rehabilitation payments. Do not include any of age test.Rule 8. Your Child Must
these items in your earned income. Meet the Relationship, Example. Your son turned 19 on DecemberEarnings while an inmate. Amounts received Age, and Residency Tests 10. Unless he was permanently and totally dis-for work performed while an inmate in a penal abled or a student, he is not a qualifying childinstitution are not earned income when figuring Your child is a qualifying child if your child meets because, at the end of the year, he was notthe earned income credit. This includes three tests. The three tests are: under age 19.amounts for work performed while in a work
release program or while in a halfway house. 1. Relationship, Student defined. To qualify as a student, your
Workfare payments. Nontaxable workfare 2. Age, and child must be, during some part of each of any 5
payments are not earned income for the EIC. calendar months during the calendar year:3. Residency.These are cash payments certain people re-
1. A full-time student at a school that has aceive from a state or local agency that adminis- The three tests are illustrated in Figure 36-1.
regular teaching staff, course of study, andters public assistance programs funded under The paragraphs that follow contain more infor-
regular student body at the school, orthe federal Temporary Assistance for Needy mation about each test.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 241

Page 244 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
AND
AND
A qualifying child is a child who is your ...
Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or a descendant of any of
them (for example, your grandchild)
OR
was...
Under age 19 at the end of 2008
OR
Under age 24 at the end of 2008 and a student
Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year, regardless of age.
who...
Lived with you in the United States
for more than half of 2008.
OR
Relationship
Age
Residency
Figure 36-1. Tests for Qualifying Child
Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, stepsister, or a
descendant of any of them (for example, your niece or nephew)
Graphic in Pub.596 (text may not match). Text from F.1040 inst.
2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train- the child lived with you. Examples of a specialResidency Test
ing course given by a school described in circumstance include illness, school attend-
Your child must have lived with you in the United(1), or a state, county, or local government. ance, business, vacation, military service, and
States for more than half of 2008. The following detention in a juvenile facility.The 5 calendar months need not be consecu- definitions clarify the residency test.tive. Kidnapped child. A kidnapped child is treatedA full-time student is a student who is en- United States. This means the 50 states and as living with you for more than half of the year ifrolled for the number of hours or courses the the District of Columbia. It does not include the child lived with you for more than half theschool considers to be full-time attendance. Puerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam. part of the year before the date of the kidnap-
Special rules may apply for people who Homeless shelter. Your home can be any ping. The child must be presumed by law en-
had to relocate because of the Mid- location where you regularly live. You do not forcement authorities to have been kidnapped
western storms, tornadoes, or flooding. need a traditional home. For example, if your by someone who is not a member of your family
TIP
For details, see Publication 4492-B. child lived with you for more than half the year in or your child's family. This treatment applies for
one or more homeless shelters, your child all years until the child is returned. However, theSchool defined. A school can be an ele- meets the residency test. last year this treatment can apply is the earliermentary school, junior or senior high school, of:Military personnel stationed outside thecollege, university, or technical, trade, or
United States.  U.S. military personnel sta-mechanical school. However, on-the-job train- 1. The year there is a determination that thetioned outside the United States on extendeding courses, correspondence schools, and child is dead, oractive duty are considered to live in the Unitedschools offering courses only through the In-
2. The year the child would have reachedStates during that duty period for purposes ofternet do not count as schools for the EIC.
age 18.the EIC.Vocational high school students. Stu-
If your qualifying child has been kidnappedExtended active duty. Extended activedents who work in co-op jobs in private industry
and meets these requirements, enter ªKC,º in-duty means you are called or ordered to duty foras a part of a school's regular course of class-
stead of a number, on line 6 of Schedule EIC.an indefinite period or for a period of more thanroom and practical training are considered
90 days. Once you begin serving your extendedfull-time students.
Social security number. Your qualifying childactive duty, you are still considered to have been
must have a valid social security number (SSN)Permanently and totally disabled. Your on extended active duty even if you do not serve
unless the child was born and died in 2008. Youchild is permanently and totally disabled if both more than 90 days.
cannot claim the EIC on the basis of a qualifyingof the following apply. Birth or death of a child. A child who was child if:born or died in 2008 is treated as having lived1. He or she cannot engage in any substan-
with you for all of 2008 if your home was the 1. Your qualifying child's SSN is missing fromtial gainful activity because of a physical or
child's home the entire time he or she was alive your tax return or is incorrect,mental condition.
in 2008. 2. Your qualifying child's social security card2. A doctor determines the condition has
says ªNot valid for employmentº and waslasted or can be expected to last continu- Temporary absences. Count time that you or
issued for use in getting a federally fundedously for at least a year or can lead to your child is away from home on a temporary
benefit, ordeath. absence due to a special circumstance as time
Page 242 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 245 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Instead of an SSN, your qualifying child Table 36-2. When More Than One Person Files a Return Claiming the
has: Same Qualifying Child (Tie-Breaker Rule)
a. An individual taxpayer identification Caution. If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent
number (ITIN), which is issued to a under the special rule for divorced or separated parents described later, see
noncitizen who cannot get an SSN, or Applying Rule 9 to divorced or separated parents.
b. An adoption taxpayer identification
IF more than one person files a return claiming THEN the child will be treated asnumber (ATIN), which is issued to
the same qualifying child and . . . the qualifying child of the . .adopting parents who cannot get an
SSN for the child being adopted until only one of the persons is the child's parent, parent.the adoption is final.
two of the persons are parents of the child, and they parent with whom the child lived
If you have two qualifying children and only do not file a joint return together, the longest during the year.
one has a valid SSN, you can claim the EIC only
two of the persons are parents of the child, the childon the basis of that child. For more information
lived with each parent the same amount of timeabout SSNs, see Rule 2.
during the year, and the parents do not file a joint parent with the higher adjusted
return together, gross income (AGI).Rule 9. Your Qualifying
none of the persons are the child's parent, person with the highest AGI.Child Cannot Be Used By
More Than One Person To
Example 1 ± child lived with parent and which person will claim the EIC , earlier, yourClaim the EIC
grandparent. You and your 2-year-old son mother can claim both you and your son as
Sometimes a child meets the rules to be a quali- lived with your mother all year. You are 25 years qualifying children for the EIC.
fying child of more than one person. However, old. Your only income was $9,000 from a
only one person can treat that child as a qualify- Example 5 ± parent can claim EIC becausepart-time job. Your mother's only income was
ing child and claim the EIC using that child. The grandparent cannot. The facts are the same$20,000 from her job. Your son is a qualifying
paragraphs that follow will help you decide who, as in Example 1 except that your mother earnedchild of both you and your mother because he
$50,000 from her job. Because your mother'sif anyone, can claim the EIC when more than meets the relationship, age, and residency tests
earned income is too high for her to claim thefor both you and your mother. However, onlyone person has the same qualifying child.
EIC, only you can claim the EIC using your son.one of you can treat him as a qualifying child to
You can choose which person will claim the claim the EIC (and the other tax benefits listed in
EIC. If you and someone else have the same Example 6 ± separated parents. You,You can choose which person will claim the EIC,
qualifying child, you and the other person(s) can your husband, and your 10-year-old son livedearlier, for which that person qualifies). If you do
decide which of you, if otherwise eligible, will together until August 1, 2008, when your hus-not claim your son as a qualifying child for the
take all of the following tax benefits based on the band moved out of the household. In August andEIC or any of the other tax benefits listed in You
September, your son lived with you. For the restqualifying child. can choose which person will claim the EIC ,
of the year, your son lived with your husband,your mother can treat your son as a qualifying• The exemption for the child. the boy's father. Your son is a qualifying child ofchild to claim the EIC and any other tax benefits
• The child tax credit. both you and your husband because your sonlisted for which she qualifies.
lived with each of you for more than half the year• Head of household filing status. and because he met the relationship and ageExample 2 ± child lived with parent and
• The credit for child and dependent care tests for both of you. At the end of the year, yougrandparent. The facts are the same as in
expenses. and your husband still were not divorced, legallyExample 1 except that you and your mother both
separated, or separated under a written separa-claim your son as a qualifying child. In this case,• The exclusion for dependent care benefits. tion agreement, so the special rule for divorcedyou as the child's parent will be the only one
• The EIC. or separated parents does not apply.allowed to claim your son as a qualifying child for
the EIC and the other tax benefits listed in You You and your husband will file separate re-The other person cannot take any of these six can choose which person will claim the EIC, for turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat yourtax benefits unless he or she has a different which you qualify. The IRS will disallow your son as a qualifying child. This means, if yourqualifying child. mother's claim to the EIC and any other tax husband does not claim your son as a qualifying
If you and the other person(s) cannot agree benefit listed, unless she has another qualifying child for the EIC or any of the other tax benefits
and more than one person claims the EIC or any child. listed in You can choose which person will claim
of the other tax benefits just listed using the the EIC, earlier, you can claim him as a qualify-
same child, the tie-breaker rule (explained in Example 3 ± three children lived with par- ing child for the EIC and any other tax benefit
Table 36-2) applies. However, the tie-breaker ent and grandparent. The facts are the same listed for which you qualify. However, your filing
as in Example 1 except that you also have tworule does not apply if the other person is your status is married filing separately, so you cannot
other young children who are qualifying children claim the EIC or the credit for child and depen-spouse and you file a joint return.
of both you and your mother. Only one of you dent care expenses. See Rule 3.
If another person claims the EIC using this can claim each child as a qualifying child. How-
child. If your EIC is denied because your qual- ever, you and your mother can split the three Example 7 ± separated parents. The facts
ifying child is treated under this rule as the quali- qualifying children between you. For example, are the same as in Example 6 except that you
fying child of another person for 2008, you may you can claim one child as a qualifying child and and your husband both claim your son as a
be able to take the EIC using a different qualify- your mother can claim the other two. qualifying child. In this case, only your husband
ing child, but you cannot take the EIC using the will be allowed to treat your son as a qualifying
Example 4 ± parent is qualifying child of child. This is because, during 2008, the boy livedrules in Part C  for people who do not have a
grandparent. The facts are the same as in with him longer than with you. You cannot claimqualifying child.
Example 1 except that you are only 18 years old. the EIC (either with or without a qualifying child).
If the other person cannot claim the EIC. If This means you are a qualifying child of your However, your husband's filing status is married
you and someone else have the same qualifying mother. Because of Rule 10,  discussed next, filing separately, so he cannot claim the EIC or
child but the other person cannot claim the EIC you cannot claim the EIC. Only your mother may the credit for child and dependent care ex-
because he or she is not eligible or his or her be able to treat your son as a qualifying child to penses. See Rule 3.
earned income or AGI is too high, you may be claim the EIC. If your mother meets all the other
able to treat the child as a qualifying child. See requirements for claiming the EIC and you do Example 8 ± unmarried parents. You,
Example 5. But also see You can choose which not claim your son as a qualifying child for any of your 5-year-old son, and your son's father lived
person will claim the EIC, earlier. the other tax benefits listed in You can choose together all year. You and your son's father are
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 243

Page 246 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not married. Your son is a qualifying child of both he or she will not claim the child as a other income. Because you meet the relation-
dependent for the year, and the non-you and his father because he meets the rela- ship, age, and residency tests, you are a qualify-
custodial parent attaches the form ortionship, age, and residency tests for both you ing child of your mother. She can claim the EIC if
statement to his or her return. (If theand his father. You earned $12,000 and your she meets all the other requirements. Because
divorce decree or separation agreementson's father earned $14,000. Neither of you had you are your mother's qualifying child, you can-
went into effect after 1984, the noncus-any other income. Your son's father agrees to let not claim the EIC. This is so even if your mother
todial parent can attach certain pagesyou treat the child as a qualifying child. This cannot or does not claim the EIC.
from the decree or agreement insteadmeans, if your son's father does not claim your
of Form 8332.)son as a qualifying child for the EIC or any of the
other tax benefits listed in You can choose which b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-person will claim the EIC, earlier, you can claim rate maintenance or written separation Part C. Ruleshim as a qualifying child for the EIC and any agreement that applies to 2008 pro-other tax benefits listed for which you qualify. vides that the noncustodial parent can If You Do Not Haveclaim the child as a dependent and the
Example 9 ± unmarried parents. The noncustodial parent provides at least a Qualifying Childfacts are the same as in Example 8 except that $600 for the support of the child during
you and your son's father both claim your son as the year. Read this part if you:a qualifying child. In this case, only your son's
father will be allowed to treat your son as a For details, see chapter 3. Also see Applying 1. Do not have a qualifying child, andqualifying child. This is because his AGI, Rule 9 to divorced or separated parents, next. 2. Have met all the rules in Part A.$14,000, is more than your AGI, $12,000. You
Applying Rule 9 to divorced or separatedcannot claim the EIC (either with or without a
parents. If a child is treated as the qualifyingqualifying child). Part C discusses Rules 11 through 14. You mustchild of the noncustodial parent under the spe- meet all four of these rules, in addition to thecial rule for children of divorced or separatedExample 10 ± child did not live with a rules in Parts A and D, to qualify for the earnedparents just described, only the noncustodialparent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your income credit without a qualifying child.parent can claim an exemption and the child taxsister's child, lived with your mother all year. You
credit for the child. However, the noncustodial If you have a qualifying child, the rulesare 25 years old, and your only income was
parent cannot claim the child as a qualifying in this part do not apply to you. You can$9,300 from a part-time job. Your mother's only
child for the other tax benefits listed in You can claim the credit only if you meet all theincome was $15,000 from her job. Your niece is
CAUTION
! choose which person will claim the EIC, earlier. rules in Parts A, B, and D. See Rule 8 to find outa qualifying child of both you and your mother Only the custodial parent or another eligible tax- if you have a qualifying child.because she meets the relationship, age, and payer can claim the child as a qualifying child forresidency tests for both you and your mother. those tax benefits. However, if the custodial par-However, only one of you can treat her as a Rule 11. You Must Be atent and another eligible taxpayer both file aqualifying child. Your mother agrees to let you return claiming the child as a qualifying child fortreat the child as a qualifying child. This means, Least Age 25 but Under any of these four tax benefits, the IRS will disal-if your mother does not claim her as a qualifying Age 65low all but one of the claims using the tie-breakerchild for the EIC or any of the other tax benefits rule in Table 36-2.listed in You can choose which person will claim You must be at least age 25 but under age 65 atthe EIC, you can claim your niece as a qualifying the end of 2008. If you are married filing a jointchild for the EIC and any other tax benefits listed Rule 10. You Cannot Be a return, either you or your spouse must be atfor which you qualify. Qualifying Child of least age 25 but under age 65 at the end of
2008. It does not matter which spouse meets theExample 11 ± child did not live with a Another Person age test, as long as one of the spouses does.parent. The facts are the same as in Example
If neither you nor your spouse meets the ageYou are a qualifying child of another person10 except that you and your mother both claim
test, you cannot claim the EIC. Put ªNoº next to(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if allyour niece as a qualifying child. In this case, only
of the following statements are true. line 64a (Form 1040), line 40a (Form 1040A), oryour mother will be allowed to treat your niece as
line 8a (Form 1040EZ).a qualifying child. This is because your mother's 1. You are that person's son, daughter,AGI, $15,000, is more than your AGI, $9,300. stepchild, grandchild, or foster child. Or, Example 1. You are age 28 and unmarried.you are that person's brother, sister, halfSpecial rule for divorced or separated par- You meet the age test.brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsis-ents. A child will be treated as the qualifying ter (or the child or grandchild of that per-child of his or her noncustodial parent (for pur- Example 2. You are married and filing ason's brother, sister, half brother, halfposes of claiming an exemption and the child tax joint return. You are age 23 and your spouse issister, stepbrother, or stepsister).credit, but not for the EIC) if all of the following age 27. You meet the age test because your
apply. spouse is at least age 25 but under age 65.2. At the end of the year you were under age
19, or under age 24 and a student, or any1. The parents: age if you were permanently and totally Rule 12. You Cannot Bedisabled at any time during the year.a. Are divorced or legally separated under the Dependent of Anothera decree of divorce or separate mainte- 3. You lived with that person in the United
nance, PersonStates for more than half of the year.
b. Are separated under a written separa- For more details about the tests to be a qualify- If you are not filing a joint return, you meet thistion agreement, or ing child, see Rule 8. rule if:If you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6 • You checked box 6a on Form 1040 orare a qualifying child of another person, youmonths of the year. 1040A, orcannot claim the EIC. This is true even if the
person for whom you are a qualifying child does2. The child received over half of his or her • You did not check the ªYouº box on line 5not claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claimsupport for the year from the parents. of Form 1040EZ, and you entered $8,950the EIC. Put ªNoº beside line 64a (Form 1040) or on that line.3. The child is in the custody of one or both line 40a (Form 1040A).
parents for more than half of the year. If you are filing a joint return, you meet thisExample. You and your daughter lived with4. Either of the following statements is true. rule if:your mother all year. You are 22 years old and
• You checked both box 6a and box 6b ona. The custodial parent signs Form 8332 attended a trade school full time. You had a
or a substantially similar statement that Form 1040 or 1040A, orpart-time job and earned $5,700. You had no
Page 244 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 247 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You and your spouse did not check either Figuring earned income. If you areRule 14. You Must Have self-employed, a statutory employee, or a mem-the ªYouº box or the ªSpouseº box on line
Lived in the United States ber of the clergy or a church employee who files5 of Form 1040EZ, and you entered
Schedule SE (Form 1040), you will figure your$17,900 on that line. More Than Half of the Year earned income when you fill out Part 4 of EIC
Worksheet B in the Form 1040 instructions.If you are not sure whether someone else can Your home (and your spouse's, if filing a joint
claim you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) Otherwise, figure your earned income by us-return) must have been in the United States for
as a dependent, read the rules for claiming a ing the worksheet in Step 5 of the Form 1040more than half the year.
dependent in chapter 3. instructions for lines 64a and 64b or the FormIf it was not, put ªNoº next to line 64a (Form
If someone else can claim you (or your 1040A instructions for lines 40a and 40b, or the1040), line 40a (Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form
worksheet in Step 2 of the Form 1040EZ instruc-spouse if filing a joint return) as a dependent on 1040EZ).
tions for lines 8a and 8b.his or her return, but does not, you still cannot
claim the credit. When using one of those worksheets to fig-United States. This means the 50 states and
ure your earned income, you will start with thethe District of Columbia. It does not includeExample 1. In 2008, you were age 25, sin- amount on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) orPuerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam.
gle, and living at home with your parents. You line 1 (Form 1040EZ). You will then reduce that
worked and were not a student. You earned amount by any amount included on that line andHomeless shelter. Your home can be any$7,500. Your parents cannot claim you as a described in the following list.location where you regularly live. You do notdependent. When you file your return, you claim need a traditional home. If you lived in one or • Scholarship or fellowship grants not re-an exemption for yourself by not checking the more homeless shelters in the United States for ported on a Form W-2. A scholarship orªYouº box on line 5 of your Form 1040EZ and by more than half the year, you meet this rule. fellowship grant that was not reported toentering $8,950 on that line. You meet this rule. you on a Form W-2 is not considered
Military personnel stationed outside the earned income for the earned incomeExample 2. The facts are the same as in United States. U.S. military personnel sta- credit.Example 1, except that you earned $2,000. Your tioned outside the United States on extendedparents can claim you as a dependent but de- • Inmates. Amounts received for work per-active duty (defined in Rule 8) are considered to formed while an inmate in a penal institu-cide not to. You do not meet this rule. You live in the United States during that duty period tion are not earned income for the earnedcannot claim the credit because your parents for purposes of the EIC. income credit. This includes amounts re-could have claimed you as a dependent.
ceived for work performed while in a work
release program or while in a halfwayRule 13. You Cannot Be a house. If you received any amount for
work done while an inmate in a penal insti-Qualifying Child of Part D. Figuring and
tution and that amount is included in theAnother Person total on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A)Claiming the EIC
or line 1 (Form 1040EZ), put ªPRIº and theYou are a qualifying child of another person amount on the dotted line next to line 7Read this part if you have met all the rules in(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if all (Form 1040), in the space to the left of theParts A and B, or all the rules in Parts A and C.of the following statements are true. entry space for line 7 (Form 1040A), or inPart D  discusses Rule 15.  You must meet
the space to the left of line 1 (Form1. You are that person's son, daughter, this rule, in addition to the rules in Parts A and B,
1040EZ).stepchild, grandchild, or foster child. Or, or Parts A and C, to qualify for the earned in-
you are that person's brother, sister, half come credit. • Deferred compensation plans. A pen-
brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsis- This part of the chapter also explains how to sion or annuity from a nonqualified de-
ter (or the child or grandchild of that per- figure the amount of your credit. You have two ferred compensation plan or a
son's brother, sister, half brother, half choices. nongovernmental section 457 plan is not
sister, stepbrother, or stepsister). considered earned income for the earned1. Have the IRS figure the EIC for you. If you income credit. If you received such an2. At the end of the year you were under age want to do this, see IRS Will Figure the amount and it was included in the total on19, or under age 24 and a student, or any EIC for You. line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or lineage if you were permanently and totally
1 (Form 1040EZ), put ªDFCº and the2. Figure the EIC yourself. If you want to dodisabled at any time during the year.
amount on the dotted line next to line 7this, see How To Figure the EIC Yourself.3. You lived with that person in the United (Form 1040), in the space to the left of the
States for more than half of the year. entry space for line 7 (Form 1040A), or in
the space to the left of line 1 (FormRule 15. Your EarnedIf you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)
1040EZ). This amount may be reported inare a qualifying child of another person, you Income Must Be Less box 11 of your Form W-2. If you receivedcannot claim the EIC. This is true even if the
such an amount but box 11 is blank, con-Than:person for whom you are a qualifying child does
tact your employer for the amount re-not claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claim ceived as a pension or annuity.the EIC. Put ªNoº next to line 64a (Form 1040), • $38,646 ($41,646 for married filing jointly)
line 40a (Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form if you have more than one qualifying child, Clergy. If you are a member of the clergy1040EZ). • $33,995 ($36,995 for married filing jointly) who files Schedule SE and the amount on line 2
if you have one qualifying child, or of that schedule includes an amount that wasExample. You lived with your mother all also reported on line 7 (Form 1040), subtractyear. You are age 26 and permanently and to- • $12,880 ($15,880 for married filing jointly) that amount from the amount on line 7 (Formtally disabled. Your only income was from a if you do not have a qualifying child. 1040) and enter the result in the first space ofcommunity center where you went three days a the worksheet in Step 5  of the Form 1040 in-week to answer telephones. You earned $5,000 Earned income generally means wages, sala- structions for lines 64a and 64b. Put ªClergyº onfor the year and provided more than half of your ries, tips, other taxable employee pay, and net the dotted line next to line 64a (Form 1040).own support. Because you meet the relation- earnings from self-employment. Employee pay
ship, age, and residency tests, you are a qualify- is earned income only if it is taxable. Nontaxable Church employees.  A church employee
employee pay, such as certain dependent careing child of your mother for the EIC. She can means an employee (other than a minister or
benefits and adoption benefits, is not earnedclaim the EIC if she meets all the other require- member of a religious order) of a church or
income. But there is an exception for nontaxablements. Because you are a qualifying child of qualified church-controlled organization that is
combat pay, which you can choose to include inyour mother, you cannot claim the EIC. This is exempt from employer social security and Medi-
earned income. Earned income is explained inso even if your mother cannot or does not claim care taxes. If you received wages as a church
detail in Rule 7.the EIC. employee and included any amount on both line
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 245

Page 248 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5a of Schedule SE and line 7 (Form 1040), do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc-
subtract that amount from the amount on line 7 allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- tion booklet.
(Form 1040) and enter the result in the first turn. 3. Enter the amount of your earned incomespace of the worksheet in Step 5 of the Form credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet on1040 instructions for lines 64a and 64b. Form 1040A, line 40a.
Form 1040EZ 4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.IRS Will Figure Do not attach it to your income tax return.If you file Form 1040EZ and want the IRS tothe EIC for You If you do not have a qualifying child, stopfigure your credit for you, follow these steps. here.
The IRS will figure your EIC for you if you follow 1. Put ªEICº in the space to the left of line 8a. 5. If you have a qualifying child, completethe steps explained in this section. Then if you have any of the types of in- Schedule EIC according to its instructions.come described earlier under Inmates orDo not ask the IRS to figure your EIC Be sure to enter the child's social securityDeferred compensation plans, follow theunless you are eligible for it. Read the number on line 2 of that schedule. If youinstructions given there.rules in Parts A, B, C, and D to see if do not, your credit may be reduced or dis-
CAUTION
!
you qualify. allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and
turn.are electing to include it in your earnedIf you want the IRS to also figure the income for the EIC, enter the amount onamount of your income tax, see chap- line 8b. For details, see Nontaxable com- Form 1040EZ and EIC Worksheet. If you fileter 30.
TIP bat pay election in Rule 7. Form 1040EZ and want to figure the credit your-
self, follow these steps.3. Complete all other parts of your return that
apply to you, but do not fill in lines 10, 12a, 1. Go to your form instruction booklet andForm 1040 or 13. turn to the instructions for lines 8a and 8b
If you file Form 1040 and want the IRS to figure and look for the EIC Worksheet.
your credit for you, follow these steps. How To Figure the 2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according to
its instructions. Find the amount of your1. Put ªEICº on the dotted line next to line EIC Yourself credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc-64a. Then, if you have any of the types of
tion booklet.income described earlier under Inmates, To figure the EIC yourself, use the EIC Work-
Deferred compensation plans, or Clergy, sheet in the instructions for the form you are 3. Enter the amount of your earned incomefollow the instructions given there. using (Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet on
1040EZ). Form 1040EZ, line 8a.2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and
are electing to include it in your earned 4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.Form 1040 and EIC Worksheet. If you fileincome for the EIC, enter the amount on Do not attach it to your income tax return.Form 1040 and want to figure the credit yourself,line 64b. For details, see Nontaxable com- follow these steps.bat pay election in Rule 7.
1. Go to your form instruction booklet and3. Complete all other parts of your return that turn to the instructions for lines 64a andapply to you (including line 60), but do not 64b, and look for Worksheet A or Work- Examplesfill in lines 71, 72, 73a, and 75. If you do sheet B.not have a qualifying child, stop here. The following two comprehensive examples2. Complete the EIC Worksheet that applies4. If you have a qualifying child, complete (complete with filled-in forms) may be helpful.to your situation according to its instruc-Schedule EIC according to its instructions. tions. Complete Worksheet B if you were 1. John and Janet Smith, a married coupleBe sure to enter the child's social security self-employed, a member of the clergy or a with one qualifying child and using Formnumber on line 2 of that schedule. If you church employee who files Schedule SE, 1040A.do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- or a statutory employee filing Schedule Callowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- 2. Kelly Green, age 30, a student, with noor C-EZ. Find the amount of your credit inturn. qualifying child and using Form 1040EZ.the EIC Table in your instruction booklet.
3. Enter the amount of your earned income
credit from Worksheet A or B on Form Example 1. John and JanetForm 1040A 1040, line 64a.
Smith (Form 1040A)If you file Form 1040A and want the IRS to figure 4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.
your credit for you, follow these steps. Do not attach it to your income tax return. John and Janet Smith are married and will file a
If you do not have a qualifying child, stop joint return. They have one child, Amy, who is 31. Put ªEICº to the left of the entry space for here. years old. Amy lived with John and Janet for allline 40a. Then, if you have any of the types of 2008. John worked and earned $9,500. Janetof income described earlier under Inmates 5. If you have a qualifying child, complete worked part of the year and earned $1,500.or Deferred compensation plans, follow the Schedule EIC according to its instructions. Their earned income and AGI are $11,000. Johninstructions given there. Be sure to enter the child's social security and Janet qualify for the earned income creditnumber on line 2 of that schedule. If you2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and and fill out the EIC Worksheet and Scheduledo not, your credit may be reduced or dis-are electing to include it in your earned EIC. The Smiths will attach Schedule EIC toallowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-income for the EIC, enter the amount on Form 1040A when they send their completedturn.line 40b. For details, see Nontaxable com- return to the IRS.
bat pay election in Rule 7. They took the following steps to completeForm 1040A and EIC Worksheet. If you file Schedule EIC and the EIC Worksheet.3. Complete all other parts of your return that Form 1040A and want to figure the credit your-
apply to you (including line 36), but do not self, follow these steps.
fill in lines 43, 44, 45a, and 47. If you do
Completing Schedule EICnot have a qualifying child, stop here. 1. Go to your form instruction booklet and
turn to the instructions for lines 40a and4. If you have a qualifying child, complete The Smiths complete Schedule EIC because40b, and look for the EIC Worksheet.Schedule EIC according to its instructions. they have a qualifying child. They enter ªJohn
Be sure to enter the child's social security 2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according to and Janet Smithº and John's SSN (the SSN that
number on line 2 of that schedule. If you its instructions. Find the amount of your appears first on their Form 1040A) on the line at
Page 246 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 249 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the top of Schedule EIC. The Smiths then fill out Line 3. Kelly enters $6,260 (her AGI). income credit, give your employer a Form W-5,
Qualifying Child Information (lines 1 ± 6). Earned Income Credit Advance Payment Certifi-Line 4. Kelly checks the ªNoº box because
cate, for 2009.Line 1. The Smiths enter Amy's first name lines 1 and 3 are not the same.
and last name in the column ªChild 1.º After you have read the instructions andLine 5. Kelly checks the ªYesº box because completed Form W-5, give the lower part of theLine 2. They enter Amy's SSN. the amount on line 3 ($6,260) is less than form to your employer. Keep the top part for your$7,000. She leaves line 5 blank and enters theLine 3. They enter Amy's year of birth records.amount from line 2, $438, on line 6.(2005).
Line 6. She enters $438 here and on FormLines 4a and 4b. The Smiths skip lines 4a More than one employer. If you have more1040EZ, line 8a. Kelly's earned income credit isand 4b because Amy was born after 1989. than one employer, give a certificate to only one$438.Line 5. The Smiths enter ªDaughter.º This of them. If you are married and both you and
line shows Amy's relationship to John and Ja- your spouse are employed and expect to qualify
net. for the credit, you may give a Form W-5 to your
employer and your spouse may give one to hisLine 6. The Smiths enter ª12.º This is how Advance Earnedmany months Amy lived with them in 2008. or her employer.
If you receive advance payments of EIC inIncome Credit
2009, you must file a 2009 tax return (even if youCompleting the EIC Worksheet Do you expect to be eligible for the EIC this year would not otherwise have to file) to report the
(2009) and to have a qualifying child? If so, you payments and claim any additional EIC. Box 9 ofNext, the Smiths will complete the EIC Work-
can choose to get payments of the EIC in your your Form W-2 will show the amount you re-sheet to figure their earned income credit.
paycheck now instead of waiting to get your EIC ceived. See the instructions for Form 1040 orLine 1. The Smiths enter $11,000 (their all at once in 2010 when you file your tax return Form 1040A for the line number on which youearned income). for the year 2009. These payments are called report advance payments of EIC.
Line 2. The Smiths go to the Earned Income advance EIC payments. This part of the chapter
Credit Table in the Form 1040A instructions. explains how you may be able to get them this
Receipt of advance payments you do notThe Smiths find their income of $11,000 within year and how to report them on your tax return.
qualify for. If you receive advance paymentsthe range of $11,000 to $11,050. They follow
this line across to the column that describes their of EIC in 2009, and later find out that you are notWho can get the advance payment of thefiling status and number of children and find eligible for some or all of them, you still mustearned income credit? To get part of the$2,917. They enter $2,917 on line 2. report them on your tax return.earned income credit paid to you throughout the
Line 3. The Smiths enter their AGI of You cannot use Form 1040EZ to reportyear in your paycheck, you must meet all the$11,000. your advance payments. You must filefollowing rules.
Form 1040 or Form 1040A.Line 4. The Smiths check the ªYesº box
CAUTION
! 1. You must expect that your earned incomebecause lines 1 and 3 are the same ($11,000). and AGI will each be less than $35,463They skip line 5 and enter the amount from line 2 ($38,583 if you expect to file married filing When to give your employer a new Form W-5.(2,917) on line 6.
jointly). The 2009 Form W-5 you give to your employer isLine 6. The Smiths' EIC is $2,917. valid until December 31, 2009. If you expect to2. You must expect to have a qualifying child.
be eligible for EIC in 2010 and you want to3. You must expect to meet all the rules inExample 2. Kelly Green receive advance payments, you must give yourParts A, B, and D of this chapter or in the employer a new Form W-5 in 2010. Do this each(Form 1040EZ) instructions for Form W-5.
year you expect to be eligible for the EIC.
Kelly Green is age 30 and a full-time student. The rules in Parts A, B, and D are If you no longer want to get advance pay-She lived with her parents in the United States expected to be basically the same for ments or if your situation changes and you nofor all of 2008. She had a part-time job and 2009, except that you will be allowed to longer qualify for the earned income credit, you
CAUTION
!earned $6,240. She earned $20 interest on a have more earned income, more adjusted gross must give your employer a new Form W-5.savings account. She is not eligible to be income, and up to $3,100 of investment income. Check the ªNoº box on line 1 of the new form.claimed as a dependent on her parents' return. Also, there will be changes to the definition of aAlthough she lived with her parents, she is not If your spouse files a Form W-5 with his orqualifying child. For details, see Publication 553,their qualifying child because she does not meet her employer, you must file a new Form W-5Highlights of 2008 Tax Changes.the age test. She does not have any children. with your employer. Check the ªYesº box on lineKelly qualifies for the earned income credit. 3.Kelly will file Form 1040EZ and complete the Persons who are not entitled to receive ad-EIC Worksheet. vance payments. Under certain circum- Advance Payments stances, even if you meet these rules, you may
Received in 2008not be entitled to get advance EIC. If your wagesCompleting the EIC Worksheet are not subject to federal income tax, social
If you received advance payments of EIC insecurity tax, or Medicare tax withholding, youKelly figures the amount of her earned income
2008, you must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A tocannot get the advance payment of the earnedcredit on the EIC Worksheet as follows.
report the payments. Your Form W-2, box 9, willincome credit. If you are a farm worker paid on aLine 1. She enters $6,240 (her earned in- show the amount you received. Report thedaily basis, your employer is not required to paycome). amount on line 60 (Form 1040) or line 36 (Formyou the advance amount of the credit.
Line 2. Kelly goes to the Earned Income 1040A).
Credit Table in the forms instruction booklet. How To Get Advance You cannot use Form 1040EZ to reportShe finds her earned income of $6,240 in the your advance payments.range of $6,200 to $6,250. Kelly follows this line Payments for 2009
CAUTION
!
across to the column that describes her filing
If you meet the rules stated above under Whostatus and finds $438. She enters $438 on line
can get the advance payment of the earned2.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 247

Page 250 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
John and Janet Smith 222200222
00000 2223
2005
12
Amy Smith
Daughter
/H17076
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE EIC Earned Income Credit(Form 1040A or 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 43
Qualifying Child Information
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040A
or 1040 instructions.
Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040) 2008Cat. No. 13339M
Before you begin: ● See the instructions for Form 1040A, lines 40a and 40b, or Form 1040, lines 64a and 64b, to make
sure that (a) you can take the EIC, and (b) you have a qualifying child.
Qualifying Child Information
● It will take us longer to process your return and issue your refund if you do not fill in all lines that apply for each
qualifying child.
4
2
5
6
1 Child’s name
Child’s SSN
Child’s relationship to you
Number of months child lived with
you in the United States during 2008
months
Yes.
months
If the child was born before 1990—
Was the child permanently and totally disabled during
any part of 2008?
b
Yes.
First name Last name First name Last name
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
(99)
EIC
1040A
1040
Complete and attach to Form 1040A or 1040
only if you have a qualifying child.
● Be sure the child’s name on line 1 and social security number (SSN) on line 2 agree with the child’s
social security card. Otherwise, at the time we process your return, we may reduce or disallow your
EIC. If the name or SSN on the child’s social security card is not correct, call the Social Security
Administration at 1-800-772-1213.
Child 1 Child 2
If you have more than two qualifying children, you
only have to list two to get the maximum credit.
The child must have an SSN as defined on page 43
of the Form 1040A instructions or page 49 of the
Form 1040 instructions unless the child was born and
died in 2008. If your child was born and died in 2008
and did not have an SSN, enter “Died” on this line
and attach a copy of the child’s birth certificate, death
certificate, or hospital medical records.
No. No.
Go to line 5. Go to line 5.Continue. Continue.
Yes. Yes.No. No.
Continue. Continue.The child is not a
qualifying child.
The child is not a
qualifying child.
● If the child lived with you for more than half of
2008 but less than 7 months, enter “7.”
● If the child was born or died in 2008 and your
home was the child’s home for the entire time he
or she was alive during 2008, enter “12.”
Do not enter more than 12 months. Do not enter more than 12 months.
You may also be able to take the additional child tax credit if your child (a) was under age 17 at the end of 2008, and
(b) is a U.S. citizen, U.S. national, or U.S. resident alien. For more details, see the instructions for line 41 of Form
1040A or line 66 of Form 1040.
. . . . . . . . . .
● If you take the EIC even though you are not eligible, you may not be allowed to take the credit for up to 10 years. See
back of schedule for details.
(for example, son, daughter, grandchild,
niece, nephew, foster child, etc.)
Was the child under age 24 at the end of 2008 and a
student?
a
Child’s year of birth
If born after 1989, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
Year
If born after 1989, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
Year3
CAUTION
TIP
2008
Page 248 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 251 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
11,000
2,917
11,000
2,917
EIC Worksheet _ line 41 Cat. 12088U07
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Lines 40a and 40b
1040A
Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your earned income from Step 5 on
page 42.
Look up the amount on line 1 in the EIC Table on pages 45–52 to
find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing
status and the number of children you have. Enter the credit here.
Enter the amount from Form 1040A, line 22.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Go to line 5.No.
If you have:
Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on
pages 45–52 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status and the number of children you
have. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040A, line 40a.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
Enter “No” to the left of the entry space for line 40a.
If line 2 is zero, You cannot take the credit.
● No qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $7,200
($10,200 if married filing jointly)?
● 1 or more qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $15,750
($18,750 if married filing jointly)?
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
Reminder—
If you have a qualifying child, complete and attach
Schedule EIC.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see
page 42 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the credit
for 2008.
/H12011
/H17076
/H17076
EIC
1040A
CAUTION
/H12011
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 249

STOP
CAUTION
!
Page 252 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Earned Income Credit (EIC) WorksheetÐLines 8a and 8b Keep for Your Records
1. Enter your earned income from Step 2 on page 13 ......................... . 1. 6,240
2. Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC Table on page 16 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status (Single or Married filing jointly).
Enter the credit here ................................................................ . 2. 438
If line 2 is zero, 
STOP You cannot take the credit. Enter ªNoº in the space to the left of line 8a.
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040EZ, line 4 .............................. . 3. 6,260
4. Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Yes.  Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
ú No. Go to line 5.
5. Is the amount on line 3 less than $7,200 ($10,200 if married filing jointly)?
ú Yes.  Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on page 16 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status (Single or Married filing jointly).
Enter the credit here ........................................................ . 5.
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2. Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
6. Earned income credit. Enter this amount on Form 1040EZ, line 8a ............................... . 6. 438
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see above to find out if you must file Form
8862 to take the credit for 2008.
CAUTION
!
Page 250 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 253 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EIC Eligibility Checklist Keep for Your Records
You may claim the EIC if you answer ªYesº to all the following questions.*
Yes No
1. Is your AGI less than: M M
• $12,880 ($15,880 if married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $33,995 ($36,995 if married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child, or
• $38,646 ($41,646 if married filing jointly) if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rule 1.)
2. Do you, your spouse, and your qualifying child each have a valid SSN? (See Rule 2.) M M
3. Is your filing status married filing jointly, head of household, qualifying widow(er), or single? M M
(See Rule 3.)
Caution: If you or your spouse is a nonresident alien, answer ªYesº only if your filing status is married
filing jointly. 
(See Rule 4.)
4. Answer ªYesº if you are not filing Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ. Otherwise, answer ªNo.º M M
(See Rule 5.)
5. Is your investment income $2,950 or less? (See Rule 6.) M M
6. Is your total earned income at least $1 but less than: M M
• $12,880 ($15,880 if married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $33,995 ($36,995 if married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child, or
• $38,646 ($41,646 if married filing jointly) if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rules 7 and 15.)
7. Answer ªYesº if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) are not a qualifying child of another person. M M
Otherwise, answer ªNo.º (See Rules 10 and 13.)
STOP: If you have a qualifying child, answer questions 8 and 9 and skip 10 ± 12. If you do not
have a qualifying child, skip questions 8 and 9 and answer 10 ± 12.*
8. Does your child meet the age, residency, and relationship tests for a qualifying child? M M
(See Rule 8.)
9. Is your child a qualifying child only for you? Answer ªYesº if your qualifying child also meets the tests to be M M
a qualifying child of another person, but the other person is not claiming any child-related tax benefits using
that child. Answer ªNoº if you do not know whether the other person is claiming any child-related tax
benefits using that child.
10. Were you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) at least age 25 but under 65 at the end of 2008? M M
(See Rule 11.)
11. Answer ªYesº if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) cannot be claimed as a dependent on anyone M M
else's return. Answer ªNoº if you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) can be claimed as a dependent on
someone else's return. (See Rule 12.)
12. Was your main home (and your spouse's if filing a joint return) in the United States for more than half the M M
year? (See Rule 14.)
* PERSONS WITH A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 9, you can claim the EIC.
Remember to fill out Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use Form 1040EZ. If you
answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 8 and ªNoº to question 9, see Rule 9 to help you determine whether you can claim
the EIC. If you answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 7 and ªNoº to question 8, answer questions 10 through 12 to see if
you can claim the EIC without a qualifying child.
PERSONS WITHOUT A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 7, and 10 through 12, you
can claim the EIC.
If you answered ªNoº to any question that applies to you: You cannot claim the EIC.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 251

Page 254 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Foreign tax credit. ❏ 5405 First-Time Homebuyer Credit
• Mortgage interest credit. ❏ 5695 Residential Energy Efficient
Property Credit37. • Nonrefundable credit for prior year mini-
❏ 8396 Mortgage Interest Creditmum tax.
❏ 8801 Credit For Prior Year Minimum Tax• Residential energy efficient property
Other Credits Ð Individuals, Estates, and Trustscredit.
❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage• Retirement savings contributions credit.
Subsidy
This chapter also discusses the following re-What's New ❏ 8839 Qualified Adoption Expensesfundable credits.
❏ 8880 Credit for Qualified RetirementAdoption credit. The maximum adoption • Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain. Savings Contributionscredit increases to $11,650. See Adoption
• First-time homebuyer credit.Credit for more information. ❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax Credit
• Health coverage tax credit. ❏ 8910 Alternative Motor Vehicle CreditRecovery rebate credit. This credit is figured
• Recovery rebate credit.like the economic stimulus payment except that ❏ 8911 Alternative Fuel Vehicle Refuelingyour 2008 tax information is used to figure the Property Credit• Refundable credit for prior year minimumcredit, instead of your 2007 tax information. The tax. ❏ 8912 Credit to Holders of Tax Creditmaximum credit is $600 ($1,200 if married filing
Bonds• Credit for excess social security tax or rail-jointly) plus $300 for each qualifying child. The
road retirement tax withheld.credit is reduced by any economic stimulus pay-
ment you received. See Recovery Rebate Credit
Several other credits are discussed in otherfor more information.
chapters in this publication.
First-time homebuyer credit. You may be Nonrefundable Credits• Child and dependent care credit (chapterable to claim a credit of up to $7,500 if you are a
32).first-time homebuyer and your modified ad- The credits discussed in this part of the chapter
justed gross income is less than $95,000 can reduce your tax. However, if the total of• Credit for the elderly or the disabled
($170,000 if married filing jointly). This credit is these credits is more than your tax, the excess is(chapter 33).
like a loan to you. You must recapture the not refunded to you.• Child tax credit (chapter 34).amount of your 2008 credit in 15 equal yearly
installments starting in 2010 (2 years after claim- • Education credits (chapter 35). Adoption Crediting the credit). See First-Time Homebuyer
• Earned income credit (chapter 36).Credit for more information. You may be able to take a tax credit of up to
$11,650 for qualified expenses paid to adopt anNonbusiness energy property credit not al- Nonrefundable credits. The first part of this eligible child. The credit may be allowed for thelowed for 2008. You cannot claim the non- chapter, Nonrefundable Credits, covers nine adoption of a child with special needs even if youbusiness energy property credit for property credits that you subtract from your tax. These do not have any qualified expenses.placed in service in 2008. However, you may be credits may reduce your tax to zero. If these If your modified adjusted gross income (AGI)able to claim it next year for property placed in credits are more than your tax, the excess is not is more than $174,730, your credit is reduced. Ifservice in 2009. Also, you still may be able to refunded to you. your modified AGI is $214,730 or more, youclaim the residential energy efficient property
cannot take the credit.credit for 2008. See Residential Energy Efficient Refundable credits. The second part of thisProperty Credit for more information. chapter, Refundable Credits, covers six credits Qualified adoption expenses. Qualified
that are treated as payments and are refundable adoption expenses are reasonable and neces-Excess withholding of social security tax
to you. These credits are added to the federal sary expenses directly related to, and whoseand railroad retirement tax. Social security
income tax withheld and any estimated tax pay- principal purpose is for, the legal adoption of antax and tier 1 railroad retirement (RRTA) tax are
ments you made. If this total is more than your eligible child. These expenses include:both withheld at a rate of 6.2% of wages. The
total tax, the excess will be refunded to you.maximum wages subject to these taxes in- • Adoption fees,creased to $102,000 in 2008. The withholding
• Court costs,rate of tier 2 RRTA is 3.9% of wages in 2008. Useful Items
The maximum wages subject to this tax in- You may want to see: • Attorney fees,creased to $75,900 in 2008. If you had too much
• Travel expenses (including amounts spentsocial security or RRTA tax withheld during Publication for meals and lodging) while away from2008, you may be entitled to a credit of the
❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses home, andexcess withholding. For more information about
the credit, see Credit for Excess Social Security ❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for • Re-adoption expenses to adopt a foreignTax or Railroad Retirement Tax Withheld under Individuals child.Refundable Credits, later.
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Time .
Homeowners Nonqualified expenses. Qualified adop-
❏ 535 Business Expenses tion expenses do not include expenses:
Introduction ❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements • That violate state or federal law,
(IRAs)This chapter discusses the following nonrefund- • For carrying out any surrogate parentingable credits. arrangement,Form (and Instructions)• Adoption credit. • For the adoption of your spouse's child,❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit (Individual,• Alternative motor vehicle credit. Estate, or Trust) • For which you received funds under any
• Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property federal, state, or local program,❏ 2439 Notice to Shareholder ofcredit. Undistributed Long-Term Capital • Allowed as a credit or deduction under any
Gains• Credit to holders of tax credit bonds. other federal income tax rule,
Page 252 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 255 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Paid or reimbursed by your employer or • Qualified fuel cell vehicle. tank of a motor vehicle propelled by the fuel, but
any other person or organization, or only if the storage or dispensing is at the point
where the fuel is delivered into the tank.• Paid before 1997. Amount of credit. Generally, for a qualified
alternative fuel vehicle, an advanced lean burn Electricity. Electric vehicle recharging
technology vehicle, or a qualified hybrid vehicle, property placed in service after October 3, 2008,Eligible child. The term ªeligible childº means you can rely on the manufacturer's (or, in the is eligible for the credit. See the Form 8911any individual: case of a foreign manufacturer, its domestic instructions for details and other property eligi-
• Under 18 years old, or distributor's) certification that a specific make, ble for the credit.
model, and model year vehicle qualifies for the• Physically or mentally incapable of caring Amount of the credit. For personal use prop-credit and the maximum amount of the credit forfor himself or herself. erty, the credit is generally the smaller of 30% ofwhich it qualifies. For an updated list of certified the property's cost or $1,000. For business usevehicles and the specific credit amounts forChild with special needs. An eligible child property, the credit is generally the smaller ofeach model, go to www.irs.gov/newsroom/arti-is a child with special needs if all three of the 30% of the property's cost or $30,000. Eachcle/0,,id=157557,00.html on the Internet.following apply. property's cost must first be reduced by any
Additional requirements. In addition to the section 179 deduction before figuring the credit.1. The child was a citizen or resident of the manufacturer's (or domestic distributor's) certifi- How to take the credit. To take the credit, youUnited States (including U.S. possessions) cation, the following requirements must be met must complete Form 8911 and attach it to yourat the time the adoption process began. to qualify for the credit: Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for2. A state (including the District of Columbia) • You placed the vehicle in service during Form 1040, line 54. Check box c and enterhas determined that the child cannot or the year; ª8911º on the line next to box c.should not be returned to his or her par-
• The original use of the vehicle began with More information. For more information onents' home.
you; the credit, see the instructions for Form 8911.3. The state has determined that the child will
• You acquired the vehicle for your use or tonot be adopted unless assistance is pro-
lease to others, and not for resale; and Credit to Holders of Taxvided to the adoptive parents. Factors
used by states to make this determination • You use the vehicle primarily in the United Credit Bondsinclude: States.
You may be able to take a credit if you are aa. The child's ethnic background, holder of a tax credit bond. Tax credit bondsPhaseout of credit. Ordinarily the amount of include:b. The child's age, the credit is 100% of the manufacturer's (or
• Clean renewable energy bonds, andc. Whether the child is a member of a mi- domestic distributor's) certification of the maxi-
nority or sibling group, and mum credit allowable as explained above. How- • Gulf tax credit bonds.ever, if you purchased a qualified hybrid ord. Whether the child has a medical condi- advanced lean burn technology vehicle from a The issuers do not pay interest on these typestion or a physical, mental, or emotional manufacturer who previously sold at least of bonds. Instead of receiving interest, the bond-handicap. 60,000 of these vehicles, the amount of your holders qualify to claim a tax credit.credit may be reduced. Your manufacturer
Interest income. The amount of any tax creditshould give you the information you need toWhen to take the credit. Generally, until the
allowed (figured before applying tax liability lim-figure your phaseout percentage. Also see theadoption becomes final, you take the credit in
its) must be included as interest income on yourForm 8910 instructions.the year after your qualified expenses were paid
tax return.or incurred. If the adoption becomes final, you For Toyota and Lexus vehicles, no
take the credit in the year your expenses were How to take the credit. Complete Form 8912credit is allowed for 2008. For certain
paid or incurred. See the instructions for Form and attach it to your Form 1040. Include theother vehicles the credit is reduced.
CAUTION
!
8839 for more specific information on when to credit in your total for Form 1040, line 54. CheckSee the Form 8910 instructions or Summary of
take the credit. box c, and enter ª8912º on the line next to box c.the Credit for Qualified Hybrid Vehicles,  on the
Internet at www.irs.gov/newsroom/article/Foreign child. If the child is not a U.S. citi- More information. For more information, see0,,id=157557,00.html.zen or resident at the time the adoption process the instructions for Form 8912.
began, you cannot take the credit unless the Recapture of credit. If the vehicle no longeradoption becomes final. You treat all adoption qualifies for the credit, you may have to recap- Foreign Tax Creditexpenses paid or incurred in years before the ture part or all of the credit.adoption becomes final as paid or incurred in the You generally can choose to take income taxesyear it becomes final. How to take the credit. To take the credit, you you paid or accrued during the year to a foreignmust complete Form 8910 and attach it to your country or U.S. possession as a credit againstHow to take the credit. To take the credit, you Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for your U.S. income tax. Or, you can deduct themmust complete Form 8839 and attach it to your Form 1040, line 54. Check box c and enter as an itemized deduction (see chapter 22).Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for ª8910º on the line next to box c. You cannot take a credit (or deduction) forForm 1040, line 53, and check box b on that line.
More information. For more information on foreign income taxes paid on income that you
the credit, see the instructions for Form 8910. exclude from U.S. tax under any of the following.Alternative Motor Vehicle
1. Foreign earned income exclusion.Credit Alternative Fuel Vehicle
2. Foreign housing exclusion.Refueling Property CreditYou may be able to take a credit if you place an
3. Income from Puerto Rico exempt fromalternative motor vehicle in service in 2008.
U.S. tax.You may be able to take a credit if you place
qualified alternative fuel vehicle refueling prop-Alternative motor vehicle. An alternative 4. Possession exclusion.erty in service in 2008.motor vehicle is a new vehicle that qualifies as
one of the following four types of vehicles. Qualified alternative fuel vehicle refueling Limit on the credit. Unless you can elect not
property. Qualified alternative fuel vehicle re- to file Form 1116 (see Exception, later), your• Qualified hybrid vehicle.
fueling property is any property (other than a foreign tax credit cannot be more than your U.S.• Advanced lean burn technology vehicle. building or its structural components) used to tax liability (Form 1040, line 44), multiplied by a
• Qualified alternative fuel vehicle. store or dispense alternative fuel into the fuel fraction. The numerator of the fraction is your
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 253

Page 256 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
taxable income from sources outside the United 8396. If your allowable credit is reduced be- How to take the credit. Figure your 2008
States. The denominator is your total taxable nonrefundable credit (if any), and any carryfor-cause of this tax liability limit, you can carry
income from U.S. and foreign sources. See Pub- ward to 2009 on Form 8801, and attach it to yourforward the unused portion of the credit to the
lication 514 for more information. Form 1040. Include the credit in your total fornext 3 years or until used, whichever comes first.
Form 1040, line 54, and check box b. You canIf you are subject to the $2,000 limit becauseHow to take the credit. Complete Form 1116 carry forward any unused credit for prior yearyour certificate credit rate is more than 20%, youand attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit minimum tax to later years until it is completelycannot carry forward any amount more thanon Form 1040, line 50. used.$2,000 (or your share of the $2,000 if you must
Exception. You do not have to complete divide the credit).
More information. For more informationForm 1116 to take the credit if all of the following
about the credit, see the instructions for Formapply. How to take the credit. Figure your 2008
8801.credit and any carryforward to 2009 on Form• All of your foreign source gross income
8396, and attach it to your Form 1040. Be surewas passive income, which generally in-
to include any credit carryforward from 2005, Residential Energycludes interest and dividends.
2006, and 2007.
Efficient Property Credit• All of your foreign source gross income Include the credit in your total for Form 1040,and the foreign tax paid on it were re- line 53, and check box a. You may be able to take this credit if you madeported to you on a qualified payee state-
energy saving improvements to your home lo-ment, which includes Form 1099-INT and Reduced home mortgage interest deduction. cated in the United States in 2008.Form 1099-DIV. If you itemize your deductions on Schedule A
• The total of your creditable foreign taxes (Form 1040), you must reduce your home mort- Home. A home is where you lived in 2008 andwas not more than $300 ($600 if married gage interest deduction by the amount of the may include a house, houseboat, mobile home,filing jointly). mortgage interest credit shown on Form 8396, cooperative apartment, condominium, and aline 3. You must do this even if part of that manufactured home that conforms to Federal• You elect this procedure for the tax year. amount is to be carried forward to 2009. For Manufactured Home Construction and Safetymore information about the home mortgage in- Standards.For more details on these requirements, see terest deduction, see chapter 23.the instructions for Form 1116. If you are a member of a condominium man-
agement association for a condominium youRecapture of federal mortgage subsidy. If own or a tenant-stockholder in a cooperativeMortgage Interest Credit you received an MCC with your mortgage loan, housing corporation, you are treated as havingyou may have to recapture (pay back) all or part paid your proportionate share of any costs ofThe mortgage interest credit is intended to help of the benefit you received from that program. such association or corporation for purposes oflower-income individuals own a home. If you The recapture may be required if you sell or this credit.qualify, you can take the credit each year for part dispose of your home at a gain during the first 9of the home mortgage interest you pay. years after the date you closed your mortgage Amount of credit. The credit is 30% of yourloan. See Publication 523, Selling Your Home,Who qualifies. You may be eligible for the costs of qualified:for more information.credit if you were issued a qualified mortgage • Solar electric property,credit certificate (MCC)  from your state or local
government. Generally, an MCC is issued only Nonrefundable Credit for • Solar water heating property,
in connection with a new mortgage for the Prior Year Minimum Tax • Fuel cell property,purchase of your main home.
• Small wind energy property, andThe tax laws give special treatment to someAmount of credit. Figure your credit on Form
kinds of income and allow special deductions • Geothermal heat pump property.8396. If your mortgage loan amount is equal to
and credits for some kinds of expenses. If you(or smaller than) the certified indebtedness
benefit from these laws, you may have to pay at This includes labor costs properly allocable to(loan) amount shown on your MCC, enter on
least a minimum amount of tax in addition to any the onsite preparation, assembly, or original in-Form 8396, line 1, all the interest you paid on
other tax on these items. This is called the alter- stallation of the property to the home. The credityour mortgage during the year.
native minimum tax. is limited to:If your mortgage loan amount is larger than
The special treatment of some items of in-the certified indebtedness amount shown on • $2,000 for qualified solar electric propertycome and expenses only allows you to postponeyour MCC, you can figure the credit on only part costs,paying tax until a later year. If in prior years youof the interest you paid. To find the amount to
• $2,000 for qualified solar water heatingpaid alternative minimum tax because of theseenter on line 1, multiply the total interest you
property costs,tax postponement items, you may be able topaid during the year on your mortgage by the
take a credit for prior year minimum tax againstfollowing fraction. • $500 for each one-half kilowatt of capacityyour current year's regular tax. of qualified fuel cell property for which
You may be able to take a credit against your qualified fuel cell property costs are paid,Certified indebtedness regular tax if for 2007 you had:amount on your MCC • $4,000 for qualified small wind energy
• An alternative minimum tax liability and property costs, andOriginal amount of your adjustments or preferences other than ex-
mortgage • $2,000 for qualified geothermal heat pumpclusion items,
property costs.
• A minimum tax credit that you are carryingLimit based on credit rate. If the certificate forward to 2008, orcredit rate is more than 20%, the credit you are Basis reduction. You must reduce the basisallowed cannot be more than $2,000. If two or • An unallowed qualified electric vehicle of your home by the amount of any credit al-more persons (other than a married couple filing credit. lowed.a joint return) hold an interest in the home to
which the MCC relates, this $2,000 limit must be How to take the credit Complete Form 5695Refundable credit. If you have any unuseddivided based on the interest held by each per- and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the creditminimum tax credit carryforward from 2005 orson. See Publication 530 for more information. on Form 1040, line 53, and check box c.earlier years, you may qualify for a refund of that
credit amount. For more information, see Re-Carryforward. Your credit (after applying the
fundable Credit for Prior Year Minimum Tax,limit based on credit rate) is also subject to a More information. For more information on
later.limit based on your tax that is figured using Form this credit, see the instructions for Form 5695.
Page 254 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 257 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Notice to Shareholder of Undistributed • A partnership in which you directly or indi-Retirement Savings rectly own more than 50% of the capitalLong-Term Capital Gains, showing your share
Contributions Credit interest or profits interest.of the undistributed capital gains and the tax
paid, if any. Take the credit for the tax paid by For more information about related persons, seeYou may be able to take this credit if you, or your entering the amount on Form 1040, line 68, and Nondeductible Loss in chapter 2 of Publicationspouse if filing jointly, made: checking box a. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets.
• Contributions (other than rollover contribu- your return. See Capital Gain Distributions in
tions) to a traditional or Roth IRA, chapter 8 for more information on undistributed Amount of the credit. Generally, the credit is
capital gains. the smaller of:• Elective deferrals to a 401(k) or 403(b)
plan (including designated Roth contribu- • $7,500 ($3,750 if married filing sepa-
tions) or to a governmental 457, SEP, or First-Time Homebuyer rately), or
SIMPLE plan, Credit • 10% of the purchase price of the home.
• Voluntary employee contributions to a
The first-time homebuyer credit operates muchqualified retirement plan (including the fed- You are allowed the full amount of the credit if
eral Thrift Savings Plan), or like an interest-free loan. You generally must your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) is
repay it over a 15-year period. See Recapture of $75,000 or less ($150,000 or less if married filing• Contributions to a 501(c)(18)(D) plan. credit later. jointly). The credit is reduced if MAGI is more
than $75,000 ($150,000 if married filing jointly).However, you cannot take the credit if either of
The credit is eliminated completely if MAGI isWho can claim the credit. In general, youthe following applies.
$95,000 ($170,000 if married filing jointly) orcan claim the credit if you are a first-time
more.1. The amount on Form 1040, line 38, or homebuyer. You are considered a first-time
Form 1040A, line 22, is more than $26,500 homebuyer if: Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI).($39,750 if head of household; $53,000 if Your MAGI is the amount from Form 1040, line• You bought your main home in the Unitedmarried filing jointly). 38, increased by the total of any:States after April 8, 2008, and before July
2. The person(s) who made the qualified con- 1, 2009, and • Exclusion of income from Puerto Rico, andtribution or elective deferral (a) was born
• You (and your spouse if married) did not • Amount from Form 2555, line 45 and lineafter January 1, 1991, (b) is claimed as a
own any other main home during the 50; Form 2555-EZ, line 18; and Formdependent on someone else's 2008 tax re-
3-year period ending on the date of 4563, line 15.turn, or (c) was a student (defined next).
purchase.
Student. You were a student if during any part Recapture of credit. You generally must re-If you constructed your main home, you areof 5 calendar months of 2008 you: pay (recapture) the credit over a 15-year periodtreated as having bought it on the date you first in 15 equal installments. The recapture period• Were enrolled as a full-time student at a occupied it. begins 2 years after the year in which youschool, or
claimed the credit. Thus, if you claim the creditMain home. Your main home is the one you
• Took a full-time, on-farm training course on your 2008 tax return, the recapture periodlive in most of the time. It can be a house,
given by a school or a state, county, or begins in 2010 and you must include the firsthouseboat, condominium, or other type of resi-local government agency. installment as additional tax on your 2010 taxdence.
return.
School. A school includes a technical, If your home ceases to be your main homeWho cannot claim the credit. You cannottrade, or mechanical school. It does not include before the 15-year period is up, you must in-claim the credit if any of the following apply.an on-the-job training course, correspondence clude all remaining annual installments as addi-school, or school offering courses only through 1. Your modified adjusted gross income is tional tax on the return for the tax year thatthe Internet. happens. This includes situations where you sell$95,000 or more ($170,000 or more if mar-
the home or convert it to business or rentalried filing jointly). See Modified adjustedHow to take the credit. Figure the credit on property.gross income (MAGI) later.Form 8880. Enter the credit on your Form 1040,
For purposes of repaying the credit, eachline 51, or your Form 1040A, line 32, and attach 2. You are eligible to claim the District of Co- spouse filing a joint return is treated as havingForm 8880 to your return. lombia first-time homebuyer credit for 2008 been allowed half the credit.or any prior year.
Example 1. You claimed a $7,500 credit on3. Your home financing comes from
your 2008 tax return. You must include $500tax-exempt mortgage revenue bonds.Refundable Credits ($7,500 ÷  15) as additional tax on your 2010 tax4. You are a nonresident alien. return and on each tax return for the next 14The credits discussed in this part of the chapter years.5. Your home is located outside the Unitedare treated as payments of tax. If the total of States.these credits, withheld federal income tax, and Example 2. You claimed a $7,500 credit onestimated tax payments is more than your total 6. You sell the home, or it ceases to be your your 2008 tax return. In 2009, you sold the hometax, the excess can be refunded to you. main home, before the end of 2008. to your son. You must include $7,500 as addi-
tional tax on your 2009 tax return.7. You acquired your home by gift or inheri-
Credit for Tax on tance. Exceptions. The following are exceptions
to the recapture rule.Undistributed Capital Gain 8. You acquired your home from a related
person. • If you sell the home to someone who isYou must include in your income any amounts not related to you, the recapture in theA related person includes:that regulated investment companies (com- year of sale is limited to the amount ofmonly called mutual funds) or real estate invest- • Your spouse, ancestors (parents, grand- gain on the sale. When figuring the gain,ment trusts (REITs) allocated to you as capital parents, etc.), or lineal descendants (chil- reduce the adjusted basis of the home bygain distributions, even if you did not actually dren, grandchildren, etc.). the amount of the credit you have not re-receive them. If the mutual fund or REIT paid a captured.• A corporation in which you directly or indi-tax on the capital gain, you are allowed a credit
rectly own more than 50% in value of thefor the tax since it is considered paid by you. The • If the home is destroyed, condemned, or
outstanding stock of the corporation.mutual fund or REIT will send you Form 2439, disposed of under threat of condemnation,
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 255

Page 258 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and you acquire a new main home within For definitions and special rules, including You must attach invoices and proof of pay-
ment for any amounts you include on Form2 years of the event, you continue to re- those relating to qualified health insurance
8885, line 2. For details, see Publication 502 orcapture the credit over the rest of the plans, qualifying family members, and em-
Form 8885.15-year recapture period. ployer-sponsored health insurance plans, see
Publication 502 and the instructions for Form• If, as part of a divorce settlement, the 8885. Recovery Rebate Credithome is transferred to a spouse or former
spouse, the spouse who receives the
This credit is figured like the economic stimulushome is responsible for recapturing the re- TAA Recipient payment you may have received in 2008 exceptmaining credit. that your 2008 tax information is used to figure
You were an eligible TAA recipient on the first• If you die, the rest of the credit does not this credit. Your 2007 tax information was used
day of the month if, for any day in that month orhave to be recaptured. to figure your economic stimulus payment.
the prior month, you: You may be able to take this credit only if:
• Received a trade readjustment allowance,How to take the credit. To take the credit, • You did not get an economic stimulus pay-
orcomplete Form 5405 and attach it to your Form ment, or
1040. Include your credit on Form 1040, line 69. • Would have been entitled to receive such • Your economic stimulus payment was less
an allowance except that you had not ex- than $600 ($1,200 if married filing jointly
hausted all rights to any unemploymentHealth Coverage Tax for 2007) plus $300 for each qualifying
insurance (except additional compensa- child you had for 2008.Credit tion that is funded by a state and is not However, you do not qualify for this credit if all ofreimbursed from any federal funds) toYou may be able to take this credit for any month the following apply.which you were entitled (or would be enti-in which all the following statements were true
tled if you applied). • You received an economic stimulus pay-on the first day of the month.
ment of $300 ($600 if married filing jointly
• You were an eligible trade adjustment as- Example. You received a trade adjustment for 2007) before any offset (see Offset
sistance (TAA) recipient, alternative TAA against debts in chapter 1),allowance for January 2008. You were an eligi-
(ATAA) recipient, or Pension Benefit Guar- ble TAA recipient on the first day of January and • Your 2008 tax on Form 1040, line 46anty Corporation (PBGC) pension recipi- February. (Form 1040A, line 28, or Form 1040EZ,ent (defined later). line 11), is $300 or less ($600 or less if
• You were covered by a qualified health married filing jointly for 2008),Alternative TAA Recipientinsurance plan for which you paid the pre- • Your 2008 filing status is the same as yourmiums, or your portion of the premiums, You were an eligible alternative TAA recipient 2007 filing status, anddirectly to your health plan. on the first day of the month if, for that month or • You do not have any qualifying children.• You were not entitled to Medicare Part A the prior month, you received benefits under an
or enrolled in Medicare Part B. alternative trade adjustment assistance pro- Generally, the credit cannot be more thangram for older workers established by the De-• You were not enrolled in Medicaid or the your 2008 net income tax liability (your regularpartment of Labor. tax liability plus any alternative minimum taxState Children's Health Insurance Pro-
(AMT), minus any nonrefundable credits yougram (SCHIP). Example. You received benefits under an
claimed other than the child tax credit). How-alternative trade adjustment assistance pro-• You were not enrolled in the Federal Em- ever, your credit will be at least $300 ($600 ifgram for older workers for October 2008. Theployees Health Benefits program (FEHBP) married filing jointly) if you meet either of theprogram was established by the Department ofor eligible to receive benefits under the following two conditions:Labor. You were an eligible alternative TAA re-U.S. military health system (CHAMPUS/ cipient on the first day of October and Novem- • The total of your earned income, socialTRICARE). ber. security benefits (including social security• You were not covered by, or eligible for disability payments), tier 1 railroad retire-
coverage under, any employer-sponsored ment benefits, certain veterans benefits,
health insurance plan (including any em- PBGC Pension Recipient and nontaxable combat pay is at least
ployer-sponsored health insurance plan of $3,000, orYou were an eligible PBGC pension recipient onyour spouse).
• Your total income is more than $8,950 ifthe first day of the month, if both of the following• You were not imprisoned under federal, your filing status is single or married filingapply.state, or local authority. separately ($11,500 if head of household;
1. You were age 55 or older on the first day $14,400 if qualifying widow(er); $17,900 ifBut, you cannot take the credit if you can be
of the month. married filing jointly), and your net incomeclaimed as a dependent on someone else's
tax liability is more than zero.2008 tax return. If you meet all of these condi- 2. You received a benefit for that month that
tions, you may be able to take a credit of up to was paid by the PBGC under title IV of the If you meet either of these conditions, you can65% of the amount you paid for qualified health Employee Retirement Income Security Act also get an additional $300 for each of yourinsurance coverage for you and any qualifying of 1974 (ERISA). children who is a qualifying child for the child taxfamily members. You cannot take the credit for credit.If you received a lump-sum payment from theinsurance premiums on coverage that was par-
PBGC after August 5, 2002, you meet item (2) To be eligible, you and your spouse eachtially paid for with a National Emergency Grant.
must have a valid social security number. To getabove for any month that you would have re-The amount you paid for qualified health insur- the additional $300 credit for a child, the childceived a PBGC benefit if you had not receivedance coverage must be reduced by any Archer must have a valid social security number. How-the lump-sum payment.MSA and health savings account distributions ever, a valid social security number is not re-used to pay for the coverage. quired for you, your spouse, or any qualifying
You can take this credit on your tax return or child if you file a joint return and either you orHow To Take the Credit
have it paid on your behalf in advance to your your spouse was a member of the U. S. Armed
To take the credit, complete Form 8885 andinsurance company. If the credit is paid on your Forces at any time in 2008. You are not eligible
attach it to your Form 1040. Include your creditbehalf in advance, that amount will reduce the for the credit if you can be claimed as a depen-
in the total for Form 1040, line 68, and check boxamount of the credit you can take on your tax dent of another taxpayer, or if you file Form
return. d. 1040NR, 1040NR-EZ, 1040-PR, or 1040-SS.
Page 256 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 259 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your adjusted gross income (AGI) is more of wages subject to tax and the maximum Example. You are married and file a joint
than $75,000 ($150,000 if married filing jointly), amount of tax that should have been withheld for return with your spouse who had no gross in-
your credit will be reduced by 5% of your AGI in 2008. come in 2008. During 2008, you worked for the
excess of that amount. Brown Shoe Company and earned $60,000 in
Maximum tax wages. Social security tax of $3,720 was with-Credit reduced or eliminated by economic Maximum that should held. You also worked for another employer inwages have beenstimulus payment. Your credit is reduced by 2008 and earned $51,000 in wages. $3,162 ofType of tax subject to tax withheldany economic stimulus payment you received in social security tax was withheld from these2008. However, if your credit is less than the Social security or wages. Because you worked for more than oneRRTA tier 1 $102,000 $6,324.00stimulus payment you received, you do not have employer and your total wages were more thanto repay the difference. RRTA tier 2 $75,900 $2,960.10 $102,000, you can take a credit of $558.00 for
How to take the credit. To take the credit, the excess social security tax withheld.All wages are subject to Medicare taxcomplete the Recovery Rebate Credit Work- withholding.sheet±Line 70  in the Form 1040 instructions 1. Add all social security tax withheld
CAUTION
!
(Recovery Rebate Credit Worksheet±Line 42 in (but not more than $6,324.00 for
the Form 1040A instructions or Recovery Re- each employer). Enter the total Use Form 843, Claim for Refund and here ................... . $6,882.00bate Credit Worksheet ±Line 9  in the Form Request for Abatement, to claim a re-1040-EZ instructions). Include your credit on 2. Enter any uncollected socialfund of excess tier 2 RRTA tax. Be sure
TIPForm 1040, line 70 (Form 1040A, line 42, or security tax on tips or group-termto attach a copy of all of your W-2 forms. See theForm 1040-EZ, line 9). life insurance included in the totalworksheet in Publication 505, Tax Withholding on Form 1040, line 61 ....... . -0-
and Estimated Tax, to help you figure the excess
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,324.00 orRefundable Credit for Prior amount. less, stop here. You cannot take the
Year Minimum Tax credit .................. . 6,882.00
Employer's error. If any one employer with-
4. Social security tax limit ....... . 6,324.00held too much social security or tier 1 RRTA tax,If you paid the alternative minimum tax for 2007
you cannot take the excess as a credit against 5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.or you had a minimum tax credit carryforward to
Enter the result here and on Formyour income tax. The employer should adjust2008, you may be able to take a credit for prior
1040, line 65 (or Form 1040A, linethe tax for you. If the employer does not adjustyear minimum tax. For information about the
43) ................... . $558.00the overcollection, you can file a claim for refundnonrefundable credit for prior year minimum tax
using Form 843.you may be able to take, see Nonrefundable
Credit for Prior Year Minimum Tax, earlier. How-
How to figure the credit if you worked for aJoint return. If you are filing a joint return, youever, for 2008, you may qualify for a refundable
railroad. If you were a railroad employee atcannot add the social security or tier 1 RRTA taxcredit for prior year minimum tax if you have any
any time during 2008, figure the credit as fol-withheld from your spouse's wages to theunused minimum tax credit carryforward from
lows:amount withheld from your wages. Figure the2005 or earlier years, even if the total amount of
withholding separately for you and your spouseyour current year credit is more than your total
to determine if either of you has excess with-tax liability. To figure the amount of any 2008 1. Add all social security and tier 1
holding. RRTA tax withheld (but not morerefundable credit, complete Part IV of Form
than $6,324.00 for each employer).8801. Include any refundable credit on Form
Enter the total here ......... .How to figure the credit if you did not work1040, line 68, and check box c. You can carry
for a railroad. If you did not work for a railroadforward any unused credit for prior year mini- 2. Enter any uncollected social
during 2008, figure the credit as follows:mum tax to later years. security and tier 1 RRTA tax on tips
or group-term life insurance
included in the total on Form 1040,1. Add all social security tax withheldCredit for Excess Social line 61 ................. .(but not more than $6,324.00 for
each employer). Enter the total Security Tax or Railroad 3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,324.00 or
here ................... . less, stop here. You cannot take Retirement Tax Withheld the credit ................ .2. Enter any uncollected social
security tax on tips or group-term 4. Social security and tier 1 RRTA Most employers must withhold social security life insurance included in the total tax limit ................. . 6,324.00tax from your wages. If you work for a railroad on Form 1040, line 61 ....... .employer, that employer must withhold tier 1 5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,324.00 orrailroad retirement (RRTA) tax and tier 2 RRTA Enter the result here and on Form
less, stop here. You cannot take 1040, line 65 (or Form 1040A, linetax. the credit ................ . 43) ................... .If you worked for two or more employers in
4. Social security tax limit ....... . 6,324.002008, you may have had too much social secur-
ity or tier 1 RRTA tax withheld from your pay. 5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.
You can claim the excess social security or tier 1 How to take the credit. Enter the credit onEnter the result here and on Form
RRTA tax as a credit against your income tax. Form 1040, line 65, or include it in the total for1040, line 65 (or Form 1040A, line
43) ................... .The following table shows the maximum amount Form 1040A, line 43.
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 257

Page 260 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See the instructions for line 44 that begin on
2008 page 34 to see if you must use the Tax Table
below to figure your tax.
CAUTION
!
Tax Table Example. Mr. and Mrs. Brown are filing a joint return. Their
taxable income on Form 1040, line 43, is $25,300. First, they
find the $25,300±25,350 taxable income line. Next, they find
the column for married filing jointly and read down the
column. The amount shown where the taxable income line
and filing status column meet is $2,996. This is the tax
amount they should enter on Form 1040, line 44.
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
25,200
25,250
25,300
25,350
3,383
3,390
3,398
3,405
Sample Table
25,250
25,300
25,350
25,400
2,981
2,989
2,996
3,004
3,383
3,390
3,398
3,405
3,211
3,219
3,226
3,234
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
0 5 0 0 0 0 1,300 1,325 131 131 131 131 2,700 2,725 271 271 271 271
5 15 1 1 1 1 1,325 1,350 134 134 134 134 2,725 2,750 274 274 274 274
15 25 2 2 2 2 1,350 1,375 136 136 136 136 2,750 2,775 276 276 276 276
25 50 4 4 4 4 1,375 1,400 139 139 139 139 2,775 2,800 279 279 279 279
50 75 6 6 6 6 1,400 1,425 141 141 141 141 2,800 2,825 281 281 281 28175 100 9 9 9 9 1,425 1,450 144 144 144 144 2,825 2,850 284 284 284 284
100 125 11 11 11 11 1,450 1,475 146 146 146 146 2,850 2,875 286 286 286 286
125 150 14 14 14 14 1,475 1,500 149 149 149 149 2,875 2,900 289 289 289 289
150 175 16 16 16 16 1,500 1,525 151 151 151 151 2,900 2,925 291 291 291 291175 200 19 19 19 19 1,525 1,550 154 154 154 154 2,925 2,950 294 294 294 294
200 225 21 21 21 21 1,550 1,575 156 156 156 156 2,950 2,975 296 296 296 296
225 250 24 24 24 24 1,575 1,600 159 159 159 159 2,975 3,000 299 299 299 299
250 275 26 26 26 26 1,600 1,625 161 161 161 161275 300 29 29 29 29 3,0001,625 1,650 164 164 164 164
300 325 31 31 31 31 1,650 1,675 166 166 166 166 3,000 3,050 303 303 303 303325 350 34 34 34 34 1,675 1,700 169 169 169 169 3,050 3,100 308 308 308 308350 375 36 36 36 36 1,700 1,725 171 171 171 171 3,100 3,150 313 313 313 313375 400 39 39 39 39 1,725 1,750 174 174 174 174 3,150 3,200 318 318 318 318400 425 41 41 41 41 1,750 1,775 176 176 176 176 3,200 3,250 323 323 323 323425 450 44 44 44 44 1,775 1,800 179 179 179 179 3,250 3,300 328 328 328 328450 475 46 46 46 46 1,800 1,825 181 181 181 181 3,300 3,350 333 333 333 333475 500 49 49 49 49 1,825 1,850 184 184 184 184 3,350 3,400 338 338 338 338500 525 51 51 51 51 1,850 1,875 186 186 186 186 3,400 3,450 343 343 343 343525 550 54 54 54 54 1,875 1,900 189 189 189 189 3,450 3,500 348 348 348 348550 575 56 56 56 56 1,900 1,925 191 191 191 191 3,500 3,550 353 353 353 353575 600 59 59 59 59 1,925 1,950 194 194 194 194 3,550 3,600 358 358 358 358600 625 61 61 61 61 1,950 1,975 196 196 196 196 3,600 3,650 363 363 363 363625 650 64 64 64 64 1,975 2,000 199 199 199 199 3,650 3,700 368 368 368 368650 675 66 66 66 66 3,700 3,750 373 373 373 373675 700 69 69 69 69 2,000 3,750 3,800 378 378 378 378700 725 71 71 71 71 2,000 2,025 201 201 201 201 3,800 3,850 383 383 383 383725 750 74 74 74 74 2,025 2,050 204 204 204 204 3,850 3,900 388 388 388 388750 775 76 76 76 76 2,050 2,075 206 206 206 206 3,900 3,950 393 393 393 393775 800 79 79 79 79 2,075 2,100 209 209 209 209 3,950 4,000 398 398 398 398800 825 81 81 81 81 2,100 2,125 211 211 211 211825 850 84 84 84 84 4,0002,125 2,150 214 214 214 214850 875 86 86 86 86 2,150 2,175 216 216 216 216875 900 89 89 89 89 4,000 4,050 403 403 403 4032,175 2,200 219 219 219 219 4,050 4,100 408 408 408 408900 925 91 91 91 91 2,200 2,225 221 221 221 221 4,100 4,150 413 413 413 413925 950 94 94 94 94 2,225 2,250 224 224 224 224 4,150 4,200 418 418 418 418950 975 96 96 96 96 2,250 2,275 226 226 226 226975 1,000 99 99 99 99 4,200 4,250 423 423 423 4232,275 2,300 229 229 229 229
4,250 4,300 428 428 428 4282,300 2,325 231 231 231 2311,000 4,300 4,350 433 433 433 4332,325 2,350 234 234 234 234 4,350 4,400 438 438 438 4382,350 2,375 236 236 236 2361,000 1,025 101 101 101 101 4,400 4,450 443 443 443 4432,375 2,400 239 239 239 2391,025 1,050 104 104 104 104 4,450 4,500 448 448 448 4481,050 1,075 106 106 106 106 2,400 2,425 241 241 241 241 4,500 4,550 453 453 453 4531,075 1,100 109 109 109 109 2,425 2,450 244 244 244 244 4,550 4,600 458 458 458 4582,450 2,475 246 246 246 2461,100 1,125 111 111 111 111 2,475 2,500 249 249 249 249 4,600 4,650 463 463 463 4631,125 1,150 114 114 114 114
4,650 4,700 468 468 468 4681,150 1,175 116 116 116 116 2,500 2,525 251 251 251 251
4,700 4,750 473 473 473 4731,175 1,200 119 119 119 119 2,525 2,550 254 254 254 254
4,750 4,800 478 478 478 4782,550 2,575 256 256 256 2561,200 1,225 121 121 121 121 2,575 2,600 259 259 259 259 4,800 4,850 483 483 483 4831,225 1,250 124 124 124 124
4,850 4,900 488 488 488 4881,250 1,275 126 126 126 126 2,600 2,625 261 261 261 261
4,900 4,950 493 493 493 4931,275 1,300 129 129 129 129 2,625 2,650 264 264 264 264
4,950 5,000 498 498 498 4982,650 2,675 266 266 266 266
2,675 2,700 269 269 269 269
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 259)
- 258 -

Page 261 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
5,000 8,000 11,000
5,000 5,050 503 503 503 503 8,000 8,050 803 803 803 803 11,000 11,050 1,253 1,103 1,253 1,103
5,050 5,100 508 508 508 508 8,050 8,100 810 808 810 808 11,050 11,100 1,260 1,108 1,260 1,108
5,100 5,150 513 513 513 513 8,100 8,150 818 813 818 813 11,100 11,150 1,268 1,113 1,268 1,113
5,150 5,200 518 518 518 518 8,150 8,200 825 818 825 818 11,150 11,200 1,275 1,118 1,275 1,118
5,200 5,250 523 523 523 523 8,200 8,250 833 823 833 823 11,200 11,250 1,283 1,123 1,283 1,123
5,250 5,300 528 528 528 528 8,250 8,300 840 828 840 828 11,250 11,300 1,290 1,128 1,290 1,128
5,300 5,350 533 533 533 533 8,300 8,350 848 833 848 833 11,300 11,350 1,298 1,133 1,298 1,133
5,350 5,400 538 538 538 538 8,350 8,400 855 838 855 838 11,350 11,400 1,305 1,138 1,305 1,138
5,400 5,450 543 543 543 543 8,400 8,450 863 843 863 843 11,400 11,450 1,313 1,143 1,313 1,143
5,450 5,500 548 548 548 548 8,450 8,500 870 848 870 848 11,450 11,500 1,320 1,148 1,320 1,149
5,500 5,550 553 553 553 553 8,500 8,550 878 853 878 853 11,500 11,550 1,328 1,153 1,328 1,156
5,550 5,600 558 558 558 558 8,550 8,600 885 858 885 858 11,550 11,600 1,335 1,158 1,335 1,164
5,600 5,650 563 563 563 563 8,600 8,650 893 863 893 863 11,600 11,650 1,343 1,163 1,343 1,171
5,650 5,700 568 568 568 568 8,650 8,700 900 868 900 868 11,650 11,700 1,350 1,168 1,350 1,179
5,700 5,750 573 573 573 573 8,700 8,750 908 873 908 873 11,700 11,750 1,358 1,173 1,358 1,186
5,750 5,800 578 578 578 578 8,750 8,800 915 878 915 878 11,750 11,800 1,365 1,178 1,365 1,194
5,800 5,850 583 583 583 583 8,800 8,850 923 883 923 883 11,800 11,850 1,373 1,183 1,373 1,201
5,850 5,900 588 588 588 588 8,850 8,900 930 888 930 888 11,850 11,900 1,380 1,188 1,380 1,209
5,900 5,950 593 593 593 593 8,900 8,950 938 893 938 893 11,900 11,950 1,388 1,193 1,388 1,216
5,950 6,000 598 598 598 598 8,950 9,000 945 898 945 898 11,950 12,000 1,395 1,198 1,395 1,224
6,000 9,000 12,000
6,000 6,050 603 603 603 603 9,000 9,050 953 903 953 903 12,000 12,050 1,403 1,203 1,403 1,231
6,050 6,100 608 608 608 608 9,050 9,100 960 908 960 908 12,050 12,100 1,410 1,208 1,410 1,239
6,100 6,150 613 613 613 613 9,100 9,150 968 913 968 913 12,100 12,150 1,418 1,213 1,418 1,246
6,150 6,200 618 618 618 618 9,150 9,200 975 918 975 918 12,150 12,200 1,425 1,218 1,425 1,254
6,200 6,250 623 623 623 623 9,200 9,250 983 923 983 923 12,200 12,250 1,433 1,223 1,433 1,261
6,250 6,300 628 628 628 628 9,250 9,300 990 928 990 928 12,250 12,300 1,440 1,228 1,440 1,269
6,300 6,350 633 633 633 633 9,300 9,350 998 933 998 933 12,300 12,350 1,448 1,233 1,448 1,276
6,350 6,400 638 638 638 638 9,350 9,400 1,005 938 1,005 938 12,350 12,400 1,455 1,238 1,455 1,284
6,400 6,450 643 643 643 643 9,400 9,450 1,013 943 1,013 943 12,400 12,450 1,463 1,243 1,463 1,291
6,450 6,500 648 648 648 648 9,450 9,500 1,020 948 1,020 948 12,450 12,500 1,470 1,248 1,470 1,299
6,500 6,550 653 653 653 653 9,500 9,550 1,028 953 1,028 953 12,500 12,550 1,478 1,253 1,478 1,306
6,550 6,600 658 658 658 658 9,550 9,600 1,035 958 1,035 958 12,550 12,600 1,485 1,258 1,485 1,314
6,600 6,650 663 663 663 663 9,600 9,650 1,043 963 1,043 963 12,600 12,650 1,493 1,263 1,493 1,321
6,650 6,700 668 668 668 668 9,650 9,700 1,050 968 1,050 968 12,650 12,700 1,500 1,268 1,500 1,329
6,700 6,750 673 673 673 673 9,700 9,750 1,058 973 1,058 973 12,700 12,750 1,508 1,273 1,508 1,336
6,750 6,800 678 678 678 678 9,750 9,800 1,065 978 1,065 978 12,750 12,800 1,515 1,278 1,515 1,344
6,800 6,850 683 683 683 683 9,800 9,850 1,073 983 1,073 983 12,800 12,850 1,523 1,283 1,523 1,351
6,850 6,900 688 688 688 688 9,850 9,900 1,080 988 1,080 988 12,850 12,900 1,530 1,288 1,530 1,359
6,900 6,950 693 693 693 693 9,900 9,950 1,088 993 1,088 993 12,900 12,950 1,538 1,293 1,538 1,366
6,950 7,000 698 698 698 698 9,950 10,000 1,095 998 1,095 998 12,950 13,000 1,545 1,298 1,545 1,374
7,000 10,000 13,000
7,000 7,050 703 703 703 703 10,000 10,050 1,103 1,003 1,103 1,003 13,000 13,050 1,553 1,303 1,553 1,381
7,050 7,100 708 708 708 708 10,050 10,100 1,110 1,008 1,110 1,008 13,050 13,100 1,560 1,308 1,560 1,389
7,100 7,150 713 713 713 713 10,100 10,150 1,118 1,013 1,118 1,013 13,100 13,150 1,568 1,313 1,568 1,396
7,150 7,200 718 718 718 718 10,150 10,200 1,125 1,018 1,125 1,018 13,150 13,200 1,575 1,318 1,575 1,404
7,200 7,250 723 723 723 723 10,200 10,250 1,133 1,023 1,133 1,023 13,200 13,250 1,583 1,323 1,583 1,411
7,250 7,300 728 728 728 728 10,250 10,300 1,140 1,028 1,140 1,028 13,250 13,300 1,590 1,328 1,590 1,419
7,300 7,350 733 733 733 733 10,300 10,350 1,148 1,033 1,148 1,033 13,300 13,350 1,598 1,333 1,598 1,426
7,350 7,400 738 738 738 738 10,350 10,400 1,155 1,038 1,155 1,038 13,350 13,400 1,605 1,338 1,605 1,434
7,400 7,450 743 743 743 743 10,400 10,450 1,163 1,043 1,163 1,043 13,400 13,450 1,613 1,343 1,613 1,441
7,450 7,500 748 748 748 748 10,450 10,500 1,170 1,048 1,170 1,048 13,450 13,500 1,620 1,348 1,620 1,449
7,500 7,550 753 753 753 753 10,500 10,550 1,178 1,053 1,178 1,053 13,500 13,550 1,628 1,353 1,628 1,456
7,550 7,600 758 758 758 758 10,550 10,600 1,185 1,058 1,185 1,058 13,550 13,600 1,635 1,358 1,635 1,464
7,600 7,650 763 763 763 763 10,600 10,650 1,193 1,063 1,193 1,063 13,600 13,650 1,643 1,363 1,643 1,471
7,650 7,700 768 768 768 768 10,650 10,700 1,200 1,068 1,200 1,068 13,650 13,700 1,650 1,368 1,650 1,479
7,700 7,750 773 773 773 773 10,700 10,750 1,208 1,073 1,208 1,073 13,700 13,750 1,658 1,373 1,658 1,486
7,750 7,800 778 778 778 778 10,750 10,800 1,215 1,078 1,215 1,078 13,750 13,800 1,665 1,378 1,665 1,494
7,800 7,850 783 783 783 783 10,800 10,850 1,223 1,083 1,223 1,083 13,800 13,850 1,673 1,383 1,673 1,501
7,850 7,900 788 788 788 788 10,850 10,900 1,230 1,088 1,230 1,088 13,850 13,900 1,680 1,388 1,680 1,509
7,900 7,950 793 793 793 793 10,900 10,950 1,238 1,093 1,238 1,093 13,900 13,950 1,688 1,393 1,688 1,516
7,950 8,000 798 798 798 798 10,950 11,000 1,245 1,098 1,245 1,098 13,950 14,000 1,695 1,398 1,695 1,524
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 260)
- 259 -

Page 262 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
14,000 17,000 20,000
14,000 14,050 1,703 1,403 1,703 1,531 17,000 17,050 2,153 1,751 2,153 1,981 20,000 20,050 2,603 2,201 2,603 2,431
14,050 14,100 1,710 1,408 1,710 1,539 17,050 17,100 2,160 1,759 2,160 1,989 20,050 20,100 2,610 2,209 2,610 2,439
14,100 14,150 1,718 1,413 1,718 1,546 17,100 17,150 2,168 1,766 2,168 1,996 20,100 20,150 2,618 2,216 2,618 2,446
14,150 14,200 1,725 1,418 1,725 1,554 17,150 17,200 2,175 1,774 2,175 2,004 20,150 20,200 2,625 2,224 2,625 2,454
14,200 14,250 1,733 1,423 1,733 1,561 17,200 17,250 2,183 1,781 2,183 2,011 20,200 20,250 2,633 2,231 2,633 2,461
14,250 14,300 1,740 1,428 1,740 1,569 17,250 17,300 2,190 1,789 2,190 2,019 20,250 20,300 2,640 2,239 2,640 2,469
14,300 14,350 1,748 1,433 1,748 1,576 17,300 17,350 2,198 1,796 2,198 2,026 20,300 20,350 2,648 2,246 2,648 2,476
14,350 14,400 1,755 1,438 1,755 1,584 17,350 17,400 2,205 1,804 2,205 2,034 20,350 20,400 2,655 2,254 2,655 2,484
14,400 14,450 1,763 1,443 1,763 1,591 17,400 17,450 2,213 1,811 2,213 2,041 20,400 20,450 2,663 2,261 2,663 2,491
14,450 14,500 1,770 1,448 1,770 1,599 17,450 17,500 2,220 1,819 2,220 2,049 20,450 20,500 2,670 2,269 2,670 2,499
14,500 14,550 1,778 1,453 1,778 1,606 17,500 17,550 2,228 1,826 2,228 2,056 20,500 20,550 2,678 2,276 2,678 2,506
14,550 14,600 1,785 1,458 1,785 1,614 17,550 17,600 2,235 1,834 2,235 2,064 20,550 20,600 2,685 2,284 2,685 2,514
14,600 14,650 1,793 1,463 1,793 1,621 17,600 17,650 2,243 1,841 2,243 2,071 20,600 20,650 2,693 2,291 2,693 2,521
14,650 14,700 1,800 1,468 1,800 1,629 17,650 17,700 2,250 1,849 2,250 2,079 20,650 20,700 2,700 2,299 2,700 2,529
14,700 14,750 1,808 1,473 1,808 1,636 17,700 17,750 2,258 1,856 2,258 2,086 20,700 20,750 2,708 2,306 2,708 2,536
14,750 14,800 1,815 1,478 1,815 1,644 17,750 17,800 2,265 1,864 2,265 2,094 20,750 20,800 2,715 2,314 2,715 2,544
14,800 14,850 1,823 1,483 1,823 1,651 17,800 17,850 2,273 1,871 2,273 2,101 20,800 20,850 2,723 2,321 2,723 2,551
14,850 14,900 1,830 1,488 1,830 1,659 17,850 17,900 2,280 1,879 2,280 2,109 20,850 20,900 2,730 2,329 2,730 2,559
14,900 14,950 1,838 1,493 1,838 1,666 17,900 17,950 2,288 1,886 2,288 2,116 20,900 20,950 2,738 2,336 2,738 2,566
14,950 15,000 1,845 1,498 1,845 1,674 17,950 18,000 2,295 1,894 2,295 2,124 20,950 21,000 2,745 2,344 2,745 2,574
15,000 18,000 21,000
15,000 15,050 1,853 1,503 1,853 1,681 18,000 18,050 2,303 1,901 2,303 2,131 21,000 21,050 2,753 2,351 2,753 2,581
15,050 15,100 1,860 1,508 1,860 1,689 18,050 18,100 2,310 1,909 2,310 2,139 21,050 21,100 2,760 2,359 2,760 2,589
15,100 15,150 1,868 1,513 1,868 1,696 18,100 18,150 2,318 1,916 2,318 2,146 21,100 21,150 2,768 2,366 2,768 2,596
15,150 15,200 1,875 1,518 1,875 1,704 18,150 18,200 2,325 1,924 2,325 2,154 21,150 21,200 2,775 2,374 2,775 2,604
15,200 15,250 1,883 1,523 1,883 1,711 18,200 18,250 2,333 1,931 2,333 2,161 21,200 21,250 2,783 2,381 2,783 2,611
15,250 15,300 1,890 1,528 1,890 1,719 18,250 18,300 2,340 1,939 2,340 2,169 21,250 21,300 2,790 2,389 2,790 2,619
15,300 15,350 1,898 1,533 1,898 1,726 18,300 18,350 2,348 1,946 2,348 2,176 21,300 21,350 2,798 2,396 2,798 2,626
15,350 15,400 1,905 1,538 1,905 1,734 18,350 18,400 2,355 1,954 2,355 2,184 21,350 21,400 2,805 2,404 2,805 2,634
15,400 15,450 1,913 1,543 1,913 1,741 18,400 18,450 2,363 1,961 2,363 2,191 21,400 21,450 2,813 2,411 2,813 2,641
15,450 15,500 1,920 1,548 1,920 1,749 18,450 18,500 2,370 1,969 2,370 2,199 21,450 21,500 2,820 2,419 2,820 2,649
15,500 15,550 1,928 1,553 1,928 1,756 18,500 18,550 2,378 1,976 2,378 2,206 21,500 21,550 2,828 2,426 2,828 2,656
15,550 15,600 1,935 1,558 1,935 1,764 18,550 18,600 2,385 1,984 2,385 2,214 21,550 21,600 2,835 2,434 2,835 2,664
15,600 15,650 1,943 1,563 1,943 1,771 18,600 18,650 2,393 1,991 2,393 2,221 21,600 21,650 2,843 2,441 2,843 2,671
15,650 15,700 1,950 1,568 1,950 1,779 18,650 18,700 2,400 1,999 2,400 2,229 21,650 21,700 2,850 2,449 2,850 2,679
15,700 15,750 1,958 1,573 1,958 1,786 18,700 18,750 2,408 2,006 2,408 2,236 21,700 21,750 2,858 2,456 2,858 2,686
15,750 15,800 1,965 1,578 1,965 1,794 18,750 18,800 2,415 2,014 2,415 2,244 21,750 21,800 2,865 2,464 2,865 2,694
15,800 15,850 1,973 1,583 1,973 1,801 18,800 18,850 2,423 2,021 2,423 2,251 21,800 21,850 2,873 2,471 2,873 2,701
15,850 15,900 1,980 1,588 1,980 1,809 18,850 18,900 2,430 2,029 2,430 2,259 21,850 21,900 2,880 2,479 2,880 2,709
15,900 15,950 1,988 1,593 1,988 1,816 18,900 18,950 2,438 2,036 2,438 2,266 21,900 21,950 2,888 2,486 2,888 2,716
15,950 16,000 1,995 1,598 1,995 1,824 18,950 19,000 2,445 2,044 2,445 2,274 21,950 22,000 2,895 2,494 2,895 2,724
16,000 19,000 22,000
16,000 16,050 2,003 1,603 2,003 1,831 19,000 19,050 2,453 2,051 2,453 2,281 22,000 22,050 2,903 2,501 2,903 2,731
16,050 16,100 2,010 1,609 2,010 1,839 19,050 19,100 2,460 2,059 2,460 2,289 22,050 22,100 2,910 2,509 2,910 2,739
16,100 16,150 2,018 1,616 2,018 1,846 19,100 19,150 2,468 2,066 2,468 2,296 22,100 22,150 2,918 2,516 2,918 2,746
16,150 16,200 2,025 1,624 2,025 1,854 19,150 19,200 2,475 2,074 2,475 2,304 22,150 22,200 2,925 2,524 2,925 2,754
16,200 16,250 2,033 1,631 2,033 1,861 19,200 19,250 2,483 2,081 2,483 2,311 22,200 22,250 2,933 2,531 2,933 2,761
16,250 16,300 2,040 1,639 2,040 1,869 19,250 19,300 2,490 2,089 2,490 2,319 22,250 22,300 2,940 2,539 2,940 2,769
16,300 16,350 2,048 1,646 2,048 1,876 19,300 19,350 2,498 2,096 2,498 2,326 22,300 22,350 2,948 2,546 2,948 2,776
16,350 16,400 2,055 1,654 2,055 1,884 19,350 19,400 2,505 2,104 2,505 2,334 22,350 22,400 2,955 2,554 2,955 2,784
16,400 16,450 2,063 1,661 2,063 1,891 19,400 19,450 2,513 2,111 2,513 2,341 22,400 22,450 2,963 2,561 2,963 2,791
16,450 16,500 2,070 1,669 2,070 1,899 19,450 19,500 2,520 2,119 2,520 2,349 22,450 22,500 2,970 2,569 2,970 2,799
16,500 16,550 2,078 1,676 2,078 1,906 19,500 19,550 2,528 2,126 2,528 2,356 22,500 22,550 2,978 2,576 2,978 2,806
16,550 16,600 2,085 1,684 2,085 1,914 19,550 19,600 2,535 2,134 2,535 2,364 22,550 22,600 2,985 2,584 2,985 2,814
16,600 16,650 2,093 1,691 2,093 1,921 19,600 19,650 2,543 2,141 2,543 2,371 22,600 22,650 2,993 2,591 2,993 2,821
16,650 16,700 2,100 1,699 2,100 1,929 19,650 19,700 2,550 2,149 2,550 2,379 22,650 22,700 3,000 2,599 3,000 2,829
16,700 16,750 2,108 1,706 2,108 1,936 19,700 19,750 2,558 2,156 2,558 2,386 22,700 22,750 3,008 2,606 3,008 2,836
16,750 16,800 2,115 1,714 2,115 1,944 19,750 19,800 2,565 2,164 2,565 2,394 22,750 22,800 3,015 2,614 3,015 2,844
16,800 16,850 2,123 1,721 2,123 1,951 19,800 19,850 2,573 2,171 2,573 2,401 22,800 22,850 3,023 2,621 3,023 2,851
16,850 16,900 2,130 1,729 2,130 1,959 19,850 19,900 2,580 2,179 2,580 2,409 22,850 22,900 3,030 2,629 3,030 2,859
16,900 16,950 2,138 1,736 2,138 1,966 19,900 19,950 2,588 2,186 2,588 2,416 22,900 22,950 3,038 2,636 3,038 2,866
16,950 17,000 2,145 1,744 2,145 1,974 19,950 20,000 2,595 2,194 2,595 2,424 22,950 23,000 3,045 2,644 3,045 2,874
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 261)
- 260 -

Page 263 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
23,000 26,000 29,000
23,000 23,050 3,053 2,651 3,053 2,881 26,000 26,050 3,503 3,101 3,503 3,331 29,000 29,050 3,953 3,551 3,953 3,781
23,050 23,100 3,060 2,659 3,060 2,889 26,050 26,100 3,510 3,109 3,510 3,339 29,050 29,100 3,960 3,559 3,960 3,789
23,100 23,150 3,068 2,666 3,068 2,896 26,100 26,150 3,518 3,116 3,518 3,346 29,100 29,150 3,968 3,566 3,968 3,796
23,150 23,200 3,075 2,674 3,075 2,904 26,150 26,200 3,525 3,124 3,525 3,354 29,150 29,200 3,975 3,574 3,975 3,804
23,200 23,250 3,083 2,681 3,083 2,911 26,200 26,250 3,533 3,131 3,533 3,361 29,200 29,250 3,983 3,581 3,983 3,811
23,250 23,300 3,090 2,689 3,090 2,919 26,250 26,300 3,540 3,139 3,540 3,369 29,250 29,300 3,990 3,589 3,990 3,819
23,300 23,350 3,098 2,696 3,098 2,926 26,300 26,350 3,548 3,146 3,548 3,376 29,300 29,350 3,998 3,596 3,998 3,826
23,350 23,400 3,105 2,704 3,105 2,934 26,350 26,400 3,555 3,154 3,555 3,384 29,350 29,400 4,005 3,604 4,005 3,834
23,400 23,450 3,113 2,711 3,113 2,941 26,400 26,450 3,563 3,161 3,563 3,391 29,400 29,450 4,013 3,611 4,013 3,841
23,450 23,500 3,120 2,719 3,120 2,949 26,450 26,500 3,570 3,169 3,570 3,399 29,450 29,500 4,020 3,619 4,020 3,849
23,500 23,550 3,128 2,726 3,128 2,956 26,500 26,550 3,578 3,176 3,578 3,406 29,500 29,550 4,028 3,626 4,028 3,856
23,550 23,600 3,135 2,734 3,135 2,964 26,550 26,600 3,585 3,184 3,585 3,414 29,550 29,600 4,035 3,634 4,035 3,864
23,600 23,650 3,143 2,741 3,143 2,971 26,600 26,650 3,593 3,191 3,593 3,421 29,600 29,650 4,043 3,641 4,043 3,871
23,650 23,700 3,150 2,749 3,150 2,979 26,650 26,700 3,600 3,199 3,600 3,429 29,650 29,700 4,050 3,649 4,050 3,879
23,700 23,750 3,158 2,756 3,158 2,986 26,700 26,750 3,608 3,206 3,608 3,436 29,700 29,750 4,058 3,656 4,058 3,886
23,750 23,800 3,165 2,764 3,165 2,994 26,750 26,800 3,615 3,214 3,615 3,444 29,750 29,800 4,065 3,664 4,065 3,894
23,800 23,850 3,173 2,771 3,173 3,001 26,800 26,850 3,623 3,221 3,623 3,451 29,800 29,850 4,073 3,671 4,073 3,901
23,850 23,900 3,180 2,779 3,180 3,009 26,850 26,900 3,630 3,229 3,630 3,459 29,850 29,900 4,080 3,679 4,080 3,909
23,900 23,950 3,188 2,786 3,188 3,016 26,900 26,950 3,638 3,236 3,638 3,466 29,900 29,950 4,088 3,686 4,088 3,916
23,950 24,000 3,195 2,794 3,195 3,024 26,950 27,000 3,645 3,244 3,645 3,474 29,950 30,000 4,095 3,694 4,095 3,924
24,000 27,000 30,000
24,000 24,050 3,203 2,801 3,203 3,031 27,000 27,050 3,653 3,251 3,653 3,481 30,000 30,050 4,103 3,701 4,103 3,931
24,050 24,100 3,210 2,809 3,210 3,039 27,050 27,100 3,660 3,259 3,660 3,489 30,050 30,100 4,110 3,709 4,110 3,939
24,100 24,150 3,218 2,816 3,218 3,046 27,100 27,150 3,668 3,266 3,668 3,496 30,100 30,150 4,118 3,716 4,118 3,946
24,150 24,200 3,225 2,824 3,225 3,054 27,150 27,200 3,675 3,274 3,675 3,504 30,150 30,200 4,125 3,724 4,125 3,954
24,200 24,250 3,233 2,831 3,233 3,061 27,200 27,250 3,683 3,281 3,683 3,511 30,200 30,250 4,133 3,731 4,133 3,961
24,250 24,300 3,240 2,839 3,240 3,069 27,250 27,300 3,690 3,289 3,690 3,519 30,250 30,300 4,140 3,739 4,140 3,969
24,300 24,350 3,248 2,846 3,248 3,076 27,300 27,350 3,698 3,296 3,698 3,526 30,300 30,350 4,148 3,746 4,148 3,976
24,350 24,400 3,255 2,854 3,255 3,084 27,350 27,400 3,705 3,304 3,705 3,534 30,350 30,400 4,155 3,754 4,155 3,984
24,400 24,450 3,263 2,861 3,263 3,091 27,400 27,450 3,713 3,311 3,713 3,541 30,400 30,450 4,163 3,761 4,163 3,991
24,450 24,500 3,270 2,869 3,270 3,099 27,450 27,500 3,720 3,319 3,720 3,549 30,450 30,500 4,170 3,769 4,170 3,999
24,500 24,550 3,278 2,876 3,278 3,106 27,500 27,550 3,728 3,326 3,728 3,556 30,500 30,550 4,178 3,776 4,178 4,006
24,550 24,600 3,285 2,884 3,285 3,114 27,550 27,600 3,735 3,334 3,735 3,564 30,550 30,600 4,185 3,784 4,185 4,014
24,600 24,650 3,293 2,891 3,293 3,121 27,600 27,650 3,743 3,341 3,743 3,571 30,600 30,650 4,193 3,791 4,193 4,021
24,650 24,700 3,300 2,899 3,300 3,129 27,650 27,700 3,750 3,349 3,750 3,579 30,650 30,700 4,200 3,799 4,200 4,029
24,700 24,750 3,308 2,906 3,308 3,136 27,700 27,750 3,758 3,356 3,758 3,586 30,700 30,750 4,208 3,806 4,208 4,036
24,750 24,800 3,315 2,914 3,315 3,144 27,750 27,800 3,765 3,364 3,765 3,594 30,750 30,800 4,215 3,814 4,215 4,044
24,800 24,850 3,323 2,921 3,323 3,151 27,800 27,850 3,773 3,371 3,773 3,601 30,800 30,850 4,223 3,821 4,223 4,051
24,850 24,900 3,330 2,929 3,330 3,159 27,850 27,900 3,780 3,379 3,780 3,609 30,850 30,900 4,230 3,829 4,230 4,059
24,900 24,950 3,338 2,936 3,338 3,166 27,900 27,950 3,788 3,386 3,788 3,616 30,900 30,950 4,238 3,836 4,238 4,066
24,950 25,000 3,345 2,944 3,345 3,174 27,950 28,000 3,795 3,394 3,795 3,624 30,950 31,000 4,245 3,844 4,245 4,074
25,000 28,000 31,000
25,000 25,050 3,353 2,951 3,353 3,181 28,000 28,050 3,803 3,401 3,803 3,631 31,000 31,050 4,253 3,851 4,253 4,081
25,050 25,100 3,360 2,959 3,360 3,189 28,050 28,100 3,810 3,409 3,810 3,639 31,050 31,100 4,260 3,859 4,260 4,089
25,100 25,150 3,368 2,966 3,368 3,196 28,100 28,150 3,818 3,416 3,818 3,646 31,100 31,150 4,268 3,866 4,268 4,096
25,150 25,200 3,375 2,974 3,375 3,204 28,150 28,200 3,825 3,424 3,825 3,654 31,150 31,200 4,275 3,874 4,275 4,104
25,200 25,250 3,383 2,981 3,383 3,211 28,200 28,250 3,833 3,431 3,833 3,661 31,200 31,250 4,283 3,881 4,283 4,111
25,250 25,300 3,390 2,989 3,390 3,219 28,250 28,300 3,840 3,439 3,840 3,669 31,250 31,300 4,290 3,889 4,290 4,119
25,300 25,350 3,398 2,996 3,398 3,226 28,300 28,350 3,848 3,446 3,848 3,676 31,300 31,350 4,298 3,896 4,298 4,126
25,350 25,400 3,405 3,004 3,405 3,234 28,350 28,400 3,855 3,454 3,855 3,684 31,350 31,400 4,305 3,904 4,305 4,134
25,400 25,450 3,413 3,011 3,413 3,241 28,400 28,450 3,863 3,461 3,863 3,691 31,400 31,450 4,313 3,911 4,313 4,141
25,450 25,500 3,420 3,019 3,420 3,249 28,450 28,500 3,870 3,469 3,870 3,699 31,450 31,500 4,320 3,919 4,320 4,149
25,500 25,550 3,428 3,026 3,428 3,256 28,500 28,550 3,878 3,476 3,878 3,706 31,500 31,550 4,328 3,926 4,328 4,156
25,550 25,600 3,435 3,034 3,435 3,264 28,550 28,600 3,885 3,484 3,885 3,714 31,550 31,600 4,335 3,934 4,335 4,164
25,600 25,650 3,443 3,041 3,443 3,271 28,600 28,650 3,893 3,491 3,893 3,721 31,600 31,650 4,343 3,941 4,343 4,171
25,650 25,700 3,450 3,049 3,450 3,279 28,650 28,700 3,900 3,499 3,900 3,729 31,650 31,700 4,350 3,949 4,350 4,179
25,700 25,750 3,458 3,056 3,458 3,286 28,700 28,750 3,908 3,506 3,908 3,736 31,700 31,750 4,358 3,956 4,358 4,186
25,750 25,800 3,465 3,064 3,465 3,294 28,750 28,800 3,915 3,514 3,915 3,744 31,750 31,800 4,365 3,964 4,365 4,194
25,800 25,850 3,473 3,071 3,473 3,301 28,800 28,850 3,923 3,521 3,923 3,751 31,800 31,850 4,373 3,971 4,373 4,201
25,850 25,900 3,480 3,079 3,480 3,309 28,850 28,900 3,930 3,529 3,930 3,759 31,850 31,900 4,380 3,979 4,380 4,209
25,900 25,950 3,488 3,086 3,488 3,316 28,900 28,950 3,938 3,536 3,938 3,766 31,900 31,950 4,388 3,986 4,388 4,216
25,950 26,000 3,495 3,094 3,495 3,324 28,950 29,000 3,945 3,544 3,945 3,774 31,950 32,000 4,395 3,994 4,395 4,224
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 262)
- 261 -

Page 264 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
32,000 35,000 38,000
32,000 32,050 4,403 4,001 4,403 4,231 35,000 35,050 5,100 4,451 5,100 4,681 38,000 38,050 5,850 4,901 5,850 5,131
32,050 32,100 4,410 4,009 4,410 4,239 35,050 35,100 5,113 4,459 5,113 4,689 38,050 38,100 5,863 4,909 5,863 5,139
32,100 32,150 4,418 4,016 4,418 4,246 35,100 35,150 5,125 4,466 5,125 4,696 38,100 38,150 5,875 4,916 5,875 5,146
32,150 32,200 4,425 4,024 4,425 4,254 35,150 35,200 5,138 4,474 5,138 4,704 38,150 38,200 5,888 4,924 5,888 5,154
32,200 32,250 4,433 4,031 4,433 4,261 35,200 35,250 5,150 4,481 5,150 4,711 38,200 38,250 5,900 4,931 5,900 5,161
32,250 32,300 4,440 4,039 4,440 4,269 35,250 35,300 5,163 4,489 5,163 4,719 38,250 38,300 5,913 4,939 5,913 5,169
32,300 32,350 4,448 4,046 4,448 4,276 35,300 35,350 5,175 4,496 5,175 4,726 38,300 38,350 5,925 4,946 5,925 5,176
32,350 32,400 4,455 4,054 4,455 4,284 35,350 35,400 5,188 4,504 5,188 4,734 38,350 38,400 5,938 4,954 5,938 5,184
32,400 32,450 4,463 4,061 4,463 4,291 35,400 35,450 5,200 4,511 5,200 4,741 38,400 38,450 5,950 4,961 5,950 5,191
32,450 32,500 4,470 4,069 4,470 4,299 35,450 35,500 5,213 4,519 5,213 4,749 38,450 38,500 5,963 4,969 5,963 5,199
32,500 32,550 4,478 4,076 4,478 4,306 35,500 35,550 5,225 4,526 5,225 4,756 38,500 38,550 5,975 4,976 5,975 5,206
32,550 32,600 4,488 4,084 4,488 4,314 35,550 35,600 5,238 4,534 5,238 4,764 38,550 38,600 5,988 4,984 5,988 5,214
32,600 32,650 4,500 4,091 4,500 4,321 35,600 35,650 5,250 4,541 5,250 4,771 38,600 38,650 6,000 4,991 6,000 5,221
32,650 32,700 4,513 4,099 4,513 4,329 35,650 35,700 5,263 4,549 5,263 4,779 38,650 38,700 6,013 4,999 6,013 5,229
32,700 32,750 4,525 4,106 4,525 4,336 35,700 35,750 5,275 4,556 5,275 4,786 38,700 38,750 6,025 5,006 6,025 5,236
32,750 32,800 4,538 4,114 4,538 4,344 35,750 35,800 5,288 4,564 5,288 4,794 38,750 38,800 6,038 5,014 6,038 5,244
32,800 32,850 4,550 4,121 4,550 4,351 35,800 35,850 5,300 4,571 5,300 4,801 38,800 38,850 6,050 5,021 6,050 5,251
32,850 32,900 4,563 4,129 4,563 4,359 35,850 35,900 5,313 4,579 5,313 4,809 38,850 38,900 6,063 5,029 6,063 5,259
32,900 32,950 4,575 4,136 4,575 4,366 35,900 35,950 5,325 4,586 5,325 4,816 38,900 38,950 6,075 5,036 6,075 5,266
32,950 33,000 4,588 4,144 4,588 4,374 35,950 36,000 5,338 4,594 5,338 4,824 38,950 39,000 6,088 5,044 6,088 5,274
33,000 36,000 39,000
33,000 33,050 4,600 4,151 4,600 4,381 36,000 36,050 5,350 4,601 5,350 4,831 39,000 39,050 6,100 5,051 6,100 5,281
33,050 33,100 4,613 4,159 4,613 4,389 36,050 36,100 5,363 4,609 5,363 4,839 39,050 39,100 6,113 5,059 6,113 5,289
33,100 33,150 4,625 4,166 4,625 4,396 36,100 36,150 5,375 4,616 5,375 4,846 39,100 39,150 6,125 5,066 6,125 5,296
33,150 33,200 4,638 4,174 4,638 4,404 36,150 36,200 5,388 4,624 5,388 4,854 39,150 39,200 6,138 5,074 6,138 5,304
33,200 33,250 4,650 4,181 4,650 4,411 36,200 36,250 5,400 4,631 5,400 4,861 39,200 39,250 6,150 5,081 6,150 5,311
33,250 33,300 4,663 4,189 4,663 4,419 36,250 36,300 5,413 4,639 5,413 4,869 39,250 39,300 6,163 5,089 6,163 5,319
33,300 33,350 4,675 4,196 4,675 4,426 36,300 36,350 5,425 4,646 5,425 4,876 39,300 39,350 6,175 5,096 6,175 5,326
33,350 33,400 4,688 4,204 4,688 4,434 36,350 36,400 5,438 4,654 5,438 4,884 39,350 39,400 6,188 5,104 6,188 5,334
33,400 33,450 4,700 4,211 4,700 4,441 36,400 36,450 5,450 4,661 5,450 4,891 39,400 39,450 6,200 5,111 6,200 5,341
33,450 33,500 4,713 4,219 4,713 4,449 36,450 36,500 5,463 4,669 5,463 4,899 39,450 39,500 6,213 5,119 6,213 5,349
33,500 33,550 4,725 4,226 4,725 4,456 36,500 36,550 5,475 4,676 5,475 4,906 39,500 39,550 6,225 5,126 6,225 5,356
33,550 33,600 4,738 4,234 4,738 4,464 36,550 36,600 5,488 4,684 5,488 4,914 39,550 39,600 6,238 5,134 6,238 5,364
33,600 33,650 4,750 4,241 4,750 4,471 36,600 36,650 5,500 4,691 5,500 4,921 39,600 39,650 6,250 5,141 6,250 5,371
33,650 33,700 4,763 4,249 4,763 4,479 36,650 36,700 5,513 4,699 5,513 4,929 39,650 39,700 6,263 5,149 6,263 5,379
33,700 33,750 4,775 4,256 4,775 4,486 36,700 36,750 5,525 4,706 5,525 4,936 39,700 39,750 6,275 5,156 6,275 5,386
33,750 33,800 4,788 4,264 4,788 4,494 36,750 36,800 5,538 4,714 5,538 4,944 39,750 39,800 6,288 5,164 6,288 5,394
33,800 33,850 4,800 4,271 4,800 4,501 36,800 36,850 5,550 4,721 5,550 4,951 39,800 39,850 6,300 5,171 6,300 5,401
33,850 33,900 4,813 4,279 4,813 4,509 36,850 36,900 5,563 4,729 5,563 4,959 39,850 39,900 6,313 5,179 6,313 5,409
33,900 33,950 4,825 4,286 4,825 4,516 36,900 36,950 5,575 4,736 5,575 4,966 39,900 39,950 6,325 5,186 6,325 5,416
33,950 34,000 4,838 4,294 4,838 4,524 36,950 37,000 5,588 4,744 5,588 4,974 39,950 40,000 6,338 5,194 6,338 5,424
34,000 37,000 40,000
34,000 34,050 4,850 4,301 4,850 4,531 37,000 37,050 5,600 4,751 5,600 4,981 40,000 40,050 6,350 5,201 6,350 5,431
34,050 34,100 4,863 4,309 4,863 4,539 37,050 37,100 5,613 4,759 5,613 4,989 40,050 40,100 6,363 5,209 6,363 5,439
34,100 34,150 4,875 4,316 4,875 4,546 37,100 37,150 5,625 4,766 5,625 4,996 40,100 40,150 6,375 5,216 6,375 5,446
34,150 34,200 4,888 4,324 4,888 4,554 37,150 37,200 5,638 4,774 5,638 5,004 40,150 40,200 6,388 5,224 6,388 5,454
34,200 34,250 4,900 4,331 4,900 4,561 37,200 37,250 5,650 4,781 5,650 5,011 40,200 40,250 6,400 5,231 6,400 5,461
34,250 34,300 4,913 4,339 4,913 4,569 37,250 37,300 5,663 4,789 5,663 5,019 40,250 40,300 6,413 5,239 6,413 5,469
34,300 34,350 4,925 4,346 4,925 4,576 37,300 37,350 5,675 4,796 5,675 5,026 40,300 40,350 6,425 5,246 6,425 5,476
34,350 34,400 4,938 4,354 4,938 4,584 37,350 37,400 5,688 4,804 5,688 5,034 40,350 40,400 6,438 5,254 6,438 5,484
34,400 34,450 4,950 4,361 4,950 4,591 37,400 37,450 5,700 4,811 5,700 5,041 40,400 40,450 6,450 5,261 6,450 5,491
34,450 34,500 4,963 4,369 4,963 4,599 37,450 37,500 5,713 4,819 5,713 5,049 40,450 40,500 6,463 5,269 6,463 5,499
34,500 34,550 4,975 4,376 4,975 4,606 37,500 37,550 5,725 4,826 5,725 5,056 40,500 40,550 6,475 5,276 6,475 5,506
34,550 34,600 4,988 4,384 4,988 4,614 37,550 37,600 5,738 4,834 5,738 5,064 40,550 40,600 6,488 5,284 6,488 5,514
34,600 34,650 5,000 4,391 5,000 4,621 37,600 37,650 5,750 4,841 5,750 5,071 40,600 40,650 6,500 5,291 6,500 5,521
34,650 34,700 5,013 4,399 5,013 4,629 37,650 37,700 5,763 4,849 5,763 5,079 40,650 40,700 6,513 5,299 6,513 5,529
34,700 34,750 5,025 4,406 5,025 4,636 37,700 37,750 5,775 4,856 5,775 5,086 40,700 40,750 6,525 5,306 6,525 5,536
34,750 34,800 5,038 4,414 5,038 4,644 37,750 37,800 5,788 4,864 5,788 5,094 40,750 40,800 6,538 5,314 6,538 5,544
34,800 34,850 5,050 4,421 5,050 4,651 37,800 37,850 5,800 4,871 5,800 5,101 40,800 40,850 6,550 5,321 6,550 5,551
34,850 34,900 5,063 4,429 5,063 4,659 37,850 37,900 5,813 4,879 5,813 5,109 40,850 40,900 6,563 5,329 6,563 5,559
34,900 34,950 5,075 4,436 5,075 4,666 37,900 37,950 5,825 4,886 5,825 5,116 40,900 40,950 6,575 5,336 6,575 5,566
34,950 35,000 5,088 4,444 5,088 4,674 37,950 38,000 5,838 4,894 5,838 5,124 40,950 41,000 6,588 5,344 6,588 5,574
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 263)
- 262 -

Page 265 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
41,000 44,000 47,000
41,000 41,050 6,600 5,351 6,600 5,581 44,000 44,050 7,350 5,801 7,350 6,069 47,000 47,050 8,100 6,251 8,100 6,819
41,050 41,100 6,613 5,359 6,613 5,589 44,050 44,100 7,363 5,809 7,363 6,081 47,050 47,100 8,113 6,259 8,113 6,831
41,100 41,150 6,625 5,366 6,625 5,596 44,100 44,150 7,375 5,816 7,375 6,094 47,100 47,150 8,125 6,266 8,125 6,844
41,150 41,200 6,638 5,374 6,638 5,604 44,150 44,200 7,388 5,824 7,388 6,106 47,150 47,200 8,138 6,274 8,138 6,856
41,200 41,250 6,650 5,381 6,650 5,611 44,200 44,250 7,400 5,831 7,400 6,119 47,200 47,250 8,150 6,281 8,150 6,869
41,250 41,300 6,663 5,389 6,663 5,619 44,250 44,300 7,413 5,839 7,413 6,131 47,250 47,300 8,163 6,289 8,163 6,881
41,300 41,350 6,675 5,396 6,675 5,626 44,300 44,350 7,425 5,846 7,425 6,144 47,300 47,350 8,175 6,296 8,175 6,894
41,350 41,400 6,688 5,404 6,688 5,634 44,350 44,400 7,438 5,854 7,438 6,156 47,350 47,400 8,188 6,304 8,188 6,906
41,400 41,450 6,700 5,411 6,700 5,641 44,400 44,450 7,450 5,861 7,450 6,169 47,400 47,450 8,200 6,311 8,200 6,919
41,450 41,500 6,713 5,419 6,713 5,649 44,450 44,500 7,463 5,869 7,463 6,181 47,450 47,500 8,213 6,319 8,213 6,931
41,500 41,550 6,725 5,426 6,725 5,656 44,500 44,550 7,475 5,876 7,475 6,194 47,500 47,550 8,225 6,326 8,225 6,944
41,550 41,600 6,738 5,434 6,738 5,664 44,550 44,600 7,488 5,884 7,488 6,206 47,550 47,600 8,238 6,334 8,238 6,956
41,600 41,650 6,750 5,441 6,750 5,671 44,600 44,650 7,500 5,891 7,500 6,219 47,600 47,650 8,250 6,341 8,250 6,969
41,650 41,700 6,763 5,449 6,763 5,679 44,650 44,700 7,513 5,899 7,513 6,231 47,650 47,700 8,263 6,349 8,263 6,981
41,700 41,750 6,775 5,456 6,775 5,686 44,700 44,750 7,525 5,906 7,525 6,244 47,700 47,750 8,275 6,356 8,275 6,994
41,750 41,800 6,788 5,464 6,788 5,694 44,750 44,800 7,538 5,914 7,538 6,256 47,750 47,800 8,288 6,364 8,288 7,006
41,800 41,850 6,800 5,471 6,800 5,701 44,800 44,850 7,550 5,921 7,550 6,269 47,800 47,850 8,300 6,371 8,300 7,019
41,850 41,900 6,813 5,479 6,813 5,709 44,850 44,900 7,563 5,929 7,563 6,281 47,850 47,900 8,313 6,379 8,313 7,031
41,900 41,950 6,825 5,486 6,825 5,716 44,900 44,950 7,575 5,936 7,575 6,294 47,900 47,950 8,325 6,386 8,325 7,044
41,950 42,000 6,838 5,494 6,838 5,724 44,950 45,000 7,588 5,944 7,588 6,306 47,950 48,000 8,338 6,394 8,338 7,056
42,000 45,000 48,000
42,000 42,050 6,850 5,501 6,850 5,731 45,000 45,050 7,600 5,951 7,600 6,319 48,000 48,050 8,350 6,401 8,350 7,069
42,050 42,100 6,863 5,509 6,863 5,739 45,050 45,100 7,613 5,959 7,613 6,331 48,050 48,100 8,363 6,409 8,363 7,081
42,100 42,150 6,875 5,516 6,875 5,746 45,100 45,150 7,625 5,966 7,625 6,344 48,100 48,150 8,375 6,416 8,375 7,094
42,150 42,200 6,888 5,524 6,888 5,754 45,150 45,200 7,638 5,974 7,638 6,356 48,150 48,200 8,388 6,424 8,388 7,106
42,200 42,250 6,900 5,531 6,900 5,761 45,200 45,250 7,650 5,981 7,650 6,369 48,200 48,250 8,400 6,431 8,400 7,119
42,250 42,300 6,913 5,539 6,913 5,769 45,250 45,300 7,663 5,989 7,663 6,381 48,250 48,300 8,413 6,439 8,413 7,131
42,300 42,350 6,925 5,546 6,925 5,776 45,300 45,350 7,675 5,996 7,675 6,394 48,300 48,350 8,425 6,446 8,425 7,144
42,350 42,400 6,938 5,554 6,938 5,784 45,350 45,400 7,688 6,004 7,688 6,406 48,350 48,400 8,438 6,454 8,438 7,156
42,400 42,450 6,950 5,561 6,950 5,791 45,400 45,450 7,700 6,011 7,700 6,419 48,400 48,450 8,450 6,461 8,450 7,169
42,450 42,500 6,963 5,569 6,963 5,799 45,450 45,500 7,713 6,019 7,713 6,431 48,450 48,500 8,463 6,469 8,463 7,181
42,500 42,550 6,975 5,576 6,975 5,806 45,500 45,550 7,725 6,026 7,725 6,444 48,500 48,550 8,475 6,476 8,475 7,194
42,550 42,600 6,988 5,584 6,988 5,814 45,550 45,600 7,738 6,034 7,738 6,456 48,550 48,600 8,488 6,484 8,488 7,206
42,600 42,650 7,000 5,591 7,000 5,821 45,600 45,650 7,750 6,041 7,750 6,469 48,600 48,650 8,500 6,491 8,500 7,219
42,650 42,700 7,013 5,599 7,013 5,829 45,650 45,700 7,763 6,049 7,763 6,481 48,650 48,700 8,513 6,499 8,513 7,231
42,700 42,750 7,025 5,606 7,025 5,836 45,700 45,750 7,775 6,056 7,775 6,494 48,700 48,750 8,525 6,506 8,525 7,244
42,750 42,800 7,038 5,614 7,038 5,844 45,750 45,800 7,788 6,064 7,788 6,506 48,750 48,800 8,538 6,514 8,538 7,256
42,800 42,850 7,050 5,621 7,050 5,851 45,800 45,850 7,800 6,071 7,800 6,519 48,800 48,850 8,550 6,521 8,550 7,269
42,850 42,900 7,063 5,629 7,063 5,859 45,850 45,900 7,813 6,079 7,813 6,531 48,850 48,900 8,563 6,529 8,563 7,281
42,900 42,950 7,075 5,636 7,075 5,866 45,900 45,950 7,825 6,086 7,825 6,544 48,900 48,950 8,575 6,536 8,575 7,294
42,950 43,000 7,088 5,644 7,088 5,874 45,950 46,000 7,838 6,094 7,838 6,556 48,950 49,000 8,588 6,544 8,588 7,306
43,000 46,000 49,000
43,000 43,050 7,100 5,651 7,100 5,881 46,000 46,050 7,850 6,101 7,850 6,569 49,000 49,050 8,600 6,551 8,600 7,319
43,050 43,100 7,113 5,659 7,113 5,889 46,050 46,100 7,863 6,109 7,863 6,581 49,050 49,100 8,613 6,559 8,613 7,331
43,100 43,150 7,125 5,666 7,125 5,896 46,100 46,150 7,875 6,116 7,875 6,594 49,100 49,150 8,625 6,566 8,625 7,344
43,150 43,200 7,138 5,674 7,138 5,904 46,150 46,200 7,888 6,124 7,888 6,606 49,150 49,200 8,638 6,574 8,638 7,356
43,200 43,250 7,150 5,681 7,150 5,911 46,200 46,250 7,900 6,131 7,900 6,619 49,200 49,250 8,650 6,581 8,650 7,369
43,250 43,300 7,163 5,689 7,163 5,919 46,250 46,300 7,913 6,139 7,913 6,631 49,250 49,300 8,663 6,589 8,663 7,381
43,300 43,350 7,175 5,696 7,175 5,926 46,300 46,350 7,925 6,146 7,925 6,644 49,300 49,350 8,675 6,596 8,675 7,394
43,350 43,400 7,188 5,704 7,188 5,934 46,350 46,400 7,938 6,154 7,938 6,656 49,350 49,400 8,688 6,604 8,688 7,406
43,400 43,450 7,200 5,711 7,200 5,941 46,400 46,450 7,950 6,161 7,950 6,669 49,400 49,450 8,700 6,611 8,700 7,419
43,450 43,500 7,213 5,719 7,213 5,949 46,450 46,500 7,963 6,169 7,963 6,681 49,450 49,500 8,713 6,619 8,713 7,431
43,500 43,550 7,225 5,726 7,225 5,956 46,500 46,550 7,975 6,176 7,975 6,694 49,500 49,550 8,725 6,626 8,725 7,444
43,550 43,600 7,238 5,734 7,238 5,964 46,550 46,600 7,988 6,184 7,988 6,706 49,550 49,600 8,738 6,634 8,738 7,456
43,600 43,650 7,250 5,741 7,250 5,971 46,600 46,650 8,000 6,191 8,000 6,719 49,600 49,650 8,750 6,641 8,750 7,469
43,650 43,700 7,263 5,749 7,263 5,981 46,650 46,700 8,013 6,199 8,013 6,731 49,650 49,700 8,763 6,649 8,763 7,481
43,700 43,750 7,275 5,756 7,275 5,994 46,700 46,750 8,025 6,206 8,025 6,744 49,700 49,750 8,775 6,656 8,775 7,494
43,750 43,800 7,288 5,764 7,288 6,006 46,750 46,800 8,038 6,214 8,038 6,756 49,750 49,800 8,788 6,664 8,788 7,506
43,800 43,850 7,300 5,771 7,300 6,019 46,800 46,850 8,050 6,221 8,050 6,769 49,800 49,850 8,800 6,671 8,800 7,519
43,850 43,900 7,313 5,779 7,313 6,031 46,850 46,900 8,063 6,229 8,063 6,781 49,850 49,900 8,813 6,679 8,813 7,531
43,900 43,950 7,325 5,786 7,325 6,044 46,900 46,950 8,075 6,236 8,075 6,794 49,900 49,950 8,825 6,686 8,825 7,544
43,950 44,000 7,338 5,794 7,338 6,056 46,950 47,000 8,088 6,244 8,088 6,806 49,950 50,000 8,838 6,694 8,838 7,556
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 264)
- 263 -

Page 266 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
50,000 53,000 56,000
50,000 50,050 8,850 6,701 8,850 7,569 53,000 53,050 9,600 7,151 9,600 8,319 56,000 56,050 10,350 7,601 10,350 9,069
50,050 50,100 8,863 6,709 8,863 7,581 53,050 53,100 9,613 7,159 9,613 8,331 56,050 56,100 10,363 7,609 10,363 9,081
50,100 50,150 8,875 6,716 8,875 7,594 53,100 53,150 9,625 7,166 9,625 8,344 56,100 56,150 10,375 7,616 10,375 9,094
50,150 50,200 8,888 6,724 8,888 7,606 53,150 53,200 9,638 7,174 9,638 8,356 56,150 56,200 10,388 7,624 10,388 9,106
50,200 50,250 8,900 6,731 8,900 7,619 53,200 53,250 9,650 7,181 9,650 8,369 56,200 56,250 10,400 7,631 10,400 9,119
50,250 50,300 8,913 6,739 8,913 7,631 53,250 53,300 9,663 7,189 9,663 8,381 56,250 56,300 10,413 7,639 10,413 9,131
50,300 50,350 8,925 6,746 8,925 7,644 53,300 53,350 9,675 7,196 9,675 8,394 56,300 56,350 10,425 7,646 10,425 9,144
50,350 50,400 8,938 6,754 8,938 7,656 53,350 53,400 9,688 7,204 9,688 8,406 56,350 56,400 10,438 7,654 10,438 9,156
50,400 50,450 8,950 6,761 8,950 7,669 53,400 53,450 9,700 7,211 9,700 8,419 56,400 56,450 10,450 7,661 10,450 9,169
50,450 50,500 8,963 6,769 8,963 7,681 53,450 53,500 9,713 7,219 9,713 8,431 56,450 56,500 10,463 7,669 10,463 9,181
50,500 50,550 8,975 6,776 8,975 7,694 53,500 53,550 9,725 7,226 9,725 8,444 56,500 56,550 10,475 7,676 10,475 9,194
50,550 50,600 8,988 6,784 8,988 7,706 53,550 53,600 9,738 7,234 9,738 8,456 56,550 56,600 10,488 7,684 10,488 9,206
50,600 50,650 9,000 6,791 9,000 7,719 53,600 53,650 9,750 7,241 9,750 8,469 56,600 56,650 10,500 7,691 10,500 9,219
50,650 50,700 9,013 6,799 9,013 7,731 53,650 53,700 9,763 7,249 9,763 8,481 56,650 56,700 10,513 7,699 10,513 9,231
50,700 50,750 9,025 6,806 9,025 7,744 53,700 53,750 9,775 7,256 9,775 8,494 56,700 56,750 10,525 7,706 10,525 9,244
50,750 50,800 9,038 6,814 9,038 7,756 53,750 53,800 9,788 7,264 9,788 8,506 56,750 56,800 10,538 7,714 10,538 9,256
50,800 50,850 9,050 6,821 9,050 7,769 53,800 53,850 9,800 7,271 9,800 8,519 56,800 56,850 10,550 7,721 10,550 9,269
50,850 50,900 9,063 6,829 9,063 7,781 53,850 53,900 9,813 7,279 9,813 8,531 56,850 56,900 10,563 7,729 10,563 9,281
50,900 50,950 9,075 6,836 9,075 7,794 53,900 53,950 9,825 7,286 9,825 8,544 56,900 56,950 10,575 7,736 10,575 9,294
50,950 51,000 9,088 6,844 9,088 7,806 53,950 54,000 9,838 7,294 9,838 8,556 56,950 57,000 10,588 7,744 10,588 9,306
51,000 54,000 57,000
51,000 51,050 9,100 6,851 9,100 7,819 54,000 54,050 9,850 7,301 9,850 8,569 57,000 57,050 10,600 7,751 10,600 9,319
51,050 51,100 9,113 6,859 9,113 7,831 54,050 54,100 9,863 7,309 9,863 8,581 57,050 57,100 10,613 7,759 10,613 9,331
51,100 51,150 9,125 6,866 9,125 7,844 54,100 54,150 9,875 7,316 9,875 8,594 57,100 57,150 10,625 7,766 10,625 9,344
51,150 51,200 9,138 6,874 9,138 7,856 54,150 54,200 9,888 7,324 9,888 8,606 57,150 57,200 10,638 7,774 10,638 9,356
51,200 51,250 9,150 6,881 9,150 7,869 54,200 54,250 9,900 7,331 9,900 8,619 57,200 57,250 10,650 7,781 10,650 9,369
51,250 51,300 9,163 6,889 9,163 7,881 54,250 54,300 9,913 7,339 9,913 8,631 57,250 57,300 10,663 7,789 10,663 9,381
51,300 51,350 9,175 6,896 9,175 7,894 54,300 54,350 9,925 7,346 9,925 8,644 57,300 57,350 10,675 7,796 10,675 9,394
51,350 51,400 9,188 6,904 9,188 7,906 54,350 54,400 9,938 7,354 9,938 8,656 57,350 57,400 10,688 7,804 10,688 9,406
51,400 51,450 9,200 6,911 9,200 7,919 54,400 54,450 9,950 7,361 9,950 8,669 57,400 57,450 10,700 7,811 10,700 9,419
51,450 51,500 9,213 6,919 9,213 7,931 54,450 54,500 9,963 7,369 9,963 8,681 57,450 57,500 10,713 7,819 10,713 9,431
51,500 51,550 9,225 6,926 9,225 7,944 54,500 54,550 9,975 7,376 9,975 8,694 57,500 57,550 10,725 7,826 10,725 9,444
51,550 51,600 9,238 6,934 9,238 7,956 54,550 54,600 9,988 7,384 9,988 8,706 57,550 57,600 10,738 7,834 10,738 9,456
51,600 51,650 9,250 6,941 9,250 7,969 54,600 54,650 10,000 7,391 10,000 8,719 57,600 57,650 10,750 7,841 10,750 9,469
51,650 51,700 9,263 6,949 9,263 7,981 54,650 54,700 10,013 7,399 10,013 8,731 57,650 57,700 10,763 7,849 10,763 9,481
51,700 51,750 9,275 6,956 9,275 7,994 54,700 54,750 10,025 7,406 10,025 8,744 57,700 57,750 10,775 7,856 10,775 9,494
51,750 51,800 9,288 6,964 9,288 8,006 54,750 54,800 10,038 7,414 10,038 8,756 57,750 57,800 10,788 7,864 10,788 9,506
51,800 51,850 9,300 6,971 9,300 8,019 54,800 54,850 10,050 7,421 10,050 8,769 57,800 57,850 10,800 7,871 10,800 9,519
51,850 51,900 9,313 6,979 9,313 8,031 54,850 54,900 10,063 7,429 10,063 8,781 57,850 57,900 10,813 7,879 10,813 9,531
51,900 51,950 9,325 6,986 9,325 8,044 54,900 54,950 10,075 7,436 10,075 8,794 57,900 57,950 10,825 7,886 10,825 9,544
51,950 52,000 9,338 6,994 9,338 8,056 54,950 55,000 10,088 7,444 10,088 8,806 57,950 58,000 10,838 7,894 10,838 9,556
52,000 55,000 58,000
52,000 52,050 9,350 7,001 9,350 8,069 55,000 55,050 10,100 7,451 10,100 8,819 58,000 58,050 10,850 7,901 10,850 9,569
52,050 52,100 9,363 7,009 9,363 8,081 55,050 55,100 10,113 7,459 10,113 8,831 58,050 58,100 10,863 7,909 10,863 9,581
52,100 52,150 9,375 7,016 9,375 8,094 55,100 55,150 10,125 7,466 10,125 8,844 58,100 58,150 10,875 7,916 10,875 9,594
52,150 52,200 9,388 7,024 9,388 8,106 55,150 55,200 10,138 7,474 10,138 8,856 58,150 58,200 10,888 7,924 10,888 9,606
52,200 52,250 9,400 7,031 9,400 8,119 55,200 55,250 10,150 7,481 10,150 8,869 58,200 58,250 10,900 7,931 10,900 9,619
52,250 52,300 9,413 7,039 9,413 8,131 55,250 55,300 10,163 7,489 10,163 8,881 58,250 58,300 10,913 7,939 10,913 9,631
52,300 52,350 9,425 7,046 9,425 8,144 55,300 55,350 10,175 7,496 10,175 8,894 58,300 58,350 10,925 7,946 10,925 9,644
52,350 52,400 9,438 7,054 9,438 8,156 55,350 55,400 10,188 7,504 10,188 8,906 58,350 58,400 10,938 7,954 10,938 9,656
52,400 52,450 9,450 7,061 9,450 8,169 55,400 55,450 10,200 7,511 10,200 8,919 58,400 58,450 10,950 7,961 10,950 9,669
52,450 52,500 9,463 7,069 9,463 8,181 55,450 55,500 10,213 7,519 10,213 8,931 58,450 58,500 10,963 7,969 10,963 9,681
52,500 52,550 9,475 7,076 9,475 8,194 55,500 55,550 10,225 7,526 10,225 8,944 58,500 58,550 10,975 7,976 10,975 9,694
52,550 52,600 9,488 7,084 9,488 8,206 55,550 55,600 10,238 7,534 10,238 8,956 58,550 58,600 10,988 7,984 10,988 9,706
52,600 52,650 9,500 7,091 9,500 8,219 55,600 55,650 10,250 7,541 10,250 8,969 58,600 58,650 11,000 7,991 11,000 9,719
52,650 52,700 9,513 7,099 9,513 8,231 55,650 55,700 10,263 7,549 10,263 8,981 58,650 58,700 11,013 7,999 11,013 9,731
52,700 52,750 9,525 7,106 9,525 8,244 55,700 55,750 10,275 7,556 10,275 8,994 58,700 58,750 11,025 8,006 11,025 9,744
52,750 52,800 9,538 7,114 9,538 8,256 55,750 55,800 10,288 7,564 10,288 9,006 58,750 58,800 11,038 8,014 11,038 9,756
52,800 52,850 9,550 7,121 9,550 8,269 55,800 55,850 10,300 7,571 10,300 9,019 58,800 58,850 11,050 8,021 11,050 9,769
52,850 52,900 9,563 7,129 9,563 8,281 55,850 55,900 10,313 7,579 10,313 9,031 58,850 58,900 11,063 8,029 11,063 9,781
52,900 52,950 9,575 7,136 9,575 8,294 55,900 55,950 10,325 7,586 10,325 9,044 58,900 58,950 11,075 8,036 11,075 9,794
52,950 53,000 9,588 7,144 9,588 8,306 55,950 56,000 10,338 7,594 10,338 9,056 58,950 59,000 11,088 8,044 11,088 9,806
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 265)
- 264 -

Page 267 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
59,000 62,000 65,000
59,000 59,050 11,100 8,051 11,100 9,819 62,000 62,050 11,850 8,501 11,850 10,569 65,000 65,050 12,600 8,951 12,600 11,319
59,050 59,100 11,113 8,059 11,113 9,831 62,050 62,100 11,863 8,509 11,863 10,581 65,050 65,100 12,613 8,959 12,613 11,331
59,100 59,150 11,125 8,066 11,125 9,844 62,100 62,150 11,875 8,516 11,875 10,594 65,100 65,150 12,625 8,969 12,625 11,344
59,150 59,200 11,138 8,074 11,138 9,856 62,150 62,200 11,888 8,524 11,888 10,606 65,150 65,200 12,638 8,981 12,638 11,356
59,200 59,250 11,150 8,081 11,150 9,869 62,200 62,250 11,900 8,531 11,900 10,619 65,200 65,250 12,650 8,994 12,650 11,369
59,250 59,300 11,163 8,089 11,163 9,881 62,250 62,300 11,913 8,539 11,913 10,631 65,250 65,300 12,663 9,006 12,663 11,381
59,300 59,350 11,175 8,096 11,175 9,894 62,300 62,350 11,925 8,546 11,925 10,644 65,300 65,350 12,675 9,019 12,675 11,394
59,350 59,400 11,188 8,104 11,188 9,906 62,350 62,400 11,938 8,554 11,938 10,656 65,350 65,400 12,688 9,031 12,688 11,406
59,400 59,450 11,200 8,111 11,200 9,919 62,400 62,450 11,950 8,561 11,950 10,669 65,400 65,450 12,700 9,044 12,700 11,419
59,450 59,500 11,213 8,119 11,213 9,931 62,450 62,500 11,963 8,569 11,963 10,681 65,450 65,500 12,713 9,056 12,713 11,431
59,500 59,550 11,225 8,126 11,225 9,944 62,500 62,550 11,975 8,576 11,975 10,694 65,500 65,550 12,725 9,069 12,725 11,444
59,550 59,600 11,238 8,134 11,238 9,956 62,550 62,600 11,988 8,584 11,988 10,706 65,550 65,600 12,738 9,081 12,738 11,456
59,600 59,650 11,250 8,141 11,250 9,969 62,600 62,650 12,000 8,591 12,000 10,719 65,600 65,650 12,750 9,094 12,750 11,469
59,650 59,700 11,263 8,149 11,263 9,981 62,650 62,700 12,013 8,599 12,013 10,731 65,650 65,700 12,763 9,106 12,763 11,481
59,700 59,750 11,275 8,156 11,275 9,994 62,700 62,750 12,025 8,606 12,025 10,744 65,700 65,750 12,775 9,119 12,775 11,494
59,750 59,800 11,288 8,164 11,288 10,006 62,750 62,800 12,038 8,614 12,038 10,756 65,750 65,800 12,788 9,131 12,789 11,506
59,800 59,850 11,300 8,171 11,300 10,019 62,800 62,850 12,050 8,621 12,050 10,769 65,800 65,850 12,800 9,144 12,803 11,519
59,850 59,900 11,313 8,179 11,313 10,031 62,850 62,900 12,063 8,629 12,063 10,781 65,850 65,900 12,813 9,156 12,817 11,531
59,900 59,950 11,325 8,186 11,325 10,044 62,900 62,950 12,075 8,636 12,075 10,794 65,900 65,950 12,825 9,169 12,831 11,544
59,950 60,000 11,338 8,194 11,338 10,056 62,950 63,000 12,088 8,644 12,088 10,806 65,950 66,000 12,838 9,181 12,845 11,556
60,000 63,000 66,000
60,000 60,050 11,350 8,201 11,350 10,069 63,000 63,050 12,100 8,651 12,100 10,819 66,000 66,050 12,850 9,194 12,859 11,569
60,050 60,100 11,363 8,209 11,363 10,081 63,050 63,100 12,113 8,659 12,113 10,831 66,050 66,100 12,863 9,206 12,873 11,581
60,100 60,150 11,375 8,216 11,375 10,094 63,100 63,150 12,125 8,666 12,125 10,844 66,100 66,150 12,875 9,219 12,887 11,594
60,150 60,200 11,388 8,224 11,388 10,106 63,150 63,200 12,138 8,674 12,138 10,856 66,150 66,200 12,888 9,231 12,901 11,606
60,200 60,250 11,400 8,231 11,400 10,119 63,200 63,250 12,150 8,681 12,150 10,869 66,200 66,250 12,900 9,244 12,915 11,619
60,250 60,300 11,413 8,239 11,413 10,131 63,250 63,300 12,163 8,689 12,163 10,881 66,250 66,300 12,913 9,256 12,929 11,631
60,300 60,350 11,425 8,246 11,425 10,144 63,300 63,350 12,175 8,696 12,175 10,894 66,300 66,350 12,925 9,269 12,943 11,644
60,350 60,400 11,438 8,254 11,438 10,156 63,350 63,400 12,188 8,704 12,188 10,906 66,350 66,400 12,938 9,281 12,957 11,656
60,400 60,450 11,450 8,261 11,450 10,169 63,400 63,450 12,200 8,711 12,200 10,919 66,400 66,450 12,950 9,294 12,971 11,669
60,450 60,500 11,463 8,269 11,463 10,181 63,450 63,500 12,213 8,719 12,213 10,931 66,450 66,500 12,963 9,306 12,985 11,681
60,500 60,550 11,475 8,276 11,475 10,194 63,500 63,550 12,225 8,726 12,225 10,944 66,500 66,550 12,975 9,319 12,999 11,694
60,550 60,600 11,488 8,284 11,488 10,206 63,550 63,600 12,238 8,734 12,238 10,956 66,550 66,600 12,988 9,331 13,013 11,706
60,600 60,650 11,500 8,291 11,500 10,219 63,600 63,650 12,250 8,741 12,250 10,969 66,600 66,650 13,000 9,344 13,027 11,719
60,650 60,700 11,513 8,299 11,513 10,231 63,650 63,700 12,263 8,749 12,263 10,981 66,650 66,700 13,013 9,356 13,041 11,731
60,700 60,750 11,525 8,306 11,525 10,244 63,700 63,750 12,275 8,756 12,275 10,994 66,700 66,750 13,025 9,369 13,055 11,744
60,750 60,800 11,538 8,314 11,538 10,256 63,750 63,800 12,288 8,764 12,288 11,006 66,750 66,800 13,038 9,381 13,069 11,756
60,800 60,850 11,550 8,321 11,550 10,269 63,800 63,850 12,300 8,771 12,300 11,019 66,800 66,850 13,050 9,394 13,083 11,769
60,850 60,900 11,563 8,329 11,563 10,281 63,850 63,900 12,313 8,779 12,313 11,031 66,850 66,900 13,063 9,406 13,097 11,781
60,900 60,950 11,575 8,336 11,575 10,294 63,900 63,950 12,325 8,786 12,325 11,044 66,900 66,950 13,075 9,419 13,111 11,794
60,950 61,000 11,588 8,344 11,588 10,306 63,950 64,000 12,338 8,794 12,338 11,056 66,950 67,000 13,088 9,431 13,125 11,806
61,000 64,000 67,000
61,000 61,050 11,600 8,351 11,600 10,319 64,000 64,050 12,350 8,801 12,350 11,069 67,000 67,050 13,100 9,444 13,139 11,819
61,050 61,100 11,613 8,359 11,613 10,331 64,050 64,100 12,363 8,809 12,363 11,081 67,050 67,100 13,113 9,456 13,153 11,831
61,100 61,150 11,625 8,366 11,625 10,344 64,100 64,150 12,375 8,816 12,375 11,094 67,100 67,150 13,125 9,469 13,167 11,844
61,150 61,200 11,638 8,374 11,638 10,356 64,150 64,200 12,388 8,824 12,388 11,106 67,150 67,200 13,138 9,481 13,181 11,856
61,200 61,250 11,650 8,381 11,650 10,369 64,200 64,250 12,400 8,831 12,400 11,119 67,200 67,250 13,150 9,494 13,195 11,869
61,250 61,300 11,663 8,389 11,663 10,381 64,250 64,300 12,413 8,839 12,413 11,131 67,250 67,300 13,163 9,506 13,209 11,881
61,300 61,350 11,675 8,396 11,675 10,394 64,300 64,350 12,425 8,846 12,425 11,144 67,300 67,350 13,175 9,519 13,223 11,894
61,350 61,400 11,688 8,404 11,688 10,406 64,350 64,400 12,438 8,854 12,438 11,156 67,350 67,400 13,188 9,531 13,237 11,906
61,400 61,450 11,700 8,411 11,700 10,419 64,400 64,450 12,450 8,861 12,450 11,169 67,400 67,450 13,200 9,544 13,251 11,919
61,450 61,500 11,713 8,419 11,713 10,431 64,450 64,500 12,463 8,869 12,463 11,181 67,450 67,500 13,213 9,556 13,265 11,931
61,500 61,550 11,725 8,426 11,725 10,444 64,500 64,550 12,475 8,876 12,475 11,194 67,500 67,550 13,225 9,569 13,279 11,944
61,550 61,600 11,738 8,434 11,738 10,456 64,550 64,600 12,488 8,884 12,488 11,206 67,550 67,600 13,238 9,581 13,293 11,956
61,600 61,650 11,750 8,441 11,750 10,469 64,600 64,650 12,500 8,891 12,500 11,219 67,600 67,650 13,250 9,594 13,307 11,969
61,650 61,700 11,763 8,449 11,763 10,481 64,650 64,700 12,513 8,899 12,513 11,231 67,650 67,700 13,263 9,606 13,321 11,981
61,700 61,750 11,775 8,456 11,775 10,494 64,700 64,750 12,525 8,906 12,525 11,244 67,700 67,750 13,275 9,619 13,335 11,994
61,750 61,800 11,788 8,464 11,788 10,506 64,750 64,800 12,538 8,914 12,538 11,256 67,750 67,800 13,288 9,631 13,349 12,006
61,800 61,850 11,800 8,471 11,800 10,519 64,800 64,850 12,550 8,921 12,550 11,269 67,800 67,850 13,300 9,644 13,363 12,019
61,850 61,900 11,813 8,479 11,813 10,531 64,850 64,900 12,563 8,929 12,563 11,281 67,850 67,900 13,313 9,656 13,377 12,031
61,900 61,950 11,825 8,486 11,825 10,544 64,900 64,950 12,575 8,936 12,575 11,294 67,900 67,950 13,325 9,669 13,391 12,044
61,950 62,000 11,838 8,494 11,838 10,556 64,950 65,000 12,588 8,944 12,588 11,306 67,950 68,000 13,338 9,681 13,405 12,056
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 266)
- 265 -

Page 268 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
68,000 71,000 74,000
68,000 68,050 13,350 9,694 13,419 12,069 71,000 71,050 14,100 10,444 14,259 12,819 74,000 74,050 14,850 11,194 15,099 13,569
68,050 68,100 13,363 9,706 13,433 12,081 71,050 71,100 14,113 10,456 14,273 12,831 74,050 74,100 14,863 11,206 15,113 13,581
68,100 68,150 13,375 9,719 13,447 12,094 71,100 71,150 14,125 10,469 14,287 12,844 74,100 74,150 14,875 11,219 15,127 13,594
68,150 68,200 13,388 9,731 13,461 12,106 71,150 71,200 14,138 10,481 14,301 12,856 74,150 74,200 14,888 11,231 15,141 13,606
68,200 68,250 13,400 9,744 13,475 12,119 71,200 71,250 14,150 10,494 14,315 12,869 74,200 74,250 14,900 11,244 15,155 13,619
68,250 68,300 13,413 9,756 13,489 12,131 71,250 71,300 14,163 10,506 14,329 12,881 74,250 74,300 14,913 11,256 15,169 13,631
68,300 68,350 13,425 9,769 13,503 12,144 71,300 71,350 14,175 10,519 14,343 12,894 74,300 74,350 14,925 11,269 15,183 13,644
68,350 68,400 13,438 9,781 13,517 12,156 71,350 71,400 14,188 10,531 14,357 12,906 74,350 74,400 14,938 11,281 15,197 13,656
68,400 68,450 13,450 9,794 13,531 12,169 71,400 71,450 14,200 10,544 14,371 12,919 74,400 74,450 14,950 11,294 15,211 13,669
68,450 68,500 13,463 9,806 13,545 12,181 71,450 71,500 14,213 10,556 14,385 12,931 74,450 74,500 14,963 11,306 15,225 13,681
68,500 68,550 13,475 9,819 13,559 12,194 71,500 71,550 14,225 10,569 14,399 12,944 74,500 74,550 14,975 11,319 15,239 13,694
68,550 68,600 13,488 9,831 13,573 12,206 71,550 71,600 14,238 10,581 14,413 12,956 74,550 74,600 14,988 11,331 15,253 13,706
68,600 68,650 13,500 9,844 13,587 12,219 71,600 71,650 14,250 10,594 14,427 12,969 74,600 74,650 15,000 11,344 15,267 13,719
68,650 68,700 13,513 9,856 13,601 12,231 71,650 71,700 14,263 10,606 14,441 12,981 74,650 74,700 15,013 11,356 15,281 13,731
68,700 68,750 13,525 9,869 13,615 12,244 71,700 71,750 14,275 10,619 14,455 12,994 74,700 74,750 15,025 11,369 15,295 13,744
68,750 68,800 13,538 9,881 13,629 12,256 71,750 71,800 14,288 10,631 14,469 13,006 74,750 74,800 15,038 11,381 15,309 13,756
68,800 68,850 13,550 9,894 13,643 12,269 71,800 71,850 14,300 10,644 14,483 13,019 74,800 74,850 15,050 11,394 15,323 13,769
68,850 68,900 13,563 9,906 13,657 12,281 71,850 71,900 14,313 10,656 14,497 13,031 74,850 74,900 15,063 11,406 15,337 13,781
68,900 68,950 13,575 9,919 13,671 12,294 71,900 71,950 14,325 10,669 14,511 13,044 74,900 74,950 15,075 11,419 15,351 13,794
68,950 69,000 13,588 9,931 13,685 12,306 71,950 72,000 14,338 10,681 14,525 13,056 74,950 75,000 15,088 11,431 15,365 13,806
69,000 72,000 75,000
69,000 69,050 13,600 9,944 13,699 12,319 72,000 72,050 14,350 10,694 14,539 13,069 75,000 75,050 15,100 11,444 15,379 13,819
69,050 69,100 13,613 9,956 13,713 12,331 72,050 72,100 14,363 10,706 14,553 13,081 75,050 75,100 15,113 11,456 15,393 13,831
69,100 69,150 13,625 9,969 13,727 12,344 72,100 72,150 14,375 10,719 14,567 13,094 75,100 75,150 15,125 11,469 15,407 13,844
69,150 69,200 13,638 9,981 13,741 12,356 72,150 72,200 14,388 10,731 14,581 13,106 75,150 75,200 15,138 11,481 15,421 13,856
69,200 69,250 13,650 9,994 13,755 12,369 72,200 72,250 14,400 10,744 14,595 13,119 75,200 75,250 15,150 11,494 15,435 13,869
69,250 69,300 13,663 10,006 13,769 12,381 72,250 72,300 14,413 10,756 14,609 13,131 75,250 75,300 15,163 11,506 15,449 13,881
69,300 69,350 13,675 10,019 13,783 12,394 72,300 72,350 14,425 10,769 14,623 13,144 75,300 75,350 15,175 11,519 15,463 13,894
69,350 69,400 13,688 10,031 13,797 12,406 72,350 72,400 14,438 10,781 14,637 13,156 75,350 75,400 15,188 11,531 15,477 13,906
69,400 69,450 13,700 10,044 13,811 12,419 72,400 72,450 14,450 10,794 14,651 13,169 75,400 75,450 15,200 11,544 15,491 13,919
69,450 69,500 13,713 10,056 13,825 12,431 72,450 72,500 14,463 10,806 14,665 13,181 75,450 75,500 15,213 11,556 15,505 13,931
69,500 69,550 13,725 10,069 13,839 12,444 72,500 72,550 14,475 10,819 14,679 13,194 75,500 75,550 15,225 11,569 15,519 13,944
69,550 69,600 13,738 10,081 13,853 12,456 72,550 72,600 14,488 10,831 14,693 13,206 75,550 75,600 15,238 11,581 15,533 13,956
69,600 69,650 13,750 10,094 13,867 12,469 72,600 72,650 14,500 10,844 14,707 13,219 75,600 75,650 15,250 11,594 15,547 13,969
69,650 69,700 13,763 10,106 13,881 12,481 72,650 72,700 14,513 10,856 14,721 13,231 75,650 75,700 15,263 11,606 15,561 13,981
69,700 69,750 13,775 10,119 13,895 12,494 72,700 72,750 14,525 10,869 14,735 13,244 75,700 75,750 15,275 11,619 15,575 13,994
69,750 69,800 13,788 10,131 13,909 12,506 72,750 72,800 14,538 10,881 14,749 13,256 75,750 75,800 15,288 11,631 15,589 14,006
69,800 69,850 13,800 10,144 13,923 12,519 72,800 72,850 14,550 10,894 14,763 13,269 75,800 75,850 15,300 11,644 15,603 14,019
69,850 69,900 13,813 10,156 13,937 12,531 72,850 72,900 14,563 10,906 14,777 13,281 75,850 75,900 15,313 11,656 15,617 14,031
69,900 69,950 13,825 10,169 13,951 12,544 72,900 72,950 14,575 10,919 14,791 13,294 75,900 75,950 15,325 11,669 15,631 14,044
69,950 70,000 13,838 10,181 13,965 12,556 72,950 73,000 14,588 10,931 14,805 13,306 75,950 76,000 15,338 11,681 15,645 14,056
70,000 73,000 76,000
70,000 70,050 13,850 10,194 13,979 12,569 73,000 73,050 14,600 10,944 14,819 13,319 76,000 76,050 15,350 11,694 15,659 14,069
70,050 70,100 13,863 10,206 13,993 12,581 73,050 73,100 14,613 10,956 14,833 13,331 76,050 76,100 15,363 11,706 15,673 14,081
70,100 70,150 13,875 10,219 14,007 12,594 73,100 73,150 14,625 10,969 14,847 13,344 76,100 76,150 15,375 11,719 15,687 14,094
70,150 70,200 13,888 10,231 14,021 12,606 73,150 73,200 14,638 10,981 14,861 13,356 76,150 76,200 15,388 11,731 15,701 14,106
70,200 70,250 13,900 10,244 14,035 12,619 73,200 73,250 14,650 10,994 14,875 13,369 76,200 76,250 15,400 11,744 15,715 14,119
70,250 70,300 13,913 10,256 14,049 12,631 73,250 73,300 14,663 11,006 14,889 13,381 76,250 76,300 15,413 11,756 15,729 14,131
70,300 70,350 13,925 10,269 14,063 12,644 73,300 73,350 14,675 11,019 14,903 13,394 76,300 76,350 15,425 11,769 15,743 14,144
70,350 70,400 13,938 10,281 14,077 12,656 73,350 73,400 14,688 11,031 14,917 13,406 76,350 76,400 15,438 11,781 15,757 14,156
70,400 70,450 13,950 10,294 14,091 12,669 73,400 73,450 14,700 11,044 14,931 13,419 76,400 76,450 15,450 11,794 15,771 14,169
70,450 70,500 13,963 10,306 14,105 12,681 73,450 73,500 14,713 11,056 14,945 13,431 76,450 76,500 15,463 11,806 15,785 14,181
70,500 70,550 13,975 10,319 14,119 12,694 73,500 73,550 14,725 11,069 14,959 13,444 76,500 76,550 15,475 11,819 15,799 14,194
70,550 70,600 13,988 10,331 14,133 12,706 73,550 73,600 14,738 11,081 14,973 13,456 76,550 76,600 15,488 11,831 15,813 14,206
70,600 70,650 14,000 10,344 14,147 12,719 73,600 73,650 14,750 11,094 14,987 13,469 76,600 76,650 15,500 11,844 15,827 14,219
70,650 70,700 14,013 10,356 14,161 12,731 73,650 73,700 14,763 11,106 15,001 13,481 76,650 76,700 15,513 11,856 15,841 14,231
70,700 70,750 14,025 10,369 14,175 12,744 73,700 73,750 14,775 11,119 15,015 13,494 76,700 76,750 15,525 11,869 15,855 14,244
70,750 70,800 14,038 10,381 14,189 12,756 73,750 73,800 14,788 11,131 15,029 13,506 76,750 76,800 15,538 11,881 15,869 14,256
70,800 70,850 14,050 10,394 14,203 12,769 73,800 73,850 14,800 11,144 15,043 13,519 76,800 76,850 15,550 11,894 15,883 14,269
70,850 70,900 14,063 10,406 14,217 12,781 73,850 73,900 14,813 11,156 15,057 13,531 76,850 76,900 15,563 11,906 15,897 14,281
70,900 70,950 14,075 10,419 14,231 12,794 73,900 73,950 14,825 11,169 15,071 13,544 76,900 76,950 15,575 11,919 15,911 14,294
70,950 71,000 14,088 10,431 14,245 12,806 73,950 74,000 14,838 11,181 15,085 13,556 76,950 77,000 15,588 11,931 15,925 14,306
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 267)
- 266 -

Page 269 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
77,000 80,000 83,000
77,000 77,050 15,600 11,944 15,939 14,319 80,000 80,050 16,385 12,694 16,779 15,069 83,000 83,050 17,225 13,444 17,619 15,819
77,050 77,100 15,613 11,956 15,953 14,331 80,050 80,100 16,399 12,706 16,793 15,081 83,050 83,100 17,239 13,456 17,633 15,831
77,100 77,150 15,625 11,969 15,967 14,344 80,100 80,150 16,413 12,719 16,807 15,094 83,100 83,150 17,253 13,469 17,647 15,844
77,150 77,200 15,638 11,981 15,981 14,356 80,150 80,200 16,427 12,731 16,821 15,106 83,150 83,200 17,267 13,481 17,661 15,856
77,200 77,250 15,650 11,994 15,995 14,369 80,200 80,250 16,441 12,744 16,835 15,119 83,200 83,250 17,281 13,494 17,675 15,869
77,250 77,300 15,663 12,006 16,009 14,381 80,250 80,300 16,455 12,756 16,849 15,131 83,250 83,300 17,295 13,506 17,689 15,881
77,300 77,350 15,675 12,019 16,023 14,394 80,300 80,350 16,469 12,769 16,863 15,144 83,300 83,350 17,309 13,519 17,703 15,894
77,350 77,400 15,688 12,031 16,037 14,406 80,350 80,400 16,483 12,781 16,877 15,156 83,350 83,400 17,323 13,531 17,717 15,906
77,400 77,450 15,700 12,044 16,051 14,419 80,400 80,450 16,497 12,794 16,891 15,169 83,400 83,450 17,337 13,544 17,731 15,919
77,450 77,500 15,713 12,056 16,065 14,431 80,450 80,500 16,511 12,806 16,905 15,181 83,450 83,500 17,351 13,556 17,745 15,931
77,500 77,550 15,725 12,069 16,079 14,444 80,500 80,550 16,525 12,819 16,919 15,194 83,500 83,550 17,365 13,569 17,759 15,944
77,550 77,600 15,738 12,081 16,093 14,456 80,550 80,600 16,539 12,831 16,933 15,206 83,550 83,600 17,379 13,581 17,773 15,956
77,600 77,650 15,750 12,094 16,107 14,469 80,600 80,650 16,553 12,844 16,947 15,219 83,600 83,650 17,393 13,594 17,787 15,969
77,650 77,700 15,763 12,106 16,121 14,481 80,650 80,700 16,567 12,856 16,961 15,231 83,650 83,700 17,407 13,606 17,801 15,981
77,700 77,750 15,775 12,119 16,135 14,494 80,700 80,750 16,581 12,869 16,975 15,244 83,700 83,750 17,421 13,619 17,815 15,994
77,750 77,800 15,788 12,131 16,149 14,506 80,750 80,800 16,595 12,881 16,989 15,256 83,750 83,800 17,435 13,631 17,829 16,006
77,800 77,850 15,800 12,144 16,163 14,519 80,800 80,850 16,609 12,894 17,003 15,269 83,800 83,850 17,449 13,644 17,843 16,019
77,850 77,900 15,813 12,156 16,177 14,531 80,850 80,900 16,623 12,906 17,017 15,281 83,850 83,900 17,463 13,656 17,857 16,031
77,900 77,950 15,825 12,169 16,191 14,544 80,900 80,950 16,637 12,919 17,031 15,294 83,900 83,950 17,477 13,669 17,871 16,044
77,950 78,000 15,838 12,181 16,205 14,556 80,950 81,000 16,651 12,931 17,045 15,306 83,950 84,000 17,491 13,681 17,885 16,056
78,000 81,000 84,000
78,000 78,050 15,850 12,194 16,219 14,569 81,000 81,050 16,665 12,944 17,059 15,319 84,000 84,050 17,505 13,694 17,899 16,069
78,050 78,100 15,863 12,206 16,233 14,581 81,050 81,100 16,679 12,956 17,073 15,331 84,050 84,100 17,519 13,706 17,913 16,081
78,100 78,150 15,875 12,219 16,247 14,594 81,100 81,150 16,693 12,969 17,087 15,344 84,100 84,150 17,533 13,719 17,927 16,094
78,150 78,200 15,888 12,231 16,261 14,606 81,150 81,200 16,707 12,981 17,101 15,356 84,150 84,200 17,547 13,731 17,941 16,106
78,200 78,250 15,900 12,244 16,275 14,619 81,200 81,250 16,721 12,994 17,115 15,369 84,200 84,250 17,561 13,744 17,955 16,119
78,250 78,300 15,913 12,256 16,289 14,631 81,250 81,300 16,735 13,006 17,129 15,381 84,250 84,300 17,575 13,756 17,969 16,131
78,300 78,350 15,925 12,269 16,303 14,644 81,300 81,350 16,749 13,019 17,143 15,394 84,300 84,350 17,589 13,769 17,983 16,144
78,350 78,400 15,938 12,281 16,317 14,656 81,350 81,400 16,763 13,031 17,157 15,406 84,350 84,400 17,603 13,781 17,997 16,156
78,400 78,450 15,950 12,294 16,331 14,669 81,400 81,450 16,777 13,044 17,171 15,419 84,400 84,450 17,617 13,794 18,011 16,169
78,450 78,500 15,963 12,306 16,345 14,681 81,450 81,500 16,791 13,056 17,185 15,431 84,450 84,500 17,631 13,806 18,025 16,181
78,500 78,550 15,975 12,319 16,359 14,694 81,500 81,550 16,805 13,069 17,199 15,444 84,500 84,550 17,645 13,819 18,039 16,194
78,550 78,600 15,988 12,331 16,373 14,706 81,550 81,600 16,819 13,081 17,213 15,456 84,550 84,600 17,659 13,831 18,053 16,206
78,600 78,650 16,000 12,344 16,387 14,719 81,600 81,650 16,833 13,094 17,227 15,469 84,600 84,650 17,673 13,844 18,067 16,219
78,650 78,700 16,013 12,356 16,401 14,731 81,650 81,700 16,847 13,106 17,241 15,481 84,650 84,700 17,687 13,856 18,081 16,231
78,700 78,750 16,025 12,369 16,415 14,744 81,700 81,750 16,861 13,119 17,255 15,494 84,700 84,750 17,701 13,869 18,095 16,244
78,750 78,800 16,038 12,381 16,429 14,756 81,750 81,800 16,875 13,131 17,269 15,506 84,750 84,800 17,715 13,881 18,109 16,256
78,800 78,850 16,050 12,394 16,443 14,769 81,800 81,850 16,889 13,144 17,283 15,519 84,800 84,850 17,729 13,894 18,123 16,269
78,850 78,900 16,063 12,406 16,457 14,781 81,850 81,900 16,903 13,156 17,297 15,531 84,850 84,900 17,743 13,906 18,137 16,281
78,900 78,950 16,077 12,419 16,471 14,794 81,900 81,950 16,917 13,169 17,311 15,544 84,900 84,950 17,757 13,919 18,151 16,294
78,950 79,000 16,091 12,431 16,485 14,806 81,950 82,000 16,931 13,181 17,325 15,556 84,950 85,000 17,771 13,931 18,165 16,306
79,000 82,000 85,000
79,000 79,050 16,105 12,444 16,499 14,819 82,000 82,050 16,945 13,194 17,339 15,569 85,000 85,050 17,785 13,944 18,179 16,319
79,050 79,100 16,119 12,456 16,513 14,831 82,050 82,100 16,959 13,206 17,353 15,581 85,050 85,100 17,799 13,956 18,193 16,331
79,100 79,150 16,133 12,469 16,527 14,844 82,100 82,150 16,973 13,219 17,367 15,594 85,100 85,150 17,813 13,969 18,207 16,344
79,150 79,200 16,147 12,481 16,541 14,856 82,150 82,200 16,987 13,231 17,381 15,606 85,150 85,200 17,827 13,981 18,221 16,356
79,200 79,250 16,161 12,494 16,555 14,869 82,200 82,250 17,001 13,244 17,395 15,619 85,200 85,250 17,841 13,994 18,235 16,369
79,250 79,300 16,175 12,506 16,569 14,881 82,250 82,300 17,015 13,256 17,409 15,631 85,250 85,300 17,855 14,006 18,249 16,381
79,300 79,350 16,189 12,519 16,583 14,894 82,300 82,350 17,029 13,269 17,423 15,644 85,300 85,350 17,869 14,019 18,263 16,394
79,350 79,400 16,203 12,531 16,597 14,906 82,350 82,400 17,043 13,281 17,437 15,656 85,350 85,400 17,883 14,031 18,277 16,406
79,400 79,450 16,217 12,544 16,611 14,919 82,400 82,450 17,057 13,294 17,451 15,669 85,400 85,450 17,897 14,044 18,291 16,419
79,450 79,500 16,231 12,556 16,625 14,931 82,450 82,500 17,071 13,306 17,465 15,681 85,450 85,500 17,911 14,056 18,305 16,431
79,500 79,550 16,245 12,569 16,639 14,944 82,500 82,550 17,085 13,319 17,479 15,694 85,500 85,550 17,925 14,069 18,319 16,444
79,550 79,600 16,259 12,581 16,653 14,956 82,550 82,600 17,099 13,331 17,493 15,706 85,550 85,600 17,939 14,081 18,333 16,456
79,600 79,650 16,273 12,594 16,667 14,969 82,600 82,650 17,113 13,344 17,507 15,719 85,600 85,650 17,953 14,094 18,347 16,469
79,650 79,700 16,287 12,606 16,681 14,981 82,650 82,700 17,127 13,356 17,521 15,731 85,650 85,700 17,967 14,106 18,361 16,481
79,700 79,750 16,301 12,619 16,695 14,994 82,700 82,750 17,141 13,369 17,535 15,744 85,700 85,750 17,981 14,119 18,375 16,494
79,750 79,800 16,315 12,631 16,709 15,006 82,750 82,800 17,155 13,381 17,549 15,756 85,750 85,800 17,995 14,131 18,389 16,506
79,800 79,850 16,329 12,644 16,723 15,019 82,800 82,850 17,169 13,394 17,563 15,769 85,800 85,850 18,009 14,144 18,403 16,519
79,850 79,900 16,343 12,656 16,737 15,031 82,850 82,900 17,183 13,406 17,577 15,781 85,850 85,900 18,023 14,156 18,417 16,531
79,900 79,950 16,357 12,669 16,751 15,044 82,900 82,950 17,197 13,419 17,591 15,794 85,900 85,950 18,037 14,169 18,431 16,544
79,950 80,000 16,371 12,681 16,765 15,056 82,950 83,000 17,211 13,431 17,605 15,806 85,950 86,000 18,051 14,181 18,445 16,556
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 268)
- 267 -

Page 270 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
86,000 89,000 92,000
86,000 86,050 18,065 14,194 18,459 16,569 89,000 89,050 18,905 14,944 19,299 17,319 92,000 92,050 19,745 15,694 20,139 18,069
86,050 86,100 18,079 14,206 18,473 16,581 89,050 89,100 18,919 14,956 19,313 17,331 92,050 92,100 19,759 15,706 20,153 18,081
86,100 86,150 18,093 14,219 18,487 16,594 89,100 89,150 18,933 14,969 19,327 17,344 92,100 92,150 19,773 15,719 20,167 18,094
86,150 86,200 18,107 14,231 18,501 16,606 89,150 89,200 18,947 14,981 19,341 17,356 92,150 92,200 19,787 15,731 20,181 18,106
86,200 86,250 18,121 14,244 18,515 16,619 89,200 89,250 18,961 14,994 19,355 17,369 92,200 92,250 19,801 15,744 20,195 18,119
86,250 86,300 18,135 14,256 18,529 16,631 89,250 89,300 18,975 15,006 19,369 17,381 92,250 92,300 19,815 15,756 20,209 18,131
86,300 86,350 18,149 14,269 18,543 16,644 89,300 89,350 18,989 15,019 19,383 17,394 92,300 92,350 19,829 15,769 20,223 18,144
86,350 86,400 18,163 14,281 18,557 16,656 89,350 89,400 19,003 15,031 19,397 17,406 92,350 92,400 19,843 15,781 20,237 18,156
86,400 86,450 18,177 14,294 18,571 16,669 89,400 89,450 19,017 15,044 19,411 17,419 92,400 92,450 19,857 15,794 20,251 18,169
86,450 86,500 18,191 14,306 18,585 16,681 89,450 89,500 19,031 15,056 19,425 17,431 92,450 92,500 19,871 15,806 20,265 18,181
86,500 86,550 18,205 14,319 18,599 16,694 89,500 89,550 19,045 15,069 19,439 17,444 92,500 92,550 19,885 15,819 20,279 18,194
86,550 86,600 18,219 14,331 18,613 16,706 89,550 89,600 19,059 15,081 19,453 17,456 92,550 92,600 19,899 15,831 20,293 18,206
86,600 86,650 18,233 14,344 18,627 16,719 89,600 89,650 19,073 15,094 19,467 17,469 92,600 92,650 19,913 15,844 20,307 18,219
86,650 86,700 18,247 14,356 18,641 16,731 89,650 89,700 19,087 15,106 19,481 17,481 92,650 92,700 19,927 15,856 20,321 18,231
86,700 86,750 18,261 14,369 18,655 16,744 89,700 89,750 19,101 15,119 19,495 17,494 92,700 92,750 19,941 15,869 20,335 18,244
86,750 86,800 18,275 14,381 18,669 16,756 89,750 89,800 19,115 15,131 19,509 17,506 92,750 92,800 19,955 15,881 20,349 18,256
86,800 86,850 18,289 14,394 18,683 16,769 89,800 89,850 19,129 15,144 19,523 17,519 92,800 92,850 19,969 15,894 20,363 18,269
86,850 86,900 18,303 14,406 18,697 16,781 89,850 89,900 19,143 15,156 19,537 17,531 92,850 92,900 19,983 15,906 20,377 18,281
86,900 86,950 18,317 14,419 18,711 16,794 89,900 89,950 19,157 15,169 19,551 17,544 92,900 92,950 19,997 15,919 20,391 18,294
86,950 87,000 18,331 14,431 18,725 16,806 89,950 90,000 19,171 15,181 19,565 17,556 92,950 93,000 20,011 15,931 20,405 18,306
87,000 90,000 93,000
87,000 87,050 18,345 14,444 18,739 16,819 90,000 90,050 19,185 15,194 19,579 17,569 93,000 93,050 20,025 15,944 20,419 18,319
87,050 87,100 18,359 14,456 18,753 16,831 90,050 90,100 19,199 15,206 19,593 17,581 93,050 93,100 20,039 15,956 20,433 18,331
87,100 87,150 18,373 14,469 18,767 16,844 90,100 90,150 19,213 15,219 19,607 17,594 93,100 93,150 20,053 15,969 20,447 18,344
87,150 87,200 18,387 14,481 18,781 16,856 90,150 90,200 19,227 15,231 19,621 17,606 93,150 93,200 20,067 15,981 20,461 18,356
87,200 87,250 18,401 14,494 18,795 16,869 90,200 90,250 19,241 15,244 19,635 17,619 93,200 93,250 20,081 15,994 20,475 18,369
87,250 87,300 18,415 14,506 18,809 16,881 90,250 90,300 19,255 15,256 19,649 17,631 93,250 93,300 20,095 16,006 20,489 18,381
87,300 87,350 18,429 14,519 18,823 16,894 90,300 90,350 19,269 15,269 19,663 17,644 93,300 93,350 20,109 16,019 20,503 18,394
87,350 87,400 18,443 14,531 18,837 16,906 90,350 90,400 19,283 15,281 19,677 17,656 93,350 93,400 20,123 16,031 20,517 18,406
87,400 87,450 18,457 14,544 18,851 16,919 90,400 90,450 19,297 15,294 19,691 17,669 93,400 93,450 20,137 16,044 20,531 18,419
87,450 87,500 18,471 14,556 18,865 16,931 90,450 90,500 19,311 15,306 19,705 17,681 93,450 93,500 20,151 16,056 20,545 18,431
87,500 87,550 18,485 14,569 18,879 16,944 90,500 90,550 19,325 15,319 19,719 17,694 93,500 93,550 20,165 16,069 20,559 18,444
87,550 87,600 18,499 14,581 18,893 16,956 90,550 90,600 19,339 15,331 19,733 17,706 93,550 93,600 20,179 16,081 20,573 18,456
87,600 87,650 18,513 14,594 18,907 16,969 90,600 90,650 19,353 15,344 19,747 17,719 93,600 93,650 20,193 16,094 20,587 18,469
87,650 87,700 18,527 14,606 18,921 16,981 90,650 90,700 19,367 15,356 19,761 17,731 93,650 93,700 20,207 16,106 20,601 18,481
87,700 87,750 18,541 14,619 18,935 16,994 90,700 90,750 19,381 15,369 19,775 17,744 93,700 93,750 20,221 16,119 20,615 18,494
87,750 87,800 18,555 14,631 18,949 17,006 90,750 90,800 19,395 15,381 19,789 17,756 93,750 93,800 20,235 16,131 20,629 18,506
87,800 87,850 18,569 14,644 18,963 17,019 90,800 90,850 19,409 15,394 19,803 17,769 93,800 93,850 20,249 16,144 20,643 18,519
87,850 87,900 18,583 14,656 18,977 17,031 90,850 90,900 19,423 15,406 19,817 17,781 93,850 93,900 20,263 16,156 20,657 18,531
87,900 87,950 18,597 14,669 18,991 17,044 90,900 90,950 19,437 15,419 19,831 17,794 93,900 93,950 20,277 16,169 20,671 18,544
87,950 88,000 18,611 14,681 19,005 17,056 90,950 91,000 19,451 15,431 19,845 17,806 93,950 94,000 20,291 16,181 20,685 18,556
88,000 91,000 94,000
88,000 88,050 18,625 14,694 19,019 17,069 91,000 91,050 19,465 15,444 19,859 17,819 94,000 94,050 20,305 16,194 20,699 18,569
88,050 88,100 18,639 14,706 19,033 17,081 91,050 91,100 19,479 15,456 19,873 17,831 94,050 94,100 20,319 16,206 20,713 18,581
88,100 88,150 18,653 14,719 19,047 17,094 91,100 91,150 19,493 15,469 19,887 17,844 94,100 94,150 20,333 16,219 20,727 18,594
88,150 88,200 18,667 14,731 19,061 17,106 91,150 91,200 19,507 15,481 19,901 17,856 94,150 94,200 20,347 16,231 20,741 18,606
88,200 88,250 18,681 14,744 19,075 17,119 91,200 91,250 19,521 15,494 19,915 17,869 94,200 94,250 20,361 16,244 20,755 18,619
88,250 88,300 18,695 14,756 19,089 17,131 91,250 91,300 19,535 15,506 19,929 17,881 94,250 94,300 20,375 16,256 20,769 18,631
88,300 88,350 18,709 14,769 19,103 17,144 91,300 91,350 19,549 15,519 19,943 17,894 94,300 94,350 20,389 16,269 20,783 18,644
88,350 88,400 18,723 14,781 19,117 17,156 91,350 91,400 19,563 15,531 19,957 17,906 94,350 94,400 20,403 16,281 20,797 18,656
88,400 88,450 18,737 14,794 19,131 17,169 91,400 91,450 19,577 15,544 19,971 17,919 94,400 94,450 20,417 16,294 20,811 18,669
88,450 88,500 18,751 14,806 19,145 17,181 91,450 91,500 19,591 15,556 19,985 17,931 94,450 94,500 20,431 16,306 20,825 18,681
88,500 88,550 18,765 14,819 19,159 17,194 91,500 91,550 19,605 15,569 19,999 17,944 94,500 94,550 20,445 16,319 20,839 18,694
88,550 88,600 18,779 14,831 19,173 17,206 91,550 91,600 19,619 15,581 20,013 17,956 94,550 94,600 20,459 16,331 20,853 18,706
88,600 88,650 18,793 14,844 19,187 17,219 91,600 91,650 19,633 15,594 20,027 17,969 94,600 94,650 20,473 16,344 20,867 18,719
88,650 88,700 18,807 14,856 19,201 17,231 91,650 91,700 19,647 15,606 20,041 17,981 94,650 94,700 20,487 16,356 20,881 18,731
88,700 88,750 18,821 14,869 19,215 17,244 91,700 91,750 19,661 15,619 20,055 17,994 94,700 94,750 20,501 16,369 20,895 18,744
88,750 88,800 18,835 14,881 19,229 17,256 91,750 91,800 19,675 15,631 20,069 18,006 94,750 94,800 20,515 16,381 20,909 18,756
88,800 88,850 18,849 14,894 19,243 17,269 91,800 91,850 19,689 15,644 20,083 18,019 94,800 94,850 20,529 16,394 20,923 18,769
88,850 88,900 18,863 14,906 19,257 17,281 91,850 91,900 19,703 15,656 20,097 18,031 94,850 94,900 20,543 16,406 20,937 18,781
88,900 88,950 18,877 14,919 19,271 17,294 91,900 91,950 19,717 15,669 20,111 18,044 94,900 94,950 20,557 16,419 20,951 18,794
88,950 89,000 18,891 14,931 19,285 17,306 91,950 92,000 19,731 15,681 20,125 18,056 94,950 95,000 20,571 16,431 20,965 18,806
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 269)
- 268 -

Page 271 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
95,000 98,000
95,000 95,050 20,585 16,444 20,979 18,819 98,000 98,050 21,425 17,194 21,819 19,569
95,050 95,100 20,599 16,456 20,993 18,831 98,050 98,100 21,439 17,206 21,833 19,581
95,100 95,150 20,613 16,469 21,007 18,844 98,100 98,150 21,453 17,219 21,847 19,594
95,150 95,200 20,627 16,481 21,021 18,856 98,150 98,200 21,467 17,231 21,861 19,606
95,200 95,250 20,641 16,494 21,035 18,869 98,200 98,250 21,481 17,244 21,875 19,619
95,250 95,300 20,655 16,506 21,049 18,881 98,250 98,300 21,495 17,256 21,889 19,631
95,300 95,350 20,669 16,519 21,063 18,894 98,300 98,350 21,509 17,269 21,903 19,644
95,350 95,400 20,683 16,531 21,077 18,906 98,350 98,400 21,523 17,281 21,917 19,656
95,400 95,450 20,697 16,544 21,091 18,919 98,400 98,450 21,537 17,294 21,931 19,669
95,450 95,500 20,711 16,556 21,105 18,931 98,450 98,500 21,551 17,306 21,945 19,681
95,500 95,550 20,725 16,569 21,119 18,944 98,500 98,550 21,565 17,319 21,959 19,694
95,550 95,600 20,739 16,581 21,133 18,956 98,550 98,600 21,579 17,331 21,973 19,706
95,600 95,650 20,753 16,594 21,147 18,969 98,600 98,650 21,593 17,344 21,987 19,719
95,650 95,700 20,767 16,606 21,161 18,981 98,650 98,700 21,607 17,356 22,001 19,731
95,700 95,750 20,781 16,619 21,175 18,994 98,700 98,750 21,621 17,369 22,015 19,744
95,750 95,800 20,795 16,631 21,189 19,006 98,750 98,800 21,635 17,381 22,029 19,756
95,800 95,850 20,809 16,644 21,203 19,019 98,800 98,850 21,649 17,394 22,043 19,769
95,850 95,900 20,823 16,656 21,217 19,031 98,850 98,900 21,663 17,406 22,057 19,781
95,900 95,950 20,837 16,669 21,231 19,044 98,900 98,950 21,677 17,419 22,071 19,794
95,950 96,000 20,851 16,681 21,245 19,056 98,950 99,000 21,691 17,431 22,085 19,806
96,000 99,000
96,000 96,050 20,865 16,694 21,259 19,069 99,000 99,050 21,705 17,444 22,099 19,819
96,050 96,100 20,879 16,706 21,273 19,081 99,050 99,100 21,719 17,456 22,113 19,831
96,100 96,150 20,893 16,719 21,287 19,094 99,100 99,150 21,733 17,469 22,127 19,844
96,150 96,200 20,907 16,731 21,301 19,106 99,150 99,200 21,747 17,481 22,141 19,856
96,200 96,250 20,921 16,744 21,315 19,119 99,200 99,250 21,761 17,494 22,155 19,869
96,250 96,300 20,935 16,756 21,329 19,131 99,250 99,300 21,775 17,506 22,169 19,881
96,300 96,350 20,949 16,769 21,343 19,144 99,300 99,350 21,789 17,519 22,183 19,894
96,350 96,400 20,963 16,781 21,357 19,156 99,350 99,400 21,803 17,531 22,197 19,906
96,400 96,450 20,977 16,794 21,371 19,169 99,400 99,450 21,817 17,544 22,211 19,919
96,450 96,500 20,991 16,806 21,385 19,181 99,450 99,500 21,831 17,556 22,225 19,931
96,500 96,550 21,005 16,819 21,399 19,194 99,500 99,550 21,845 17,569 22,239 19,944
96,550 96,600 21,019 16,831 21,413 19,206 99,550 99,600 21,859 17,581 22,253 19,956
96,600 96,650 21,033 16,844 21,427 19,219 99,600 99,650 21,873 17,594 22,267 19,969
96,650 96,700 21,047 16,856 21,441 19,231 99,650 99,700 21,887 17,606 22,281 19,981
96,700 96,750 21,061 16,869 21,455 19,244 99,700 99,750 21,901 17,619 22,295 19,994
96,750 96,800 21,075 16,881 21,469 19,256 99,750 99,800 21,915 17,631 22,309 20,006
96,800 96,850 21,089 16,894 21,483 19,269 99,800 99,850 21,929 17,644 22,323 20,019
96,850 96,900 21,103 16,906 21,497 19,281 99,850 99,900 21,943 17,656 22,337 20,031
96,900 96,950 21,117 16,919 21,511 19,294 99,900 99,950 21,957 17,669 22,351 20,044
96,950 97,000 21,131 16,931 21,525 19,306 99,950 100,000 21,971 17,681 22,365 20,056
97,000
97,000 97,050 21,145 16,944 21,539 19,319
97,050 97,100 21,159 16,956 21,553 19,331
97,100 97,150 21,173 16,969 21,567 19,344
97,150 97,200 21,187 16,981 21,581 19,356
97,200 97,250 21,201 16,994 21,595 19,369
97,250 97,300 21,215 17,006 21,609 19,381
97,300 97,350 21,229 17,019 21,623 19,394 $100,00097,350 97,400 21,243 17,031 21,637 19,406 or over Ð
use the Tax97,400 97,450 21,257 17,044 21,651 19,419 Computation97,450 97,500 21,271 17,056 21,665 19,431 Worksheet97,500 97,550 21,285 17,069 21,679 19,444 on page 27097,550 97,600 21,299 17,081 21,693 19,456
97,600 97,650 21,313 17,094 21,707 19,469
97,650 97,700 21,327 17,106 21,721 19,481
97,700 97,750 21,341 17,119 21,735 19,494
97,750 97,800 21,355 17,131 21,749 19,506
97,800 97,850 21,369 17,144 21,763 19,519
97,850 97,900 21,383 17,156 21,777 19,531
97,900 97,950 21,397 17,169 21,791 19,544
97,950 98,000 21,411 17,181 21,805 19,556
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er)
- 269 -

CAUTION
!
Page 272 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 Tax Computation WorksheetÐLine 44
See the instructions for line 44 in the instructions for Form 1040 to see if you must use the worksheet below to figure your tax.
CAUTION
!
Note. If you are required to use this worksheet to figure the tax on an amount from another form or worksheet, such as the Qualified
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, the Schedule D Tax Worksheet, Schedule J, Form 8615, or the Foreign Earned Income Tax
Worksheet, enter the amount from that form or worksheet in column (a) of the row that applies to the amount you are looking up. Enter the
result on the appropriate line of the form or worksheet that you are completing.
Section AÐUse if your filing status is Single. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$164,550  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $ 6,021.75  $
Over $164,550 but not over
$357,700  $  ×  33% (.33)  $  $ 14,249.25  $
Over $357,700  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 21,403.25  $
Section BÐUse if your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er). Complete the row below that applies to you. 
Tax. 
(a) (b) (c) (d) Subtract (d) from (c).
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction Enter the result here and
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$131,450  $  ×  25% (.25)  $  $ 7,312.50  $
Over $131,450 but not over
$200,300  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $ 11,256.00  $
Over $200,300 but not over
$357,700  $  ×  33% (.33)  $  $ 21,271.00  $
Over $357,700  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 28,425.00  $
Section CÐUse if your filing status is Married filing separately. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$100,150  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $ 5,628.00  $
At least $100,150 but not over
$178,850  $  ×  33% (.33)  $ $ 10,635.00  $
Over $178,850  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 14,212.50  $
Section DÐUse if your filing status is Head of household. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$112,650  $  ×  25% (.25)  $  $ 4,937.50  $
Over $112,650 but not over
$182,400  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $  8,317.00  $
Over $182,400 but not over
$357,700  $  ×  33% (.33)  $  $ 17,437.00  $
Over $357,700  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 24,591.00  $
Page 270 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 273 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G87 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
Tax Table Cat. 24811v52t
2008
Tax Rate
Schedules
The Tax Rate Schedules are shown so you can see the tax rate that applies
to all levels of taxable income. Do not use them to figure your tax. Instead,
see chapter 30.
Schedule Z—If your filing status is Head of household
Schedule X—If your filing status is Single
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Schedule Y-2—If your filing status is Married filing separately
Schedule Y-1—If your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
CAUTION
$0
8,025
32,550
78,850
164,550
357,700
$8,025
32,550
78,850
164,550
357,700
$0
8,025
32,550
78,850
164,550
357,700
$0
16,050
65,100
131,450
200,300
357,700
$0
8,025
32,550
65,725
100,150
178,850
$0
11,450
43,650
112,650
182,400
357,700
$16,050
65,100
131,450
200,300
357,700
$8,025
32,550
65,725
100,150
178,850
$11,450
43,650
112,650
182,400
357,700
$0
16,050
65,100
131,450
200,300
357,700
$0
8,025
32,550
65,725
100,150
178,850
$0
11,450
43,650
112,650
182,400
357,700
10%
$802.50 + 15%
4,481.25 + 25%
16,056.25 + 28%
40,052.25 + 33%
103,791.75 + 35%
10%
$1,605.00 + 15%
8,962.50 + 25%
25,550.00 + 28%
44,828.00 + 33%
96,770.00 + 35%
10%
$802.50 + 15%
4,481.25 + 25%
12,775.00 + 28%
22,414.00 + 33%
48,385.00 + 35%
10%
$1,145.00 + 15%
5,975.00 + 25%
23,225.00 + 28%
42,755.00 + 33%
100,604.00 + 35%
Publication 17 (2008) Page 271

Page 274 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
This section explains some of your amount of your tax liability or cer- our examiner proposes any Your collection appeal rights are
most important rights as a tax- tain collection actions, you have changes to your return, he or she explained in detail in Publication
payer, including the examination, the right to ask the Appeals Office will explain the reasons for the 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
appeal, collection, and refund to review your case. You may also changes. If you do not agree with Innocent spouse relief. Gener-processes. ask a court to review your case. these changes, you can meet with ally, both you and your spouse arethe examiner's supervisor.Relief from certain penalties and each responsible for paying the full
interest. The IRS will waive pen- Repeat examinations. If we ex- amount of any tax, interest, and
alties when allowed by law if you amined your return for the same penalties due on your joint return.
can show you acted reasonably items in either of the 2 previous However, if you qualify for innocentDeclaration of Taxpayer and in good faith or relied on the years and proposed no change to spouse relief, you may be relievedRights incorrect advice of an IRS em- your tax liability, please contact us of all or part of the joint liability. To
ployee. We will waive interest that as soon as possible so we can see request relief, you must file Form
Protection of your rights. IRS is the result of certain errors or de- if we should discontinue the exami- 8857, Request for Innocent
employees will explain and protect lays caused by an IRS employee. nation. Spouse Relief, no later than 2
your rights as a taxpayer through- years after the date on which the
out your contact with us. IRS first attempted to collect the tax
from you. For example, the 2-yearExaminations (Audits) AppealsPrivacy and confidentiality. period for filing your claim may startThe IRS will not disclose to anyone We accept most taxpayers' returns If you do not agree with the exam- if the IRS applies your tax refundthe information you give us, except as filed. If we inquire about your iner's proposed changes, you can from 1 year to the taxes that youas authorized by law. You have the return or select it for examination, it appeal them to the Appeals Office and your spouse owe for anotherright to know why we are asking does not suggest that you are dis- of IRS. Most differences can be year. For more information on inno-you for information, how we will use honest. The inquiry or examination settled without expensive and cent spouse relief, see Publicationit, and what will happen if you do may or may not result in more tax. time-consuming court trials. Your 971, Innocent Spouse Relief, andnot provide requested information. We may close your case without appeal rights are explained in detail Form 8857.change or you may receive a re- in both Publication 5, Your AppealProfessional and courteous
fund. Rights and How To Prepare a Pro-service. If you believe that an
The process of selecting a re- test If You Don't Agree, and Publi-IRS employee has not treated you Potential Third Partyturn for examination usually begins cation 556, Examination ofin a professional, fair, and courte- Contactsin one of two ways. First, we use Returns, Appeal Rights, andous manner, you should tell that
computer programs to identify re- Claims for Refund.employee's supervisor. If the su- Generally, the IRS will deal directly
turns that may have incorrect If you do not wish to use thepervisor's response is not satisfac- with you or your duly authorized
amounts. These programs may be Appeals Office or disagree with itstory, you should write to the IRS representative. However, we
based on information returns, such findings, you may be able to takedirector for your area or the center sometimes talk with other persons
as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies your case to the U.S. Tax Court,where you filed your return. if we need information that you
of past examinations, or on certain U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or have been unable to provide, or toRepresentation. You may either issues identified by compliance the U.S. District Court where you verify information we have re-represent yourself or, with proper projects. Second, we use informa- live. If you take your case to court, ceived. If we do contact other per-written authorization, have some- tion from outside sources that indi- the IRS will have the burden of sons, such as a neighbor, bank,one else represent you in your cates that a return may have proving certain facts if you kept ad- employer, or employees, we willplace. Your representative must be incorrect amounts. These sources equate records to show your tax generally need to tell them limiteda person allowed to practice before may include newspapers, public liability, cooperated with the IRS, information, such as your name.the IRS, such as an attorney, certi- records, and individuals. If we de- and meet certain other conditions. The law prohibits us from disclos-fied public accountant, or enrolled termine that the information is ac- If the court agrees with you on most ing any more information than isagent. If you are in an interview and curate and reliable, we may use it issues in your case and finds that necessary to obtain or verify theask to consult such a person, then to select a return for examination. our position was largely unjustified, information we are seeking. Ourwe must stop and reschedule the Publication 556, Examination of you may be able to recover some of need to contact other persons mayinterview in most cases. Returns, Appeal Rights, and your administrative and litigation continue as long as there is activityYou can have someone accom- Claims for Refund, explains the costs. You will not be eligible to in your case. If we do contact otherpany you at an interview. You may rules and procedures that we follow recover these costs unless you persons, you have a right to re-make sound recordings of any in examinations. The following sec- tried to resolve your case adminis- quest a list of those contacted.meetings with our examination, ap- tions give an overview of how we tratively, including going throughpeal, or collection personnel, pro- conduct examinations. the appeals system, and you gavevided you tell us in writing 10 days us the information necessary to re- RefundsBy mail. We handle many exami-before the meeting. solve the case.nations and inquiries by mail. We You may file a claim for refund ifPayment of only the correct will send you a letter with either a you think you paid too much tax.amount of tax. You are respon- request for more information or a You must generally file the claimCollectionssible for paying only the correct reason why we believe a change to within 3 years from the date youamount of tax due under the lawÐ your return may be needed. You Publication 594, The IRS Collec- filed your original return or 2 yearsno more, no less. If you cannot pay can respond by mail or you can tion Process, explains your rights from the date you paid the tax,all of your tax when it is due, you request a personal interview with and responsibilities regarding pay- whichever is later. The law gener-may be able to make monthly in- an examiner. If you mail us the re- ment of federal taxes. It describes: ally provides for interest on yourstallment payments. quested information or provide an refund if it is not paid within 45 days• What to do when you oweexplanation, we may or may notHelp with unresolved tax of the date you filed your return ortaxes. It describes what to doagree with you, and we will explainproblems. The Taxpayer Advo- claim for refund. Publication 556if you get a tax bill and whatthe reasons for any changes.cate Service can help you if you has more information on refunds.to do if you think your bill isPlease do not hesitate to write to ushave tried unsuccessfully to re- If you were due a refund but youwrong. It also covers makingabout anything you do not under-solve a problem with the IRS. Your did not file a return, you generallyinstallment payments, delay-stand.local Taxpayer Advocate can offer must file within 3 years from theing collection action, and sub-you special help if you have a sig- date the return was due (includingBy interview. If we notify you mitting an offer innificant hardship as a result of a tax extensions) to get that refund.that we will conduct your examina- compromise.problem. For more information, see tion through a personal interview,Contacting your Taxpayer Advo- • IRS collection actions. It cov-or you request such an interview,cate under How To Get Tax Help. ers liens, releasing a lien, le-you have the right to ask that the vies, releasing a levy,examination take place at a rea-Appeals and judicial review. If seizures and sales, and re-sonable time and place that is con-you disagree with us about the lease of property.venient for both you and the IRS. If
■
Page 272 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 275 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How To Get Tax Help
to claim. To find the nearest VITA • Asking tax questions. Call the and IRS offices to pick upYou can get help with unresolved or TCE site, call 1-800-829-1040. IRS with your tax questions at certain forms, instructions,tax issues, order free publications As part of the TCE program, 1-800-829-1040. and publications. Some IRSand forms, ask tax questions, and AARP offers the Tax-Aide counsel- offices, libraries, groceryget information from the IRS in sev- • Solving problems. You caning program. To find the nearest stores, copy centers, city anderal ways. By selecting the method get face-to-face help solvingAARP Tax-Aide site, call county government offices,that is best for you, you will have tax problems every business1-888-227-7669 or visit AARP's credit unions, and office sup-quick and easy access to tax help. day in IRS Taxpayer Assis-website at ply stores have a collection oftance Centers. An employeeContacting your Taxpayer Advo- www.aarp.org/money/taxaide. products available to printcan explain IRS letters, re-cate. The Taxpayer Advocate For more information on these from a CD or photocopy fromquest adjustments to your ac-Service (TAS) is an independent programs, go to www.irs.gov and reproducible proofs. Also,count, or help you set up aorganization within the IRS whose enter keyword ªVITAº in the upper some IRS offices and librariespayment plan. Call your localemployees assist taxpayers who right-hand corner. have the Internal RevenueTaxpayer Assistance Centerare experiencing economic harm, Code, regulations, InternalInternet. You can access for an appointment. To findwho are seeking help in resolving Revenue Bulletins, and Cu-the IRS website at www. the number, go to tax problems that have not been mulative Bulletins availableirs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 www.irs.gov/localcontacts or
resolved through normal channels, for research purposes.days a week to: look in the phone book underor who believe that an IRS system United States Government, • Services. You can walk in toor procedure is not working as it • E-file your return. Find out Internal Revenue Service. your local Taxpayer Assis-should. about commercial tax prepa- tance Center every businessYou can contact the TAS by ration and e-file services • TTY/TDD equipment. If you day for personal, face-to-facecalling the TAS toll-free case intake available free to eligible tax- have access to TTY/TDD tax help. An employee canline at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/ payers. equipment, call explain IRS letters, requestTDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax• Check the status of your 2008 adjustments to your tax ac-are eligible for assistance. You can questions or to order formsrefund. Go to www.irs.gov count, or help you set up aalso call or write your local taxpayer and publications.and click on Where's My Re- payment plan. If you need toadvocate, whose phone number fund. Wait at least 72 hours • TeleTax topics. Call resolve a tax problem, haveand address are listed in your local after the IRS acknowledges 1-800-829-4477 to listen to questions about how the taxtelephone directory and in Publica- receipt of your e-filed return, pre-recorded messages cov- law applies to your individualtion 1546, Taxpayer Advocate or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing ering various tax topics. tax return, or you are moreServiceÐYour Voice at the IRS. a paper return. If you filed comfortable talking with• Refund information. To checkYou can file Form 911, Request for Form 8379 with your return, someone in person, visit yourthe status of your 2008 re-Taxpayer Advocate Service Assis- wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if local Taxpayer Assistancefund, call 1-800-829-1954tance (And Application for Tax- you filed electronically). Have Center where you can spreadduring business hours orpayer Assistance Order), or ask an your 2008 tax return available out your records and talk with1-800-829-4477 (automatedIRS employee to complete it on so you can provide your so- an IRS representativerefund information 24 hours ayour behalf. For more information, cial security number, your fil- face-to-face. No appointmentday, 7 days a week). Wait atgo to www.irs.gov/advocate. ing status, and the exact is necessaryÐjust walk in. Ifleast 72 hours after the IRSLow Income Taxpayer Clinics whole dollar amount of your you prefer, you can call youracknowledges receipt of your(LITCs). LITCs are independent refund. local Center and leave a mes-e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeksorganizations that provide low in- sage requesting an appoint-• Download forms, instructions, after mailing a paper return. Ifcome taxpayers with representa- ment to resolve a tax accountand publications. you filed Form 8379 with yourtion in federal tax controversies issue. A representative willreturn, wait 14 weeks (11• Order IRS products online.with the IRS for free or for a nomi- call you back within 2 busi-weeks if you filed electroni-nal charge. The clinics also provide ness days to schedule an• Research your tax questions cally). Have your 2008 tax re-tax education and outreach for tax- in-person appointment at youronline. turn available so you canpayers who speak English as a convenience. If you have anprovide your social security• Search publications online bysecond language. Publication ongoing, complex tax accountnumber, your filing status,topic or keyword.4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic problem or a special need,and the exact whole dollarList, provides information on clinics such as a disability, an ap-• View Internal Revenue Bulle- amount of your refund. Re-in your area. It is available at www. pointment can be requested.tins (IRBs) published in the funds are sent out weekly onirs.gov or your local IRS office. All other issues will be han-last few years. Fridays. If you check the sta- dled without an appointment.Free tax services. To find out tus of your refund and are not• Figure your withholding al- To find the number of yourwhat services are available, get given the date it will be is-lowances using the withhold- local office, go to www.irs.Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free sued, please wait until theing calculator online at gov/localcontacts or look inTax Services. It contains lists of next week before checkingwww.irs.gov/individuals. the phone book under Unitedfree tax information sources, in- back. States Government, Internal• Determine if Form 6251 mustcluding publications, services, and • Other refund information. To Revenue Service.be filed by using our Alterna-free tax education and assistance check the status of a priortive Minimum Tax (AMT) As-programs. It also has an index of year refund or amended re- Mail. You can send yoursistant.over 100 TeleTax topics (recorded turn refund, call order for forms, instruc-tax information) you can listen to on • Sign up to receive local and 1-800-829-1954. tions, and publications toyour telephone.
 national tax news by email. the address below. You should re-Accessible versions of IRS pub- Evaluating the quality of our ceive a response within 10 days• Get information on startinglished products are available on re- telephone services. To ensure after your request is received.and operating a small busi-quest in a variety of alternative IRS representatives give accurate,ness.formats for people with disabilities. courteous, and professional an- Internal Revenue Serviceswers, we use several methods toFree help with your return. Free 1201 N. Mitsubishi MotorwayPhone. Many services evaluate the quality of our tele-help in preparing your return is Bloomington, IL 61705-6613are available by phone. phone services. One method is foravailable nationwide from
a second IRS representative to lis-IRS-trained volunteers. The Volun- DVD for tax products.
ten in on or record random tele-teer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) You can order Publication
phone calls. Another is to ask someprogram is designed to help 1796, IRS Tax Products
• Ordering forms, instructions, callers to complete a short surveylow-income taxpayers and the Tax DVD, and obtain:
and publications. Call at the end of the call.Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) • Current-year forms, instruc-1-800-829-3676 to order cur-program is designed to assist tax- tions, and publications.Walk-in. Many productsrent-year forms, instructions,payers age 60 and older with their and services are availableand publications, and • Prior-year forms, instructions,tax returns. Many VITA sites offer on a walk-in basis.prior-year forms and instruc-
 and publications.free electronic filing and all volun-
tions. You should receiveteers will let you know about credits • Tax Map: an electronic re-your order within 10 days.and deductions you may be entitled • Products. You can walk in to search tool and finding aid.many post offices, libraries,
Publication 17 (2008) Page 273

Page 276 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Tax law frequently asked Purchase the DVD from National plan, find financing for your • A site map of the guide to
questions. Technical Information Service business, and much more. help you navigate the pages
(NTIS) at with ease.• Tax Topics from the IRS tele- • All the business tax forms, in-www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (nophone response system. structions, and publications • An interactive ªTeens in Bizºhandling fee) or call needed to successfully man- module that gives practical• Internal Revenue CodeÐTi- 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the age a business. tips for teens about startingtle 26 of the U.S. Code. DVD for $30 (plus a $6 handling their own business, creating a• Tax law changes for 2009.fee). The price is discounted to $25• Fill-in, print, and save fea- business plan, and filingfor orders placed prior to Decem-tures for most tax forms. • Tax Map: an electronic re- taxes.ber 1, 2008. search tool and finding aid.• Internal Revenue Bulletins. The information is updated dur-Small Business Re- • Web links to various govern-• Toll-free and email technical ing the year. Visit www.irs.gov andsource Guide 2009. This ment agencies, business as-support. enter keyword ªSBRGº in the upperonline guide is a must for sociations, and IRS
 right-hand corner for more informa-every small business owner or any• Two releases during the year. organizations. tion.taxpayer about to start a business.± The first release will ship • ªRate the Productº surveyÐThis year's guide includes:the beginning of January your opportunity to suggest2009. • Helpful information, such as changes for future editions.± The final release will ship how to prepare a businessthe beginning of March 2009.
■
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Cash method (See Cash method Retirement savings contribution Standard deduction for age 65 or
taxpayers) credit ...................... . 22 older ...................... . 13810% tax for early withdrawal from Change of: Adjustments .................. . 206 Age test ....................... . 27IRA or retirement plan  (See Early Depreciation, to deduct unclaimed Administrators, estate  (See Agents  (See alsowithdrawal from deferred interest amount .................. . 70 Executors and administrators) Fiduciaries) .................. . 100account, subheading: Tax on) Accounting periods ............ . 12 Income paid to ................ . 12Adopted child ........ . 26, 27, 31, 3510-year tax option .............. . 77 Calendar year .......... . 10, 12, 45 Signing return ................. . 14Earned income credit ......... . 241591/2 rule ...................... . 127 Change in, standard deduction not AGI  (See Adjusted gross incomeAdoption:60 day rule .................... . 123 allowed ................... . 138 (AGI))ATIN .................... . 13, 218701/2 rule ...................... . 120 Fiscal year ............. . 12, 41, 43 Agricultural workers  (SeeChild tax credit (See also Child tax401(k) plans: Fringe benefits ................ . 45 Farmworkers)credit) ..................... . 229Tax treatment of Accrual method taxpayers ...... . 12 Credit Employer's assistance Agriculture  (See Farming)contributions ................ . 48 Taxes paid during tax year, program ................... . 253 Aircraft:403(b) plans: deduction of ............... . 147 Credits ................. . 162, 252 Charitable gift of, deduction for fairRollovers ............ . 77, 124, 130 Accumulation distribution of trusts: Married filing separately ...... . 22 market value ............... . 163Tax on ...................... . 206457 plans  (See Section 457 deferred Taking .................... . 253 Airline club dues:compensation plans) Accuracy-related penalties ..... . 19 Employer assistance ........... . 46 Not entertainment expenses ... . 181529 plans  (See Qualified tuition Acknowledgment .............. . 165 Employer's assistance Airplanes, donations of ........ . 162programs) program ..................... . 1ACRS (Accelerated Cost Recovery Airport transportation:Exception for adopted child .... . 142System): Business-related travelRental property: Exemption for child ........... . 162 expense ................... . 175Alternative minimum tax ...... . 70 Expenses not deductible:A Alaska:Foster care prior to, no charitableActivities not for profit .......... . 89Abandonment of home ........ . 106 Standard meal allowance ...... . 177deduction ............... . 161Address:Abortion: Alaska Permanent FundNo charitable deductionChange of .................... . 17Deductibility as medical dividends .................... . 89for ...................... . 162Correcting label ............... . 16expense ................... . 143 Child's dividends ............. . 156Foreign child ................. . 253Foreign ...................... . 16Abroad, citizens traveling or working Income from ................ . 8, 65Medical and dental expenses ofLabel ........................ . 16(See also Citizens outside U.S.; Investment income not toadopted child .............. . 142No label received .............. . 16Foreign employment) .. . 7, 49, 178, include .................... . 156Taxpayer identificationP.O. box ..................... . 16179 Alaska Unemploymentnumber ................ . 13, 35Service Centers ............... . 17Absence, temporary ........ . 27, 30 Compensation Fund ......... . 147Taxpayer identification numbersAdjusted basis .............. . 94-95Academic period  (See name of Alcohol rehabilitation centers:(TINs) ..................... . 218Decreases to basis ............ . 94benefit) Deductibility of medicalAdvance earned incomeDepreciation .................. . 94 expense ................... . 143Accelerated Cost Recovery System credit .................. . 3, 8, 247Easements ................... . 95(ACRS): Alcoholic beverages:Filing requirements (TableEnergy conservation subsidies IRA prohibited transactionsRental property: 1-3) ......................... . 8exclusion ................... . 95 in ......................... . 126Alternative minimum tax ...... . 70 Age:Examples (Table 13-1) ......... . 94
Aliens ........................ . 218Accelerated death benefits ..... . 85 Gifts ......................... . 96 Children's investments (See
Dual-status (See Dual-statusHome sale (See Sale of home) Children, subheading: InvestmentAccident insurance ............. . 45
taxpayers)Improvements ................ . 94 income of child under age 18)Cafeteria plans ................ . 50 Filing required ................. . 7Increases to basis ............. . 94 Form 1040EZ, taxpayer under 65Long-term care ............ . 46, 51 Nonresident (See NonresidentLocal assessments ............ . 94 may use ..................... . 8Accidental death benefits ....... . 46 aliens)Sales of property .............. . 98 Gross income and filing requirementsAccidents, car ................ . 167 Resident (See Resident aliens)Section 179 deduction ......... . 94 (Table 1-1) .................. . 5Value determination .......... . 169 Alimony ..... . 35, 130-133, 131, 132,IRAs:Adjusted gross income (AGI)  (SeeWillful negligence or intentional act 133Contribution cutoff at agealso Deductions) ............. . 133as cause .................. . 168 Definition of .................. . 13070 ...................... . 120Business expenses, limit onAccountable plans for employee Mortgage payments:Distribution prior to agededuction ................. . 190reimbursements ........ . 186, 187 Interest deduction .......... . 15159 ...................... . 127Charitable contribution deductionAccountants: Reporting of income ........... . 89Distribution required at agelimit ....................... . 164Basis to include fees of ........ . 93 Alternative filing methods:70 ................. . 125, 127Itemized deduction limit ...... . 151,
CPA review courses .......... . 195 Electronic (See E-file)Pension distributions required at age193
Preparers of tax returns ........ . 14 701/2 ....................... . 79Medical and dental expenses and Alternative minimum tax
Accounting methods ........... . 12 Retirement plan recipients over agelimit of deduction ...... . 141, 145 (AMT) ....................... . 206
Accrual method (See Accrual method 75 ......................... . 76Modified (See Modified adjusted Accelerated depreciation and ... . 70
taxpayers) gross income (MAGI)) Roth IRAs .............. . 128, 130 Child's tax, figuring of ......... . 213
Page 274 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 277 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Anthrax incidents  (See Terrorist Automobiles  (See Cars) Beneficiaries  (See also EstateAlternative minimum tax (AMT)
attacks) beneficiaries; TrustAwards  (See Prizes and awards)(Cont.)
beneficiaries) .......... . 62, 77, 90Antiques  (See Collectibles)Exempt-interest dividends ...... . 65 Away-from-home travel  (See Travel
Bequests  (See also EstateFiling requirements (Table Appliances: and transportation expenses)
beneficiaries; Gifts;1-3) ......................... . 8 Deterioration and damage, not
Inheritance) ........... . 90, 91, 211Incentive stock option ........... . 9 casualty loss ............... . 168
Bingo .................... . 159, 162Nonrefundable credit for prior year Appraisal fees ................ . 199 Btax ........................ . 254 Birth control pills .............. . 143Donated property ............. . 162 Babysitting .................... . 44Payments ..................... . 8 Birth of child ................... . 27Not deductible as interest ..... . 155 Back pay, award for ............ . 44Refundable credit for prior year Head of household, qualifying personReal estate transactions, when Emotional distress damages undertax ........................ . 257 to file as ................ . 24, 25required by lender ........... . 94 Title VII of Civil Rights Act ofAlternative motor vehicle Social security number to beAppraisals: 1964 ....................... . 90credit ....................... . 253 obtained .................... . 35Casualty or theft losses ....... . 169 Backup withholding ..... . 39, 42, 55Amount of credit .............. . 253 Birth of dependent ............. . 31Archer MSAs ................... . 91 Dividend income .............. . 62How to take .................. . 253 Blackmail:Contributions ................. . 46 Penalties ..................... . 39Phaseout .................... . 253 Losses due to ................ . 168Filing requirements (Table Bad check penalty .............. . 15Recapture ................... . 253 Blind persons:1-3) ......................... . 8 Bad debts:Amateur sports organizations: Exemption from withholding .... . 38Medical expenses paid for decedent Bank deposit, loss due to bank'sCharitable contributions to ..... . 158 from ...................... . 142 Guide dogs, deductible as medicalinsolvency or bankruptcy .... . 168Ambulance service personnel: expense ................... . 143Not deductible as medical Reporting on Schedule D (FormLife insurance proceeds when death expense ................... . 143 Impairment-related work expenses,1040) ................... . 168in line of duty ............... . 86 deduction for ............... . 146Armed forces  (See also Reservists; Claim for refund .......... . 19, 103Amended returns  (See also Form Standard deduction for ........ . 138Veterans benefits; Veterans' Nonbusiness ................. . 1031040X) ....................... . 18 organizations) ... . 50, 158, 159, 182 Blood banks:Recovery ..................... . 86Itemized deduction, change to Combat zone: No charitable deduction for bloodReporting of ................. . 103standard deduction ......... . 140 donations to .......... . 159, 162Extension to file return ....... . 11 Short-term capital loss ........ . 103Standard deduction, change to Signing return for spouse ..... . 21 Blue books to determine fair marketBaggage:itemized deductions ........ . 140 value ....................... . 163Dependency allotments ........ . 31 Business-related travelAmerican citizens abroad  (See also Disability pay ................. . 49 Boarding houses ............... . 68expense ................... . 175Citizens outside U.S.) ........... . 6 Disability pensions ............. . 50 Boats:Balance due .................. . 206Employment (See Foreign GI Bill benefits ................ . 34 Charitable gift of, deduction for fairBankruptcy:employment) Military ...................... . 199 market value ............... . 163Canceled debt not deemed to beAmerican Indians  (See Indians) Military quarters allotments ..... . 31 Donations of ................. . 162income ..................... . 85American Samoa: Naval officers on permanent duty Body scan .................... . 143Financial institution's bankruptcyIncome from ................... . 6 aboard ship ................ . 175 causing deductible loss ..... . 168 Bona fide business purpose:
Permanent duty overseas ..... . 175Amortization: Reporting of ............... . 173 Travel expenses ............. . 177
Real estate taxes when receivingBond premiums, treatment Work-related education ....... . 193Banks:housing allowance ..... . 149, 151of ......................... . 158 Automatic investment service, Bonds:Rehabilitative programAMT  (See Alternative minimum tax determination of holding Adjusted basis for ............. . 97payments .................. . 49(AMT)) period ..................... . 103 Amortization of premium ..... . 158,Reserves .................... . 190Annuities  (See also IRAs with .................... . 119 201Retirees' pay:Rollovers) .................... . 77 Losses on deposits, when casualty As capital assets ............. . 101Taxable income ............. . 49Cost computation .............. . 74 losses ................ . 102, 168 Convertible bonds ............. . 99Withholding ................. . 36Credit for elderly or disabled Reporting of ............... . 173 Discounted:Uniforms .................... . 199persons .................... . 74 Money market accounts ........ . 64 Capital gain or loss ......... . 102Wages ....................... . 49Decedent's unrecovered investment Bar associations: Issued at discount ............. . 60in .......................... . 13 Art works: Charitable contributions to ..... . 162 Market discount bonds ........ . 102Early distributions from ......... . 78 As capital assets ............. . 101 Bar employees: Original issue discount ......... . 60Deferred annuity contracts .. . 78, Capital gains or losses from sale or Tips (See Tip income) Redemption of ................ . 9879 trade of ................... . 112 Retirement of ............. . 78, 98Bar review courses ............ . 195Estimated tax ................. . 74 Artists, performing  (See Performing Sale of ....................... . 59Bargain sales:Exclusion limit ................ . 75 artists) Savings ...................... . 56As charitable contributions .... . 164Form 1099-R ................. . 42 Assessments, local  (See Local Sold at premium, computation ofBasis of purchase ............. . 95General Rule: assessments) adjusted basis .............. . 97Barter income .................. . 84Annuity starting before November Assistance  (See Tax help) State or local government,Definition of bartering .......... . 8419, 1996 ................. . 76 Assistance, tax  (See Tax help) tax-exempt ................ . 102Form 1099-B ............. . 42, 84Nonqualified plans and qualified Tax-exempt ................... . 59Assumption of mortgage ....... . 93 Basis:plans for recipients over 75 Fees not included in basis ...... . 94 Bonuses ................ . 38, 44, 92Adjusted basis ................ . 94years .................... . 76 Athletic events: Bookkeeping  (See RecordkeepingAllocation between business andPurchased annuities ......... . 74 Charitable contributions, amount requirements)personal use ................ . 93Survivor's annuity ........... . 79 deductible ................. . 159 Bad debts ................... . 103 Books to determine fair marketGuaranteed payments ......... . 76 ATIN (Adoption taxpayer Bargain purchases ............ . 95 value ....................... . 169IRAs as ..................... . 119 identification number) ........ . 13 Bonds ........................ . 97 Borrowed funds  (See alsoJoint return ................... . 74 Cost basis .................... . 93At-risk rules: Loans) .................. . 74, 157Worksheet .................. . 75 IRAs for nondeductibleRental property ............... . 70 Used for charitable contributions,Loans from plan ............... . 74 contributions ........ . 122, 126 deduction for ............... . 164Attachment of wages ........... . 12Lump-sum distributions ........ . 76 Definition of ................... . 93 Bottled water ................. . 143Attachments to return .......... . 13Multiple plan benefits .......... . 74 Gifts ......................... . 96 Boy Scouts:Attorneys:Partly taxable payments ........ . 75 Home sales (See Sale of home) Charitable contributions to .... . 158,Bar review courses ........... . 195Purchased annuities ........... . 74 Improvements to real estate .... . 94 159Attorneys' fees ........... . 200, 202Reporting of .................. . 74 Inheritance ................... . 96 Breach of contract:Basis to include ............... . 93Retirement annuities (See also Involuntary conversion ......... . 95 Damages as income ........... . 90Social security and railroadRetirement plans) ........... . 73 Like-kind exchanges ........... . 99 employment ................. . 198retirement benefits, deductionsRollovers ..................... . 77 Other than cost ........ . 95-97, 99for ......................... . 83 Bribes .................... . 89, 201Sale of ...................... . 102 Points not to be included ....... . 94Title to property, for preparation, Brokers:Gain as ordinary income ..... . 74 Property received forfiling, etc. ................... . 93 Form 1099-B ............. . 42, 98Simplified method to calculate services .................... . 95Audits: IRAs with .................... . 119tax-free part of annuity Real estate ................... . 93
Travel expense records ....... . 185 Commissions ......... . 119, 120payment .................... . 75 Restricted property ............ . 95
Receiving dividends, reporting onSurvivor's annuity ........... . 79 Auto insurance: Stock or stock rights ........... . 65
Form 1099-MISC ............ . 63Worksheet for computation ... . 76 Medical expenses covered by, not Tax-exempt obligations:
deductible ................. . 143 Burglary:Survivor annuities ............. . 79 Bonds ...................... . 97
Losses due to ................ . 168Trade of insurance policies and Automatic extension of time to Transfers between spouses ... . 96,
annuities ................... . 99 file .......................... . 11 100 Burial expenses  (See Funerals)
Unrecovered investment ...... . 201 Form 4868 .................... . 11 Beetles: Business associates  (See also
Withholding ............ . 13, 38, 74 Automatic investment services: Entertainment expenses) ..... . 177,Damage or destruction to trees and
Annulled marriages: 179plants, when casualtyHolding period, determination
loss ....................... . 168Filing status .................. . 20 of ......................... . 103 Business travel to meet ....... . 181
Publication 17 (2008) Page 275

Page 278 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D .................. . 110 Casualties .................... . 109 Large quantities of items ...... . 163Business associates  (Cont.)
Section 1250 gains from sale of real Noncash contributions,Travel expenses of, paying Casualty insurance:
property .............. . 101, 113 recordkeepingfor ........................ . 176 Premiums not in property
State or local government bonds, requirements .............. . 165basis ....................... . 94Business expenses  (See also
tax-exempt ................ . 102 Nonqualified organizations .... . 161Reimbursements from ......... . 89Entertainment expenses) ..... . 177,
Tax rates .................... . 112 Not deductible ............... . 161179 Casualty losses ...... . 166-174, 199,
Maximum capital gain rates (Table Ordinary income property asJob search expenses .......... . 91 201
16-1) .................... . 112 donation ................... . 163Meal expenses (See Meal and Adjusted basis in property ..... . 94,
Total net gain ................ . 111 Property contributions ......... . 162lodging expenses) 95, 170, 174
Total net loss ................ . 111 Decreased in value ......... . 163Reimbursements .......... . 38, 44 Amount of loss ............... . 169
Undistributed gains ........... . 111 Increased in value .......... . 163Returning excess for business Appraisals ................... . 169
Credit for tax on ........ . 64, 255 Publication 78, list of qualifiedexpenses ............ . 38, 188 Bank deposit, loss due to bank's
organizations .............. . 158Car expenses ................. . 166Travel (See Travel and transportation insolvency or bankruptcy .... . 168
Qualified organizations ........ . 158expenses) Costs:Car pools ..................... . 182
Types of ................... . 158Work-related education ....... . 195 Cleaning up or makingCarrybacks:
Written statement from ...... . 160repairs .................. . 169Business organizations: Business tax credit
Schedule A (Form 1040) to be usedPhotographs andCharitable contributions to ..... . 162 carrybacks ................. . 19
for deductions .............. . 166appraisals ............... . 169Business property: Carryovers: Time of making contribution, how toDeductible losses ............ . 167As gift, adjusted basis for ....... . 96 Capital loss ............. . 111, 112 determine ................. . 164$100 rule .................. . 172Basis for depreciation .......... . 97 Worksheet ................. . 112 To individuals, notWhen to take (TableProperty use changed to, adjusted Charitable contributions, when deductible ............ . 159, 16125-2) .................... . 173basis for .................... . 97 deduction exceeds Token items given byDeduction limits .............. . 172Sales or exchanges ........... . 98 adjusted-gross-income recipients .................. . 160For personal property (TableLike-kind exchanges ......... . 99 limits ...................... . 165 Volunteers, deductibility of25-1) .................... . 171Business tax credits: Investment interest ........... . 156 contributions (Table 24-2) ... . 160Definition of casualty .......... . 167Claim for refund ............... . 19 Cars  (See also Standard mileage Disasters (See also Disaster Charitable deduction for livingBusiness use of home ......... . 198 rates; Travel and relief) ..................... . 170 expenses ................... . 164transportation) ... . 47, 92, 174, 183 Employer's emergency disaster Charity benefit events:Accidents resulting in casualty fund ...................... . 170 Deduction amount for charitableloss ....................... . 167C Fair market value of contributions ............... . 159Value determination ........ . 169Cafeteria plans ................. . 50 property ................... . 169 Checklists:Willful negligence or intentional actCalendar year taxpayers: Form 4684 to be filed ......... . 167 Medical and dental expenseas cause ................ . 168Accounting periods ..... . 10, 12, 45 Insurance proceeds, treatment deductions (Table 21-1) ..... . 144Actual expenses ............. . 183Filing due date ................ . 10 of ......................... . 170 Checks:Advertising displays on ........ . 182 Net operating losses .......... . 174California Nonoccupational As charitable contributions .... . 164Allowances from employers ... . 187 Nondeductible losses ......... . 168Disability Benefit Fund ...... . 147 Canceled checks as evidence ofAs capital assets ............. . 101 Proof of loss ................. . 168Campaign contributions ... . 89, 159, travel expenses ............ . 184Blue book to determine fair market Property used partly for business and162 Constructive receipt of ......... . 12value ..................... . 163 partly for personalPresidential Election Campaign Payment of tax ................ . 15Books to determine fair market purposes .................. . 172Fund ....................... . 13 Penalty if not honored .......... . 15value ..................... . 169 Reimbursement .............. . 170Campaign expenses ........... . 202 Business and personal use, Check-writing fees ............ . 202Reporting of gain or loss ...... . 173Canada: allocation between .... . 183, 185 Child and dependent careSingle casualty on multipleContributions to charitable Business-related travel credit ......................... . 8properties ................. . 171organizations in ....... . 159, 162 expenses .................. . 175 Due diligence ................ . 220Cell phone .................... . 198Resident of ............... . 26, 30 Car pools .................... . 182 Earned income ............... . 218Cemeteries:Charitable gift of, deduction for fairCancellation of Debt ............ . 84 Full-time student ............. . 218Charitable contributions to ..... . 158market value ............... . 163Exceptions to treatment as Married filing separately ........ . 22Certificate, mortgage credit .... . 254Charitable organization service, useincome ..................... . 84 Payments to relatives ......... . 219
Certificates of deposit (CDs)  (Seefor ........................ . 161Form 1099-C ................. . 42 Child born alive ................ . 27also Individual retirementDepreciation ................. . 184Candidates for public office: Child care:arrangements (IRAs)) ..... . 60, 118Donations of ................. . 162Contributions to, no charitable Babysitting ................... . 44Electric vehicles (See Electric cars) Chambers of commerce:deduction for .......... . 159, 162 Care providers ................ . 44Employer-provided ............ . 46 Charitable contributions to .... . 159,Capital assets: Credit (See Child and dependentFixed and variable rate 162Coal and iron ore .............. . 88 care credit)(FAVR) .................... . 188 Entertainment expenses forDefinition of .................. . 101 Expenses .................... . 34Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill attending meetings ......... . 180Capital expenses ............... . 32 Nursing care for healthy baby, notout ....................... . 189 Change of address ............. . 17 deductible as medicalCapital gains or losses ... . 101, 104, Hauling tools or instruments ... . 182 Change of name ............ . 13, 43 expense ................... . 143110, 113 Interest on loans, not Chaplains:Bad debts as short-term capital Child custody .................. . 28deductible ................. . 157 Life insurance proceeds when deathloss ....................... . 103 Child support .................. . 90Leased vehicles .............. . 184 in line of duty ............... . 86Carryover of ............ . 111, 112 Alimony, difference from ..... . 131,Medical transportation ... . 143, 144Worksheet ................. . 112 Charitable 132Parking (See Parking fees)Character of gain ............. . 101 contributions ........... . 158-166 Child support under pre-1985Personal property taxes on,Character of loss ............. . 101 $500 or more noncash contribution: agreement ................... . 35deduction of ............... . 150Child's distributions and dividends, Form 8283 to be used ...... . 166 Child tax credit .... . 7, 8, 26, 229-230Reporting of ................. . 186reporting of ........... . 156, 210 Bargain sales as ............. . 164 Additional credit .............. . 229Table 26-3 showing forms to beCollectibles .................. . 112 Benefit received as result of Amount of credit .............. . 229used .................... . 188Deductions .................. . 111 contribution ........... . 159, 162 Claiming, procedure for ....... . 229Sale, trade-in, or otherLimit on ................... . 111 Capital gain property as Form 8812, completed ........ . 230disposition ................. . 184Married filing separately ...... . 22 donation ................... . 163 Limits ................... . 22, 229Section 179 deductions ....... . 184Distributions .................. . 64 Limit on deduction .......... . 164Work-related education, Modified adjusted grossForm 1040 or 1040A to be Carryover of excesstransportation for ........... . 196 income .................. . 229used ................ . 8, 65, 111 deduction ................. . 165 Married filing separately ........ . 22Cash:Hobbies, sales from Deductions: Qualifying child ............... . 229Dividends paid as ............. . 62collections .................. . 91 30% limit of adjusted gross Withholding, checkingRebates ...................... . 89Holding period, determination income .................. . 164 amount .................... . 230Sales of property for ........... . 99of ......................... . 103 50% limit of adjusted gross Child, qualifying ................ . 27Cash contributions, records toHow to report ................ . 110 income .................. . 164
keep ........................ . 165 Childcare:Installment sales and ......... . 111 Examples of (Table 24-1) ... . 158
Credit ....................... . 216Cash method taxpayers ........ . 12Lump-sum distributions from Limits on ............. . 159, 164
Provider:Bad debts ................... . 103pensions and annuities ....... . 77 Year to claim deduction ..... . 164
Taxpayer identificationPoints, deduction of .......... . 153Mutual funds paying ........... . 64 Definition of .................. . 158
number ................. . 220Real estate transactions, taxNet capital gain ..... . 101, 111, 112 Fair market value of property
allocation .................. . 148 Children  (See also Adoption) ... . 46,Included as investment contributions .......... . 159, 163
Taxes paid during tax year, 162income .................. . 156 Recordkeeping
deduction of ............... . 147 Additional credit on child taxNet long-term capital loss ..... . 111 requirements ............ . 166
Worthless securities and negotiable credit ..................... . 229Sale of personal items ......... . 92 Gifts to reduce public debt ...... . 16
promissory notes ............ . 98 Adoption (See Adopted child)Sale or trade of property held more Itemized deductions, limit
than 1 year ........... . 103, 111 Cash rebates ................... . 89 on ........................ . 158 Babysitters ................... . 44
Page 276 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 279 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Withholding from IRA Common law marriage .......... . 20 Copyrights .................... . 101Children  (Cont.)
distributions ............... . 126 Infringement damages ......... . 90Birth of child: Communist organizations:
Royalties ..................... . 87Head of household, qualifying Civic associations: Charitable contributions to ..... . 162
person to file as ....... . 24, 25 Charitable contributions to ..... . 162 Corporations  (See also SCommunity property ..... . 6, 57, 96
Social security number to be corporations) ................. . 86Contributions to, no charitable Alimony, difference from ...... . 131
obtained ................. . 35 Controlled corporations ... . 99, 100deduction for ............... . 159 IRAs ........................ . 119
Care providers (See also Child Director fees as self-employmentCivil defense organizations: Married filing separately ........ . 22
care) ....................... . 44 income ..................... . 90Medical and dentalCharitable contributions to ..... . 159
Child's tax, figuring of ......... . 213 Reorganizations and nontaxableexpenses .................. . 141Civil service retirement
trade of stock ............... . 99Alternative minimum tax ..... . 213 Commuting expenses .... . 182, 202benefits ...................... . 73
Credit for (See also Child and Corrections  (See Errors)Employer-provided commuterCivil suits  (See also Damages fromdependent care credit; Child tax Cosmetic surgery:vehicle ..................... . 47lawsuits) ..................... . 90credit) ..................... . 7, 8 Not deductible as medicalCompensation  (See also Wages andCivil tax penalties  (See Penalties)Custody of .................... . 28 expense ................... . 143salaries) ...................... . 44Clergy .......................... . 7Death of child: Cosmetics:Defined for IRA purposes ...... . 119Contributions that can be spent asHead of household, qualifying Not deductible as medicalDefined for Roth IRAindividual wishes, not deductibleperson to file as ....... . 24, 25 expense ................... . 143purposes .................. . 128charitable contribution ...... . 161Deductions .................. . 213 Employee .................... . 44 Cost basis ..................... . 93Housing ...................... . 48Dividends of (See this heading: Miscellaneous compensation ... . 44 IRAs for nondeductibleReal estate taxes when receivingInvestment income of child under Nonemployee ................. . 90 contributions .......... . 122, 126housing allowance ... . 149, 151age 18) Computation of tax ............. . 13 Cost-of-living allowances ....... . 45Life insurance proceeds whenEarnings of .................... . 6 Equal amounts ................ . 13chaplain died in line of Country clubs:Filing requirements ............. . 6 Negative amounts ............. . 13duty ....................... . 86 Charitable contributions to ..... . 162As dependents (Table 1-2) .... . 6 Rounding off dollars ........... . 13Pensions ..................... . 48 Dues:Gifts to .................. . 55, 211 Computer ..................... . 198 Charitable deduction notSpecial income rules ........... . 48Inclusion of child's income on allowed ............ . 159, 160Condemnation of property .... . 109,Clerical help, deductibilityparents's return (Figure Entertainment expense deduction167of .......................... . 19931-A) ..................... . 209 not allowed .............. . 181Basis computation ............. . 95Clients  (See also EntertainmentIncome, calculation of ......... . 209 Disaster areas, government-ordered Coupon bonds ................. . 61expenses) .............. . 177, 179Capital gains distributions ... . 210 demolition of unsafe Court awards and damages  (SeeBusiness travel to meet ....... . 181Investment income of ...... . 54, 62 home ..................... . 167 Damages from lawsuits)Travel expenses of, payingInvestment income of certain Period of ownership andfor ........................ . 176 Cousin ........................ . 31children ............... . 208-214 use ....................... . 108Closing costs: Coverdell ESAs:Form 8615, use of (Figure Confidential information:Real property transactions ...... . 93 Additional tax on ............. . 20631-B) ................... . 210
Privacy Act and paperwork reductionSale of home ................ . 106 Filing requirements (TableInvestment income information .................. . 3 1-3) ......................... . 8defined .................. . 211 Clothing: Travel expenses and ......... . 184Parental information, providing CPAs  (See Accountants)Military ...................... . 199
Conservation:of ....................... . 211 Moth damage, not casualty Credit card payment of taxes:Charitable contribution to promote,Parents' election to report on Form loss ....................... . 168 Estimated tax ............. . 41, 42recordkeeping1040 .................... . 208 Uniforms: Credit cards:requirement ............... . 166Trust income ............... . 213 Charitable organization requiring, Annual fees, not deductible .... . 157Qualified contribution ......... . 164Investment income of child under deduction for cost and upkeep Benefits, taxability ofConstructive receipt ofage 18: of ....................... . 161 insurance .................. . 90income .................. . 12, 61Dependent filing requirements Used clothing, charitable deduction Charitable contributions charged
(Table 1-2) ................ . 6 Contributions  (See also Campaignfor fair market value ........ . 163 to ......................... . 164
Interest and dividends ...... . 7, 8 contributions; Charitablework ........................ . 199 Finance charges, not
Parents' election to report on Form contributions) .... . 16, 89, 158-166, deductible ................. . 157Club dues and membership fees:
1040 ................. . 7, 156 159, 162 Payment of taxes ........ . 3, 11, 15Entertainment expenses ...... . 180
Kidnapped ................ . 27, 30 Nontaxable combat pay ...... . 119, Convenience fee of serviceCoal and iron ore ............... . 88Net investment income, figuring 120 providers ................. . 15Coins  (See Collectibles)of ......................... . 211 Political ..................... . 202 Installment agreements ...... . 16Collectibles:Nontaxable income ........... . 211 Reservist repayments ......... . 119 Credit for child and dependent careAs capital assets ............. . 101Property received as gift, income Retirement (See specific type of expenses ................... . 207Gains or losses from sale or tradefrom ...................... . 211 plan) Credit for prior year minimum tax:of ......................... . 112Signing return, parent for Controlled corporations: Nonrefundable ............... . 254IRA investment in ............ . 126child ....................... . 14 Nontaxable stock purchase Refundable .................. . 257Collective bargainingStandard deduction for ... . 138, 139 of .......................... . 99 Credit for the elderly or theagreements .................. . 38Stillborn ...................... . 27 Related party transactions ..... . 100 disabled .................... . 207College professor:Support of (See Child support) Conventions: Nontaxable payments ......... . 228Research expenses .......... . 199Tax credit (See Child tax credit) Delegates: Credit reports:Colleges and universities:Tentative tax figured at parent's tax Deduction of unreimbursed Costs not included in propertyCharitable contributions to .... . 158,rate ....................... . 213 expenses ................ . 161 basis ....................... . 94159Transporting school children .... . 92 Travel expenses ........... . 179 Fees for, not deductible ....... . 15750% limit on deduction ...... . 164Chronic illness: Travel expenses ............. . 179 Credit to holders of tax creditAthletic events, amountAccelerated payment of life Work-related education, deduction of bonds ...................... . 253deductible ............... . 159insurance proceeds (See travel expenses for overseas Credits .................. . 205, 207Education costs (See also QualifiedAccelerated death benefits) conventions ............... . 196 Alternative motor vehicle credit (Seetuition programs) ............ . 92Long-term care (See Long-term care Conversion  (See specific retirement Alternative motor vehicle credit)Employer-provided educationalinsurance contracts) or IRA plan) Capital gains, undistributed, credit forassistance (See alsoChurch employees: Convertible stocks and tax on ................. . 64, 255EducationalFiling requirements (Table bonds ....................... . 99 Changing claim ............... . 18assistance) .............. . 1341-3) ......................... . 8 Cooperative housing: Child and dependent care (See ChildCombat zone:Churches, temples, etc.: Dwelling unit used as home .... . 66 and dependent care credit)Extension to file return ......... . 11Charitable contributions to .... . 158, Mortgage interest Child tax (See Child tax credit)Signing return for spouse ....... . 21159 statements ................ . 155 Clean renewable energy bonds (SeeComments on publication ....... . 450% limit on deduction ...... . 164 Real estate taxes, deduction Credit to holders of tax creditConvention delegates, deduction of Commission drivers: of ......................... . 148 bonds)unreimbursed expenses ..... . 161 Deduction of expenses ........ . 186 Taxes that are deductible (Table Earned income (See Earned income
22-1) .................... . 149Citizen or resident test ......... . 26 Commissions .................. . 38 credit)
Sale or trade of:Advance ..................... . 44Citizens outside U.S.: Education (See Education credits)
Form 1099-S to report ...... . 111IRAs with brokers ....... . 119, 120Business travel outside Empowerment zone and renewal
Period of ownership andProperty basis to include when buyerU.S. ................. . 178, 179 community employment
use ..................... . 107pays ....................... . 93Self-employed persons ...... . 178 credit ..................... . 205
Sharing of (kickbacks) ......... . 91 Cooperatives:Standard meal allowance ... . 177 Excess withholding of social security
Unearned, deduction for repayment Patronage dividends ........... . 65Earned income exclusion ........ . 3 and railroad retirement tax (See
of .......................... . 44Employment (See Foreign Co-owners: Excess withholding credit)
employment) Commodities: Dwelling unit used as home by First-time homebuyer ......... . 255
Extension of time to file ........ . 11 Derivative financial co-owner, rental income and For the disabled .............. . 225
Filing requirements ............. . 6 instruments ................ . 101 expense allocation .......... . 69 For the elderly ............... . 225
Publication 17 (2008) Page 277

Page 280 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deceased spouse .............. . 6 Deferred annuity contracts  (See Disabilities, persons with ...... . 216Credits (Cont.)
Annuities) Accrued leave payment ........ . 50Personal exemption ......... . 25Foreign tax (See Foreign tax credit)
Armed forces ................. . 49Due dates .................... . 11Gulf tax credit bonds (See Credit to Deferred compensation:
Blind (See Blind persons)holders of tax credit bonds) Filing requirements ............. . 6 Limit ......................... . 48
Health coverage tax (See Health Cafeteria plans ................ . 50Funeral expenses ............ . 161 Nonqualified plans ............. . 45
coverage tax credit) Credit for (See Elderly or disabled,Medical and dental Deferred compensation plans  (See
Hope scholarship .............. . 22 credit for)expenses .................. . 142 Retirement plans)
Lifetime learning (See Lifetime Dependent who is disabled,Savings bonds ................ . 58 Delinquent taxes:
learning credit) deduction for careSpouse's death ............... . 21 Real estate transactions, taxMortgage interest (See Mortgage expenses .................. . 144Standard deduction ........... . 138 allocation .................. . 148interest credit) Guide dogs, deductible as medicalTransfer of property at death .... . 98 Delivery services ............. . 3, 10Nonfundable credits .......... . 252 expense ................... . 143Declaration of rights of taxpayers: Business-related travelOther than those on Form 1040A, Impairment-related work expensesIRS request for information ...... . 3 expense ................... . 175Form 1040 to be used ........ . 9 of .................... . 145, 191Deduction: Demutualization of life insurancePrior year minimum tax (AMT), Work-related education ..... . 197Costs of discrimination suits .... . 90 companies .................. . 100nonrefundable ............. . 254 Income ....................... . 50Deductions  (See also Bad debts; Dental expenses  (See Medical andPrior year minimum tax (AMT), Insurance costs ............... . 50Capital losses; Entertainment dental expenses)refundable ................. . 257 Military and governmentexpenses; Personal exemption; Dentures:Recovery rebate ............. . 256 pensions ................... . 50Points; Recovery of amounts Deductibility as medicalRefundable credits ........... . 255 Public assistance benefits ...... . 89previously deducted; Standard expense ................... . 143Residential energy credits (See Reporting of disability pensiondeduction) ..... . 22, 25, 35, 86, 103, Dependent care:Residential energy credit) income ..................... . 50111, 130, 138, 153, 155, 177, 179 Benefits ................ . 216, 220Retirement savings contribution (See Retirement, pensions, andAlimony, deductible by Center ...................... . 219Retirement savings contribution profit-sharing plans .......... . 50payer ..................... . 132 Credit for .................... . 216credit) Signing of return by court-appointedBusiness expenses (See Business Dependent taxpayer test ........ . 26Cremation: representative .............. . 14expenses) Dependent's education expenses,Not deductible as medical Social security and railroadCasualty losses (See Capital losses) claiming:expense ................... . 143 retirement benefits, deductionsChanging claim after filing, need to Education credit ......... . 235, 236 for ......................... . 83Criminal prosecutions: amend ..................... . 18 Special school or home for,Travel expenses for federal Dependents  (See also Child taxCharitable contributions (See also deductibility of medicalstaff ...................... . 176 credit) .................. . 7, 8, 142Charitable expense ................... . 143Birth of ....................... . 31Cruises: contributions) .......... . 158-166 Terrorist attack as cause of injury,Born and died within year .. . 13, 35Travel expenses when incidental Dental expenses (See Medical and disability payments excluded fromDeath of ...................... . 31business activities .......... . 178 dental expenses) taxation .................... . 74Deceased dependent's medical andWork-related education, deduction of Depreciation .................. . 94 Workers' compensation ........ . 51dental expenses ........... . 142expenses .................. . 196 Educator expenses ........... . 133 Disabled dependent care expenses, Disability:Custodial fees ................ . 200 Estate ....................... . 200 deduction for ............... . 144 Income ...................... . 227Custody of child ............... . 28 Fee-basis government Exemption for .............. . 25-35 Disability benefits:Customers  (See also Entertainment officials .................... . 190 Filing requirements ............. . 6 Earned income credit ......... . 241expenses) .............. . 177, 179 Impairment-related work Earned income, unearned income, Disability insurance payments:Business travel to meet ....... . 181 expenses ............. . 145, 191 and gross income levels (Table Earned income credit ......... . 241Travel expenses of, paying Interest (See Interest payments) 1-2) ....................... . 6for ........................ . 176 Disability, permanent and totalInvestment expenses ......... . 156 Married, filing joint return ....... . 26 disability .................... . 225IRA contributions (See Individual Medical and dental expenses Disabled:retirement arrangements (IRAs)) of ......................... . 142 Child ......................... . 27Itemizing (See Itemized deductions)D Qualifying child ........... . 27, 142 Dependent ................... . 31Jury duty pay you gave to yourDaily allowance  (See Per diem) Qualifying relative ........ . 30, 142 Disaster Assistance Act of 1988:employer .................... . 8Damage to property  (See also Social security number ..... . 13, 35 Withholding ................... . 39Long-term care insuranceCasualty losses) ............. . 166 Adoption taxpayer identification Disaster loss, standard deductioncontracts .................. . 143Disasters (See also Disaster number .............. . 13, 35 increased by ................ . 139Medical expenses (See Medical andrelief) ..................... . 170 Alien dependents ............ . 35dental expenses) Disaster relief  (See also TerroristDamages ..................... . 198 Standard deduction for ........ . 139Mortgage interest (See Mortgages) attacks) .......... . 51, 74, 89, 170Damages from lawsuits ......... . 90 Travel expenses for .......... . 176 Cash gifts to victims .......... . 170Not itemizing, use of FormMedical expenses as part of Tuition deduction for .......... . 1371040A ...................... . 8 Disaster Relief and Emergencysettlement ................. . 145 Dependents not allowed to claim Assistance Act:Pass-through entities ......... . 200Dating your return .............. . 14 dependents .................. . 26 Grants ..................... . 89Penalties, no deductionDaycare centers  (See also Child and Depletion allowance ............ . 88 Unemployment assistance ... . 88permitted .................. . 157dependent care credit; Child Deposits ...................... . 219 Employer's emergency disasterPenalty on early withdrawal ofcare) .................. . 8, 44, 219 Loss on ..................... . 200 fund ...................... . 170savings ..................... . 8De minimis benefits ............ . 46 Losses on .............. . 102, 168 Government-ordered demolition orPerforming artists'Deadlines  (See Due dates) Reporting of ............... . 173 relocation of home that is unsafeexpenses .................. . 190
Death  (See Decedents) Depreciation: due to ..................... . 167Prepaid insurance
Adjustment to basis for ......... . 94Death benefits: Grants or payments ........... . 89premiums ................. . 144
Alternative minimum tax andAccelerated ................... . 85 Replacement of lost or destroyedPrescription medicines ........ . 143
accelerated depreciation ..... . 70Life insurance proceeds (See Life property ................... . 170Rental expenses .......... . 66, 69
Cars ........................ . 184insurance) Discharge of qualified principalRepayments .................. . 87 Cell phone ................... . 198Public safety officers who died or residence indebtedness .... . 105,Section 179 deductions: Change of use of property ...... . 97were killed in line of duty, tax 107Adjustment to basis for ....... . 94 Computer ................... . 198exclusion ................... . 86 Disclosure statement ........... . 20Car expenses .............. . 184 Correcting amount claimed ..... . 70Death of child .................. . 27 Discount, bonds and notes issuedSelf-employed persons: Form 4562:Death of dependent ............ . 31 at ............................ . 60Health insurance Rental propertyDebt instruments  (See Bonds or premiums ............... . 146 Discounted debt instruments  (Seedepreciation .............. . 70Notes) Social security and railroad also Original issue discountHome computer .............. . 200retirement benefits .......... . 83 (OID)) ........................ . 42Debts  (See also Bad debts) ..... . 19, Property used in trade or business,Standard deduction ....... . 138-14086 Capital gain or loss ........... . 102as noncapital assets ........ . 101Stop-smoking programs ....... . 143Canceled (See Cancellation of debt) Discounts:Real property:Nonrecourse .................. . 84 Student loan interest deduction (See Employee discounts, effect onGain from disposition ofStudent loans)Paid by another ............... . 12 basis ....................... . 95property ............. . 70, 109Payoff of debt included in sales Theft loss .................... . 201 Distributions  (See also Dividends;Land, no depreciation of ..... . 70transaction ................. . 98 Transportation expenses (See Travel Rollovers) ................ . 42, 77Rental property ........... . 67, 70Public, gifts to reduce .......... . 16 and transportation expenses) Early (See Early withdrawal fromDesignated Roth Account ... . 74, 78Recourse ..................... . 84 Tuition and fees (See Tuition) deferred interest account)Defined. ...................... . 73Refund offset against ...... . 10, 14 Union dues (See Labor unions) Liquidating distributions ........ . 64Destroyed records ............ . 185Work-related education ....... . 195Deceased taxpayers  (See Lump sum (See Lump-sumDiagnostic medical tests ....... . 141Decedents) Deeds: distributions)
Diaper service ................ . 143Preparation costs for .......... . 155 Nondividend distributions ....... . 64Decedents  (See also Executors and
Direct deposit of refunds ....... . 14administrators) ................. . 6 Qualified charitable ........... . 125Recording fees, basis to
Capital loss of ................ . 112 include ..................... . 94 Directors' fees ................. . 90 Qualified reservist ............. . 79
Page 278 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 281 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Drug or alcohol rehabilitation Easements: Election to include child's incomeDistributions  (Cont.)
centers: on parent's return ....... . 208-211Adjustment to basis for ......... . 95Required minimum distributions (See
Deductibility of medical Inclusion of child's income onalso Individual retirement Economic stimulus
expense ................... . 143 parent's return (Figurearrangements (IRAs); payment .................... . 257
31-A) ..................... . 209Pensions) ......... . 79, 124, 125 Drugs: Education:
Return of capital ............... . 64 Elective deferrals  (See alsoAs medical expenses: Savings bond program ......... . 58
Retirement plans) ............. . 73District of Columbia: Over-the-counter drugs, not Education credits  (See also Hope
deductible ............... . 143First-time homebuyer credit .... . 106 Limits ........................ . 48credit; Lifetime learning
Prescription medicines,Dividends  (See also Form Elective surgery:credit) .................. . 1, 9, 233
deductibility .............. . 1431099-DIV) ................. . 62-66 Not deductible as medicalAcademic period ............. . 234
Alaska Permanent Fund (See Alaska Dry cleaning: expense ................... . 143Comparison chart (Table
Permanent Fund dividends) Business-related travel 35-1) ...................... . 233 Electric cars:
As stock dividends and stock expense .............. . 175, 177 Dependent's education expenses, Credit ....................... . 183
rights ...................... . 64 Dual-status taxpayers ........... . 7 claiming .............. . 235, 236 Credits:
Backup withholding ............ . 62 Joint returns not available ...... . 21 Eligible educational Filing requirements (Table
Beneficiary of estate or trust institution .................. . 234Standard deduction ........... . 138 1-3) ....................... . 8
receiving ................... . 62 Expenses, qualifiedDue dates ...................... . 10 Electronic filing  (See E-file)Buying more stock with ........ . 64 education ............ . 234, 2352008 dates (Table 1-5) ......... . 10 Electronic payment options ..... . 3,Defined ...................... . 62 General requirements ......... . 233Disaster areas, postponed 15Exempt-interest dividends ...... . 65 Income limits ................ . 236deadlines .................. . 173 Credit card ............... . 15, 41Expenses related to, deduction Married filing separately ... . 22, 234Extension (See Extension of time to Electronic Federal Tax Paymentof .......................... . 66 Modified adjusted gross incomefile) System (EFTPS) ........ . 15, 41Fees to collect ............... . 200 (MAGI) .................... . 236Nonresident aliens' returns ..... . 10 Electronic funds withdrawal .... . 15,Foreign income ............... . 62 Phaseout of credit ............ . 236Due diligence: 35, 41, 42Form 1040A, use of ............ . 8 Qualified educationChild and dependent care Electronic reporting:Form 1099-DIV (See Form expenses ............. . 234, 235credit ..................... . 220 Returns (See E-file)1099-DIV) Recapture of ................... . 8Dues: Tip statement from employees toHolding period, determination Filing requirements (TableChamber of Commerce ....... . 198 employers .................. . 52of ......................... . 103 1-3) ....................... . 8Club ........................ . 202 Eligible educational institution:Insurance dividends ........... . 65 Timing of .................. . 236Union ....................... . 199 Education credits ............. . 234Money market funds ........... . 64 Refund of expenses .......... . 235Dwelling units  (See also Home; Foreign schools ......... . 134, 136Nominees receiving on behalf of Tuition deduction and ......... . 234Vacation homes) ....... . 24, 68, 69 Student loan interestanother .................... . 62 Who cannot claim ............ . 234Cooperative (See Cooperative deduction ................. . 134Nondividend distributions ....... . 64 Education expenses  (See alsohousing) Tuition and fees deduction .... . 136Ordinary dividends ............ . 63 Tuition) ...................... . 135Defined ...................... . 68Patronage dividends ........... . 65 Eligible student:Employer-provided (See EducationalRenting (See Rental income andQualified ................. . 63, 65 Hope credit .................. . 236assistance)expenses)Real estate investment trusts Lifetime learning credit ........ . 238Teacher's out-of-pocket(REITs) paying .............. . 64 Student loan interestexpenses .................. . 133Redemption treated as ......... . 98 deduction ................. . 134Tuition (See Qualified tuitionReinvestment plans ........... . 64 E Tuition and fees deduction .... . 137programs)Reporting of .................. . 65 Early withdrawal from deferred Embezzlement:Work-related education, deduction ofAs interest .................. . 62 interest account: Losses due to ................ . 168expenses .................. . 196Scrip dividends ................ . 65 Annuities ..................... . 78 Reporting embezzled funds ..... . 91Educational assistance  (See alsoSold stock .................... . 63 Form 1099-R reporting (See Form Tuition) ...................... . 135 Emergency medical serviceStockholder debts when canceled 1099-R) Employer-provided ............ . 46 personnel:as ......................... . 84 Form 5329 reporting (See Form Tuition deduction, effect Life insurance proceeds when deathVeterans' insurance ........... . 65 5329) on ...................... . 136 in line of duty ............... . 86Divorced parents ............... . 27 Higher education expenses, Scholarships (See Scholarships and Emotional distress damages .... . 90Divorced parents, special exception from penalty ...... . 119 fellowships) Employee benefits  (See also Fringerule ......................... . 244 IRAs: Tuition (See Qualified tuition benefits; specific type of benefit (e.g.,Early distributions,Divorced taxpayers  (See also programs) Health insurance, Life insurance,defined .................. . 127Alimony) ..................... . 89 Educational institution  (See Eligible etc.)) .................. . 38, 45, 46Penalties ............. . 125, 127Child and dependent care educational institution) Employee businesscredit ..................... . 218 Section 457 deferred compensation Educational organizations: expenses ............... . 174-191Child custody ................. . 28 plans ...................... . 78 As related party in Commuting expenses ......... . 182Definition of divorce instrument for Tax on ....................... . 78 transactions ............... . 100 Deductions for ............... . 174purposes of alimony ........ . 131 Earned income ................ . 245 Charitable contributions to .... . 158, Form 2106 for deducting .... . 186Estimated tax payments ........ . 43 Child and dependent care 159 Impairment-related work expenses,Filing status .............. . 20, 21 credit ..................... . 218 50% limit on deduction ...... . 164 deduction for .......... . 145, 191IRAs ................... . 120, 124 Defined: Educator expenses ............ . 198 Meals (See Meal and lodgingMedical and dental expenses of For purposes of standard Educator out-of-pocket expenses)children of ................. . 142 deduction ............... . 139 expenses ................... . 133 Reimbursements (See also PerMortgage interest, payment as Dependent filing requirements (Table diem) ..... . 38, 44, 186, 187, 188EE series bonds  (See U.S. savingsalimony ................... . 151 1-2) ......................... . 6 bonds) Returning excess ....... . 38, 188Personal exemption ........... . 25 Employee ................... . 240
Real estate taxes, allocation E-file ...................... . 3, 5, 9 Travel (See Travel and transportationSelf-employed ............... . 240of ......................... . 149 expenses)Extensions of time to file ....... . 11Earned income credit ..... . 207, 238Transfers between spouses ... . 96, Work-related education ...... . 193,On time filing ................. . 102008 changes .................. . 1100 197EIC  (See Earned income credit)Advance .................... . 3, 8Use of home after divorce ..... . 108 Employee expenses:EITC Assistant ................ . 238Filing requirements (TableDoctors' bills  (See Medical and Cell phone ................... . 198Elderly or disabled, credit for .... . 81-3) ....................... . 8dental expenses) Home computer ......... . 198, 200Married filing separately ........ . 22Amount of earned income ....... . 1Documentary evidence: Miscellaneous ............... . 198Considered unmarried ......... . 24 Elderly persons  (See alsoRecordkeeping Employees  (See also FringePensions) .................... . 73Disability benefits ............. . 241requirements .............. . 184 benefits) .................. . 45, 46Credit for (See Elderly or disabled,Disability insurance
Domestic help: Awards for service ............. . 44credit for)payments ................. . 241
Withholding ................... . 36 Business expenses (See EmployeeFiling claim .................... . 7 Exemption from withholding .... . 38
Domestic help, no exemption business expenses)Foster child .................. . 241 Home for the aged ............ . 32
for ........................... . 26 Discounts for, effect on basis ... . 95Investment income, limit on ...... . 1 Long-term care (See Long-term care
Domestic relations orders, qualified Form W-4 to be filled out whenMarried filing separately ........ . 22 insurance contracts)
(QDROs): starting new job ............. . 37Military personnel ............ . 242 Nutrition Program for the
Rollover of retirement plan Elderly ..................... . 89 Fringe benefits (See also FringeSocial security card ........... . 242
distribution ................. . 78 benefits) .................... . 38Social security number ........ . 242 Standard deduction for age 65 or
Donations  (See Charitable older ...................... . 138 Jury duty pay ................. . 91Two persons with same qualifying
contributions) child ....................... . 28 Tax Counseling for the Overseas employment (See Foreign
Elderly ..................... . 10Down payment assistance ...... . 90 employment)Earthquakes  (See also Disaster
relief) ....................... . 170 Election precinct officials:Droughts: Employees of the intelligence
Casualty loss caused by ...... . 167Losses of property due to ..... . 168 Fees, reporting of ............. . 91 community ................. . 108
Publication 17 (2008) Page 279

Page 282 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employers: Estates  (See also Estate Commuting benefits for Farmworkers:
beneficiaries) ................. . 90 employees ................. . 47 Estimated tax ................. . 40Educational assistance from (See
De minimis benefits ............ . 46Income ....................... . 90 Withholding ................... . 36Educational assistance)
Disability pensions of federalInvestment interest ........... . 156E-file options .................. . 10 Federal crime investigations or
employees and military ....... . 50Tax (See also Estate tax) ..... . 150,Form W-4, having new employees fill prosecutions:
Education Savings Bond201out ........................ . 37 Travel expenses ............. . 176
Program .................... . 91Survivor's annuity ........... . 79Overseas employment (See Foreign Federal employees:
Educational assistance fromemployment) Estimated tax ............... . 35-43 Accrued leave payment ........ . 45employer ................... . 46Vehicles provided by ........... . 46 Amount to pay to avoid Cost-of-living allowances ....... . 45Elective deferrals, limit onWithholding rules .............. . 37 penalty ..................... . 41 Disability pensions ............. . 50exclusion ................... . 48Avoiding ...................... . 39 Based on years of service .... . 50Employment: Employee awards ............. . 44Change in estimated tax ....... . 41 Exclusion, conditions for ..... . 50Agency fees ............. . 90, 198 Energy conservationCredit for .............. . 36, 42, 43 Terrorist attack .............. . 51RÂesumÂe expenses ........... . 198 subsidies ............... . 90, 92Definition ..................... . 36 FECA payments ............... . 51Taxes (See also Social security and Foreign earned income ......... . 3Divorced taxpayers ............ . 43Medicare taxes) ............. . 45 Federal Employees' CompensationFrozen deposit interest ......... . 91Electronic funds withdrawal .... . 35, Act (FECA) payments ......... . 51FICA withholding (See also Group-term life insurance ...... . 4741, 42Withholding) .............. . 12 Federal government:Holocaust victims restitution .... . 91Figuring amount of tax ......... . 40Tip income ............ . 8, 9, 52 Charitable contributions to .... . 158,Long-term care insuranceFirst period, no income subject to 159Employment taxes  (See also Social contracts ................... . 51estimated tax in ............. . 41 Employees (See Federal employees)security and Medicare Parking fees,Fiscal year taxpayers .......... . 41taxes) .............. . 216, 219, 222 Federal income tax:employer-provided .......... . 47Married taxpayers ............. . 40FICA withholding (See also Interest on, not deductible ..... . 157Public safety officers who died orName change ................. . 43Withholding) ...... . 36, 37, 39, 42 Not deductible ............... . 150were killed in line of duty, deathNot required .................. . 39 Deductibility (Table 22-1) .... . 149Empowerment zone ........... . 205 benefits .................... . 86Overpayment applied to ........ . 14 Federal judges:Endowment proceeds .......... . 85 Sale of home ................. . 92Payment vouchers ............ . 41 Employer retirement planScholarships .................. . 92Energy assistance .............. . 89 Payments ................ . 15, 41 coverage .................. . 120Strike benefits ................ . 92Energy conservation: Figuring amount of each Terrorist attack as cause of injury, Fee-basis officials:Measures and modifications .... . 90 payment ................. . 41 disability payments .......... . 74 Business expenses of ......... . 190Subsidies ..................... . 90 Schedule ................... . 41 Work-related educationExecutors and administrators .... . 6Exclusion as adjustment to When to start ............... . 41 expenses .................. . 197Related party transactions ..... . 100basis ..................... . 95 Who must make ............. . 39 Fees  (See also specific types ofExempt-interest dividends ...... . 55Utility rebates ................. . 92 Penalty for underpayment ..... . 36, deductions and income) ... . 90, 219Alternative minimum tax ........ . 65Entertainers and musicians .... . 199 41, 43, 209 Professional license .......... . 202Dividend reporting ............. . 65Entertainment expenses ...... . 177, IRS computation of, Form Information-reporting Fees, comprehensive/179 2210 ..................... . 43 requirement ................ . 65 bundled ............... . 137, 23550% limit .................... . 180 Pension payments ............. . 74 Exemption amount: Fellowships  (See Scholarships andFigure 26-A summary of Safe harbor for higher income 2008 changes .................. . 1 fellowships)rules .................... . 179 individuals .................. . 35 Exemption from foreign tax credit Fertility enhancement procedures:Allocation of costs ....... . 180, 185 Saturday, Sunday, holiday limit ........................ . 254 Deductibility as medicalBusiness-related gifts vs. ...... . 181 rule ........................ . 41 expense ................... . 143Exemptions:Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill Separate returns .............. . 43 Dependents ............... . 25-35 FICA withholding  (See also Socialout ....................... . 189 Social security or railroad retirement From withholding .............. . 37 security and Medicare taxes;Meal expenses included ....... . 180 benefits .................... . 81 Personal (See Personal exemption) Withholding) .... . 12, 35, 36, 37, 39,Proof of expenses ............ . 184 State and local income taxes, Phaseout .............. . 22, 25, 35 42, 45Table 26-2 summary ........ . 184 deduction of ............... . 147 Securities, tax-exempt (See Fiduciaries  (See also Executors andRecordkeeping Unemployment Securities) administrators; Trustees) ... . 6, 119,requirements .............. . 184 compensation ............... . 88 State or local government bonds, 120Reporting of ................. . 186 Estimates: tax-exempt ................ . 102 Fees for services .............. . 90Table 26-3 showing forms to be Travel expenses ............. . 184 Expatriates ................... . 109 Prohibited transactions ........ . 126used .................... . 188 Excess benefits tax  (See Section Related party transactions ..... . 100Expenses paid by another ...... . 90Taking turns paying for meals or 72(m)(5)) Figures  (See Tables and figures)Extension of time to file ........ . 11entertainment .............. . 180 Excess reimbursements: Automatic .................... . 11 Figuring taxes and credits  (See alsoTickets ...................... . 180 Business expense Citizens outside U.S. .......... . 11 Worksheets) .... . 80, 135, 137, 205,Face-value as deductible reimbursements ........ . 38, 188 E-file options .................. . 11 257amount ................. . 180 Medical expenses ............ . 145 Inclusion on return ............. . 11Gift vs. entertainment Filing requirements  (See alsoExcess reimbursement flowchart Extortion:deduction ............... . 181 Married filing separately) .... . 5-20,(Figure 21-A) ............ . 145 Losses due to ................ . 168 22Entertainment facilities: Excess withholding credit .... . 252, Extravagant expenses ......... . 180 Calendar year filers ............ . 10Expenses for use of .......... . 181 257 Citizens outside U.S. ........... . 6Eye surgery:Equipment  (See also Tools) .... . 182 How to take .................. . 257 Dependents ................... . 6Deductibility as medicalRental for rental property ....... . 67 Joint returns ................. . 257 Electronic (See E-file)expense ................... . 143Equitable relief  (See Innocent spouse Exchange students: Extensions ................... . 11Eyeglasses:relief) Expenses paid for, deductible when Gross income levels (TableAs medical expense .......... . 143Errors: under agreement with qualified 1-1) ......................... . 5Address label, correction of ..... . 16 organization ............... . 160 Individual taxpayers ............ . 6Depreciation, correcting amount on Exchanges  (See also Trade of Joint filing (See also JointFForm 1040X ................ . 70 property) ................. . 98, 99 returns) .................... . 21Discovery after filing, need to amend Failure to comply with tax laws  (SeeLike-kind exchanges ....... . 95, 99 Late filing penalties (See Penalties)return ...................... . 18 Penalties)Partially nontaxable Most taxpayers (Table 1-1) ...... . 5Form 1099 showing incorrect exchange .............. . 96, 99 Fair market value (FMV): Other situations requiring filingamount ..................... . 63 Taxable exchange, defined ..... . 95 Casualty loss ................ . 169 (Table 1-3) .................. . 8Form W-2c for corrected wage and Tax-free: Definition of ................... . 93 Unmarried persons (See Singletax statement ............... . 42 Sales of property .............. . 98Definition of ................. . 95 taxpayers)Refunds ...................... . 17 Stolen property ............... . 169Holding period, determination When to file ................... . 10of ....................... . 103Escrow: Fair rental price ................ . 68 Where to file ................ . 5, 17
Taxes placed in, when Excise taxes  (See also Fair rental value ................ . 32 Who must file ............. . 5, 6, 7
deductible ................. . 149 Penalties) ................... . 125 Family  (See also Child tax credit; Filing status .............. . 6, 20-25Basis to include ............... . 93Estate beneficiaries  (See also Children; Dependents; Related party Annulled marriages ............ . 20
Inheritance) .............. . 96, 103 Deductibility (Table 22-1) ...... . 149 transactions) ..... . 6, 100, 213, 229 Change to, after time of filing ... . 18
Dividends received by ......... . 62 IRAs for failure to take minimum Adoption credit (See Adoption) Divorced taxpayers ............ . 20
distributions ............... . 125IRAs (See Individual retirement Care credit (See Child and Head of household ........ . 20, 22
arrangements (IRAs)) Roth IRAs .............. . 129, 130 dependent care credit) Qualifying person to file as ... . 24
Losses of estate ............... . 90 Standard meal allowance not allowedExclusions from gross income: Joint returns .................. . 21
Receiving income from if related to employer ....... . 187Accelerated death benefits ..... . 85 Married filing a joint return ..... . 240
estate ...................... . 90 Annuities ..................... . 75 Farming: Married filing separately ... . 22, 240
Rollover restrictions ........... . 77 Canceled debt ................ . 85 Activity not for profit ........... . 89 Surviving spouse .............. . 20
Estate tax: Capital gains from home sale (See Canceled debt, treatment of .... . 85 Unmarried persons (See also Single
Deduction ................... . 150 Sale of home) Patronage dividends ........... . 65 taxpayers) ................ . 6, 20
Page 280 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 283 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Final return for decedent: Form: Unearned commission, deduction Use of ............... . 8, 21, 22
for repayment of .......... . 44843: Workers' compensation ...... . 51Capital loss deduction on ...... . 112
1040, Schedule B:Claim for refund and request for 1040A, Schedule 1:Medical expenses ............ . 142
abatement ............... . 257 Dividends .................. . 65 Dividends .................. . 65Standard deduction ........... . 138
982: 1040, Schedule C: 1040EZ ..................... . 207Finance charges: Reduction of tax attributes due to Barter income ............... . 84 Address label ............... . 16Credit cards, retail installment discharge of indebtedness (and Child care providers ......... . 44 Alaska Permanent Fundcontracts, etc., not section 1082 basis Corporate director fees ....... . 90 dividends ................. . 65deductible ................. . 157 adjustment) .............. . 107 Forgiveness of debts ........ . 84 FECA benefits .............. . 51Financial institutions  (See also 1040 .................... . 61, 207 Foster-care providers ........ . 91 No attachments ............. . 13Banks) ................. . 102, 119 Address label ............... . 16 Kickbacks .................. . 91 Personal exemption ......... . 25Financially disabled persons .... . 18 Adoption expenses ......... . 253 Notary fees ................. . 91 Presidential Election CampaignFines  (See also Penalties) ...... . 10, Alaska Permanent Fund Fund ..................... . 13Oil, gas, or mineral interest19, 20 dividends ................. . 65 royalties .................. . 87 Reporting pay ............... . 44
Deductibility ................. . 202 Alien taxpayer identification Rental income and Tip income reporting ......... . 53
Firefighters: numbers ................. . 35 expenses ............. . 73, 87 Use of ................... . 8, 21
Life insurance proceeds when death Alternative minimum tax, Statutory employees ........ . 186 Workers' compensation ...... . 51
in line of duty ............... . 86 nonrefundable credit for prior Work-related education 1040NR:
year tax ................. . 254 expenses ................ . 197 Nonresident alien return ...... . 10Volunteer firefighters:
Armed forces' retirement 1040, Schedule C-EZ: 1040NR-EZ:Charitable contributions
pay ...................... . 49 Child care providers ......... . 44 Nonresident alien easyto ....................... . 159
Attachments to .............. . 13 Corporate director fees ....... . 90 return .................... . 10IRAs ...................... . 121
Capital gains ................ . 65 Foster-care providers ........ . 91 1040-V:Fires: Charitable contributions, deduction Kickbacks .................. . 91 Payment voucher ........... . 15Arson, no casualty loss for .... . 168 to be itemized ............ . 158 Notary fees ................. . 91 1040X:Casualty loss caused by ..... . 167, Check mailed with ........... . 15 Oil, gas, or mineral interest Amended individual return .... . 18171 Child's capital gain royalties .................. . 87 Annulled marriages .......... . 20First-time homebuyer credit .. . 106, distributions ............. . 156 Rental income and Bad debts, claim for255 Clergy pension .............. . 48 expenses ............. . 73, 87 refund ................... . 103First-year expensing  (See Section Deduction for alimony Statutory employees ........ . 186 Change of filing status ....... . 22179 deductions) paid .................... . 132 Work-related education Check mailed with ........... . 15Fiscal year .............. . 12, 41, 43 Disability retirement pay ...... . 50 expenses ................ . 197 Child's return .............. . 211
Fishermen: Dividends .................. . 65 1040, Schedule D: Completing ................. . 18
Estimated tax ................. . 40 Educator expenses ......... . 133 Business property sales ...... . 99 Depreciation: Correcting amount
Excess withholding credit ... . 257Indian fishing rights ............ . 91 Capital gains or losses ..... . 110, of ........................ . 70
FECA benefits .............. . 51 111 Filing ...................... . 18Fleet operations:
First-time homebuyer Child's capital gain Itemized deduction, change toStandard mileage rate not
credit ................... . 256 distributions ............. . 156 standard deduction ....... . 140allowed ................... . 183
Foreign tax credit ........... . 254 Fractional shares, sale of ..... . 65 Standard deduction, change toFlexible spending account or Health insurance credit ...... . 256 Nonbusiness bad debts, loss of itemized deductions ...... . 140arrangement ................ . 143 Insurance distributions ....... . 65 deposits due to bank's Worthless securities, claim forFloods  (See also Disaster IRAs ................. . 126, 127 insolvency or refund .................... . 98relief) ....................... . 170 Mortgage interest credit ..... . 254 bankruptcy .............. . 168 1065:Casualty loss caused by ...... . 167 Personal exemption ......... . 25 Sale expenses ............. . 111 Partnership income .......... . 86FMV  (See Fair market value) Presidential Election Campaign Undistributed long-term capital 1096 ........................ . 111Food benefits: Fund ..................... . 13 gains ................... . 111 1098:
Nutrition program for the Railroad retirement benefits, Worthless securities ......... . 98 More than one borrower (not
elderly ..................... . 89 reporting on .............. . 81 1040, Schedule E: spouse), reporting of mortgage
Food stamps ................... . 31 Recapture of alimony ....... . 133 Income-producing property, interest deduction by attaching
Foreclosure .............. . 105, 155 Reporting of alimony deduction of interest on loan of ....................... . 157
received ................. . 133 for ...................... . 158 Mortgage insurance premiumsForeign children:
Reporting taxes on tips not Rental income and reported on .............. . 156Adoption credit ............... . 253
reported to employer ....... . 53 expenses ............. . 72, 73 Mortgage interest overpaid inForeign employment ......... . 7, 49 Reporting uncollected taxes on Royalties ................... . 87 earlier year .............. . 153Employment abroad ........... . 49 tips ...................... . 53 1040, Schedule F: Mortgage interestPension plan contributions ..... . 75 Schedule A, Mortgage interest Self-employed persons ...... . 186 statement ........ . 73, 86, 155Social security and Medicare deduction ............... . 254 Work-related education Points reported on .......... . 155taxes ...................... . 49 Social security benefits, reporting expenses ................ . 197 Prepaid interest reportedU.S. citizen ................... . 49 on ....................... . 81 1040, Schedule SE .......... . 7, 48 on ...................... . 156
Waiver of alien status .......... . 49 Social security numbers ...... . 35 1040A .................. . 61, 207 Refund of interest reported
Foreign governments, employees Student loan interest Address label ............... . 16 on ...................... . 156
of ........................... . 49 deduction ............... . 135 Adoption expenses ......... . 253 1098-C:
Foreign income: Tip income reporting ......... . 53 Alaska Permanent Fund Contributions of Motor Vehicles,
Undistributed long-term capital dividends ................. . 65 Boats, and Airplanes ...... . 162Dividends .................... . 62
gains ................... . 255 Alien taxpayer identification 1098-E ...................... . 135Earned income exclusion ........ . 3
Use of ............... . 9, 21, 22 numbers ................. . 35 1098-T ................. . 235, 238Reporting of ................... . 2
Wages and salary Armed forces' retirement 1099:Sale of foreign property ........ . 97 reporting ................. . 44 pay ...................... . 49 Taxable income report ... . 12, 44Foreign income taxes: Workers' compensation ...... . 51 Attachments to return ........ . 13 1099-A:Deduction of ................. . 147 1040, Schedule A: Capital gains ................ . 65 Acquisition or abandonment ofForm 1116 to claim credit ... . 150 Charitable contributions ..... . 16, Clergy pension .............. . 48 secured property ......... . 105
Schedule A or Form 1040 158, 166 Disability retirement pay ...... . 50 1099-B ...................... . 111
reporting ................ . 150 Employee business expense Dividend income reporting .... . 65 Barter income ............... . 84
Definition of .................. . 147 deduction ............... . 190 Dividends .................. . 65 Broker to report sales of stocks,
Foreign nationals  (See Resident Federal employees buying back Educator expenses ......... . 133 bonds, or commodities .... . 98,
aliens) sick leave ................ . 51 Excess withholding credit ... . 257 111
Gifts, deduction of .......... . 186 FECA benefits .............. . 51 1099-C:Foreign organizations:
Investment expenses Insurance distributions ....... . 65 Cancellation of debt .... . 84, 105Charitable contributions to .... . 159,
deduction ............... . 156 IRA distributions ............ . 126 1099-CAP:162
Investment interest Personal exemption ......... . 25 Change in control or capitalForeign schools .......... . 134, 136
deduction ............... . 158 Presidential Election Campaign structure ................ . 111Foreign Service ............... . 108 Itemized deduction limit ..... . 139 Fund ..................... . 13 1099-DIV:Foreign students ............... . 27 Loss of deposits due to bank's Railroad retirement benefits, Dividend incomeExpenses paid for, deductible when insolvency or bankruptcy reporting on .............. . 81 statement ......... . 48, 62, 65under agreement with qualified cause ................... . 168 Reporting pay ............... . 44 Return of capital ............ . 64organization ............... . 160 Medical and dental Social security benefits, reporting 1099-G:Foreign tax credit ............. . 253 expenses ................ . 145 on ....................... . 81 State tax refunds ............ . 86
How to take .................. . 254 Outplacement services, Social security numbers ...... . 35 1099-INT ................. . 55, 61
Limit on ..................... . 253 deduction ................ . 45 Student loan interest 1099-MISC:
Forgiveness of debt  (See Travel expenses, deduction deduction ............... . 135 Brokers receiving
Cancellation of debt) of ....................... . 188 Tip income reporting ......... . 53 dividends ................. . 63
Publication 17 (2008) Page 281

Page 284 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5329: 8901: Schedule F:Form:
Real estate or personal propertyEarly distributions of sheltered Information on Qualifying Children1099-MISC: (Cont.)
taxes on property used infunds .................... . 78 Who Are NotNonemployee
business, deduction of .... . 150Dependents ............. . 229Required minimum distributions,compensation ............. . 90
Self-employment tax, deductionfailure to take ........ . 79, 127 8910:1099-OID ..................... . 60
of ......................... . 1506251 ........................ . 206 Alternative motor vehicle1099-R ....................... . 58
credit ................... . 253Alternative minimum tax ..... . 213 Form 1040, Schedule A ........ . 151Early distributions of pension
8912:6252:funds .................... . 78 Form 1040, Schedule D:
Credit to Holders of Tax CreditInstallment sale income ..... . 109IRA distributions ....... . 126, 127 Reporting sale of home ....... . 109
Bonds ................... . 2538275:Life insurance policy surrendered Form 1040A:
9465:Disclosure statement ........ . 20for cash .................. . 85 Estimated tax payments ........ . 43
Installment agreement8275-R:Retirement plan Overpayment offset against next
request .................. . 16Regulation disclosuredistributions .............. . 13 year's tax ................... . 41
Form 8919:statement ................ . 201099-S ...................... . 111 Form 1040-ES:Uncollected social security and8283:Real estate transactions Estimated tax ............. . 40, 42Medicare tax on wages .... . 44Charitable noncash contribution ofproceeds ........... . 105, 111 Form 1040-ES(NR):Requiring Form 1040 to be usedmore than $500 value ..... . 1661116: Estimated tax for nonresidentwhen filing ................... . 98379:Foreign tax credit ........... . 254 aliens ...................... . 40RRB-1042S:Injured spouse claim ......... . 151120S: Form 1099-B:Railroad retirement benefits for8396:S corporation income ........ . 86 Barter income ................. . 42nonresident aliens ......... . 80Mortgage interest credit .... . 151,2106: Form 1099-C:RRB-1099:254Business-related Cancellation of Debt ........... . 42Railroad retirement8453:expenses ........... . 186, 189 Form 1099-DIV:benefits .................. . 80Address label ............... . 16Performing artists .......... . 190 Dividend income statement ..... . 42SS-5 ........................ . 2408453-OL:Travel expenses ........... . 188 Form 1099-G:Social security numberAddress label ............... . 16Work-related education Government payments ......... . 42request .............. . 13, 358582:expenses ................ . 197 Form 1099-INT:SSA-1042S:Passive activity gains or2106-EZ: Interest income statement ...... . 42Social security benefits forlosses ............... . 70, 111Business-related
Form 1099-MISC:nonresident aliens ......... . 808606:expenses ................ . 189
Miscellaneous income ......... . 42SSA-1099:IRA contributions,Performing artists .......... . 190
Withheld state and localSocial security benefits ....... . 80Nondeductible ...... . 119, 122,Work-related education
taxes ..................... . 147W-10 ....................... . 220126expenses ................ . 197
W-2: Form 1099-OID:IRA contributions,2119:
Original issue discount, from issuerBox 12 with code L .... . 174, 188,Recharacterization of ..... . 125Postponement of gain from sale of
or broker ................... . 421908615 ......................... . 54home ................... . 107
Election precinct officials' Form 1099-Q:Certain children with more than2439:
fees ..................... . 91 Payments from Qualified Education$1,800 of investmentNotice to shareholder on
Employer retirement plan Programs .................. . 42income .......... . 62, 210, 211undistributed long-term capital
participation indicated ..... . 120Form 1040A may be used whengains ............... . 64, 255 Form 1099-R:
Employer-reported incomefiling ...................... . 8 Retirement plan distributions .... . 422441 ........................ . 221
statement .. . 12, 13, 44, 45, 48Net investment income ...... . 211 Withheld state and local taxes shown2555 ........................ . 240
Fringe benefits .......... . 45, 46Parental information ........ . 211 on ........................ . 1472555-EZ ..................... . 240
Recordkeeping .............. . 17Sample completed form ..... . 2142848: Form 1099-S:
Reimbursements reported as part8801: Real estate transactionsPower of attorney and declaration
of income ..... . 174, 186, 188,Alternative minimum tax ..... . 254 proceeds .................. . 149of representative ...... . 14, 21
1898812:3115 ......................... . 57 Form 1116:
Statutory employees ........ . 186Additional child tax credit .... . 2303800: Foreign tax credit ............. . 150
Uncollected taxes ........... . 538814 ......................... . 54General business credit ...... . 19 Form 2210:W-2G:Additional tax, figuring of .... . 2104029 ........................ . 240 Underpayment of estimatedGambling winnings withholdingCalculation of child's4070: tax ......................... . 43statement ................ . 91income .................. . 209Reporting tips to employer .... . 52 Form 8332:W-4P:Capital gains distributions ... . 2104070A: Release of exemption toRollover distributions, election notParents' election to report child'sDaily record of tips .......... . 52 noncustodial parent .......... . 28to have tax withheld ....... . 74interest and dividends .... . 62,4137: Form 8814 .................... . 211W-4V:156Social security and Medicare taxes Form RRB-1099:Voluntary withholdingReduced deductions oron tips not reported to Railroad retirement benefits .... . 42request .................. . 88credits .................. . 209employer ................. . 53 Form SSA-1099:W-5 ......................... . 247Sample form ............... . 2114361 ........................ . 240 Social security benefits ......... . 42W-7:8815 ......................... . 584506: Form W-2:Individual taxpayer identification8818 ......................... . 59Copy of tax return request .... . 17 Employer-reported incomenumber request ........... . 358822:4506-T: statement .................. . 42W-7A:Change of address .......... . 17Tax return transcript Filing with return .............. . 42Adoption taxpayer identification8824:request .................. . 17 Separate form from eachnumber request ....... . 13, 35Like-kind exchanges ......... . 994562: employer ................... . 42W-9:8828:Depreciation of rental Withheld state and localTIN of home seller andRecapture of federal mortgageproperty .................. . 70 taxes ..................... . 147purchaser ............... . 157subsidy ................. . 1104684: Form W-2c:8839:Bank deposit, loss due to bank's Form 1040: Corrected wage and taxQualified adoptioninsolvency or Estimated tax payments ........ . 43 statement .................. . 42expenses ............ . 46, 253bankruptcy .............. . 168 Foreign income taxes, deduction Form W-2G:8853:Casualty or theft loss ...... . 167, of ......................... . 150 Gambling winnings withholdingAccelerated death benefits ... . 86173 Gambling winnings ............ . 39 statement .............. . 39, 42Archer MSAs and long-term care4797: Overpayment offset against next Withheld state and local taxes showninsurance contracts ........ . 46Sales of business property .. . 99, year's tax ................... . 41 on ........................ . 1478857:109 Reporting sale of home ....... . 109
Form W-4:Innocent spouse relief ....... . 21Small business stock Schedule A:
Employee withholding allowancelosses ................... . 102 8862 ........................ . 239 State and local income taxes,
certificate ............ . 36, 37, 394868 ..................... . 11, 35 8863 ........................ . 238 deduction of ............. . 150
Filling out form andAutomatic extension of time to 8874: State benefit funds, mandatory worksheets ................. . 37file ................... . 11, 35 New markets credit, filing contributions to .......... . 147
Form W-4P:Filing electronic form ......... . 11 requirements (Table 1-3) .... . 8 Taxes, deduction of ......... . 150
Pensions and annuities withholdingFiling paper form ............ . 11 8879: Schedule C:
certificate ................... . 394952: Authorization for E-file provider to Real estate or personal property
Form W-4S:use self-selected PIN ...... . 10Investment interest expense taxes on property used in
Sick pay withholding request .... . 38deduction ............... . 156 8880: business, deduction of .... . 150
Net capital gain, election to include Credit for Qualified Retirement Schedule E: Form W-4V ..................... . 39
as investment income ..... . 156 Savings Contributions ..... . 255 Real estate or personal property Unemployment compensation,
4972: 8885: taxes on rental property, voluntary withholding
Lump-sum distributions ...... . 77 Health insurance credit ...... . 256 deduction of ............. . 150 request ..................... . 39
Page 282 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 285 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form(s) 1099: Financial institution's bankruptcy Graduate school  (See also High-low rate method to compute
causing deductible loss ..... . 168 Educational assistance) ....... . 134 per diem .................... . 187Taxable income report ..... . 39, 42
Reporting of ............... . 173 Tuition deduction (See Tuition) Hobbies ...................... . 200Forms  (See also Tax returns) ..... . 5
Gambling (See Gambling winnings Grants  (See Scholarships and Activity not for profit ........... . 89Foster care:
and losses) fellowships) Losses ....................... . 91Adoption as motive for, no charitable Hobby losses ................. . 91 Grants, disaster relief .......... . 89 Holding period:deduction ................. . 161 Ordinary gain and loss ........ . 101 Determination of ............. . 103Gratuities  (See Tip income)Care providers' payments ...... . 91 Bank deposit, loss due to bank's Holiday gifts ................... . 46Charitable deduction for nonprofit Gross income:insolvency orcare ...................... . 161 Adjustments other than on Form Holiday, deadline falling on ..... . 41bankruptcy .............. . 168Child tax credit ............... . 229 1040A, Form 1040 to be Holocaust victims restitution ... . 91Ordinary loss ................ . 101 used ........................ . 9Difficulty-of-care payments ..... . 91 Home  (See also Casualty losses;Passive activity (See also Passive Age, higher filing threshold afterEmergency foster care, maintaining Mortgages; Refinancing; Vacationactivity) ............ . 22, 70, 111 65 .......................... . 6space in home for ........... . 91 homes) ...... . 68, 69, 151, 153, 166Related party sale or trade of Defined ....................... . 6Expenses unreimbursed and not Abandonment of ............. . 106depreciable property ........ . 100 Filing requirements (Tabledeductible as charitable Acquisition debt (See alsoShort-term .............. . 101, 111 1-1) ....................... . 5contributions ............... . 161 Mortgages) ................ . 151Priority in deducting ........ . 112 Dependent filing requirements (TableFoster care payments and Aged, home for ............... . 32Sale or trade of property held 1 1-2) ......................... . 6expenses .................... . 32 As capital asset .............. . 101year or less .............. . 103 Rental income ................ . 66 Basis (See Sale of home)Foster child ............. . 27, 30, 32 Theft (See also Theft Gross income test .............. . 31 Business use of .............. . 198Earned income credit ......... . 241 losses) ............... . 166, 168 Group-term life insurance: Closing costs ................ . 106Foster Grandparent Program ... . 50 Total net gain ................ . 111 Accidental death benefits ....... . 46 Cost of keeping up ............ . 24Found property ................ . 91 Gambling winnings and Definition ..................... . 46 Worksheet .................. . 24Fractional shares: losses .................. . 91, 201 Exclusion from income ......... . 47 Damage to (See also CasualtyForm 1040 .................... . 39Payment for .................. . 65 Limitation on ................ . 46 losses) .................... . 166Withholding ............... . 39, 42Fraternal societies: Permanent benefits ............ . 46 Foreclosure .................. . 105Gaming Industry Tip ComplianceCharitable contributions to ..... . 158 Taxable cost, calculation of ..... . 47 Improvements:Agreement Program .......... . 53Dues, no charitable Uncollected social security/Medicare For medical care,deduction ............ . 159, 162 Garbage pickup: taxes ....................... . 9 deductibility .............. . 143Deductibility (Table 22-1) ...... . 149Fraud: Reporting of (Table 1-3) ....... . 8 Loans for .................. . 153Losses due to ................ . 168 Garnishment and attachment ... . 12 Uncollected tax .............. . 206 Jointly owned:
Penalties ................. . 19, 38 Gas royalties ................... . 88 Mortgage payments asGuam:Reporting anonymously to IRS ... . 3 Gems: alimony ................. . 131Income from ................... . 6
Free tax services .............. . 273 As capital assets ............. . 101 Separate residences in andGuide dogs:
IRA prohibited transactionsFreight: alimony payments ........ . 132Deductibility as medical
in ......................... . 126Basis to include ............... . 93 Taxes and insurance premiums asexpense ................... . 143
alimony ................. . 131General business credit ....... . 205Fringe benefits:
Main home, defined .......... . 105General Rule  (See Annuities)Accident and health
Office ....................... . 198insurance .................. . 45 General sales taxes ...... . 146, 147, H Points ........................ . 94Accounting period ............. . 45 148, 149, 150 H.R. 10 plans ................... . 74 Possession before final settlement,Adoption, employer GI Bill benefits ................. . 34 Handicapped persons  (See rent not deductible asassistance .................. . 46 Gift taxes: Disabilities, persons with) interest .................... . 153Archer MSA contributions ...... . 46 Not deductible ............... . 150 Hawaii: Repossession ................ . 105De minimis benefits ............ . 46 Gifts: Standard meal allowance ...... . 177 Security system .............. . 202Education assistance .......... . 46 $25 limit on business-related Head of household ............. . 20 Settlement fees .............. . 106Employer-provided vehicles .... . 46 expenses .................. . 181 Cost of keeping up home ....... . 24 Tax home, determination forForm W-2 .................... . 45 $4 or less for business-related Worksheet .................. . 24 travel-related businessGroup-term life insurance expenses .................. . 181 Filing requirements (Table expenses .................. . 175premiums .................. . 46 Adjusted basis for ............. . 96 1-1) ........................ . 22 Tenants in common, taxes andHoliday gifts .................. . 46 Business-related expenses .... . 181 How to file .................... . 23 insurance premiums asRetirement planning services ... . 47 Children, income from property given Qualifying person .............. . 22 alimony ................... . 131Taxable income ............... . 45 to ......................... . 211 Qualifying person to file as ..... . 24 Home equity loans:Disaster victims receiving cashTransportation ................ . 47 Summary (Table 2-1) ........ . 24 Car purchased by ............ . 183gifts ....................... . 170Withholding ................... . 38 Qualifying surviving spouse with Interest deduction ............ . 151Holding period, determinationFrozen deposits: dependent child ............. . 24 Proceeds invested in tax-exemptof ......................... . 103Interest on .................... . 91 Health: securities, interest notHoliday gifts .................. . 46IRA rollover period Flexible spending deductible ................. . 153Incidental costs of business-relatedextension .................. . 123 arrangement ................ . 46 Home improvement loans ...... . 153expenses .................. . 181Full-time student: Health insurance (See also Accident Home office:Not taxed ..................... . 91Child and dependent care insurance) .................. . 45 Capital gains exclusion ........ . 109Proof of expenses (Table 26-2credit ..................... . 218 Reimbursement arrangement ... . 46 Travel to another worksummary) ................. . 184Fund-raising events: Savings account .............. . 46 location ................... . 182RecordkeepingCharitable contributions, amount Health coverage tax credit ...... . 7,requirements .............. . 184 Home schooling:deductible ................. . 159 256Reporting of expenses ........ . 186 Expenses not deductible ...... . 133Rental of dwelling unit used as Health insurance:Table 26-3 showing forms to be Homebuyer credit ............. . 255home ...................... . 69 Auto insurance policy covering, notused .................... . 188 Homeowners' associations:Funeral expenses .............. . 34 deductible as medicalSchedule A (Form 1040) for Charges ..................... . 150Funerals: expense ................... . 143deduction ................. . 186 Deductibility (Table 22-1) .... . 149Clergy, payment for ............ . 48 Premiums:To reduce the public debt ...... . 16 Charitable contributions to .... . 159,Credit for workers displaced byExpenses ................... . 201 Girl Scouts: 162foreign trade or receivingContributions to cover, not Charitable contributions to .... . 158, Homeworkers:pension from PBGC ...... . 141deductible as charitable 159 Deduction of expenses ........ . 186Deductible as medicaldonations ............... . 161 Glasses: Hope credit ................... . 236expense ................. . 143Not deductible ............. . 143 As medical expense .......... . 143 Claiming the credit ........... . 238Self-employed persons, deductibleFuture interests: Gold and silver: Comparison with lifetime learningexpenses ................ . 146Definition of .................. . 163 As capital assets ............. . 101 chart (Table 35-1) .......... . 233Reimbursement .............. . 144Tangible personal property, Capital gains or losses from sale or Eligible student ............... . 236Health insurance premiums ..... . 34charitable deduction for ..... . 163 trade of ................... . 112 Figuring the credit ............ . 236Health savings account ........ . 143IRA investments in ........... . 126 Married filing separately ... . 22, 234Health Spa .................... . 202Golden parachute payments: Modified adjusted gross incomeHearing aids:Tax on ...................... . 206G (MAGI) .................... . 236As medical expense .......... . 143Golf clubs  (See Country clubs) Tuition deduction and .... . 135, 234Gains and losses  (See also Capital
Hedging transactions .......... . 101gains; Capital gains or losses; Goodwill Industries  (See Charitable Hospitals:
Help  (See Tax help)Capital losses) ......... . 8, 22, 110 contributions) Charitable contributions to
High income taxpayers:Casualty (See also Casualty nonprofits ................. . 159Government employees:
Estimated tax ................. . 40losses) ............... . 166, 167 50% limit on deduction ...... . 164Federal (See Federal employees)
Claim for refund for loss ........ . 19 Higher education  (See Colleges andState (See State or local Meals and lodging provided for
universities)Collectibles .................. . 112 governments) patients, deductibility ....... . 143
Publication 17 (2008) Page 283

Page 286 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tips (See Tip income) Form 8606 for nondeductible Joint returns .................. . 21Hospitals: (Cont.)
contributions ............. . 119Underreported ................ . 18Payments for services for specific Insider stock compensation from
Inherited IRAs ....... . 91, 123, 124patient, not deductible as expatriated corporation:Income aid payment ........... . 199
charitable contributions ..... . 161 Required distributions ....... . 125 Tax on ...................... . 206Income from nonqualified deferred
Services fees, deductibility of Interest on, treatment of ....... . 119compensation plans: Insolvency:
medical expense ........... . 143 Married couples (See this heading:Additional tax on ............. . 206 Canceled debt not deemed to be
Spousal IRAs)Host or hostess ................ . 85 income ..................... . 85Income taxes:
Modified adjusted gross incomeHotels: Financial institution's insolvencyFederal (See Federal income tax) (MAGI):Club dues: causing deductible loss ..... . 102Foreign (See Foreign income taxes) Computation of ............. . 122Not entertainment Reporting of ............... . 173State or local (See State or local Effect on deduction if covered byexpenses ................ . 181 Installment agreements ......... . 16income taxes) employer retirement plan (TableNot considered dwelling units ... . 68 Installment sales ............... . 98Income-producing 17-1) .................... . 121Household employees ......... . 222 expenses ................... . 199 Capital gains and ............. . 111Effect on deduction if not coveredHousehold furnishings: Home sale ................... . 109Income-producing property: by employer retirement planAntiques (See Collectibles) Deduction of interest on loan Insulin:(Table 17-2) ............. . 121As capital assets ............. . 101 for ........................ . 158 Deductibility as medicalWorksheet 17-1 ............ . 122Household items, charitable expense ................... . 143Indefinite absence from job: Nondeductible contributions ... . 122deduction for ............... . 162 Work-related education Insurance:Early withdrawal ............ . 127Household members  (See also Head during ..................... . 194 Accident (See Accident insurance)Tax on earnings on ......... . 122of household) ................. . 20 Alimony deduction for, when homeIndependent contractors: Ordinary income, distributionsAlimony payments, spouses cannot owned as tenants inHomeworkers, deduction of as ........................ . 125be members of same common ................... . 131expenses .................. . 186 Penalties .................... . 126household ................. . 132 Casualty or theft loss, reimbursementIndians: Early distributions (See EarlyHousehold services ........... . 219 to adjust loss .............. . 170Employment credit, recapture of: withdrawal from deferred interestHousehold workers  (See Domestic Distributions from, reportingFiling requirements (Table account)help) of .......................... . 651-3) ....................... . 8 Excess contributions ........ . 126 Dividends:Household workers, no exemption Fishing rights ................. . 91 Form 8606 not filed for
for ........................... . 26 Interest on .................. . 65Taxes collected by tribal nondeductible
Form 1099-R to reportHousing  (See also Home; Vacation governments, deduction contributions ........ . 119, 122
benefits .................... . 42homes) ................ . 24, 68, 69 of ......................... . 147 Overstatement of nondeductible
Life (See also Group-term lifeAlimony payments made to contributions ............. . 122Individual retirement arrangements insurance; Life insurance) ... . 38,cover ..................... . 131 Prohibited transactions ...... . 126(IRAs)  (See also Rollovers; Roth 46Clergy ....................... . 48 Required distributions, failure toIRAs) ...... . 77, 118-130, 123, 127
Living expenses paid by, possibleCooperative (See Cooperative take ............... . 125, 127Administrative fees ...... . 119, 120, income from ............... . 170housing) Prohibited transactions ........ . 126200
Reimbursements:Rental property (See Rental income Recharacterization ofAge 591/2 for distribution ....... . 127
From casualty insurance ..... . 89and expenses) contribution ................ . 124Exception to rule ........... . 127 State insurer delinquencyHurricanes  (See also Disaster Reporting of:Age 701/2: proceedings preventing minimumrelief) ....................... . 170 Distributions ............... . 126Contributions cut off at ...... . 120 pension distributions ......... . 79Casualty loss due to .......... . 167 Filing requirements (TableDistributions required at .... . 125, Trade of policies and1-3) ....................... . 8127 annuities ................... . 99Recharacterization ofCompensation, defined ....... . 119 Withholding against benefits .... . 13contributions ............. . 125I Contribution limits ............ . 119 Insurance agents:Required distributions .... . 124, 125Age 50 or older, ............ . 119Icons, use of .................... . 4 Deduction of expenses ........ . 186Excess accumulations ...... . 127Under age 50, ............. . 119Identification number, qualifying Retirement savings contribution Insurance companies:Contributions ............... . 8, 22person ...................... . 218 credit ................. . 22, 255 State delinquency proceedings, IRADesignating year for whichIllegal activities: Self-employed persons ........ . 119 distributions not made duecontribution is made ...... . 120Reporting of .................. . 91 to ......................... . 127Spousal IRAs ....... . 119, 120, 122Excess .................... . 126Impairment  (See Disabilities, persons Taxability .................... . 127 Insurance premiums:Filing before contribution iswith) Distributions ............... . 125 Alimony when spouse owns lifemade ................... . 120Impairment-related work Time of taxation .............. . 119 insurance policy ............ . 131Nondeductible ............. . 122expenses ................... . 197 Transfers permitted ........... . 123 Casualty insurance ............ . 94Not required annually ....... . 120Improvements: To Roth IRAs ......... . 123, 124 Health insurance:Roth IRA contribution for sameReal estate, adjustments to basis Trustee administrative fees .... . 200 Credit for workers displaced byyear .................... . 129for ......................... . 94 Trustee-to-trustee transfers .... . 123 foreign trade or receivingTime of .................... . 120Rental property (See Rental income IRA to Roth IRA ............ . 129 pension from PBGC ...... . 141Withdrawal before filing dueand expenses) Types of ..................... . 119 Deductible as medicaldate .................... . 125Incidental expenses: Withdrawals ............ . 125, 126 expense ................. . 143Cost basis .............. . 122, 126Business-related gifts ......... . 181 Early (See Early withdrawal from Self-employed persons,Deduction for ............. . 8, 120Travel-related ................ . 177 deferred interest account) deductible ............... . 146Participant covered by employerIncome  (See also Alimony; Wages Required (See this heading: Liability ...................... . 198retirement plan (Tableand salaries) ..... . 44-52, 83-92, 89 Required distributions) Life ..................... . 34, 20217-1) .................... . 121Bartering ..................... . 84 Withholding ........... . 13, 38, 126 Life insurance ................ . 143Participant not covered byCanceled debts ............... . 84 Individual taxpayer identification Alimony ................... . 131employer retirement plan (TableConstructive receipt of ..... . 12, 61 numbers (ITINs) .......... . 13, 35 Medical ...................... . 3417-2) .................... . 121Excess reimbursement of medical Individual taxpayers  (See Single Paid in advance ............... . 56Phaseout ............... . 1, 121expenses .................. . 145 taxpayers) Public safety officers ........... . 74Definition of .................. . 119Gross ........................ . 31 Rental expenses, deduction ofInformation returns  (See also FormDistributions:Illegal activities ................ . 92 premiums paid in advance .... . 671099; Form W-2) ... . 12, 13, 39, 42,At age 591/2 ................ . 127Interest ....................... . 54 44, 45, 48 Insurance proceeds:Required minimum distributionsInvestment income ........... . 211 Partnerships to provide ........ . 86 Dividends, interest on .......... . 56(See this heading: RequiredJury duty pay ................. . 91 Inheritance  (See also Estate Installment payments .......... . 59distributions)Life insurance proceeds ........ . 85 beneficiaries) ................. . 90 Life .......................... . 59Divorced taxpayers ........... . 124Nonemployee compensation .... . 90 Adjusted basis for ............. . 96 Interest:Early distributions (See EarlyPaid to agent ................. . 12 Holding period, determination Fees to collect ............... . 200withdrawal from deferred interestPaid to third party ............. . 12 of ......................... . 103 Frozen deposits ............... . 56account)Partnership ................... . 86 IRAs (See Individual retirement Usurious ..................... . 56Employer retirement planPrepaid ...................... . 12 arrangements (IRAs))participants ......... . 2, 120, 121 Interest income ................ . 54Recovery ..................... . 86 Not taxed ..................... . 91Establishing account .......... . 119 Children:Rental (See Rental income and Inheritance tax:Time of .................... . 119 Gifts to children ............ . 211expenses) Deductibility of ............... . 150Where to set up account .... . 119 Dividends as .................. . 62Royalties ..................... . 87 Deduction ................... . 150Excess contributions .......... . 126 Form 1099-INT ............ . 12, 42S corporation ................. . 86
Injured spouse ................. . 14Figuring modified AGI (Worksheet Frozen deposits, from .......... . 91Tax exempt ................... . 31
Claim for refund ............... . 1517-1) ...................... . 122 Property purchase financed withoutTaxable income in excess of
Inmate ........................ . 218Forms to use: adequate stated interest, treatment$100,000 .................... . 9
of .......................... . 98Innocent spouse relief:Taxable income less than Form 1099-R for reporting
$100,000 .................... . 8 distributions ......... . 42, 126 Form 8857 .................... . 21 Recovery of income, on ........ . 86
Page 284 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 287 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Itinerant workers: Trips from union hall to place of Living expenses:Interest income (Cont.)
work ...................... . 182Deduction of expenses ........ . 186 Insurance paying, possible incomeReporting on Forms 1040, 1040A, or
Unemployment compensation from ...................... . 170Tax home, determination of .... . 1751040EZ ..................... . 8
payments from .............. . 88Form 1040EZ filing Loans  (See also Debts; StudentITINs  (See Individual taxpayer
threshold .................. . 8 Land  (See also Real estate) ..... . 93 loans) ............ . 8, 19, 133, 157identification numbers (ITINs))
Depreciation not allowed for .... . 70 Fees for, not deductible ....... . 157Savings bonds (See also U.S.
savings bonds) .............. . 91 Home improvement loans ..... . 153Landlords  (See Rental income and
Home mortgages (See Mortgages)Securities, Form 1040 to be expenses)J Origination fees (See Points)used ........................ . 9 Landscaping:Jewelry: Retirement plans, from ......... . 74Tax refunds, from ............. . 17 Cost of, when casualty or theft lossAs capital assets ............. . 101 Lobbying:Interest payments  (See also involved .............. . 168, 169Job  (See also headings starting with Contributions for, not charitableMortgages) ....... . 73, 86, 151-158 Larceny:``Employee'' or ``Employer'') ... . 38, deductions ........... . 159, 162Allocation of interest according to Losses due to ................ . 168174use of loan ................ . 157 Lobbying expenses ........... . 202Late filing ....................... . 3Search:Canceled debt including ........ . 84 Local assessments:Penalties ................. . 10, 19Expenses ................. . 198Car loans .................... . 183 Adjusted basis for ............. . 94Late payment:Job search:Deductions: Deductibility of ............... . 150Penalties on tax payments ..... . 19Deduction of expenses forForms to use (Table Rental property, deductionsPublic utility charges, notInterviews .................. . 9123-1) .................... . 157 for ......................... . 67deductible ................. . 157Joint accounts ................. . 55Not allowed ................ . 157 Local government employees:Laundry:Dividends, reporting of ......... . 62Reporting of ............... . 157 Section 457 plans for employeesBusiness-related travelJoint return of parents:Investment interest ........... . 156 (See Section 457 deferredexpense .............. . 175, 177Investment income of certainLimit on deduction .......... . 156 compensation plans)Lavish or extravagantchildren ................... . 208Personal interest not Local income taxes, itemizedexpenses ................... . 180Joint return test ................ . 26deductible ................. . 157 deductions ................. . 139Law enforcement officers:Joint returns:Reporting of deductions ....... . 157 Local law violated .............. . 31Life insurance proceeds when deathAccounting period ............. . 21Student loan interest Lockout benefits ............... . 92in line of duty ............... . 86After separate return ........... . 22deduction ................. . 133 Lodges  (See Social clubs)Lead-based paint removal:Carryover of capital loss ....... . 112Student loans deduction ..... . 8, 22, Deductibility as medical Lodging  (See Meal and lodgingDeceased spouse ............. . 21157 expense ................... . 143 expenses)Dependents on ................ . 30Unstated interest .......... . 93, 98 Leased property: Long-term care insuranceDivorced taxpayers ............ . 21Interference with business Casualty or theft loss ......... . 169 contracts .................... . 51Estimated tax ................. . 40operations: Chronically ill individual .... . 51, 85Excess social security/railroad Leased vehicles:Damages as income ........... . 90 Deductibility of medicalretirement tax withholding Car expenses ................ . 184Internal Revenue Service (IRS): expense ................... . 143credit ..................... . 257 Leases  (See Rental income andFraud or misconduct of employee, Exclusion, limit of .............. . 51Extension for citizens outside expenses)reporting anonymously ........ . 3 Qualified services defined ...... . 51U.S. ....................... . 11 Legal expenses .......... . 200, 202Mission of ..................... . 4 Filing status .................. . 21 Long-term debt instruments ... . 102Liability insurance:Underpayment penalties, Form 1040EZ, use of ........... . 8 Long-term gains and losses  (SeeReimbursements from ......... . 89computation by .............. . 43 Fraud penalty ................. . 20 Capital gains or losses)License fees:International employment  (See Guardian of spouse, signing Losses  (See also Gains and losses;Deductibility of ............... . 150Foreign employment) as ......................... . 21 Passive activity) ........ . 19, 22, 70Nondeductibility of ............ . 201International organizations, Injured spouse ................ . 14 Capital (See Capital gains or losses)Life insurance  (See also Acceleratedemployees of ................ . 49 Innocent spouse .............. . 21 Casualty (See also Casualtydeath benefits; Group-term lifeInternet: Nonresident or dual-status alien losses) ...... . 166, 167, 199, 201insurance) .............. . 9, 46, 85spouse ..................... . 21Electronic filing over (See E-file) Gambling (See Gambling winningsAlimony, premiums when spousePensions or annuities .......... . 74Standard meal allowance and losses)owns policy ................ . 131Worksheet .................. . 75rates ...................... . 177 Records of ................... . 169Demutualization ofPersonal exemption ........... . 25Inventory, retail ............... . 101 Theft (See also Theftcompanies ................ . 100Responsibility for ............ . 3, 21 losses) ...... . 166, 168, 199, 201Investment income: Form 1099-R for surrender of policySeparate return after joint ...... . 22Children .................. . 54, 62 Lost property ................. . 202for cash .................... . 85Signing ................... . 14, 21 When deemed casualty loss ... . 168Investment property: Premiums ................... . 202Social security and railroadRental property (See Rental income Lotteries and raffles  (See alsoNot deductible ............. . 143retirement benefits .......... . 83and expenses) Gambling winnings andProceeds ..................... . 59State and local income taxes, losses) ....................... . 91Investments: As income .................. . 85deduction of ............... . 147 No charitable deduction forPublic safety officers who died orClasses as travel expenses .... . 179 Judges, federal: tickets ................ . 159, 162were killed in line of duty, taxExpenses ................... . 156 Employer retirement plan Lump-sum distributions ........ . 76exclusion ................... . 86Fees ........................ . 200 coverage .................. . 120 10-year tax option ............. . 77Surrender of policy for cash .... . 85Property: Jury duty pay .................. . 91 Capital gain treatment ......... . 77Withholding ................... . 38As capital asset ............ . 101
Cost calculation ............... . 77Life insurance premiums ....... . 34Definition .................. . 156
Election of .................... . 77Like-kind exchanges ......... . 99 Life-care fees:
K Form 4972 .................... . 77Paid to retirement home andSeminars .................... . 202
Net unrealized appreciationKeogh plans  (See also Retirement designated for medical care,Involuntary conversion  (See also (NUA) ...................... . 77plans) .................... . 73, 74 deductibility ................ . 143Condemnation of property) .... . 167 Rollovers of ................... . 77Kickbacks ..................... . 91 Lifetime learning credit:Basis computation ............. . 95 Taxable and tax-free parts ...... . 77Kiddie tax  (See Children, subheading: Claiming the credit ........... . 238Basis for depreciation .......... . 95 Luxury travel:Investment income of) Comparison with Hope credit chartIRAs  (See Individual retirement Travel expenses when incidental(Table 35-1) ............... . 233Kidnapped children ........... . 242arrangements (IRAs)) business activities .......... . 178Eligible student ............... . 238Losses due to ransom ........ . 168Israel: Work-related education, deduction ofFiguring the credit ............ . 238Qualifying child ................ . 27Contributions to charitable expenses .................. . 196Married filing separately ... . 22, 234Qualifying relative ............. . 30organizations in ....... . 159, 162 Modified adjusted gross incomeItemized deductions: (MAGI) .................... . 236Adjusted gross income Tuition deduction and .... . 135, 234 Mlimiting ............... . 151, 193 L Like-kind exchanges ........... . 99 M&IE (Meals and incidentalChanging from standard to itemized Labels ......................... . 16 Basis for depreciation .......... . 96 expenses)  (See also Incidentaldeduction (or vice versa) .... . 140 Address correction ............ . 16 Qualifications ................. . 95 expenses; Meal and lodgingChoosing to itemize .......... . 139 Social security number to be written Sale of home ................ . 109 expenses) ..... . 175, 177, 184, 187Form 1040 to be used ....... . 9, 86 on .......................... . 2 Limit on credit. ................ . 228 Machinery  (See also Tools) .... . 182Limits on ................ . 22, 203 Labor unions: Limit on itemized deduction: Rental for rental property ....... . 67Charitable donations, deduction Collective bargaining 2008 changes .................. . 1 MACRS (Modified Accelerated Costfor ...................... . 158 agreements ................. . 38
Limits: Recovery System):Married filing separately ... . 22, 140 Contributions to, no charitable
Itemized deductions .......... . 203 Rental property:One spouse has itemized ... . 138 deduction for ............... . 159
Miscellaneous deductions ..... . 198 Alternative minimum tax ...... . 70Recovery ..................... . 86 Dues and fees ........... . 92, 162
Line of credit for home: MAGI  (See Modified adjusted grossStandard deduction to be compared Sick pay withholding under union
Interest ...................... . 151 income (MAGI))with ....................... . 139 agreements ................. . 38
Strike and lockout benefits ..... . 92State tax, for ................. . 139 Liquidating distributions ........ . 64 Mailing returns  (See Tax returns)
Publication 17 (2008) Page 285

Page 288 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Maintenance of rental property  (See Work-related education ..... . 196 Member of household or Discounted mortgage loan ...... . 84
Rental income and expenses) relationship test .............. . 30Business-related entertainment Ending early, treatment of
including ............. . 177, 180 points ..................... . 155Mandatory retirement age ...... . 227 Members of the uniformed services
Business-related travel expense Federally subsidized mortgage,or Foreign Service .......... . 108Market discount bonds ........ . 102
including ............. . 175, 177 recapture of tax paid on homeMembership fees  (See specific typeMarried dependents, filing joint
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill purchased with ............. . 254of organization)return ....................... . 26
out .................. . 189, 190 Interest:Mentally incompetent persons  (SeeMarried filing a joint return ..... . 240 Lodging ................ . 175, 177 Definition .................. . 151also Disabilities, persons with;Married filing separately ... . 22, 240 Proof of expenses ............ . 184 Form 1098 (interestElderly or disabled, credit for) ... . 8,Carryover of capital loss ....... . 112 Table 26-2 summary ........ . 184 statement) ........... . 73, 15550, 74Community property states ..... . 22 Recordkeeping Refund of .................. . 86Signing of return by court-appointedCredits, treatment of ........... . 22 requirements ......... . 177, 184 Interest credit (See Mortgage interestrepresentative .............. . 14Deductions: Reporting of ................. . 186 credit)Metals, precious  (See Gold andChanging method from or to Table 26-3 showing forms to be Interest deduction:silver)itemized deductions ...... . 140 used .................... . 188 Sale of home .............. . 151Mexico:Treatment of ................ . 22 Restaurant receipts ........... . 184 Schedule A (Form 1040) toContributions to charitableEarned income credit .......... . 22 Standard meal allowance ..... . 177, deduct .................. . 157organizations in ....... . 159, 162Gross income filing requirements 187 Late payment charges, deductionResident of ............... . 26, 30(Table 1-1) ................. . 22 Amount of ................. . 177 of ......................... . 151How to file .................... . 22 Midwestern disaster areaAreas outside continental Lender's charges forItemized deductions ...... . 22, 140 students ............... . 136, 238U.S. .................... . 177 services ................... . 155One spouse has itemized so other Midwestern disaster areas ..... . 27,Prorating on partial days of More than one borrower (notmust as well ............. . 138 34, 158, 233, 234, 238, 242travel ................... . 187 spouse), reporting of interestJoint state and local income taxes Mileage deduction for work-relatedTaking turns paying for meals or deduction ................. . 157filed, but separate federal education ................... . 193entertainment .............. . 180 Preparation costs for notes or deedsreturns .................... . 147 Mileage rates  (See Standard mileageTransportation workers ........ . 177 of trust .................... . 155Medical and dental rates)Deduction limits ............ . 180 Prepayment:expenses .................. . 141 Military  (See Armed forces)Medical and dental Allocation of deduction ...... . 151Rollovers ..................... . 22 Military personnel:expenses ............... . 141-146 Penalty for, deduction of .... . 151Social security and railroad Earned income credit ......... . 242Adjusted gross income and limit of Points ..................... . 153retirement benefits .......... . 81 Mineral royalties ............... . 88deduction ................. . 141 Reported on Form 1098 ..... . 156State and local income
Ministers  (See Clergy)Adopted child ................ . 142 Proceeds used for business ortaxes ..................... . 147
Alimony payments made to Miscellaneous deductions ..... . 197 investment, deduction of .... . 157Student loan interest deduction
cover ..................... . 131 Federal employees buying back sickand ....................... . 135 Refinancing .................. . 153
Contributions to cover, not deductible leave ...................... . 51Tenants by the entirety, allocation of Refund of interest:
as charitable donations ..... . 161 Outplacement agency fees ..... . 45real estate taxes ........... . 149 Reported on Form 1098 ..... . 156
Damages including ........... . 145 Missing children:Tuition deduction and ......... . 135 Treatment of ............... . 153
Decedent's expenses ......... . 142 Photographs of, included in IRSMarried taxpayers  (See also Joint Reverse ..................... . 153
Deduction ................... . 141 publications .................. . 3returns; Married filing separately; Seller-financed ............... . 109
Checklist for deductible expensesSpouse; Tenants by the Mistakes  (See Errors) Mosques  (See Churches, temples,(Table 21-1) ............. . 144entirety) .... . 3, 8, 21, 22, 23, 62, 74 Modified adjusted gross income etc.)Dependent's expenses ........ . 142Age 65 or older spouse: (MAGI): Motels  (See Hotels)Determination of date paid .... . 141Standard deduction ......... . 138 Child tax credit limits .......... . 229 Moth damage:Form 1040, Schedule A, forBlind spouse: Education credits ............. . 236 Not casualty losses ........... . 168reporting .................. . 145Standard deduction ......... . 138 Hope credit .................. . 236 Motor vehicles, donationsFuture expenses, settlementChild and dependent care IRAs, computation for: of .......................... . 162including .................. . 145credit ..................... . 219 Effect on deduction if covered by Moving expenses:Health insurance credit ........ . 256Deceased spouse (See also employer retirement plan (Table Standard mileage rates ......... . 1Health insurance premiums (SeeSurviving spouse) ... . 5, 6, 20, 21 17-1) ............... . 121, 122 MSAs  (See Medical savings accountsHealth insurance)Definition of spouse for purposes of Effect on deduction if not covered (MSAs))Included expenses:alimony ................... . 131 by employer retirement plan
Multiple support agreement ..... . 34Dual-status alien spouse ....... . 21 Individuals covered ......... . 141 (Table 17-2) ............. . 121
Educator expenses ........... . 133 Municipal bonds ............... . 59Meals and lodging related to Worksheet 17-1 ............ . 122
Estimated tax ................. . 40 receiving medical care ..... . 144, Museums:Lifetime learning credit ........ . 236
Filing status ............. . 5, 6, 20 177 Charitable contributions to ..... . 158Roth IRAs, computation for .... . 128
Form 1040EZ, use of ........... . 8 Medical care, defined ......... . 141 Phaseout (Table 17-3) ...... . 127 Musicians and entertainers .... . 199Gross income filing requirements Purpose of expenses ......... . 141 Worksheet 17-2 ............ . 127 Mutual funds .................. . 200(Table 1-1) ................. . 22 Reimbursements, treatment Money market certificates ...... . 55 Adjusted basis of shares ....... . 97IRAs ........................ . 120 of ..................... . 52, 144 Allocated expenses ........... . 200Money market funds ............ . 64Spouse covered by employer Work-related ................. . 220 Capital gains .................. . 64Money orders:plan ............... . 120, 122 Medical devices: Dividends from ................ . 64Payment of tax ................ . 15Living apart ................... . 21 Deductibility of ............... . 143 Exempt-interest dividends ...... . 65Penalty if not honored .......... . 15Medical and dental Medical insurance  (See Accident Nonpublicly offered ........... . 200More information  (See Tax help)expenses .................. . 141 insurance) Publicly offered .............. . 200Mortgage:Deceased spouse's Medical insurance premiums ... . 34 Undistributed capital gains .... . 111Relief ........................ . 84expenses ................ . 142 Medical research organizations: Credit for tax on ............ . 255Mortgage credit certificateNonresident alien spouse .. . 13, 21 Charitable contributions to ..... . 159 (MCC) ...................... . 254Performing artists ............ . 190
Medical savings accounts (MSAs) Roth IRAs ................... . 128 Mortgage insurance premiums:(See also Archer MSAs) .... . 46, 91Signatures when spouse unable to NBasis in property not toAdditional tax on ............. . 206sign ........................ . 14 include ..................... . 94 Name change .............. . 13, 43Medicare Advantage MSA ...... . 91Social security or railroad retirement Definition .................... . 155 Nanny tax  (See Domestic help)Medical expenses paid forbenefits, taxability ........... . 80 Form 1098 reporting .......... . 156 National Housing Act:decedent from ........... . 142Transfer of home to spouse ... . 106 Limit on deduction ............ . 155 Mortgage assistance ...... . 89, 151Medicare  (See also Social securityTransfers between spouses ... . 96, Schedule A (Form 1040) to National of the United States .... . 27and Medicare taxes) ..... . 9, 45, 49100 deduct .................... . 157 Native Americans  (See Indians)Benefits ...................... . 89Travel expenses for spouse ... . 176 Mortgage interest credit ....... . 254 Negligence penalties ........... . 19Medicare A, when deductible asMass transit passes, Carryforward ................. . 254 Net investment income ........ . 156medical expense ........... . 143employer-provided ........... . 48 Form 8396 ................... . 151 Net operating losses:Medicare Advantage MSA (SeeMaternity clothes: How to take .................. . 254 Casualty or theft losses ....... . 174Medical savings accounts (MSAs))Not deductible as medical Recapture ................... . 254 Refund of carryback ........... . 19Medicare B, when deductible asexpense ................... . 143 Reduced deduction ........... . 254
medical expense ........... . 144 New Jersey NonoccupationalMCC (Mortgage credit Mortgages  (See also Points) .. . 153,Medicare D, when deductible as Disability Benefit Fund ...... . 147certificate) .................. . 254 157medical expense ........... . 144 New Jersey UnemploymentMeal and lodging Alimony, payments as ........ . 131
Medicare tax .................. . 206 Compensation Fund ......... . 147expenses ............... . 177-180 Assistance payments ..... . 89, 151
Medicare taxes, not support .... . 34 New job, trade, or business:50% deduction for business-related Assumption of ................ . 93
Employment agency fees ...... . 198Medications:meals ................ . 177, 180 Fees not included in basis .... . 94
Job search expenses ......... . 198Figure 26-A summary of Deductibility as medical Credit certificate (MCC) from state or
rules .................... . 179 expense ................... . 143 local government ........... . 151 Travel expenses ............. . 198
Page 286 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 289 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Older taxpayers: Electronic Federal Tax Payment Cost computation .............. . 74New job, trade, or business: (Cont.)
System (EFTPS) ...... . 15, 41 Decedent's unrecovered investmentCredit for the elderly .......... . 225Work-related education
Funds withdrawal .... . 15, 35, 41 in .......................... . 13expenses .................. . 195 Online help:
Delivery services ............ . 3, 10 Definition of ............... . 78, 79New York Nonoccupational EITC Assistant ............... . 238
Estimated tax ............. . 15, 41 Disability pensions ............. . 50Disability Benefit Fund ...... . 147 Online Payment Agreement Installment agreements (See Credit for ................... . 74Nightclubs: application ................... . 16 Installment agreements) Early distributions:Cover charges, 50% limit on Options .................... . 48, 64 Late payment penalties ........ . 19 Exceptions to tax on ......... . 78deduction ................. . 180 Charitable contributions, date Payable to ``United States Qualified retirement plans,Nobel Prize .................... . 92 of ......................... . 164 Treasury`` ................... . 3 exceptions for ............. . 78Nominees .................. . 55, 60 Ordinary dividends  (See Dividends) Vouchers ..................... . 41 Tax on ..................... . 78Dividends that belong to someone Ordinary gain ................. . 101 Payments ................ . 206, 207 Elderly persons, credit for ...... . 74else .................... . 62, 65 Ordinary gain and loss  (See Gains Disaster relief ................. . 89 Elective deferral limitation ...... . 48Nonaccountable plans for employee and losses) Employer plans:Payroll deductions ....... . 150, 165reimbursements ........ . 187, 188 Organ donors: Benefits from previous employer'sWithholding (See alsoNoncapital assets ............. . 101 Deductibility of medical plan .................... . 121Withholding) ................ . 35Nonemployee compensation .... . 90 expense ................... . 143 Rollover to IRA ........ . 124, 130Payroll taxes  (See also SocialNonrefundable credits ......... . 252 Original issue discount (OID) ... . 60 Situations in which nosecurity and Medicare taxes;Nonresident alien ........ . 218, 240 Adjusted basis and ............ . 97 coverage ................ . 121Withholding) .............. . 35, 45
Discounted debtNonresident aliens .............. . 7 Estimated tax ................. . 74Peace Corps allowances ........ . 49instruments ................ . 102Due dates .................... . 10 Excess accumulation, tax on (SeePell grants:Form 1099-OID ............... . 42Estimated tax ................. . 40 also this heading: RequiredTuition deduction, effect on .... . 136Form 1040EZ, use of ........... . 8 Origination fees  (See Points) distributions) ............ . 78, 79Penalties:Individual taxpayer identification Foreign employmentOther taxes ................... . 205 Accuracy-related .............. . 19number (ITIN) ............... . 13 contributions ................ . 75Out of work ................... . 225 Alimony deduction, failure to provideSpouse ...................... . 13 Form 1099-R ................. . 42Outplacement services ......... . 45 social security number ofJoint returns not available .... . 21 General Rule for nonqualified plansDeduction of agency fees ...... . 45 recipient ................... . 133Separated .................. . 24 and qualified plans for recipientsBackup withholding ............ . 39Overpayment of tax  (See also TaxTransfers between spouses when over 75 years ............... . 76Check not honored ............ . 15refunds) ...................... . 14one spouse is nonresident Inherited pensions ............. . 91Civil penalties ................. . 19Overseas work  (See Foreignalien .................... . 100 Joint returns .................. . 74Criminal ...................... . 20employment)Standard deduction ........... . 138 Loans from plan ............... . 74Deductibility ............ . 157, 202Over-the-counter drugs:Taxpayer identification Lump-sum distributions (See alsoDefenses ..................... . 19Not deductible as medicalnumber .................... . 35 Lump-sum distributions) ...... . 76Estimated tax (See this heading:expense ................... . 143Tuition deduction and ......... . 135 Military (See Armed forces)Underpayment of estimated tax)Overtime pay .................. . 38Waiver of alien status .......... . 49 Multiple pension planFailure to include social securityOxygen equipment and oxygen: benefits .................... . 74Nontaxable payments: number ................ . 13, 20Deductibility as medical Partly taxable payments ........ . 75Credit for the elderly or the Failure to pay tax .............. . 19expense ................... . 143 Reporting of .................. . 74disabled ................... . 228 Failure to provide social security
Required distributions:Nontaxable trades  (See Tax-free number or TIN:
At age 701/2 ................. . 79exchanges) Alimony deduction .......... . 133
Excise tax for failure to takePNorthern Mariana Islands: Home seller and
minimum distributions ...... . 79Income from ................... . 6 Paper vs. electronic return  (See purchaser ............... . 157
Form 5329 for failure to receiveE-file) To dividend payers .......... . 62Notary fees .................... . 91 required minimum, ........ . 79Form 8606 not filed for nondeductiblePaperwork Reduction Act ofNot deductible as interest ..... . 155 State insurer delinquencyIRA contributions ...... . 119, 1221980 .......................... . 3Notes: proceedings preventingFraud .................... . 19, 20Parental responsibility  (SeeAs obligations of individuals ... . 102 minimum distributions ...... . 79Frivolous tax submission ....... . 20Children)Discounted ............... . 45, 60 State and local governmentInterest on .................... . 16Received for services .......... . 45 Parents who never married ..... . 28 employees (See Section 457IRAs ........................ . 126Not-for-profit activities ......... . 89 Parents, divorced or deferred compensation plans)Early distributions .......... . 127separated ............... . 27, 244Nursery schools  (See Child and Unrecovered investment in .... . 201Excess contributions ........ . 126Divorced parents ............. . 244dependent care credit) Withholding ......... . 13, 38, 74, 77Form 8606 not filed forParking fees:Nursing care: Pentagon attacks  (See TerroristnondeductibleBusiness-related travel ........ . 183Employment taxes for worker attacks)contributions ........ . 119, 122Commuting expense .......... . 182providing medical care, Overstatement of nondeductible Per capita taxes:deductibility of ............. . 143 Employer-provided fringe benefit: contributions ............. . 122 Deductibility of ............... . 150For healthy baby, not deductible as Exclusion from income ....... . 47 Required distributions, failure to Per diem:medical expense ........... . 143 Medical-related travel ......... . 144 take .................... . 125 Allowance orWages for, deductibility as medical Sports arena, business-related Late filing ................. . 10, 19 reimbursement .... . 186, 187, 188expense ................... . 143 entertainment subject to 50% Exception .................. . 19 Charitable organization service,limit ....................... . 180Nursing homes: Late payment ................. . 19 for ........................ . 161Insurance for care in (See Long-term Parks and recreation facilities: Negligence ................... . 19 Federal rate ................. . 187care insurance contracts) Charitable contributions to ..... . 159 Reportable transaction High-low rate method toMeals and lodging, deductible as Parochial school tuition: understatements ............ . 19 compute ................... . 187medical expense ........... . 144 No charitable deduction ....... . 162 Roth IRAs: Standard meal allowance ...... . 177Nutrition Program for the Conversion contributionsPartners and partnerships ..... . 200 Performing artists:Elderly ....................... . 89 withdrawn in 5-yearCapital gains or losses from ... . 111 Business expenses ........... . 190Nutritional supplements: period ................... . 130Income ....................... . 86 Work-related educationNot deductible as medical Excess contributions ........ . 129Investment interest ........... . 156 expenses .................. . 197expense ................... . 143 Substantial understatement ofRelated party transactions ..... . 100 Permanent and totalincome tax ................. . 19Passive activity ................ . 98 disability .................... . 225Tax evasion .................. . 20Losses .................. . 22, 156 Personal exemption ......... . 25-35Tips, failure to report ........... . 53O Exception for real estate Joint return ................... . 25Underpayment of estimatedprofessionals ............. . 70OASDI ......................... . 89 Limits ........................ . 22tax ............. . 36, 41, 43, 209Investment interest and ..... . 156Occupational taxes ............ . 199 Phaseout .............. . 22, 25, 35Willful failure to file ............ . 20Rental property ............. . 70Deduction of: Spouse's exemption ........... . 25Withholding ............... . 38, 39Reporting of gains or losses ... . 111Taxes that are deductible (Table Personal injury suits:Pennsylvania Unemployment22-1) .................... . 149 Pass-through entities .......... . 200 Damages from ................ . 90Compensation Fund ......... . 147Office rent, deductibility of ..... . 199 Patents: Personal interest:Pensions  (See also Annuities;Infringement damages ......... . 90Office, use of home as ......... . 198 Not deductible ............... . 157Railroad retirement benefits;Royalties ..................... . 87Offset against debts ........ . 10, 14 Personal property  (See also CasualtyRollovers) ....... . 73-79, 74, 77, 80
Patronage dividends ........... . 65 losses) ...................... . 171OID  (See Original issue discount 457 plans (See Section 457 deferred
(OID)) As capital assets ............. . 101Payment of tax .... . 3, 10, 15, 16, 18 compensation plans)
Rental income from ............ . 87By check or money order .... . 3, 15,Oil, gas, and minerals: Clergy ....................... . 48
Taxes (See Personal property taxes)41Future production sold ......... . 88 Contributions:
Theft of (See Theft losses)By credit card ........... . 3, 11, 15Royalties from ................ . 88 Retirement savings contribution
By electronic means ........... . 15Schedule C or C-EZ ......... . 87 Personal property taxes:credit ............... . 22, 255
Sale of property interest ........ . 88 Credit card ............. . 15, 41 Taxation of ................. . 48 Car taxes .................... . 183
Publication 17 (2008) Page 287

Page 290 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Private schools: Qualified student loan  (See Student Schedule A, C, E, or F (FormPersonal property taxes: (Cont.)
loan interest deduction) 1040) ................... . 150Charitable deduction forDeduction of ................. . 150
tuition ..................... . 162 Refund, treatment of .......... . 149Qualified tuition programs ...... . 92Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form
1040) ................... . 150 Prizes and awards  (See also Additional tax on ............. . 206 Real estate taxes, standard
Bonuses) .............. . 38, 44, 92Taxes (See Personal property taxes) Filing requirements (Table deduction increased by ...... . 139
Exclusion from income ......... . 44 1-3) ......................... . 8Personal representatives  (See Rebates  (See Refunds)
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similarFiduciaries) Qualifying child ................ . 27 Recapture:
prizes ...................... . 92Persons with disabilities  (See Qualifying person: Alimony ..................... . 133Scholarship prizes ............. . 92Disabilities, persons with) Child and dependent care Reporting on Form 1040 .... . 133Probationary work periods: credit ..................... . 216Photographs: Alternative motor vehicleTravel expenses during ....... . 176Casualty or theft loss claims ... . 169 Qualifying relative .............. . 30 credit ..................... . 253
Professional license fees ...... . 202Physical examination .......... . 143 Credits ........................ . 8
Professional Reputation ....... . 203Physician certification ......... . 225 Filing requirements (Table
Professionals: 1-3) ....................... . 8Physician's statement ......... . 225 REntertainment expenses for New markets credit, filingVeterans .................... . 227 Raffles ......................... . 91attending association requirements (Table 1-3) ...... . 8Place for filing ............... . 5, 17 No charitable deduction formeetings .................. . 180 Taxes ....................... . 206tickets ................ . 159, 162Plants and trees: Profit-sharing plans: Recharacterization:Railroad retirement benefits  (SeeCost of, when casualty or theft loss Form 1099-R ................. . 42 IRA contributions ............. . 124also Excess withholdinginvolved .............. . 168, 169 Lump sums (See Lump-sum credit) .......... . 74, 80-83, 92, 252 Recording fees:Plastic surgery: distributions) Deductions related to .......... . 83 Basis to include ............... . 93Not deductible as medical expense Withholding ............... . 13, 38 Employer retirement plans differentwhen cosmetic ............. . 143 Recordkeeping:Promissory notes: from ...................... . 121 Gambling .................... . 201Points ........................ . 153 Charitable contributions, date Equivalent tier 1 (social security General requirements ......... . 197Basis in property not to of ......................... . 164 equivalent benefit (SSEB)) .. . 80,include ..................... . 94 Sale of home ................ . 107Proof of business expense .... . 184 92Definition .................... . 153 Savings bonds used forTable 26-2 summary .......... . 184 Estimated tax ................. . 81Excess points ................ . 155 education .................. . 59Proof of loss .................. . 168 Form RRB-1099 ........... . 42, 80Form 1098 reporting .......... . 155 Recordkeeping requirements ... . 17Property  (See also Real Income ........................ . 8Limits on deduction ........... . 155 Business travel expenses .... . 176,estate) .................. . 93, 103 Joint returns .................. . 83Main home purchase, special 184Found ........................ . 91 Lump-sum election ............ . 81treatment of ................ . 94 Copies of returns .............. . 17Stolen ........................ . 92 Married filing separately .... . 22, 81Mortgage ending early ........ . 155 Destroyed records ............ . 185Prostheses: Repayment of benefits ......... . 81Paid by seller ................ . 155 Documentary evidence ........ . 184Deductibility of medical Reporting of .................. . 81Refinancing .................. . 153 Electronic records of tips ....... . 52expense ................... . 143 Taxability of .............. . 80, 81Schedule A (Form 1040) to Form W-2 .................... . 17Protective clothing ............ . 199 Withholding ................... . 39deduct .................... . 157 Gambling ..................... . 91Psychiatric care: Not tax deductible .......... . 150Second home ................ . 153 Incomplete records ........... . 184Specially equipped medical centers, Withholding for ................ . 81Settlement statement shows as Meal expenses:deductibility of expense ..... . 143 Railroad retirement tax (RRTA)  (Seecharged for mortgage ....... . 153 Actual cost ................ . 177Public assistance benefits ...... . 88 also Excess withholdingPolitical campaign Standard meal allowance ... . 177Public debt: credit) ....................... . 252expenses ................... . 202 Period of retention ........ . 17, 185Gifts to reduce ................ . 16 Railroad Unemployment InsurancePolitical contributions  (See Tip income ................... . 52Public parks and recreation Act .......................... . 51Campaign contributions) Travel expenses ........ . 176, 184facilities: Real estate  (See also Mortgages;Political conventions: Work-related educationCharitable contributions to ..... . 159 Vacation homes) ...... . 68, 69, 151Travel expenses ............. . 179 expenses .................. . 197Public safety officers insurance As noncapital assets .......... . 101Post office employees: Records of loss ............... . 169premiums .................... . 74 Basis ........................ . 93Rural mail carriers ............ . 183 Records to keep ............... . 165Canceled business debt, treatmentPublic transportation passes,Postponed tax deadlines: Recovery of amounts previouslyof .......................... . 85employer-provided ........... . 48Disaster areas ............... . 173 deducted .................... . 86Casualty loss ................ . 172Public utilities  (See Utilities)Postponement of gain: Itemized deductions ........... . 86Closing costs ................. . 93Publication 1244:Sale of home ................ . 107 Mortgage interest refund ....... . 86Definition of ................... . 93Daily record of tips (FormAdjusted basis .............. . 95 Over multiple years ............ . 86Division of real estate taxes ... . 1484070A) ..................... . 52Power of attorney .......... . 14, 21 Stolen property, adjustment of theftFair market value (FMV) ....... . 93Reporting tips to employer ...... . 52
Preferred stock: loss ....................... . 169Form 1099-S to report salePublication 584:Redeemable at a premium ..... . 65 Tax refunds ................... . 86proceeds ............. . 111, 149Casualty and theft losses, workbook
Pregnancy test kit ............. . 143 Holding period, determination Recovery rebate credit ........ . 256for ........................ . 167
of ......................... . 103Premature distributions  (See Early Red Cross:Publication 78 ................. . 159
Itemized charges for services notwithdrawal from deferred interest Blood donations notList of qualified organizations for
deductible ................. . 150account) deductible ............ . 159, 162charitable contributions ..... . 158
Points ....................... . 153Prepaid: Charitable contributions to .... . 158,Publications  (See Tax help)
Progressive deterioration, notInsurance .................... . 56 159Puerto Rico: casualty loss ............... . 168Preparer's fee: Redeemable ground rents:Residents of ................... . 6 Real estate-related items notDeductible amount ........... . 199 Deduction as mortgagePulitzer Prize ................... . 92 deductible ................. . 149 interest .................... . 151Preparers of tax returns ........ . 14 Punitive damages: Rental (See Rental income and Redemption of bonds .......... . 98Prepayment: As income .................... . 90 expenses) State and local bonds, beforeInsurance premiums: Settlement fees ............... . 93 maturity ................... . 102Deductibility as medical Transfer taxes ............... . 150expense ................. . 144 Redemption of stock ........... . 98Q Real estate investment trustsMortgage interest (See Mortgages) Refinancing:Qualified dividends ......... . 63, 65 (REITs):Rent paid in advance .......... . 66 Fees for, not part of propertyQualified domestic relations orders Dividends from ................ . 64Prescription medicines: basis ....................... . 94(QDROs): Undistributed capital gains .... . 111Deductibility as medical Points ....................... . 153Rollover of retirement plan Credit for tax on ........ . 64, 255expense ................... . 143 Refund of expenses  (See name ofdistribution ................. . 78 Real estate taxes:Presidential Election Campaign benefit)Qualified education expenses: Alimony deduction for, when homeFund ........................ . 13 Refundable credits ............ . 255Education credits ........ . 234, 235 owned as tenants inPresidentially declared disasters Refunds ...................... . 206Work-related education, business common ................... . 131(See Disaster relief) Mortgage interest, treatmentdeduction ............. . 195-196 Assessments (See LocalPrevention of cruelty to children or of ......................... . 153Qualified Education Programs, assessments)animals organizations: State tax ..................... . 86Payments from: Basis of property and .......... . 93Charitable contributions ....... . 158 Taxes (See Tax refunds)Form 1099-Q ................. . 42 When not reimbursed by propertyPrice reduced after purchase ... . 85 Tuition refunds ............... . 136Qualified individuals: seller .................... . 94
Principal residence  (See Home) Regulated investment companies:Under age 65 and retired on Cooperative housing (See
Prisoner ...................... . 218 permanent and total Undistributed capital gains, credit forCooperative housing)
disability ................... . 225Privacy Act and paperwork tax on ..................... . 255deduction of ................. . 148
reduction information ......... . 3 Qualified plans  (See also Retirement List of deductible taxes (Table Rehabilitative program
plans; Rollovers) ...... . 73, 77, 123 22-1) .................... . 149Private delivery services ...... . 3, 10 payments .................... . 49
Page 288 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 291 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reimbursement  (See also Per diem; Shared equity financing Social security number State and local government
Recovery of amounts previously agreement ................ . 69 (SSN) ...................... . 13 employees (See Section 457
deducted) ...... . 86, 186, 187, 188, deferred compensation plans)Spouse treated as ............. . 24Equipment rental for rental
190 Withholding ......... . 13, 38, 74, 77property .................... . 67 Residential energy credits ..... . 254
Accountable plans, definition Expenses paid by tenant ....... . 66 Retirement savings contributionResorts:
of ......................... . 186 Fair rental price ............... . 68 credit ....................... . 255Travel expenses when incidental
Allocation of ................. . 190 Home possession before final Adjusted gross income limit ..... . 22business activities .......... . 178
Casualty losses .............. . 170 settlement, rent not deductible as Returns, tax  (See Tax returns)Restaurant employees:
Employee business interest .................... . 153 Revenue stamps:Tips (See Tip income)
expenses ........... . 38, 44, 180 Improvements ................ . 67 Basis to include ............... . 93Retail installment contracts:Gain from casualty or theft Defined .................... . 67 Reverse Mortgages ............ . 153Finance charges, notloss ....................... . 170 Increase due to higher real estate deductible ................. . 157 Revolving charge accounts:Health insurance, reimbursement in taxes ..................... . 150 Retail inventory ............... . 101 Finance charges, notlater year .................. . 145 Deductibility (Table 22-1) .... . 149 deductible ................. . 157Retention of records  (SeeMedical and dental Insurance premiums paid in Recordkeeping requirements) Rewards ....................... . 92expenses .................. . 144 advance .................... . 67 Retired Senior Volunteer Rhode Island Temporary DisabilityExcess reimbursement flowchart Local assessments ............ . 67 Program ..................... . 50 Benefit Fund ................ . 147(Figure 21-A) ............ . 145 Losses from rental real estate Retirees  (See also Retirement Robbery:Mileage (See Standard mileage activities ................ . 22, 70 plans) ........................ . 73 Losses due to ................ . 168rates) Not-rented-for-profit property ... . 67 Armed forces: Rollovers ................. . 77, 123Personal expenses ........... . 186 Part interest .............. . 66, 67 Taxable income ............. . 49 Beneficiaries, restrictions ....... . 77Received after deducting Part of property rented ......... . 68 Withholding ................. . 36 Definition of .................. . 123loss ....................... . 170 Personal property rental ........ . 87 Retirement of bonds ....... . 98, 102 Designated Roth account ....... . 78Returning excess for business Personal use of property including Rollover of amount Direct rollovers ................ . 77expenses .............. . 38, 188 vacation home .............. . 68 redeemed .................. . 78 Eligible distributions ........... . 77Tax year of inclusion for insurance Allocation of expenses ....... . 67 Excess due to incorrect rolloverRetirement planning services ... . 47reimbursement ............. . 170 Pre-rental expenses ........... . 66 information ................ . 127Theft losses ................. . 170 Retirement plans  (See also Annuities;Property or services received instead From 403 plan to IRA ......... . 123Travel advances ............. . 188 Railroad retirement benefits;of money ................... . 66 From employer's plan toRollovers; Roth IRAs) ...... . 22, 73,Types of ..................... . 170 Purchaser's payment of rent, not IRA .................. . 123, 12474, 77, 80Unclaimed ................... . 196 included in property basis .... . 94 From IRA to IRA ............. . 123457 plans (See Section 457 deferredWork-related education Repairs ...................... . 67 From IRA to Roth IRA ......... . 129compensation plans)expenses .................. . 196 Reporting of .................. . 72 From Roth IRA to Roth IRA .... . 130Clergy ....................... . 48Reinvestment plans: Sale of rental property ......... . 67 From section 457 plan toContributions ................. . 48Dividends used for ............ . 64 Schedule E for reporting of ..... . 72 IRA ....................... . 123Credit for (See Retirement savingsRelated party transactions ..... . 100 Security deposits .............. . 66 From SIMPLE IRA to Rothcontribution credit)Indirect transactions .......... . 100 Self-employment tax, when IRA ....................... . 130Taxation of ................. . 48Like-kind exchanges ...... . 99, 100 applicable .................. . 73 Gain from publicly tradedCost computation .............. . 74Multiple property sales or Tax return preparation ......... . 67 securities .................. . 104Decedent's unrecovered investmenttrades ..................... . 100 Tax shelters and at-risk rules ... . 70 Inherited IRAs ............... . 124in .......................... . 13Relationship test ........... . 27, 30 Time to report ................. . 66 Lump-sum distributions ........ . 77Definition of ............... . 78, 79Relative, qualifying ............. . 30 Travel expenses associated with Married filing separately ........ . 22Disability pensions ............. . 50management andRelief fund contributions ...... . 203 Nonspouse beneficiary ......... . 78Credit for ................... . 74maintenance ................ . 67Relief funds  (See also Disaster Nontaxable amounts ........... . 77Early distributions:Vacant rental property ......... . 66relief) ....................... . 170 Partial rollovers .............. . 124Exceptions to tax on ......... . 78Reorganizations, corporate:Religious organizations  (See also Qualified domestic relations ordersTax on ..................... . 78Nontaxable trade of stock ...... . 99Churches, temples, etc.; for distribution of retirement planElderly persons, credit for ...... . 74Clergy) ....... . 7, 48, 158, 159, 161 Repairs: funds ...................... . 78Elective deferral limitation ...... . 48Charitable contributions to .... . 158, Basis, effect on ........... . 93, 94 Reporting:Employer plans:159 Cost of, when casualty or theft loss From employer's plan toBenefits from previous employer's50% limit on deduction ...... . 164 involved ................... . 169 IRA ..................... . 124plan .................... . 121Written statement not Rental expenses .............. . 67 IRA to IRA ................. . 124Rollover to IRA ........ . 124, 130needed ................. . 160 Repayment: Retirement bond redemption .... . 78Situations in which noRemainder interest, sale of .... . 109 Amount previously included in Roth IRAs .................... . 78coverage ................ . 121
income .................... . 201Rental income: Surviving spouse .............. . 77Estimated tax ................. . 74
Uncollected rent ............... . 67 Repayments ................... . 87 Taxability ............... . 123, 127Excess accumulation, tax on (See
Social security benefits ..... . 81, 87Rental income and Time limits (60-day rule) ....... . 123also this heading: Required
expenses ................. . 66-73 Unemployment Treatment of ................. . 123distributions) ............ . 78, 79
Advance rent ................. . 66 compensation ............... . 88 Waiting period between ....... . 123Foreign employment
Canceling lease, payments Withholding tax ............... . 77Reporting: contributions ................ . 75
for ......................... . 66 Form 1099-R ................. . 42Rollovers .................... . 124 Roth IRAs  (See also
Capitalized costs .............. . 67 General Rule for nonqualified and Rollovers) .......... . 127-130, 130Repossession of home ........ . 105
Change of property to rental qualified plans for recipients over Age:Requests for information fromuse .................... . 67, 97 75 years .................... . 76 Distributions after ageIRS .......................... . 17Deductions ............... . 66, 69 Inherited pensions ............. . 91 59 ...................... . 130Required minimum distributions Losses that exceed passive IRAs (See Individual retirement No limit for contributions .... . 128(See also Individual retirementincome ................... . 70 arrangements (IRAs)) No required distributionarrangements (IRAs);Depreciation (See also Joint return ................... . 74 age ..................... . 130Pensions) ........... . 79, 124, 125Depreciation) ........... . 67, 70 Keogh plans .................. . 74 Compensation, defined ....... . 128Rescue squad members:Dwelling unit not used as Contribution limits ............ . 128Loans from plan ............... . 74Life insurance proceeds when deathhome ...................... . 69 Age 50 or older, ............ . 129Lump-sum distributions (See alsoin line of duty ............... . 86Dwelling unit used as home .... . 68 Under age 50, ............. . 129Lump-sum distributions) ...... . 76Research expenses:Capital gains exclusion ...... . 109 Contributions ................ . 128Military (See Armed forces)College professor ............ . 199Computation of income and No deduction for ........... . 128Multiple pension planReservists:expenses ................. . 69 Roth IRA only .............. . 128benefits .................... . 74Deduction for transportationDays used for repairs and Time to make .............. . 129Partly taxable payments ........ . 75expense ................... . 182maintenance .............. . 69 To traditional IRA for sameReporting of .................. . 74IRAs ........................ . 121Determining if used as year .................... . 129Required distributions .......... . 79Repayments ................. . 119home .................... . 68 Conversion .................. . 129At age 701/2 ................. . 79Residency:Division of expenses ......... . 69 Definition of .................. . 127Excise tax for failure to takeHome outside U.S. (See CitizensDonation of use of property ... . 69 Distributions:minimum distributions ...... . 79outside U.S.)Figuring days of personal Qualified distributions ....... . 130Form 5329 for failure to receiveMain home, defined .......... . 105use ...................... . 69 Effect of modified AGI onrequired minimum retirement
Residency test ................. . 27Limit for rental losses ........ . 70 contributions (Table 17-3) ... . 127plan distributions .......... . 79
Resident aliens:Main home determination .... . 69 Establishing account .......... . 128State insurer delinquency
Earned income credit ......... . 240Rented for 15 days or Excess contributions .......... . 129proceedings preventing
more ..................... . 70 Estimated tax ................. . 40 minimum distributions ...... . 79 Failed conversions and
recharacterizations .... . 124, 130Rented for fewer than 15 IRA distributions, withholding Section 457 plans (See Section 457
days .............. . 66, 68, 70 from ...................... . 126 deferred compensation plans) IRA transfer to .......... . 123, 124
Publication 17 (2008) Page 289

Page 292 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Car purchase ................ . 184 Reinvestment plan, dividends used Employer treating as wages for tipRoth IRAs  (Cont.)
for ......................... . 64 income ..................... . 52Deductibility of .......... . 148, 149Modified adjusted gross income
Rollover of gain from publicly tradedGeneral Sales tax ............ . 148(MAGI) .................... . 128 Service Corps of Retired Executives
securities .................. . 104Computation (Worksheet (SCORE) ..................... . 50Sales to related persons,
Sale expenses, how to adjust17-2) .................... . 127 exception ................... . 109 Services:
for ........................ . 111Phaseout (Table 17-3) ...... . 127 Salvation Army  (See Charitable No charitable deduction for value
Short-term gains and losses ... . 111Penalties .................... . 130 contributions) of ......................... . 159
Stock appreciation rights ....... . 45Conversion contributions Property received for .......... . 95Saturday, deadline falling on .... . 41 Stock rights:withdrawn in 5-year Settlement date of securitiesSavings:period ................... . 130 As capital assets ........... . 101 transaction ................. . 103Bonds .................... . 56, 61Excess contributions ........ . 129 Dividends as ................ . 64Bonds used for education ...... . 58 Settlement fees:Spousal contributions ......... . 128 Holding period, determinationCertificate ................ . 55, 60 Real property transactions ...... . 93Taxability .................... . 130 of ....................... . 103 Sale of home ................ . 106Schedule  (See also FormWithdrawals ................. . 130 Worthless .................. . 981040) .......... . 16, 44, 45, 48, 51 Severance pay ................. . 45Excess contributions ........ . 129 Surrender of stock ............. . 981 (Form 1040A), Part I ......... . 61 Accrued leave payment ........ . 45Not taxable ................ . 130 Tax-exempt:2 of Form 1040A ............. . 221 Outplacement services ......... . 45Home equity loan proceedsRounding off dollars ........... . 13 3 of Form 1040A ............. . 227 Shipping:invested in ............... . 153Royalties ...................... . 87 Form 1040, A-F, R, SE (See Form Business-related travelInterest incurred to produceRRTA tax  (See also Excess 1040) expense ................... . 175income from ............. . 156withholding credit) ............ . 252 K-1: Shipwrecks:Interest to purchase or carry, notRural mail carriers ............. . 183 Beneficiaries receiving income Casualty loss due to .......... . 167deductible ............... . 157from estate or trust ........ . 62 Short tax year:Tenants by the entirety owning,Partnership income .......... . 86 Change in annual accountingreporting of dividends ........ . 62S S corporation income ........ . 86 period ..................... . 138Tenants in common owning,S corporations ................ . 200 K-1, Form 1041 ............... . 54 reporting of dividends ........ . 62 Short-term debt instruments:Capital gains or losses from ... . 111 R of Form 1040 .............. . 227 Worthless securities ........... . 98 Government obligations ....... . 102Related party transactions ..... . 100 X: Ordinary gain ................ . 102Security deposits:Shareholders ................. . 86 Tax rates for single Rental property, for ............ . 66 Short-term gains andInvestment interest ......... . 156 persons .................. . 21 losses ................. . 101, 111Self-employed persons  (See alsoY-1:Safe deposit box .............. . 200 Self-employment tax) ......... . 150 Priority in deducting .......... . 112Tax rates for married filingSalaries  (See Wages and salaries) Corporate directors as ......... . 90 Sale or trade of property held 1 yearjointly .................... . 21Sale of home  (See also Real Definition ...................... . 7 or less .................... . 103Y-2:estate) ........... . 70, 92, 104-110 Filing requirements (Table Sick leave:Tax rates for married filingAbandonment ................ . 106 1-3) ......................... . 8 Cash payments for unusedseparately ................ . 22Adjusted basis .......... . 105, 106 Foreign government or international leave ..................... . 144Schedules A ± F, R, SE (Form 1040)Amount realized .............. . 105 organizations, U.S. citizens Federal employees buying(See Form 1040)Basis ....................... . 106 employed by ................. . 7 back ....................... . 51Scholarships ............ . 28, 31, 34Capital gains exclusion ........ . 107 Gross income .................. . 6 Sick pay:Division of real estate taxes ... . 148 Scholarships and fellowships .... . 8 Health insurance costs, deductible as FECA payments ............... . 51Employer, payment by ........ . 105 Earned income including ...... . 139 medical expense ........... . 146 Income ....................... . 45Federal subsidy, recapture Exclusion from gross income ... . 92 Homeworkers, deduction of Railroad Unemployment Insuranceof ......................... . 110 Teaching or research expenses .................. . 186 Act ........................ . 51Foreclosure or fellowships ................. . 92 IRAs ........................ . 119 Withholding ................... . 38repossession .............. . 105 Tuition deduction, effect on .... . 136 Meal allowance not permitted when Signatures ..................... . 14Form 1099-S ................ . 105 Scientific organizations: more than 10% ownership of Agent, use of ................. . 14Gain or loss, figuring of ....... . 105 Charitable contributions to ..... . 158 corporation ................ . 187 Joint returns .................. . 21Interest deduction for Scrip dividends ................ . 65 Ministers ...................... . 7 Mentally incompetent .......... . 14mortgage .................. . 151 Second homes  (See Vacation homes) Nonemployee compensation .... . 90 Parent for child ................ . 14Interest paid to seller, reporting Second mortgages: Qualified retirement plans for ... . 74 Physically disabled ............ . 14of ......................... . 157 Interest ...................... . 151 Travel outside U.S. ........... . 178Jointly owned home .......... . 105 Signing your return ............ . 10Work-related educationSection 1202 exclusion:Land ........................ . 105 Silver  (See Gold and silver)expenses .................. . 197Capital gains or lossesMain home, defined .......... . 105 SIMPLE plans:under ..................... . 113 Self-employment tax .......... . 206More than one home .......... . 105 Rollover to Roth IRA .......... . 130Deduction of ................. . 150Section 1244 stock:Option to buy ................ . 105 Simplified employee pensionsList of deductible taxes (TableLosses on ................... . 102Period of ownership and (SEPs):22-1) .................... . 149Section 1250 gains:use ....................... . 107 IRAs as ..................... . 119Rental income ................ . 73Sale of real property subjectPoints paid by seller .......... . 155 Simplified Method:Seller-financed mortgages ..... . 109to ......................... . 113Postponed gain from ........... . 95 Computation of taxableSeminars:Recordkeeping ............... . 107 Section 179 deductions: annuity ..................... . 76Investment-related ............ . 202Reporting of gain ............. . 109 Adjustment to basis for ......... . 94 Worksheet .................. . 76Seller-financed mortgage ...... . 109 Car expenses ................ . 184 Senior Companion Program .... . 50 Single taxpayers ............... . 21Selling price ................. . 105 Section 457 deferred compensation Separate returns  (See Married filing Charitable contributions to, noSettlement fees or closing plans ........................ . 74 separately) deduction for .......... . 159, 161costs ...................... . 106 Early distributions from ......... . 78 Separated parents ......... . 27, 244 Filing requirements ............. . 6Trading homes ............... . 106 Required distributions .......... . 79 Separated parents, special Filing status ............ . 6, 20, 21Transfer to spouse ...... . 106, 108 Rollovers: rule ......................... . 244 Form 1040EZ, use of ........ . 8, 21Undeducted points ........... . 104 To IRAs .............. . 124, 130 Separated taxpayers ........... . 21 Gross income filing requirementsSale of property ............ . 97-104 Section 72(m)(5) ............... . 206 Filing status .............. . 22, 23 (Table 1-1) .................. . 5Adjusted basis ................ . 98 Securities  (See also Capital gains; IRAs ........................ . 120 Small businesses:Amount realized ............... . 98 Dividends) ............... . 62, 110 Medical and dental expenses of Capital gains or losses from stockBasis other than cost .......... . 99 Adjusted basis for ............. . 97 children of ................. . 142 of ......................... . 113Business property that has As capital assets ............. . 101 Mortgage interest ............. . 151 Keogh plans .................. . 74undergone change of use .... . 97 Bought at various times, how to Nonresident alien spouse ...... . 24 Losses on stock of ........... . 102Cash payment ................ . 99 indicate ................... . 111 Personal exemption ........... . 25 Smoking cessation programs:Debt payoff included in ......... . 98 Claim for refund ............... . 19 Separation agreements: Deductibility as medicalDefinition of ................... . 98 Constructive ownership of stock, Defined for purposes of expense ................... . 143Fair market value (FMV) ....... . 98 determination of ............ . 100 alimony ................... . 131Figuring gain or loss ........... . 98 Social clubs:Convertible stocks and SEPs  (See Simplified employeeForm 1099-B ................. . 98 Contributions to, no charitablebonds ...................... . 99 pensions (SEPs))Like-kind exchanges ........... . 99 deduction for ............... . 159Fractional shares .............. . 65 Series EE and E savings bondsPersonal items ................ . 92 Dues:Holding period, determination (See U.S. savings bonds)Redemption of stock ........... . 98 Not entertainmentof ......................... . 103 Series HH and H savingsRental property that has undergone expenses ................ . 180Joint owners, reporting of bonds ....................... . 56change of use ............... . 97 Social security and Medicare taxes dividends ................... . 62
Transfers between spouses ... . 100 Series I savings bonds ......... . 56 (See also Excess withholdingNontaxable trades ............. . 99
Sales and exchanges: Service Center addresses ....... . 17 credit) .............. . 206, 222, 252Options .................. . 48, 64
Bonds ........................ . 59 2008 changes .................. . 1Preferred stock, redeemable at a Service charges ............... . 200
Reporting of (Table 1-3) ......... . 8Sales tax: premium ................... . 65 Credit card payment of taxes ... . 15
Basis to include ............... . 93 Redemption of stock ........... . 98 Deductibility of ............... . 157 Support, not included in ........ . 34
Page 290 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 293 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Social security benefits ..... . 31, 80, Standard mileage rates ........ . 183 Double deduction not Gross income levels (Table
83 allowed ................. . 135 1-1) ....................... . 52008 rates ..................... . 1
Eligible educational Other situations requiring filingDeductions related to .......... . 83 Business-related miles ... . 174, 183
institution ................ . 134 (Table 1-3) ................ . 8Employer retirement plans different Car expenses ................ . 183
Eligible student ............. . 134 Gift expenses:from ...................... . 121 Charitable organization service, auto
Features of (Table 19-1) .... . 134 Proof of (Table 26-2) ........ . 184Estimated tax ................. . 81 use for .................... . 161
Married filing separately ...... . 22 Reporting of (Table 26-3) .... . 188Foreign employer .............. . 49 Medical reasons for use of
Qualified student loan ....... . 134 Head of household, qualifying personForm SSA-1042S for nonresident car .................. . 141, 144
Worksheet ................. . 135 (Table 2-1) ................. . 24aliens ...................... . 80 Not allowed .................. . 183 Interest, defined .............. . 134 Individual retirement arrangementsForm SSA-1099 ........... . 42, 80 Work-related education ...... . 193, Student claimed as exemption on tax (IRAs):Group-term life insurance, taxes 196 return of another person .... . 135 Figuring modified AGI (Worksheetowed on ..................... . 9 State: 17-1) .................... . 122Students ...................... . 164Income ........................ . 8 Obligations, interest on ......... . 60 Modified AGI, effect on deduction ifCredit (See Education credits)IRAs for recipients of State bar associations: covered by retirement plan atDefined ...................... . 27benefits ................... . 121 Bar review courses ........... . 195 work (Table 17-1) ........ . 121Exemption from withholding .... . 37Joint returns .................. . 83 Charitable contributions to ..... . 162 Foreign ...................... . 27 Modified AGI, effect on deduction ifLump-sum election ............ . 81 State or local governments: Foreign students ............. . 160 not covered by retirement planMarried filing separately .... . 22, 81 Bonds, tax-exempt ........... . 102 Loans (See Student loans) at work (Table 17-2) ...... . 121Paid by employer .............. . 45 Charitable contributions to .... . 158, Scholarships (See Scholarships and Roth IRAs, effect of modified AGIRepayment of benefits ..... . 81, 87 159 fellowships) on contributions (TableRepayments ................. . 200 Employees: Tuition deduction (See Tuition) 17-3) .................... . 127Reporting of .................. . 81 Section 457 plans for (See Section Tuition programs, qualified (See Roth IRAs, modified AGITaxability of .............. . 80, 81 457 deferred compensation Qualified tuition programs) (Worksheet 17-2) ......... . 127Tips, taxes owed on ............ . 9 plans) Work-related education (See Interest deductions, forms to useWithholding for ............ . 39, 81 Unemployment Work-related education) (Table 23-1) ............... . 157Not deductible ............. . 150 compensation ............. . 88 Meal expenses and 50% limit (FigureSubstantial gainful activity ..... . 225Social security number (SSN) ... . 13 Fee-basis officials: 26-A) ..................... . 179Substitute forms ............... . 12Correspondence with IRS, include Business expenses of ....... . 190 Medical and dental expenses:Suggestions for publication ..... . 4SSN ....................... . 13 Work-related education Checklist for deductible expenseSunday, deadline falling on ..... . 41Dependents .................. . 13 expenses ................ . 197 (Table 21-1) ............. . 144Supplemental wages ........... . 38Exception .................. . 13 Reimbursement, excess algorithmState or local income taxes .... . 139Failure to include penalty ....... . 13 Supplies: (Figure 21-A) ............ . 145Deduction of ............ . 146, 147Form SS-5 to request Regularly used or consumed in Roth IRA and modified adjustedList of deductible taxes (Tablenumber .................... . 13 ordinary course of trade or gross income (MAGI) phaseout22-1) .................... . 149Nonresident alien spouse ...... . 13 business .................. . 101 (Table 17-3) ............... . 127Schedule A (Form 1040) .... . 150Resident aliens ............... . 13 Support test: Student loan interest deductionElectronic returns filed withSocial security numbers Qualifying child ................ . 28 (Table 19-1) ............... . 134federal ..................... . 10(SSNs) ...................... . 218 Qualifying relative ............. . 31 Tax returns:Exception to deduction ........ . 147Alimony recipient's number Surveys: Due dates (Table 1-5) ........ . 10Federal changes, effect on ..... . 19required ................... . 133 Property basis to include ....... . 93 Steps to prepare (TableForm W-2 to show withheldChild's ........................ . 2 Surviving spouse: 1-6) ...................... . 12taxes ..................... . 147Number to be obtained at Annuity ....................... . 79 Taxes that are deductible (TableInterest on, not deductible ..... . 157birth ..................... . 35 Filing status .................. . 20 22-1) ...................... . 149Joint state and local returns butDependents ................... . 2 With dependent child ........ . 24 Travel and transportation expenses:federal returns filedDividend payers to use ......... . 62 Gross income filing requirements Examples of deductible expensesseparately ................. . 147Earned income credit .... . 239, 242 (Table 1-1) .................. . 5 (Table 26-1) ............. . 175Married filing separately ....... . 147Label, number need to be written Life insurance proceeds paid Local transportation (FigureRefunds, treatment of ......... . 147in ........................... . 2 to .......................... . 85 26-B) ................... . 181State or local taxes:Penalty for failure to provide: Rollovers by .................. . 77 Proof of (Table 26-2) ........ . 184Refunds ...................... . 86To dividend payers .......... . 62 Single filing status ............. . 21 Reporting of (Table 26-3) .... . 188Statute of limitations: Tax (See Estate tax)Social security card ........... . 239 Tuition deduction (TableClaim for refund ............... . 15 19-2) ...................... . 136Synagogues  (See Churches, temples,Sonic booms: Claim for refunds .............. . 18 Tuition deduction (Table 19-3):etc.)Casualty loss due to .......... . 167
Statutory employees .......... . 186 Claiming dependent's expensesSpecial needs children:
Stillborn child .................. . 27 (Table 19-3) ............. . 137Adoption credit ............... . 253
Volunteers, deductibility ofTStock appreciation rights ....... . 45Spouse  (See also Married taxpayers; contributions (Table 24-2) ... . 160Tables and figures:Stock bonus plans ............. . 38Surviving spouse) ... . 6, 13, 14, 20, Work-related education (FigureAdjusted basis, examples of (TableStock certificates:21, 77, 85 27-A) ..................... . 19413-1) ....................... . 94Disabled, qualifying for dependent Charitable contributions, date
Tax computation worksheet ... . 270Alimony requirements (instrumentscare credit ................. . 218 of ......................... . 164
executed after 1984) (Table Tax counsel fees .............. . 199Student ..................... . 218 Stock options .............. . 48, 64 18-1) ...................... . 131 Tax Counseling for theSSN  (See Social security number Stockholders  (See also Capital gain rates (Table Elderly ....................... . 10(SSN)) Securities) .................... . 19 16-1) ...................... . 112 Tax credits  (See Credits)Stamp taxes: Debts ........................ . 84 Car expenses, reporting of (Table Tax evasion .................... . 20Real estate transactions Stockholders' meeting 26-3) ...................... . 188and ....................... . 150 Tax figured by IRS ............. . 206expenses ................... . 203 Casualty and theft losses:Stamps  (See Collectibles) Tax help .............. . 3, 4, 10, 273Stocks  (See also Dividends; Deduction limits for personal Tax Counseling for theStandard deduction ...... . 138, 140 Securities) ................ . 19, 42 property (Table 25-1) ..... . 171 Elderly ..................... . 102008 changes .................. . 1 Stolen funds: Deduction of loss, when to take Volunteer counseling (VolunteerAge 65 or older .............. . 138 Reporting of .................. . 92 (Table 25-2) ............. . 173 Income Tax AssistanceBlind persons ................ . 138 Stolen property  (See Theft losses) Charitable contributions, deductibility program) ............... . 10, 50Changing from itemized to standard of (Table 24-1) ............. . 158Stop-smoking programs:deduction (or vice versa) .... . 140 Tax preference items .......... . 206Children's income:Deductibility as medicalComparison with itemized deduction Tax rates:Inclusion on parent's return (Figureexpense ................... . 143amount .................... . 139 Married filing jointly (Schedule31-A) ................... . 209Storms  (See also DisasterDefined ..................... . 138 Y-1) ....................... . 21Investment income more thanrelief) ....................... . 170Dependents ................. . 139 Married filing separately (Schedule$1,800, reporting of (FigureCasualty loss due to .......... . 167Final return of decedent ....... . 138 Y-2) ....................... . 2231-B) ................... . 210Straddles:Married filing separately: Single person filing (ScheduleEducation credits:Interest from ................. . 156One spouse has itemized ... . 138 X) ......................... . 21Comparison chart (TableStrike benefits ................. . 92Purpose of .................. . 138 35-1) .................... . 233 Tax refunds:Student loan interest deduction:Real property taxes ........... . 139 Entertainment expenses: Agreement with IRS extendingLoan repayment assistance ... . 135Standard meal allowance ..... . 177, 50% limit (Figure 26-A) ...... . 179 assessment period, claim based
Student loans:187 Proof of (Table 26-2) ........ . 184 on ......................... . 19
Cancellation of debt ........... . 84Amount of ................... . 177 Reporting of (Table 26-3) .... . 188 Bad debts .................... . 19
Interest deduction ..... . 8, 133, 157Areas outside continental Estimated tax, who must make Business tax credit
Academic period ........... . 134U.S. ...................... . 177 payments (Figure 4-A) ....... . 41 carrybacks ................. . 19
Amount of deduction ........ . 135Prorating on partial days of Filing requirements: Cashing check ................ . 14
travel ..................... . 187 Claiming .................. . 135 Dependents (Table 1-2) ....... . 6 Check's expiration date ........ . 14
Publication 17 (2008) Page 291

Page 294 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Indian tribal government taxes, Dividends, reporting of ......... . 62 Attorneys' fees:Tax refunds: (Cont.)
deduction of ............... . 147 Property basis to include ..... . 93Claim for .............. . 17, 18, 19 Terminal illness:
Inheritance tax ............... . 150Limitations period ........... . 18 Accelerated payment of life Tolls:
Kiddie tax (See Children,Litigation ................... . 19 insurance proceeds (See Business-related travel ........ . 183
subheading: Investment income of) Accelerated death benefits)Direct deposit ................. . 14 Tools ......................... . 199
Nanny tax (See Domestic help) Viatical settlements ............ . 85Erroneous refunds ............. . 17 Hauling to and from work ...... . 182Not deductible ............... . 150Federal income tax refunds ..... . 86 Termite damage: Rental for use on rentalPersonal property taxes:Financially disabled ............ . 18 Not casualty losses ........... . 168 property .................... . 67Car taxes .................. . 183Foreign tax paid or accrued ..... . 19 Terrorist attacks: Tornadoes  (See also DisasterDeduction of ............... . 150General rules ................. . 10 Casualty loss due to .......... . 167 relief) ....................... . 170Real estate taxes (See Real estateInquiries ...................... . 10 Disability payments for injuries from, Casualty loss due to .......... . 167taxes)Interest on ............. . 17, 19, 56 tax exclusion ................ . 74 Total support .................. . 32Sales tax ..................... . 93Late filed returns ............... . 3 Disability pensions for federal Tour guides:Withholding ................... . 36Less than $1 .................. . 14 employees ................. . 51 Free tour for organizing tour .... . 91Taxes, not support ............. . 34Limits ........................ . 18 Theft losses ...... . 166-174, 199, 201 Trade Act of 1974:Tax-exempt:Exceptions ................. . 19 $100 Rule ................... . 172 Trade readjustment allowancesBonds and other obligations .... . 59More or less than expected ..... . 14 Adjusted basis in property ..... . 94, under ...................... . 88Income ...................... . 203Net operating loss carryback .... . 19 95, 170 Trade associations:Interest ....................... . 59Offset: Amount of loss ............... . 169 Meetings and entertainmentObligations:Against debts ........... . 10, 14 Appraisals ................... . 169 expenses .................. . 180Adjusted basis .............. . 97Against next year's tax ... . 14, 41 Cost of cleaning up or making Trade of property  (See also Sale ofOrganizations:Past-due ................. . 10, 17 repairs .................... . 169 property) ..................... . 97Related party Costs of photographs andReal estate taxes, treatment Definition of ................... . 98transactions ............. . 100 appraisals ................. . 169of ......................... . 149 Form 8824 for reporting ........ . 99Section 457 deferred Deduction of loss:Reduced ..................... . 19 Like property and moneycompensation plans ....... . 74 When to take (TableState and local income tax transferred ............. . 96, 99Tax-exempt income ............ . 31 25-2) .................... . 173refunds .................... . 147 Like-kind exchanges ....... . 95, 99Definition of theft ............. . 168Tax-exempt obligations:State liability, effect on ......... . 19 Nontaxable exchanges ..... . 95, 99Fair market value of stolenAdjusted basis for ............. . 97Withholding .................... . 7 Holding period, determinationproperty ................... . 169Worthless securities ........... . 19 Tax-free exchanges: of ....................... . 103Form 4684 to be filed ......... . 167Claim for refund ............. . 98 Definition of ................... . 95 Partially nontaxableInsurance proceeds, treatmentHolding period, determinationTax return preparation: exchange .............. . 96, 99of ......................... . 170of ......................... . 103Rental expenses .............. . 67 Reporting of .................. . 99Net operating losses .......... . 174Taxis:Tax returns  (See also Due dates; Taxable exchange, defined ..... . 95Proof of loss ................. . 168Business-related travelJoint Returns; Signatures) ..... . 10, Property used partly for business and Trade-in of car ................ . 184expense ................... . 17514, 21 partly for personal Trading date of securitiesStandard mileage rate notAliens ......................... . 7 purposes .................. . 172 transaction ................. . 103allowed ................... . 183Amended (See also Form Recovered stolen property .... . 169 Traditional IRAs  (See IndividualTaxpayer Advocate ............ . 2731040X) ................ . 18, 140 Reimbursement .............. . 170 retirement arrangements (IRAs))Attachments to returns ......... . 13 Taxpayer Assistance Center ..... . 3 Reporting of gain or loss ...... . 173 Traffic violations:Child ......................... . 14 Taxpayer identification number Third parties: Fines not deductible .......... . 184Copies of ..................... . 17 (TIN): Alimony payments made to ... . 131, Transfer taxes:Dating of ..................... . 14 Adoption (ATIN) ............... . 13 132 Property basis to include ....... . 93Filing of (See also Filing Individual (ITIN) ............... . 13 Designee for IRS to discuss return Real estate transactionsrequirements) ................ . 5 Social security number (See Social with ...................... . 3, 14 and ....................... . 150Forms to use .................. . 8 security number (SSN)) Income from taxpayer's property paidFree preparation help .......... . 10 Transit passes ................. . 48Taxpayer identification numbers to .......................... . 12How to file .................... . 12 (TINs) .................. . 216, 218 Transportation ................ . 219Threats:Joint returns (See Joint Returns) Child and dependent care Transportation expenses  (SeeLosses due to ................ . 168Mailing of ................... . 1, 17 credit ..................... . 220 Travel and transportation expenses)Tickets  (See Entertainment expenses)Paid preparer ................. . 14 Childcare provider ............ . 220 Transportation workers:Tip expense:Individual (ITIN) ............... . 35Payment with ................. . 15 Meal expenses ............... . 177Business meal or entertainmentSocial security numbers (See SocialPhone number to be included .... . 3 Deduction limits ............ . 180activity, 50% deductionsecurity numbers (SSNs))Preparation fees ............. . 199 Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how tolimit ....................... . 180Private delivery services ..... . 3, 10 Teachers: complete ................ . 190Business travel expense ..... . 175,Request copy of, Form 4506 .... . 17 Expenses, deduction of ....... . 133 Travel and transportation177Work-related education ...... . 194,Request transcript of, Form expenses ...... . 174-179, 181-184Tip income .................. . 52-541954506-T ..................... . 17 Advances .............. . 186, 188Allocated tips .......... . 38, 53, 54Steps to prepare (Table 1-6) .... . 12 Telephones ................... . 203 Allocation of types of costs ... . 176,Daily record of tips ............ . 52Third party designee ......... . 3, 14 Business-related travel 185Electronic tip record ........... . 52Transcript of .................. . 17 expense ................... . 175 Bona fide business purpose ... . 177Form 4070A for daily records ... . 52Fraud or misconduct of IRSWho must file ............. . 5, 6, 7 Business associates .......... . 176Noncash tips .............. . 52, 53employee, number for reportingTax shelters: Business travel ............... . 175Penalty for failure to report ..... . 53anonymously ................ . 3Rental property and at-risk $75 or less ................ . 184Reporting on tax return ......... . 53Tax return to include phonerules ....................... . 70 Confidential informationReporting tips to employer ...... . 52number ..................... . 3Tax table .................. . 258-269 and ..................... . 184Failure to report toTemples  (See Churches, temples,Tax year  (See also Accounting Employees' expenses ....... . 176employer ............... . 9, 53etc.)periods) .................. . 10, 12 Incidental expenses ........ . 177Form 4070 for ............... . 52Temporary absence from job: Proof of businessTaxable exchanges: Service charges paid by employer asWork-related education purpose ................. . 184Definition of ................... . 95 wages ..................... . 52during ..................... . 193 Receipt not readily available toSocial security and Medicare tax:Taxes  (See also Sales Temporary absences ....... . 27, 30 prove ................... . 184Employer reporting for purposestax) ............ . 146-150, 184, 205
Temporary job assignments: Spouse or dependents ...... . 176of ........................ . 52Alternative minimum .......... . 206
Travel expenses ............. . 175 Trip outside U.S. ...... . 178, 179Filing requirements (TableBusiness taxes, deduction
Tenants  (See also Rental income and 1-3) ....................... . 8 Trip primarily for business ... . 178of ......................... . 146
expenses) .................... . 66 Uncollected .................. . 9 Trip primarily for personalDeduction of ................. . 147
By the entirety ................ . 55 Tip Rate Determination and reasons ................. . 178Schedules to use ........... . 150
In common ................... . 55 Education Program .......... . 53 U.S. travel ................. . 178Types of taxes deductible (Table
Tip-splitting or tip-pooling Unproved amounts ......... . 18822-1) .................... . 149 Tenants by the entirety:
arrangements ............... . 52 Visiting clients orAlimony, no deduction for taxes andEstate (See Estate tax)
Uncollected taxes ............. . 53 customers ............... . 181insurance paid on home ownedEstimated (See Estimated tax)
Withholding ............... . 38, 52as ........................ . 131 Charitable organization service,Excise (See Excise taxes)
Employee contributing to ..... . 53Dividends, reporting of ......... . 62 deduction for ............... . 161Federal income taxes, not
Underwithholding ........ . 38, 53Real estate taxes, allocation when Commuting expenses ......... . 182deductible ................. . 150
filing separately ............ . 149 Title insurance:Foreign taxes ................ . 147 Employer-provided commuter
Property basis to include ....... . 93 vehicle ................... . 47Income tax. deduction of .... . 147 Tenants in common:
Gift taxes .................... . 150 Conventions ................. . 179Alimony deduction for taxes and Title to property:
How to figure ................ . 205 insurance paid on home owned Abstract fees, property basis to Delegates, deduction of
Income taxes, deduction of .... . 147 as ........................ . 131 include ..................... . 93 unreimbursed amount ..... . 161
Page 292 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 295 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Notification of Unemployment tax: IRAs ........................ . 121Travel and transportation expenses
recharacterization ........ . 124 State employment taxes ....... . 222 Volunteer work ............ . 49, 218(Cont.)
Transfer from trustee to Deductibility of contributions (TableUniform Settlement Statement (FormDeductible expenses ......... . 176
trustee ............. . 123, 129 24-2) ...................... . 160HUD-1):Examples of (Table 26-1) ... . 175
Out-of-pocket expenses, deductiblePoints shown on ............. . 153Trusts  (See also TrustDefinition of .................. . 174
when serving for qualifiedbeneficiaries) ......... . 62, 90, 206Employer-provided vehicles .... . 46 Uniformed services ........... . 108
organization .......... . 158, 160Grantor trusts ................. . 90Estimates of ................. . 184 Uniforms ..................... . 199
Tax counseling (Volunteer IncomeIncome ....................... . 90Expenses paid for others ...... . 203 Charitable organization requiring,
Tax Assistance program) .... . 10,Child beneficiary ........... . 211Federal crime investigators or deduction for cost and upkeep
50prosecutors ................ . 176 Investment interest ........... . 156 of ......................... . 161
Value of income lost by, notForm 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill Related party transactions with Unions  (See also Labor deductible ................. . 162out ....................... . 189 fiduciaries ................. . 100 unions) ................ . 38, 88, 92
Vouchers for payment of tax .... . 41Fringe benefits ................ . 47 TTY/TDD information .......... . 273 Assessments ................ . 199
Getting from home to temporary Dues ........................ . 199Tubal ligation:
workplace when multiple regular Deductibility as medical United States  (See headings starting
Wworkplaces ................ . 181 expense ................... . 143 with ªFederalº or ªU.S.º)
Going home on days off from W-2 form  (See Form W-2)Tuition  (See also Hope United Way  (See Charitabletemporary assignment ...... . 176 Wages and salaries  (See also Formcredit) .................. . 136, 236 contributions)Going to business meeting away W-2) ............... . 12, 44-52, 48Alimony payments made to Universities  (See Colleges andfrom regular workplace ...... . 181 Accident and healthcover ..................... . 131 universities)Going to family home ......... . 175 insurance .................. . 45Charitable deduction not allowed for Unlawful discrimination suits:Indefinite assignment ......... . 175 Accrued leave payment ........ . 45paying ............... . 159, 162 Deduction for costs ............ . 90Job search expenses .......... . 91 Adoption, employerCredit (See Education credits) Unmarried persons  (See SingleMedical purposes, for .... . 143, 144 assistance .................. . 46Deduction for ................ . 135 taxpayers)Mileage rates (See Standard mileage Advance commissions ......... . 44Claiming for dependent ..... . 137 Unrecaptured Section 1250rates) Allowances andRefund of expenses ........ . 136 gain ................... . 101, 113New employment ............. . 198 reimbursements ......... . 38, 44Eligible educational institution, Unstated interest ........... . 93, 98 Archer MSA contributions ...... . 46No main place of business or defined .................... . 136 Unused sick leave: Awards and prizes ............. . 44work ...................... . 175 Expenses that do not Cash payments for ........... . 144 Babysitting ................... . 44Nonaccountable plans, definition qualify .................... . 136 Use of home in business ...... . 198 Back pay awards .............. . 44of ......................... . 188 Qualified programs (See Qualified Bonuses ..................... . 44Parking fees: Used clothing and householdtuition programs) Child care providers ........... . 44Business-related travel ...... . 183 goods:Related expenses, defined .... . 136 Children's earnings ............. . 6Commuting expense ........ . 182 Charitable deduction for ....... . 162Tuition and fees deduction: Clergy ....................... . 48Employer-provided fringe Used clothing and household items:Refund of expenses .......... . 136 De minimis benefits ............ . 46benefit ................... . 48 Charitable deduction for fair marketTuition programs, qualified  (See Disability income .............. . 50Medical-related travel ....... . 144 value ..................... . 163Qualified tuition programs) Elective deferrals .............. . 48Probationary work periods ..... . 176 Usurious interest ............... . 56Tuition, benefits under GI Bill ... . 34 Employee achievementProof of expenses ............ . 184 Utilities: award ...................... . 44Summary (Table 26-2) ...... . 184 Charges for installing included in Employee compensation ....... . 44Recordkeeping property basis ............... . 93 Farmworkers ................. . 36requirements ......... . 176, 184 U Emergency energy programs, Foreign employer .............. . 49Rental property maintenance and U.S. citizen: charitable contributions to ... . 159 Form W-2 (See Form W-2)management, for ............ . 67 Earned income credit ......... . 240 Energy conservation Fringe benefits ................ . 45Reporting of ................. . 186 subsidies ............... . 90, 92U.S. citizen or resident ......... . 26 Garnisheed ................... . 12Table 26-3 showing forms to be Late payment charges, notU.S. national ................... . 27 Government cost-of-livingused .................... . 188 deductible ................. . 157U.S. obligations, interest ........ . 56 allowances ................. . 45Resorts or cruise ships ........ . 178 Rebates ...................... . 92U.S. possessions: Household workers ............ . 36School children, transporting Charitable contributions to ..... . 158 Income ........................ . 8of .......................... . 92 Deduction of income tax paid Foreign .................... . 44Standard mileage rate for car use for Vto ......................... . 147 Long-term care coverage ....... . 45medical ................... . 141 Military retirees ............ . 36, 49Income from ................... . 6 Vacation homes:Summary of rules (Figure Military service ................ . 49Determining if used as home ... . 68U.S. Postal Service  (See Post office26-B) ..................... . 181 Miscellaneous compensation ... . 44Points ....................... . 153employees)Tax home, determination of .... . 175 Note for services .............. . 45Rental expenses .......... . 68, 69U.S. savings bonds:Temporary assignment or Outplacement services ......... . 45Valuations  (See also Appraisals; FairEducation, used for ............ . 22job ........................ . 175 Religious orders ............... . 49market value (FMV)) ...... . 93, 169Interest on .................... . 91Temporary work location ...... . 181 Restricted property ............ . 48Value of time or services:Transfer between spouses ..... . 96Tips ................... . 175, 177 Dividends on restrictedNo charitable deduction for ... . 159,U.S. Treasury bills or notes:Transit pass .................. . 48 stock ..................... . 48160, 162Trade of ..................... . 100Work-related education ...... . 195, Retirement plan contributions byVandalism:196 U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and employer ................... . 48Casualty loss due to .......... . 167bonds ....................... . 59Traveling salespersons: Severance pay ................ . 45Vasectomy:Deduction of expenses ........ . 186 U.S. Virgin Islands: Sick pay .................. . 45, 51Deductibility as medicalTax home, determination of .... . 175 Income from ................... . 6 Social security and Medicare taxesexpense ................... . 143Treasury bills, notes, and Unclaimed reimbursement ..... . 195 paid by employer ............ . 45Vehicles  (See Cars)bonds ....................... . 59 Stock appreciation rights ....... . 45Uncollected rent:
Veterans benefits .......... . 49, 50Treasury Inspector General: Stock options ................. . 48Income ....................... . 67
Retroactive determination ...... . 51 Supplemental ................. . 38Telephone number to report Underpayment penalties .... . 36, 41, Special statute of limitations. .... . 51 Volunteer work ................ . 49anonymously fraud or misconduct 43
Veterans' benefits: Withholding (See Withholding)of IRS employee ............. . 3 IRS computation .............. . 43
Educational assistance ......... . 92 Waiters and waitresses:Treasury notes ................. . 56 Undistributed capital gains .... . 64, Tuition deduction, effect Tips (See Tip income)Treaties: 111, 255 on ...................... . 136 War veterans' organizations  (SeeForeign charitable organizations, Unearned income of child  (See Veterans' insurance: Veterans' organizations)contributions to ............. . 159 Children, subheading: Investment Dividends on .................. . 65 War zone  (See Combat zone)Trees and plants: income of)
Veterans' organizations:Cost of, when casualty or theft loss Wash sales ........... . 98, 100, 103Unemployment compensation .. . 8, Charitable contributions to .... . 158,involved .............. . 168, 169 88 Washington State Supplemental159Trust beneficiaries: Workmen's CompensationCredit card insurance paying ... . 90 30% limit .................. . 164Dividends received by ......... . 62 Fund ....................... . 147Mandatory contributions to state Viatical settlements ............ . 85Losses of trust ................ . 90 funds, deduction of ......... . 147 Welfare benefits ............ . 31, 88
Victims of terrorism  (See TerroristReceiving income from trust ... . 90, Private fund, from ............. . 88 What's new ................... . 1, 2attacks)91 Repayment of benefits ......... . 88 Adoption benefits ............... . 1
VISTA volunteers ............... . 50Rollover restrictions ........... . 77 Reporting on Forms 1040, 1040A, or Earned income credit ........... . 1
Vitamins:1040EZ .................... . 88Trustees: Educator expenses ........... . 133
Not deductible as medicalSupplemental benefits ......... . 88Administrative fees ........... . 200 Exemption amount ............. . 1
expense ................... . 143Voluntary benefit fundIRA ......................... . 200 Hope credit ............... . 1, 233
contributions ............... . 203IRAs: Volunteer firefighters: Individual retirement arrangements
Withholding ............... . 39, 88 Charitable contributions to ..... . 159Fees ................. . 119, 120 (IRAs) ....................... . 1
Publication 17 (2008) Page 293

Page 296 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Federal income taxes, not Work-related education ........ . 193 Pensions or annuities, jointWhat's new (Cont.)
deductible ................. . 150 Business deduction: returns ..................... . 75Lifetime learning credit ..... . 1, 233
Fiscal years .................. . 43 Qualified expenses ..... . 195-196 Roth IRA modified adjusted grossLimit on itemized deduction ...... . 1
Form W-4: Reimbursements ........... . 196 income (MAGI), computationMedical and dental expenses:
Provided by employer ........ . 37 Tax benefit of .............. . 193 (Worksheet 17-2) ........... . 127Standard mileage ............ . 1
Fringe benefits ................ . 38 Education required by employer or Simplified Method computation ofMoving expenses:
Gambling winnings ........ . 39, 42 by law ..................... . 193 taxable annuity .............. . 76Standard mileage ............ . 1
General rules ................. . 36 Education that qualifies for new trade Social security or railroad retirementSocial security and Medicare
Highest rate, employer must withhold or business ................ . 195 benefits, to figuretaxes ....................... . 1
at if no W-4 ................. . 37 Education to maintain or improve taxability ............... . 80, 81Standard deduction ............. . 1
Incorrect form ................. . 42 skills ...................... . 193 Student loan interestStandard mileage rates ......... . 1
IRA distributions .............. . 126 Education to meet minimum deduction ................. . 135Wheelchairs:
New job ...................... . 36 requirements .............. . 194 Support test .................. . 32As medical expense .......... . 143
Penalties .............. . 36, 38, 39 Indefinite absence from Withholding (Form W-4) ........ . 37Widow/widower  (See Surviving Pensions and annuities .... . 13, 38, work ...................... . 194 World Trade Center attacks  (Seespouse) 74, 77 Meal expenses ............... . 196 Terrorist attacks)Winter energy payments ........ . 90 Railroad retirement benefits ... . 39, Qualifying education (Figure Worthless securities ........... . 98Withholding  (See also Form 81 27-A) ..................... . 194 Wristwatch .................... . 203W-2) ............... . 12, 35-43, 37 Repaying withheld tax ......... . 37 Recordkeeping Write-offs  (See Cancellation of debt)Agricultural Act of 1949 Rollovers ..................... . 77 requirements .............. . 197payments .................. . 39 Salaries and wages ............ . 36 Reimbursement for ........... . 196Changing amount withheld ..... . 36 Separate returns .............. . 42 Teachers ............... . 194, 195 YFor 2010 ................... . 37 Sick pay ...................... . 38 Temporary absence from Yard-care workers  (See DomesticChecking amount of ...... . 37, 230 Social security benefits ..... . 39, 81 work ...................... . 193 help)Claim for refund ................ . 7 State and local income taxes, Travel expenses for .......... . 196Commodity credit loans ........ . 39 Youth groups:deduction for ............... . 147 Unclaimed reimbursement ..... . 195Credit for ................. . 36, 42 Troop leader's travelSupplemental wages .......... . 38 Worksheets:Cumulative wage method ...... . 37 expenses .................. . 161Tips (See Tip income) Capital loss carryover ......... . 112Definition ..................... . 36 Unemployment Casualty and theft losses ...... . 167Determining amount to ■compensation ........... . 39, 88 Excess withholding credit ...... . 257withhold ................ . 36, 37 Work clothes .................. . 199 Head of household status and cost ofDisaster Assistance Act of 1988 keeping up home ............ . 24Workers' compensation ........ . 51payments .................. . 39 Individual retirement arrangementsMandatory contributions to stateDividend income .............. . 62 (IRAs), modified AGI computationfunds, deduction of ......... . 147Employers, rules for ........... . 37 (Worksheet 17-1) ........... . 122Return to work ................ . 51Exemption from ............... . 37
Page 294 Publication 17 (2008)

Page 297 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Where To File
Note. Use this table only if you are an individual taxpayer filing your own return.
AND use the zip code below according to the form you are filing and whether you
are enclosing payment
Form 1040 Form 1040A Form 1040EZ
THEN send your return No payment Payment No payment Payment No payment Payment
IF you live in... to... enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed
Department of the
Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Treasury
North Carolina, South Internal Revenue 39901±0002 39901±0102 39901±0015 39901±0115 39901±0014 39901±0114
Carolina, Virginia Service Center
Atlanta, GA
Alaska, Arizona, California,
Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho,
Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Department of the
Minnesota, Montana, Treasury
Nebraska, Nevada, New Internal Revenue 93888±0002 93888±0102 93888±0015 93888±0115 93888±0014 93888±0114
Mexico, North Dakota, Service Center
Oklahoma, Oregon, South Fresno, CA
Dakota, Utah, Washington,
Wisconsin, Wyoming
Department of the
Kentucky, Louisiana, Treasury
Mississippi, Tennessee, Internal Revenue 73301±0002 73301±0102 73301±0015 73301±0115 73301±0014 73301±0114
Texas Service Center
Austin, TX
Arkansas, Connecticut, Department of the
Delaware, Indiana, Michigan, Treasury
Missouri, New Jersey, New Internal Revenue 64999±0002 64999±0102 64999±0015 64999±0115 64999±0014 64999±0114
York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Service Center
Rhode Island, West Virginia Kansas City, MO
Department of the
District of Columbia, Maine, Treasury
Maryland, Massachusetts, Internal Revenue 05501±0002 05501±0102 05501±0015 05501±0115 05501±0014 05501±0114
New Hampshire, Vermont Service Center
Andover, MA
A foreign country, American
Samoa, Puerto Rico (or are
excluding income under Department of theInternal Revenue Code Treasurysection 933), or use an APO Internal Revenue 73301±0215 73301±0215or FPO address, or file Form Service Center 2555, 2555-EZ, or 4563, or Austin, TX, USAare a dual status alien or
nonpermanent resident of
Guam* or the Virgin Islands**
* Permanent residents of Guam should use: 
Department of Revenue and Taxation
Government of Guam, P.O. Box 23607 
GMF, GU 96921
** Permanent residents of the Virgin Islands should use:
V.I. Bureau of Internal Revenue
9601 Estate Thomas
Charlotte Amalie, St. Thomas VI 00802
Publication 17 (2008) Page 295

Page 298 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: NEWIND01 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax For
Individuals
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2009
Highlights of 2008 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2009
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
El Impuesto Federal sobre los Ingresos
(Para Personas Fisicas)
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
17SP
El Proceso de Cobro del IRS594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (Hope and Lifetime Learning
Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Business Expenses535

Page 299 of 299 of Publication 17 13:51 - 12-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Instructions 1040 -- 24811v17
Order Form
for Forms and
Publications
The most frequently ordered forms and publications are listed on the order form below.
You will receive two copies of each form, one copy of the instructions, and one copy of
each publication you order. To help reduce waste, please order only the items you need
to prepare your return.
For faster ways of getting the items you need, go to www.irs.gov/formspubs.
How To Use the Order
Form
Circle the items you need on the order form
below. Use the blank spaces to order items
not listed. If you need more space, attach a
separate sheet of paper.
Print or type your name and address
accurately in the space provided below to
ensure delivery of your order. Enclose the
order form in an envelope and mail it to the
IRS address shown on this page. You should
receive your order within 10 days after
receipt of your request.
Do not send your tax return to the address
listed below. Instead, see Where To File.
TIP
Mail Your Order Form To:
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
Cut here/H17073/H17073
N
Circle the forms and
publications you need. The
instructions for any form
you order will be included.
Name
Postal mailing address
City
Order Form
Please Print
Apt./Suite/Room
Foreign country
Daytime phone number
State ZIP code
International postal code
()
Schedule R
(1040)
2441
1040
1040EZ
Schedule SE
(1040)
Pub. 590
8829
Schedules
A&B
(1040)
1040-ES
(2009)
Pub. 1
1040A
Pub. 523
Pub. 910
Schedule C
(1040) 1040X
4562
Pub. 17
Pub. 526
Schedule D
(1040)
Schedule 1
(1040A)
2106
Pub. 334
Pub. 527
4868
Schedule E
(1040)
Schedule 2
(1040A)
6251
Pub. 463
Pub. 529
Schedule 3
(1040A)
Schedule F
(1040) Pub. 505
Schedule EIC
(1040A or
1040)
Pub. 596
8822
Schedule
C-EZ (1040) 8283
8606
Pub. 501
Pub. 502 Pub. 550
Pub. 575
Pub. 554Schedule H
(1040)
Pub. 915
1040-VSchedule J
(1040)
8812
8863
Pub. 970
Schedule D-1
(1040)
9465
Pub. 972
4506 Pub. 535
4684
Pub. 525
Pub. 547
Use the blank spaces to
order items not listed.
Save Money and Time by Going Online!
Download or order these and other tax products at www.irs.gov/formspubs
4506-T
Pub. 587
Pub. 551
Pub. 583
Pub. 919
Pub. 9468917
5405
Pub. 4681