Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P550.cvt (24-Feb-2004) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\mxverz00\documents\Epicfiles\P929 & P550\03P550.sgm
Page 1 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 ContentsCat. No. 15093R
Important Changes for 2003......... 2Department
of the Important Reminders.............. 2InvestmentTreasury
Introduction..................... 2Internal
Revenue Income and Chapter 1. Investment Income........ 3Service
General Information............. 3
Interest Income................ 5Expenses Discount on Debt Instruments...... 12
When To Report Interest Income.... 16
How To Report Interest Income..... 16
Dividends and Other Corporate(Including Capital
Distributions............... 19
How To Report DividendGains and Losses)
Income ................... 23
Stripped Preferred Stock.......... 24
REMICs, FASITs, and OtherFor use in preparing CDOs .................... 24
S Corporations................ 26
Investment Clubs............... 262003 Returns
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters and Other
Reportable Transactions......... 28
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses...... 31
Limits on Deductions............ 31
Interest Expenses.............. 31
Bond Premium Amortization........ 33
Expenses of Producing Income..... 35
Nondeductible Expenses.......... 36
How To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 37
When To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 37
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property............ 38
What Is a Sale or Trade?.......... 38
Basis of Investment Property....... 41
How To Figure Gain or Loss....... 44
Nontaxable Trades.............. 45
Transfers Between Spouses....... 46
Related Party Transactions........ 47
Capital Gains and Losses......... 48
Capital or Ordinary Gain or
Loss..................... 48
Holding Period............... 52
Nonbusiness Bad Debts......... 53
Short Sales................. 54
Wash Sales ................. 55
Options.................... 56
Straddles................... 57
Sales of Stock to ESOPs or
Certain Cooperatives......... 60
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded Securities...... 61
Gains on Qualified Small
Business Stock............. 61
Rollover of Gain From Sale of 
Empowerment Zone Assets..... 63
Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses ................... 63Get forms and other information Special Rules for Traders in
Securities................. 71faster and easier by:
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help...... 72Internet • www.irs.gov or FTP • ftp.irs.gov
Glossary ....................... 74
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine)
Index.......................... 76

Page 2 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Changes in corporate control or capital Alien’s individual taxpayer identification
number (ITIN). If you are a nonresident orstructure.If you own stock in a corporationImportant Changes resident alien and do not have and are not eligi-that has had a change in control or a substantial
ble to get a social security number (SSN), youchange in capital structure after 2002, that cor-for 2003 must apply for an ITIN. For details on how to doporation may send you Form 1099–CAP,
so, see Form W–7, Application for IRS Individ-Changes in Corporate Control and CapitalLower maximum tax rates on net capital ual Taxpayer Identification Number, and its in-Structure. Form 1099–CAP will show the cashgain. For sales and other dispositions of prop- structions. If you already have an ITIN, enter itand fair market value of stock and other propertyerty after May 5, 2003 (including installment wherever an SSN is requested on your tax re-you received in exchange for the corporation’spayments received after that date), the maxi- turn.stock. If the total cash and fair market value ofmum tax rates on net capital gain have changed
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitlethe stock and other property is more than youras follows.
you to social security benefits or change youradjusted basis in the stock you gave up, the
• The 20% and 10% tax rates have been employment or immigration status under U.S.difference is a taxable gain. Report the gain on
lowered to 15% and 5%, respectively. law.Schedule D (Form 1040). However, a loss is not
deductible if the box below box 10 of Form• The 8% tax rate for qualified 5-year gain Photographs of missing children.The Inter-1099–CAP is checked; do not report it onhas been eliminated. Instead, the new 5% nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theSchedule D (Form 1040).rate applies to gain that would have quali- National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-fied for the 8% rate. dren. Photographs of missing children selectedReportable transactions.You may have to
by the Center may appear in this publication ondisclose information about certain transactionsThere is no change to the maximum tax rates pages that would otherwise be blank. You can(called “reportable transactions”) in which youthat apply to collectibles gain, gain on qualified help bring these children home by looking at theparticipated. This disclosure requirement ap-small business stock, and unrecaptured section photographs and calling 1–800–THE-LOSTplies to reportable transactions entered into after1250 gain. (1–800– 843–5678) if you recognize a child.2002. Reportable transactions include transac-5% rate reduced to zero in 2008. For tax tions that are the same as or substantially similaryears beginning in 2008, the 5% rate is reduced
to tax avoidance transactions identified by theto zero.
IRS, transactions that are offered under condi-Elimination of 18% rate. In 2006, the 20% Introductiontions of confidentiality, and transactions that re-rate was scheduled to be lowered to 18% forsult in large losses. You must disclosequalified 5-year gain from property with a hold- This publication provides information on the taxinformation about reportable transactions oning period that began after 2000. The 18% rate treatment of investment income and expenses.Form 8886, Reportable Transaction Disclosureand the 5-year holding period have been elimi- It explains what investment income is taxable
Statement. For more information, see chapter 2.nated. Instead, the new 15% rate applies to gain and what investment expenses are deductible. It
that would have qualified for the 18% rate. explains when and how to show these items onSale of DC Zone assets.Beginning in 2003,your tax return. It also explains how to determineTaxpayers who owned certain assets on investments in District of Columbia Enterpriseand report gains and losses on the disposition ofJanuary 1, 2001, could have elected to treatZone (DC Zone) assets held more than 5 yearsinvestment property and provides informationthose assets as sold and repurchased on thewill qualify for a special tax benefit. If you sell oron property trades and tax shelters.same date, if they paid tax for 2001 on anytrade a DC Zone asset at a gain, you will notresulting gain. The purpose of the election was The glossary at the end of this publica-have to include any qualified capital gain in yourto make any future gain on the asset eligible for tion defines many of the terms used.gross income. This exclusion applies to an inter-the 18% rate. That election is irrevocable. Thus,est in, or property of, certain businesses operat-
TIP
if you made the election, you may not amend ing in the District of Columbia. For moreyour 2001 income tax return to get a refund ofinformation, see Publication 954, Tax Incentivesthe tax you paid on the resulting gain. for Distressed Communities.More information. For more information, Investment income. This generally includes
see Capital Gain Tax Rates, in chapter 4. interest, dividends, capital gains, and other
types of distributions.Maximum tax rate on qualified dividends.
Beginning in 2003, “qualified dividends” are sub-Important Reminders
Investment expenses. These include interestject to the same 5% or 15% maximum tax rate
paid or incurred to acquire investment propertythat applies to net capital gain. They should beU.S. property acquired from a foreign
and expenses to manage or collect income fromshown in box 1b of Forms 1099–DIV (or similarperson. If you acquire a U.S. real property
investment property.statements) you receive. interest from a foreign person or firm, you may
If you have qualified dividends, you musthave to withhold income tax on the amount you
figure your tax by completing either Schedule Dpay for the property (including cash, the fairComments and suggestions. We welcome
(Form 1040), Capital Gains and Losses, or the market value of other property, and any as-your comments about this publication and your
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-sumed liability). Domestic or foreign corpora-suggestions for future editions.
sheet in the Form 1040 or 1040A instructions.tions, partnerships, trusts, and estates may alsoYou can e-mail us at *taxforms@irs.gov.For more information, see Qualified Divi-have to withhold on certain distributions andPlease put “Publications Comment” on the sub-dends and How To Report Dividend Income, in other transactions involving U.S. real propertyject line.chapter 1. interests. If you fail to withhold, you may be heldYou can write to us at the following address:liable for the tax, penalties that apply, and inter-Holding periods for qualified
est. For more information, see Publication 515,dividends.The holding periods for qualified divi-
Internal Revenue Servicedends shown in this publication may conflict withWithholding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and
Individual Forms and Publications Branchthose in your tax form instructions and other IRSForeign Entities.
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Ipublications. However, the holding periods dis-
Foreign source income. If you are a U.S. 1111 Constitution Ave. NWcussed in this publication are correct. They are
citizen with investment income from sources Washington, DC 20224based on pending legislation that would amend
outside the United States (foreign income), youthe holding periods by changing the 120-day
must report that income on your tax return un-period to a 121-day period and the 180-day
less it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whetherWe respond to many letters by telephone.period to a 181-day period. The Commissioner
you reside inside or outside the United StatesTherefore, it would be helpful if you would in-of Internal Revenue has agreed to allow taxpay-
and whether or not you receive a Form 1099clude your daytime phone number, including theers to apply the new periods as if the legislation
were presently enacted. from the foreign payer. area code, in your correspondence.
Page 2

Page 3 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 5 for information about gettingCustodian account for your child.If your
these publications and forms. child is the actual owner of an account that is
recorded in your name as custodian for the child,
1. give the child’s SSN to the payer. For example,
you must give your child’s SSN to the payer of
dividends on stock owned by your child, even
General Information
though the dividends are paid to you as custo-
Investment A few items of general interest are covered here.dian.
Recordkeeping. You should keep a Penalty for failure to supply SSN.You will
Income list showing sources and amounts ofbe subject to a penalty if, when required, you fail
investment income that you receiveto:RECORDS
during the year. Also, keep the forms you re-
1) Include your SSN on any return, state-ceive that show your investment income (FormsTopics
ment, or other document,1099–INT, Interest Income, and 1099–DIV,This chapter discusses: Dividends and Distributions, for example) as an 2) Give your SSN to another person who hasimportant part of your records.• Interest income, to include it on any return, statement, or
other document, or• Dividends and other corporate distribu-Tax on investment income of a child under
tions, 3) Include the SSN of another person on anyage 14. Part of a child’s 2003 investment in-
come may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. This return, statement, or other document.• Real estate mortgage investment conduits
may happen if all of the following are true.(REMICs), financial asset securitization in- The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-
vestment trusts (FASITs), and other collat- mum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.1) The child was under age 14 at the end oferalized debt obligations (CDOs), You will not be subject to this penalty if you2003. A child born on January 1, 1990, is
can show that your failure to provide the SSNconsidered to be age 14 at the end of• S corporations, and
was due to a reasonable cause and not to willful2003.• Investment clubs. neglect.2) The child had more than $1,500 of invest-If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also bement income (such as taxable interest andUseful Items subject to backup withholding.dividends) and has to file a tax return.
You may want to see:
3) Either parent was alive at the end of 2003.Backup withholding. Your investment in-
Publication come is generally not subject to regular with-If all of these statements are true, Form 8615
holding. However, it may be subject to backupmust be completed and attached to the child’s❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income withholding to ensure that income tax is col-tax return. If any of these statements is not true,
lected on the income. Under backup withhold-Form 8615 is not required and the child’s income❏ 537 Installment Sales
ing, the bank, broker, or other payer of interest,is taxed at his or her own tax rate.❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions original issue discount (OID), dividends, cashHowever, the parent can choose to include
patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold,❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements the child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s
as income tax, a percentage of the amount you(IRAs) return if certain requirements are met. Use
are paid. For 2004, the percentage is 28%.Form 8814 for this purpose.❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk RulesFor more information about the tax on invest-Backup withholding applies if:
❏ 1212 List of Original Issue Discount ment income of children and the parents’ elec-
1) You do not give the payer your identifica-Instruments tion, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for Children
tion number (either a social security num-and Dependents.
Form (and Instructions) ber or an employer identification number)
Beneficiary of an estate or trust.Interest, in the required manner,
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040)Interest and dividends, and other investment income you re-2) The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) noti-Ordinary Dividends ceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust isfies the payer that you gave an incorrectgenerally taxable income. You should receive a❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A)Interest and identification number,Schedule K–1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary’sOrdinary Dividends for Form 1040AShare of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from 3) The IRS notifies the payer that you areFilers the fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K–1 and itssubject to backup withholding on interest
❏ 1099 General Instructions for Forms instructions will tell you where to report the in-or dividends because you have underre-
1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G come on your Form 1040. ported interest or dividends on your in-
come tax return, or❏ 3115 Application for Change in Social security number (SSN). You mustAccounting Method 4) You are required, but fail, to certify thatgive your name and SSN to any person required
you are not subject to backup withholdingby federal tax law to make a return, statement,❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax —
for the reason described in (3).or other document that relates to you. This in-Individuals
cludes payers of interest and dividends.❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations Certification.For new accounts paying in-SSN for joint account.If the funds in a jointterest or dividends, you must certify under pen-❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 14 Whoaccount belong to one person, list that person’salties of perjury that your social security numberHave Investment Income of More name first on the account and give that person’s(SSN) is correct and that you are not subject toThan $1,500 SSN to the payer. (For information on who ownsbackup withholding. Your payer will give you athe funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’s Form W–9 , Request for Taxpayer Identificationlater.) If the joint account contains combinedInterest and Dividends Number and Certification, or similar form, tofunds, give the SSN of the person whose namemake this certification. If you fail to make this❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Seriesis listed first on the account. certification, backup withholding may begin im-EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds These rules apply both to joint ownership bymediately on your new account or investment.Issued After 1989 a married couple and to joint ownership by other
Underreported interest and dividends.❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record individuals. For example, if you open a joint
You will be considered to have underreportedRedemption of Series EE and I savings account with your child using funds be-
your interest and dividends if the IRS has deter-U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After longing to the child, list the child’s name first on
mined for a tax year that:1989 the account and give the child’s SSN.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

Page 4 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) You have a bona fide dispute with the IRS been notified by a payer that you are subject to
1) You failed to include any part of a reporta-about whether underreporting occurred. backup withholding because you have provided
ble interest or dividend payment required an incorrect SSN or employer identification3) Backup withholding will cause or is caus-to be shown on your return, or number, you can stop it by following the instruc-ing an undue hardship, and it is unlikelytions the payer gives you.2) You were required to file a return and tothat you will underreport interest and divi-
include a reportable interest or dividenddends in the future. Reporting backup withholding.If backup
payment on that return, but you failed to withholding is deducted from your interest or4) You have corrected the underreporting byfile the return. dividend income or other reportable payment,filing a return if you did not previously filethe bank or other business must give you anone and by paying all taxes, penalties, andHow to stop backup withholding due to information return for the year (for example, ainterest due for any underreported interestunderreporting.If you have been notified that Form 1099–INT) that indicates the amount with-or dividend payments.you underreported interest or dividends, you can held. The information return will show anyrequest a determination from the IRS to preventIf the IRS determines that backup withhold-backup withholding as “Federal income tax with-backup withholding from starting or to stoping should stop, it will provide you with a certifi-held.”backup withholding once it has begun. You mustcation and will notify the payers who were sentNonresident aliens.Generally, paymentsshow that at least one of the following situationsnotices earlier. made to nonresident aliens are not subject toapplies.
How to stop backup withholding due to anbackup withholding. You can use Form
1) No underreporting occurred. incorrect identification number.If you have W–8BEN , Certificate of Foreign Status of Bene-
ficial Owner for United States Tax Withholding,
Table 1–1. Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income to certify exempt status. However, this does not
exempt you from the 30% (or lower treaty) with-(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this
holding rate that may apply to your investmentpublication, especially How To Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend
income. For information on the 30% rate, seeIncome in chapter 1.)
Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Income If you file Form 1040 If you can file Form If you can file Form
Penalties.There are civil and criminal pen-1040A 1040EZ
alties for giving false information to avoid
backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500.Taxable interest that Line 8a (You may need Line 8a (You may need Line 2
The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine oftotals $1,500 or less to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as
well.) well.) up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or
both.
Ordinary dividends Line 9a (You may need Line 9a (You may need
that total $1,500 or to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as Where to report investment income.Table
less well.) well.) 1–1  gives an overview of the forms and sched-
ules to use to report some common types of
Taxable interest that Line 8a; also use Line 8a; also use investment income. But, see the rest of this
totals more than Schedule B Schedule 1 publication for detailed information about report-
$1,500 ing investment income.
Ordinary dividends Line 9a; also use Line 9a; also use Joint accounts.If two or more persons hold
that total more than Schedule B Schedule 1 property (such as a savings account, bond, or$1,500 stock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or
tenants in common, each person’s share of anyQualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the Line 9b; also use the interest or dividends from the property is deter-you do not have to file Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and mined by local law.Schedule D) Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax
Worksheet Worksheet
Example. You and your husband have a
joint money market account. Under state law,Qualified dividends (if Line 9b (Also report them You cannot use Form
half the income from the account belongs to you,you have to file on Schedule D, line 23, 1040A.
and half belongs to your husband. If you fileSchedule D) or the Schedule D Tax
Worksheet, line 2.) separate returns, you each report half of the
income.
Savings bond interest Schedule B; also use Schedule 1; also use
Income from property given to a child.you will exclude Form 8815 Form 8815
because of higher Property you give as a parent to your child under
education expenses You cannot use Form the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the
1040EZ Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law,
becomes the child’s property.
Capital gain Line 13a (Also enter any Line 10a (Also enter any Income from the property is taxable to the
distributions (if you do post-May 5 gain on line post-May 5 gain on line child, except that any part used to satisfy a legalnot have to file 13b.) 10b.) obligation to support the child is taxable to theSchedule D) parent or guardian having that legal obligation.
Capital gain Schedule D, line 13 Savings account with parent as trustee.
distributions (if you Interest income from a savings account opened
have to file Schedule for a child who is a minor, but placed in the name
D) and subject to the order of the parents as trust-
ees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of the
Gain or loss from Line 13a; also use state in which the child resides, both of theYou cannot use Formsales of stocks or Schedule D 1040A following are true.bonds
1) The savings account legally belongs to theGain or loss from Line 13a; also use child.exchanges of like-kind Schedule D and Form
investment property 8824 2) The parents are not legally permitted to
use any of the funds to support the child.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 5 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Accuracy-related penalty.An accuracy-re- Exempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest is true for accounts that mature in 1 year or less
lated penalty of 20% can be charged for under- dividends you receive from a regulated invest- and pay interest in a single payment at maturity.
payments of tax due to negligence or disregard ment company (mutual fund) are not included in If interest is deferred for more than 1 year, see
of rules or regulations or substantial understate-your taxable income. (However, see Original Issue Discount (OID), later.
ment of tax. For information on the penalty andInformation-reporting requirement, next.) You Interest subject to penalty for earlyany interest that applies, see Penalties in chap- will receive a notice from the mutual fund tellingwithdrawal. If you withdraw funds from a de-ter 2. you the amount of the exempt-interest dividends ferred interest account before maturity, you maythat you received. Exempt-interest dividendshave to pay a penalty. You must report the totalare not shown on Form 1099–DIV or Form amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-1099–INT. count during the year, without subtracting the
Interest Income penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-Information-reporting requirement.Al-
ings under How To Report Interest Income,though exempt-interest dividends are not tax-
Terms you may need to know later, for more information on how to report theable, you must show them on your tax return if
(see Glossary): interest and deduct the penalty.you have to file. This is an information-reporting
requirement and does not change the Money borrowed to invest in money mar-exempt-interest dividends into taxable income.ket certificate.The interest you pay on moneyAccrual method See How To Report Interest Income, later. borrowed from a bank or savings institution toBelow-market loan meet the minimum deposit required for a moneyNote. Exempt-interest dividends paid frommarket certificate from the institution and theCash method specified private activity bonds may be subjectinterest you earn on the certificate are two sepa-Demand loan to the alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251rate items. You must report the total interest youand its instructions for more information aboutearn on the certificate in your income. If youForgone interest this tax. (Private activity bonds are discusseditemize deductions, you can deduct the interestGift loan later under State or Local Government Obliga-you pay as investment interest, up to the amounttions.) of your net investment income. See Interest Ex-Interest
penses in chapter 3.Interest on VA dividends.Interest on insur-Nominee ance dividends that you leave on deposit with
Example. You deposited $5,000 with aOriginal issue discount the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not
bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank totaxable. This includes interest paid on dividendsPrivate activity bond make up the $10,000 minimum deposit requiredon converted United States Government Life
to buy a 6-month money market certificate. TheTerm loan Insurance policies and on National Service Life
certificate earned $575 at maturity in 2003, butInsurance policies.
you received only $265, which represented the
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).This section discusses the tax treatment of dif- $575 you earned minus $310 interest charged
Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.ferent types of interest income. on your $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form
Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You1099–INT for 2003 showing the $575 interestIn general, any interest that you receive orgenerally do not include it in your income untilyou earned. The bank also gives you a state-that is credited to your account and can beyou make withdrawals from the IRA. See Publi-ment showing that you paid $310 interest forwithdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have tocation 590 for more information. 2003. You must include the $575 in your in-be entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to this
come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-rule are discussed later.
Taxable Interest — General ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject
Form 1099–INT. Interest income is generally to the net investment income limit.
Taxable interest includes interest you receivereported to you on Form 1099–INT, or a similar
Gift for opening account.If you receive non-from bank accounts, loans you make to others,statement, by banks, savings and loans, and
cash gifts or services for making deposits or forand other sources. The following are someother payers of interest. This form shows you the
opening an account in a savings institution, yousources of taxable interest.interest you received during the year. Keep this
may have to report the value as interest.form for your records. You do not have to attachDividends that are actually interest.Certain For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts orit to your tax return. distributions commonly called dividends are ac-services valued at more than $10 must be re-Report on your tax return the total amount oftually interest. You must report as interestported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 orinterest income that you receive for the tax year.so-called “dividends” on deposits or on sharemore, gifts or services valued at more than $20This includes amounts reported to you on Formaccounts in: must be reported as interest. The value is deter-1099–INT and amounts for which you did not mined by the cost to the financial institution.• Cooperative banks,receive a Form 1099–INT.
• Credit unions,Nominees. Generally, if someone receives Example. You open a savings account at
interest as a nominee for you, that person will your local bank and deposit $800. The account• Domestic building and loan associations,
give you a Form 1099–INT showing the interest earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-• Domestic savings and loan associations,received on your behalf. culator. If no other interest is credited to your
account during the year, the Form 1099–INTIf you receive a Form 1099–INT that in- • Federal savings and loan associations,
you receive will show $35 interest for the year.cludes amounts belonging to another person, and
You must report $35 interest income on your taxsee the discussion on nominee distributions,• Mutual savings banks. return.later, under How To Report Interest Income.
Incorrect amount. If you receive a Form Interest on insurance dividends.Interest onMoney market funds. Generally, amounts1099–INT that shows an incorrect amount (or insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-you receive from money market funds should beother incorrect information), you should ask the surance company that can be withdrawn annu-reported as dividends, not as interest.issuer for a corrected form. The new Form ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to
Money market certificates, savings certifi-1099–INT you receive will be marked “Cor- your account. However, if you can withdraw it
cates, and other deferred interest accounts.rected.” only on the anniversary date of the policy (or
If you open any of these accounts, interest mayother specified date), the interest is taxable in
Form 1099–OID. Reportable interest income be paid at fixed intervals of 1 year or less duringthe year that date occurs.
may also be shown on Form 1099–OID, Origi- the term of the account. You generally must
nal Issue Discount. For more information about include this interest in your income when youPrepaid insurance premiums.Any increase
amounts shown on this form, see Original Issueactually receive it or are entitled to receive it in the value of prepaid insurance premiums,
Discount (OID), later in this chapter. without paying a substantial penalty. The same advance premiums, or premium deposit funds is
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

Page 6 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-Bonds traded flat.If you buy a bond at a or if interest is charged at a rate below the
ums due on insurance policies or made avail- discount when interest has been defaulted or applicable federal rate.
able for you to withdraw. when the interest has accrued but has not been A demand loan or gift loan that is a
paid, the transaction is described as trading abelow-market loan is generally treated as anU.S. obligations.Interest on U.S. obligations,bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is notarm’s-length transaction in which the lender issuch as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds,income and is not taxable as interest if paid later.treated as having made:issued by any agency or instrumentality of theWhen you receive a payment of that interest, it isUnited States is taxable for federal income tax 1) A loan to the borrower in exchange for aa return of capital that reduces the remainingpurposes. note that requires the payment of interestcost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues
at the applicable federal rate, andafter the date of purchase, however, is taxableInterest on tax refunds.Interest you receive
interest income for the year received or accrued.on tax refunds is taxable income. 2) An additional payment to the borrower inSee Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later in an amount equal to the forgone interest.Interest on condemnation award.If the con-this chapter.demning authority pays you interest to compen- The borrower is generally treated as transferring
sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the the additional payment back to the lender as
Below-Market Loansinterest is taxable. interest. The lender must report that amount as
interest income.If you make a below-market gift or demand loan,Installment sale payments.If a contract for
The lender’s additional payment to the bor-you must report as interest income any forgonethe sale or exchange of property provides for
rower is treated as a gift, dividend, contributioninterest (defined later) from that loan. Thedeferred payments, it also usually provides for
to capital, pay for services, or other payment,below-market loan rules and exceptions are de-interest payable with the deferred payments.
depending on the substance of the transaction.scribed in this section. For more information,That interest is taxable when you receive it. If
The borrower may have to report this paymentsee section 7872 of the Internal Revenue Codelittle or no interest is provided for in a deferred
as taxable income, depending on its classifica-and its regulations.payment contract, part of each payment may be
tion.If you receive a below-market loan, you maytreated as interest. See Unstated Interest and
These transfers are considered to occur an-be able to deduct the forgone interest as well asOriginal Issue Discount in Publication 537.
nually, generally on December 31.any interest that you actually paid, but not if it isInterest on annuity contract.Accumulated personal interest. Term loans. A term loan is any loan that isinterest on an annuity contract you sell before its
not a demand loan. A term loan is a below-mar-maturity date is taxable. Loans subject to the rules.The rules for
ket loan if the amount of the loan is more thanbelow-market loans apply to:Usurious interest.Usurious interest is inter- the present value of all payments due under theest charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as• Gift loans, loan.interest unless state law automatically changes A lender who makes a below-market term• Pay-related loans,it to a payment on the principal. loan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer-• Corporation-shareholder loans, ring an additional lump-sum cash payment toInterest income on frozen deposits.Ex-
the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to capi-clude from your gross income interest on frozen• Tax avoidance loans, and
tal, etc.) on the date the loan is made. Thedeposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the• Loans to qualified continuing care facilitiesamount of this payment is the amount of the loanyear, you cannot withdraw any part of the de-(made after October 11, 1985) under aminus the present value, at the applicable fed-posit because: continuing care contract. eral rate, of all payments due under the loan. An
1) The financial institution is bankrupt or in- equal amount is treated as original issue dis-A pay-related loan is any below-market loansolvent, or count (OID). The lender must report the annualbetween an employer and an employee or be-part of the OID as interest income. The borrower2) The state in which the institution is locatedtween an independent contractor and a personmay be able to deduct the OID as interest ex-has placed limits on withdrawals becausefor whom the contractor provides services.pense. See Original Issue Discount (OID), later.other financial institutions in the state areA tax avoidance loan is any below-market
bankrupt or insolvent. loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one ofExceptions to the below-market loan rules.
the main purposes of the interest arrangement.The amount of interest you must exclude is Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are
the interest that was credited on the frozen de- discussed here.Forgone interest.For any period, forgone in-posits minus the sum of: terest is: Exception for loans of $10,000 or less.
The rules for below-market loans do not apply to1) The net amount you withdrew from these1) The amount of interest that would be pay-any day on which the total outstanding amountdeposits during the year, and able for that period if interest accrued onof loans between the borrower and lender isthe loan at the applicable federal rate and2) The amount you could have withdrawn as $10,000 or less. This exception applies only to:was payable annually on December 31,of the end of the year (not reduced by any
minuspenalty for premature withdrawals of a 1) Gift loans between individuals if the gift
time deposit). loan is not directly used to buy or carry2) Any interest actually payable on the loanincome-producing assets, andfor the period.If you receive a Form 1099–INT for interest
income on deposits that were frozen at the end 2) Pay-related loans or corporation-share-
Applicable federal rate.Applicable federalof 2003, see Frozen deposits under How To holder loans if the avoidance of federal tax
rates are published by the IRS each month in theReport Interest Income for information about is not a principal purpose of the interest
Internal Revenue Bulletin. Some IRS officesreporting this interest income exclusion on your arrangement.
have these bulletins available for research. Seetax return. This exception does not apply to a term loanchapter 5 for other ways to get this information.The interest you exclude is treated as described in (2) above that previously has beencredited to your account in the following year.Rules for below-market loans.The rules thatsubject to the below-market loan rules. ThoseYou must include it in income in the year you canapply to a below-market loan depend on rules will continue to apply even if the outstand-withdraw it. whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, oring balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.
term loan.Example. $100 of interest was credited on Exception for loans to continuing care fa-
your frozen deposit during the year. You with-Gift and demand loans.A gift loan is anycilities.Loans to qualified continuing care fa-
drew $80 but could not withdraw any more as of below-market loan where the forgone interest is cilities under continuing care contracts are not
the end of the year. You must include $80 in in the nature of a gift. subject to the rules for below-market loans for
your income and exclude $20 from your income A demand loan is a loan payable in full at any the calendar year if the lender or the lender’s
for the year. You must include the $20 in your time upon demand by the lender. A demand loan spouse is age 65 or older at the end of the year.
income for the year you can withdraw it. is a below-market loan if no interest is charged For 2003, this exception applies only to the part
Page 6 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 7 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the total outstanding loan balance that is bonds were issued. The original 10-year matur-U.S. Savings Bonds
$151,000 or less. ity period of series E bonds has been extended
to 40 years for bonds issued before DecemberThis section provides tax information on U.S.Exception for loans without significant tax 1965 and 30 years for bonds issued after No-savings bonds. It explains how to report theeffect. Loans are excluded from the interest income on these bonds and how to treatvember 1965. Series EE and series E bonds arebelow-market loan rules if their interest arrange-transfers of these bonds. issued at a discount. The face value is payablements do not have a significant effect on theU.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi-to you at maturity.federal tax liability of the borrower or the lender.viduals include the following.These loans include: Series I bonds. Series I bonds were first
• Series HH bonds offered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed1) Loans made available by the lender to the bonds issued at their face amount with a matur-• Series EE bondsgeneral public on the same terms and con- ity period of 30 years. The face value plus allditions that are consistent with the lender’s• Series I Bonds accrued interest is payable to you at maturity.customary business practice,
Reporting options for cash method tax-2) Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or payers. If you use the cash method of report-Note. The Treasury Department has an-municipal government that are made avail- ing income, you can report the interest on seriesnounced that August 2004 will be the last issueable under a program of general applica- EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of themonth for HH/H bonds. After August 31, 2004,tion to the public, following ways.you will no longer be able to reinvest your HH/H
3) Certain employee-relocation loans, bonds or exchange your EE/E bonds for HH 1) Method 1. Postpone reporting the interestbonds.4) Certain loans from a foreign person, un- until the earlier of the year you cash orless the interest income would be effec- For other information on U.S. savingsdispose of the bonds or the year in whichtively connected with the conduct of a U.S. bonds, write to: they mature. (However, see Savingstrade or business and would not be ex- bonds traded, later.) Note. Series E bondsempt from U.S. tax under an income taxFor Series HH/H: issued in 1963 and 1973 matured in 2003.treaty, Bureau of the Public Debt If you have used method 1, you generally
Current Income Services Division5) Gift loans to a charitable organization, con- must report the interest on these bonds on
HH/H Assistance Branchtributions to which are deductible, if the your 2003 return.P.O. Box 2186total outstanding amount of loans between 2) Method 2. Choose to report the increaseParkersburg, WV 26106–2186.the organization and lender is $250,000 or in redemption value as interest each year.less at all times during the tax year, and
You must use the same method for all series EE,6) Other loans on which the interest arrange- series E, and series I bonds you own. If you doment can be shown to have no significantFor Series EE and I: not choose method 2 by reporting the increaseeffect on the federal tax liability of the Bureau of the Public Debt in redemption value as interest each year, youlender or the borrower. Accrual Services Division must use method 1.P.O. Box 1328For a loan described in (6) above, all the
If you plan to cash your bonds in theParkersburg, WV 26106–1328.facts and circumstances are used to determine if
same year that you will pay for higherthe interest arrangement has a significant effectOr, on the Internet, visit: educational expenses, you may want
TIP
on the federal tax liability of the lender or bor-www.publicdebt.treas.gov/sav/ to use method 1 because you may be able torower. Some factors to be considered are: sav.htm exclude the interest from your income. To learn
• Whether items of income and deduction how, see Education Savings Bond Program,
generated by the loan offset each other,Accrual method taxpayers.If you use an ac-later.
crual method of accounting, you must report• The amount of these items, Change from method 1. If you want tointerest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it
• The cost to you of complying with the change your method of reporting the interestaccrues. You cannot postpone reporting interest
below-market loan rules, if they were to from method 1 to method 2, you can do sountil you receive it or until the bonds mature.
apply, and without permission from the IRS. In the year ofCash method taxpayers. If you use the cashchange you must report all interest accrued to• Any reasons other than taxes for structur-method of accounting, as most individual tax-date and not previously reported for all youring the transaction as a below-marketpayers do, you generally report the interest onbonds.loan. U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But seeOnce you choose to report the interest eachSeries EE and series I bonds, below. year, you must continue to do so for all seriesIf you structure a transaction to meet this
Series HH bonds. These bonds are issued atEE, series E, and series I bonds you own and forexception, and one of the principal purposes of
face value. Interest is paid twice a year by directany you get later, unless you request permissionstructuring the transaction in that way is the
deposit to your bank account. If you are a cashto change, as explained next.avoidance of federal tax, the loan will be consid-
method taxpayer, you must report interest onered a tax-avoidance loan and this exception will Change from method 2. To change fromthese bonds as income in the year you receive it.not apply. method 2 to method 1, you must request permis-Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980.Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of sion from the IRS. Permission for the change isBefore 1980, series H bonds were issued. Se-$100,000 or less.For gift loans between indi- automatically granted if you send the IRS aries H bonds are treated the same as series HHviduals, if the outstanding loans between the statement that meets all the following require-bonds. If you are a cash method taxpayer, youlender and borrower total $100,000 or less, the ments. must report the interest when you receive it.forgone interest to be included in income by theSeries H bonds have a maturity period of 301) You have typed or printed at the top,lender and deducted by the borrower is limited toyears. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years. “Change in Method of Accounting Underthe amount of the borrower’s net investment
Section 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc.income for the year. If the borrower’s net invest-Series EE and series I bonds.Interest on
2002–9 ” (or later update).ment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated as these bonds is payable when you redeem the
zero. This limit does not apply to a loan if the bonds. The difference between the purchase2) It includes your name and social securityavoidance of federal tax is one of the main price and the redemption value is taxable inter-number under the label in (1).purposes of the interest arrangement. est.
3) It identifies the savings bonds for whichEffective dates.These rules apply to term Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds were you are requesting this change.loans made after June 6, 1984, and to demand first offered in July 1980. They have a maturity
4) It includes your agreement to:loans outstanding after that date. period of 30 years. Before July 1980, series E
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Page 8 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IRS, as discussed earlier under Change fromTable 1–2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
method 2.
IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ...
Ownership transferred.If you bought seriesyou buy a bond in your name and the name of you. E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely withanother person as co-owners, using only your
your own funds and had them reissued in yourown funds
co-owner’s name or beneficiary’s name alone,
you buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond.you must include in your gross income for the
who is the sole owner of the bond year of reissue all interest that you earned on
these bonds and have not previously reported.you and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion
But, if the bonds were reissued in your nameco-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond.
alone, you do not have to report the interestpurchase price
accrued at that time.
you and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separateThis same rule applies when bonds (otherproperty state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generallythan bonds held as community property) areproperty report one-half of the interest. transferred between spouses or incident to di-
vorce.
a) Report all interest on any bonds ac- 1099–INT at the time of redemption, the otherExample. You bought series EE bonds en-quired during or after the year of co-owner must provide you with another Formtirely with your own funds. You did not choose tochange when the interest is realized1099–INT showing the amount of interest fromreport the accrued interest each year. Later, youupon disposition, redemption, or finalthe bond that is taxable to you. The co-ownertransfer the bonds to your former spouse undermaturity, whichever is earliest, andwho redeemed the bond is a “nominee.” Seea divorce agreement. You must include the de-Nominee distributions under How To Report In-b) Report all interest on the bonds ac- ferred accrued interest, from the date of theterest Income, later, for more information aboutquired before the year of change when original issue of the bonds to the date of transfer,how a person who is a nominee reports interestthe interest is realized upon disposition, in your income in the year of transfer. Yourincome belonging to another person.redemption, or final maturity, whichever former spouse includes in income the interest on
is earliest, with the exception of the in-Both co-owners’ funds used. If you and the bonds from the date of transfer to the date of
terest reported in prior tax years.the other co-owner each contribute part of the redemption.
bond’s purchase price, the interest is generallyPurchased jointly.If you and a co-owner5) It includes your signature. taxable to each of you, in proportion to theeach contributed funds to buy series E, seriesamount each of you paid.You must attach this statement to your tax re- EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the
turn for the year of change, which you must fileCommunity property. If you and your bonds reissued in the co-owner’s name alone,
by the due date (including extensions). spouse live in a community property state and you must include in your gross income for the
You can have an automatic extension of 6hold bonds as community property, one-half of year of reissue your share of all the interest
months from the due date of your return for thethe interest is considered received by each of earned on the bonds that you have not previ-year of change (excluding extensions) to file theyou. If you file separate returns, each of you ously reported. The former co-owner does notstatement with an amended return. At the top ofgenerally must report one-half of the bond inter- have to include in gross income at the time ofthe statement, write “Filed pursuant to sectionest. For more information about community reissue his or her share of the interest earned301.9100–2.” To get this extension, you mustproperty, see Publication 555, Community Prop- that was not reported before the transfer. Thishave filed your original return for the year of theerty. interest, however, as well as all interest earnedchange by the due date (including extensions). after the reissue, is income to the formerTable 1–2. These rules are also shown inco-owner.By the date you file the original state-Table 1–2.ment with your return, you must also This income-reporting rule also applies when
send a copy to the address below. the bonds are reissued in the name of yourChild as only owner.Interest on U.S. savingsInternal Revenue Service former co-owner and a new co-owner. But thebonds bought for and registered only in theAttention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulings new co-owner will report only his or her share ofname of your child is income to your child, evenBranch) the interest earned after the transfer.if you paid for the bonds and are named asP.O. Box 7604 If bonds that you and a co-owner boughtbeneficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E,Benjamin Franklin Station jointly are reissued to each of you separately inor series I bonds, the interest on the bonds isWashington, DC 20044. the same proportion as your contribution to theincome to your child in the earlier of the year theIf you use a private delivery service, send the purchase price, neither you nor your co-ownerbonds are cashed or disposed of or the year thecopy to the Internal Revenue Service, Attention: has to report at that time the interest earnedbonds mature, unless your child chooses to re-CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulings Branch), 1111 before the bonds were reissued.port the interest income each year.Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, DC
Choice to report interest each year.The20224. Example 1. You and your spouse each
choice to report the accrued interest each yearInstead of filing this statement, you can re- spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series
quest permission to change from method 2 to can be made either by your child or by you forEE savings bond. The bond was issued to you
method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case, your child. This choice is made by filing an in-and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-
follow the form instructions for an automaticcome tax return that shows all the interestpone reporting interest on the bond. You later
change. No user fee is required. earned to date, and by stating on the return thathave the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one
your child chooses to report the interest eachin your name and one in your spouse’s name. AtCo-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued inyear. Either you or your child should keep a copythat time neither you nor your spouse has tothe names of co-owners, such as you and yourof this return. report the interest earned to the date of reissue.child or you and your spouse, interest on theUnless your child is otherwise required to filebond is generally taxable to the co-owner who Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EEa tax return for any year after making this choice,bought the bond. savings bond entirely with your own funds. Theyour child does not have to file a return only to
bond was issued to you and your spouse asreport the annual accrual of U.S. savings bondOne co-owner’s funds used. If you used
co-owners. You both postponed reporting inter-interest under this choice. However, see Tax onyour funds to buy the bond, you must pay the tax
est on the bond. You later have the bond reis-investment income of a child under age 14,on the interest. This is true even if you let the
sued as two $500 bonds, one in your name andearlier, under General Information. Neither youother co-owner redeem the bond and keep all
one in your spouse’s name. You must report halfnor your child can change the way you report thethe proceeds. Under these circumstances, since
the interest earned to the date of reissue.interest unless you request permission from thethe other co-owner will receive a Form
Page 8 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 9 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Transfer to a trust.If you own series E, series For more information on income in respect of a To figure the interest reported as a taxable distri-
decedent, see Publication 559, Survivors, Exec-bution and your interest income when you re-EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a
utors, and Administrators. deem the bond, see Worksheet for savingstrust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must
bonds distributed from a retirement orinclude in your income for that year the interest
Example 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax-profit-sharing plan under How To Report Interestearned to the date of transfer if you have not
payer, died and left you a $1,000 series EEIncome, later.already reported it. However, if you are consid-
bond. He had bought the bond for $500 and hadered the owner of the trust and if the increase in
not chosen to report the interest each year. AtSavings bonds traded. If you postponed re-value both before and after the transfer contin-
the date of death, interest of $200 had accruedporting the interest on your series EE or series Eues to be taxable to you, you can continue to
on the bond and its value of $700 was includedbonds, you did not recognize taxable incomedefer reporting the interest earned each year.in your uncle’s estate. Your uncle’s executorwhen you traded the bonds for series HH orYou must include the total interest in your in-chose not to include the $200 accrued interest inseries H bonds, unless you received cash in thecome in the year you cash or dispose of theyour uncle’s final income tax return. The $200 istrade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-bonds or the year the bonds finally mature,income in respect of the decedent. ries HH bonds.) Any cash you received is in-whichever is earlier. come up to the amount of the interest earned onYou are a cash method taxpayer and do notThe same rules apply to previously unre- the bonds traded. When your series HH or se-choose to report the interest each year as it isported interest on series EE or series E bonds if ries H bonds mature, or if you dispose of themearned. If you cash the bond when it reachesthe transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or before maturity, you report as interest the differ-maturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter-series H bonds you acquired in a trade for the ence between their redemption value and yourest income—the difference between maturityseries EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds cost. Your cost is the sum of the amount youvalue of $1,000 and the original cost of $500.traded, later. paid for the traded series EE or series E bondsFor that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane-
plus any amount you had to pay at the time ofous itemized deduction not subject to theDecedents. The manner of reporting interest the trade.2%-of-adjusted- gross-income limit) any federalincome on series E, series EE, or series I bonds,estate tax paid because the $200 interest was
after the death of the owner, depends on the Example 1. You own series EE bonds withincluded in your uncle’s estate.
accounting and income-reporting method previ- accrued interest of $523 and a redemption value
ously used by the decedent. of $2,723 and have postponed reporting theExample 2. If, in Example 1, the executor
interest. You trade the bonds for $2,500 in serieshad chosen to include the $200 accrued interestDecedent who reported interest each year.
HH bonds and $223 in cash. You must report thein your uncle’s final return, you would report onlyIf the bonds transferred because of death were
$300 as interest when you cashed the bond at $223 as taxable income in the year of the trade.owned by a person who used an accrual
maturity. $300 is the interest earned after yourmethod, or who used the cash method and had Example 2. The facts are the same as inuncle’s death.chosen to report the interest each year, the Example 1. You hold the series HH bonds untilinterest earned in the year of death up to theExample 3. If, in Example 1, you make or maturity, when you receive $2,500. You mustdate of death must be reported on that person’shave made the choice to report the increase inreport $300 as interest income in the year offinal return. The person who acquires the bondsredemption value as interest each year, youmaturity. This is the difference between theirincludes in income only interest earned after theinclude in gross income for the year you acquireredemption value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200date of death. the bond all of the unreported increase in value(the amount you paid for the series EE bonds).
Decedent who postponed reporting inter-of all series E, series EE, and series I bonds you(It is also the difference between the accrued
est. If the transferred bonds were owned by ahold, including the $200 on the bond you inher-interest of $523 on the series EE bonds and the
decedent who had used the cash method andited from your uncle. $223 cash received on the trade.)
had not chosen to report the interest each year, Choice to report interest in year of trade.Example 4. When your aunt died, sheand who had bought the bonds entirely with his You can choose to treat all of the previouslyowned series H bonds that she had acquired in aor her own funds, all interest earned before unreported accrued interest on series EE ortrade for series E bonds. You were the benefi-death must be reported in one of the following series E bonds traded for series HH bonds asciary of these bonds. Your aunt used the cashways. income in the year of the trade. If you make thismethod and did not choose to report the interestchoice, it is treated as a change from method 1.on the series E bonds each year as it accrued.1) The surviving spouse or personal repre- See Change from method 1 under Series EEYour aunt’s executor chose not to include anysentative (executor, administrator, etc.) and series I bonds, earlier.interest earned before your aunt’s death on herwho files the final income tax return of the
final return.decedent can choose to include on that Form 1099–INT for U.S. savings bondreturn all of the interest earned on theThe income in respect of the decedent is theinterest.When you cash a bond, the bank orbonds before the decedent’s death. Thesum of the unreported interest on the series Eother payer that redeems it must give you aperson who acquires the bonds then in-bonds and the interest, if any, payable on theForm 1099–INT if the interest part of the pay-cludes in income only interest earned afterseries H bonds but not received as of the date ofment you receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of yourthe date of death. your aunt’s death. You must report any interestForm 1099–INT should show the interest as thereceived during the year as income on yourdifference between the amount you received2) If the choice in (1) is not made, the interestreturn. The part of the interest that was payableand the amount paid for the bond. However,earned up to the date of death is income inbut not received before your aunt’s death isyour Form 1099–INT may show more interestrespect of the decedent. It should not beincome in respect of the decedent and maythan you have to include on your income taxincluded in the decedent’s final return. Allqualify for the estate tax deduction. For informa-return. For example, this may happen if any ofof the interest earned both before and aftertion on when to report the interest on the seriesthe following are true.the decedent’s death (except any part re-E bonds traded, see Savings bonds traded,ported by the estate on its income tax re-later. 1) You chose to report the increase in theturn) is income to the person who acquires redemption value of the bond each year.the bonds. If that person uses the cashSavings bonds distributed from a retirement The interest shown on your Formmethod and does not choose to report theor profit-sharing plan.If you acquire a U.S. 1099–INT will not be reduced by amountsinterest each year, he or she can postponesavings bond in a taxable distribution from apreviously included in income.reporting it until the year the bonds areretirement or profit-sharing plan, your income for
cashed or disposed of or the year they 2) You received the bond from a decedent.the year of distribution includes the bond’s re-
mature, whichever is earlier. In the year The interest shown on your Formdemption value (its cost plus the interest ac-
that person reports the interest, he or she 1099–INT will not be reduced by any inter-crued before the distribution). When you redeem
can claim a deduction for any federal es- est reported by the decedent before death,the bond (whether in the year of distribution or
tate tax that was paid on the part of the or on the decedent’s final return, or by thelater), your interest income includes only the
interest included in the decedent’s estate.interest accrued after the bond was distributed. estate on the estate’s income tax return.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Page 10 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) Ownership of the bond was transferred.Qualified expenses.Qualified higher educa- Example. In February 2003, Mark and
The interest shown on your Form tional expenses are tuition and fees required for Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-
1099–INT will not be reduced by interest you, your spouse, or your dependent (for whom ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in April
that accrued before the transfer. you claim an exemption) to attend an eligible 1995. They received proceeds of $7,256, repre-
educational institution. senting principal of $5,000 and interest of4) You were named as a co-owner and the Qualified expenses include any contribution$2,256. In 2003, they paid $4,000 of theirother co-owner contributed funds to buyyou make to a qualified tuition program or to a daughter’s college tuition. They are not claimingthe bond. The interest shown on your Coverdell education savings account. For infor- an education credit for that amount, and theirForm 1099–INT will not be reduced by themation about these programs, see Publication daughter does not have any tax-free educationalamount you received as nominee for the970, Tax Benefits for Education. assistance. They can exclude $1,244 ($2,256 ×other co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in Qualified expenses do not include expenses ($4,000 ÷ $7,256)) of interest in 2003. Theythis section, for more information about thefor room and board or for courses involving must pay tax on the remaining $1,012 ($2,256 −reporting requirements.) sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of a $1,244) interest.
5) You received the bond in a taxable distri-degree or certificate granting program. Figuring the interest part of the proceedsbution from a retirement or profit-sharing (Form 8815, line 6).To figure the amount ofEligible educational institutions.Theseplan. The interest shown on your Form interest to report on Form 8815, line 6, use theinstitutions include most public, private, and1099–INT will not be reduced by the inter- Line 6 Worksheet in the Form 8815 instructions.nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocationalest portion of the amount taxable as a dis-schools that are accredited and are eligible to If you previously reported any interesttribution from the plan and not taxable asparticipate in student aid programs run by the from savings bonds cashed duringinterest. (This amount is generally shownDepartment of Education. 2003, use the Alternate Line 6 Work-on Form 1099–R, Distributions From Pen-
sheet below instead.sions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Shar-Reduction for certain benefits.You must
ing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc.,reduce your qualified higher educational ex-
for the year of distribution.) penses by certain tax-free benefits the student Alternate Line 6 Worksheet
may have received. These benefits include:For more information on including the correct 1. Enter the amount from Form 8815,
line 5....................amount of interest on your return, see U.S. sav- 1) Scholarships that are exempt from tax
2. Enter the face value of all post-1989ings bond interest previously reported or Nomi- (see Publication 970, for information onseries EE bonds cashed in 2003 . .nee distributions under How To Report Interest tax-free scholarships), and 3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50)Income, later.
2) Any other nontaxable payments (other 4. Enter the face value of all series I
Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-than gifts, bequests, or inheritances) re-bonds cashed in 2003.........
empt from state and local taxes. The 5. Add lines 3 and 4............ceived for educational expenses, such as:
Form 1099–INT you receive will indi- 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1.......
TIP
a) Veterans’ educational assistance bene-cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bonds 7. Enter the amount of interest
fits,interest in box 3. Do not include this income on reported as income in previous
your state or local income tax return. years ....................b) Benefits under a qualified tuition pro-8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter thegram, or result here and on Form 8815, line 6
c) Certain employer-provided educationalEducation Savings Bond Program Modified adjusted gross income limit.assistance benefits.
The interest exclusion is limited if your modifiedYou may be able to exclude from income all or
adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:part of the interest you receive on the redemp-Effect of other education benefits.Do nottion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the • $58,500 to $73,500 for taxpayers filing sin-include in your qualified expenses any expensesyear if you pay qualified higher educational ex- gle or head of household, andthat were:penses during the same year. This exclusion is
• $87,750 to $117,750 for married taxpayersknown as the Education Savings Bond Program.1) Covered by nontaxable educational bene- filing jointly, or for a qualifying widow(er)You do not qualify for this exclusion if yourfits paid directly to, or by, the educationalwith dependent child.filing status is married filing separately. institution,
You do not qualify for the interest exclusion if2) Used to figure an education credit on FormForm 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of In- your modified AGI is equal to or more than the8863,terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds upper limit for your filing status.
3) Used to figure the nontaxable amount of aIssued After 1989, to figure your exclusion. At- Modified AGI. Modified AGI, for purposesdistribution from a Coverdell ESA, ortach the form to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. of this exclusion, is adjusted gross income (line
4) Used to figure the nontaxable amount of a21 of Form 1040A or line 34 of Form 1040)Qualified U.S. savings bonds.A qualified distribution from a qualified state tuitionfigured before the interest exclusion, and modi-U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued program. fied by adding back any:after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be
For information about these benefits, see Publi-issued either in your name (sole owner) or in 1) Foreign earned income exclusion,cation 970.your and your spouse’s names (co-owners).
2) Foreign housing exclusion and deduction,You must be at least 24 years old before the
Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in-bond’s issue date. 3) Exclusion of income for bona fide re-terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav-sidents of American Samoa,The issue date of a bond may be earlierings bonds you redeem during the year are not
than the date the bond is purchasedmore than your adjusted qualified higher educa-4) Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,
because the issue date assigned to ational expenses for the year, you may be able to
CAUTION
!
5) Exclusion for adoption benefits receivedbond is the first day of the month in which it isexclude all of the interest. If the proceeds areunder an employer’s adoption assistancepurchased. more than the expenses, you may be able to program,exclude only part of the interest.Beneficiary.You can designate any individ-To determine the excludable amount, multi-6) Deduction for tuition and fees, andual (including a child) as a beneficiary of theply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.bond. 7) Deduction for student loan interest.The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the
Verification by IRS.If you claim the exclu- qualified higher educational expenses you paid Use the worksheet in the instructions for line
sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp- during the year. The denominator (bottom part) 9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If you
tion information from the Department of of the fraction is the total proceeds you received claim any of the exclusion or deduction items
Treasury. during the year. listed above (except items 6 and 7), add the
Page 10 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 11 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount of the exclusion or deduction (exceptDiscount on Short-Term Obligations under Dis- part of the sales price as interest income for the
any deduction for tuition and fees or student loancount on Debt Instruments, later. year of sale.
interest) to the amount on line 5 of the work- If you buy a bond between interest paymentIf you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur-
sheet, and enter the total on Form 8815, line 9, dates, part of the purchase price representsity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you will
as your modified AGI. interest accrued before the date of purchase.receive payment for the difference between the
When that interest is paid to you, treat it as aproceeds of the maturing bill (par amount lessRoyalties included in modified AGI.Be- return of your capital investment, rather thanany tax withheld) and the purchase price of thecause the deduction for interest expenses attrib- interest income, by reducing your basis in thenew Treasury security. However, you must re-utable to royalties and other investments is bond. See Accrued interest on bonds underport the full amount of the interest income onlimited to your net investment income (see In- How To Report Interest Income, later in thiseach of your Treasury bills at the time it reachesvestment Interest in chapter 3), you cannot fig- chapter, for information on reporting the pay-maturity.ure the deduction for interest expenses until you ment.have figured this exclusion of savings bond in-Treasury notes and bonds. Treasury notesterest. Therefore, if you had interest expenseshave maturity periods of more than 1 year, rang-Insurancethat are attributable to royalties and deductibleing up to 10 years. Maturity periods for Treasuryon Schedule E (Form 1040), you must make a Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-bonds are longer than 10 years. Both of thesespecial computation of your deductible interest ciary of the insured person are usually not tax-Treasury issues generally are issued in denomi-to figure the net royalty income included in your able. But if you receive the proceeds innations of $1,000 to $1 million. Both notes andmodified AGI. You must figure deductible inter- installments, you must usually report part ofbonds generally pay interest every 6 months.est without regard to this exclusion of bond inter- each installment payment as interest income.Generally, you report this interest for the yearest. For more information about insurance pro-paid. When the notes or bonds mature, you canYou can use a “dummy” Form 4952, Invest- ceeds received in installments, see Publicationredeem these securities for face value.ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make the 525.Treasury notes and bonds are usually soldspecial computation. On this form, include inby auction with competitive bidding. If, afteryour net investment income your total interest Interest option on insurance.If you leave lifecompiling the competitive bids, a determinationincome for the year from series EE and I U.S. insurance proceeds on deposit with an insur-is made that the purchase price is less than thesavings bonds. Use the deductible interest ance company under an agreement to pay inter-face value, you will receive a refund for theamount from this form only to figure the net est only, the interest paid to you is taxable.difference between the purchase price and theroyalty income included in your modified AGI.face value. This amount is considered originalAnnuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-Do not attach this form to your tax return.issue discount. However, the original issue dis-ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-After you figure this interest exclusion, use acount rules (discussed later) do not apply if theceive are taxed as pension and annuity incomeseparate Form 4952 to figure your actual deduc-discount is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) offrom a nonqualified plan, not as interest income.tion for investment interest expenses, and at-the face amount, multiplied by the number of fullSee Publication 939, General Rule for Pensionstach that form to your return. years from the date of original issue to maturity.and Annuities, for information on taxation of
Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter-See De minimis OID under Original Issue Dis-pension and annuity income from nonqualified
est exclusion, you must keep a writtencount (OID), later. If the purchase price is deter-plans.
record of the qualified U.S. savingsmined to be more than the face amount, theRECORDS
bonds you redeem. Your record must includedifference is a premium. (See Bond Premium State or Localthe serial number, issue date, face value, andAmortization in chapter 3.) Government Obligationstotal redemption proceeds (principal and inter- For other information on these notes orest) of each bond. You can use Form 8818 , Interest you receive on an obligation issued by abonds, write to:Optional Form To Record Redemption of Series state or local government is generally not tax-EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989, able. The issuer should be able to tell youTreasury Directto record this information. You should also keep whether the interest is taxable. The issuerAttn: Customer Informationbills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu- should also give you a periodic (or year-end)P.O. Box 9150mentation that shows you paid qualified higher statement showing the tax treatment of the obli-Minneapolis, MN 55480–9150.educational expenses during the year. gation. If you invested in the obligation through a
Or, on the Internet, visit: trust, a fund, or other organization, that organi-
www. publicdebt.treas.gov zation should give you this information.
U.S. Treasury Bills, Even if interest on the obligation is not
subject to income tax, you may have toNotes, and Bonds
report capital gain or loss when you sellCAUTION
!
Treasury inflation-indexed securities.Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts it. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax may
These securities pay interest twice a year at a(obligations) of the U.S. Government. apply to other dispositions of the obligation.
fixed rate, based on a principal amount that is
adjusted to take into account inflation and defla-Taxation of interest.Interest income from
tion. For the tax treatment of these securities,Treasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to Tax-Exempt Interestsee Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments underfederal income tax, but is exempt from all state
Original Issue Discount (OID), later.and local income taxes. You should receive Interest on a bond used to finance government
Form 1099–INT showing the amount of interest operations generally is not taxable if the bond isRetirement, sale, or redemption.For infor-(in box 3) that was paid to you for the year. issued by a state, the District of Columbia, amation on the retirement, sale, or redemption ofU.S. possession, or any of their political subdivi-Payments of principal and interest generallyU.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or-sions. Political subdivisions include:will be credited to your designated checking ordinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non-savings account by direct deposit through the • Port authorities,taxable Trades in chapter 4 for informationTREASURY DIRECT system. about trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer-• Toll road commissions,tain other designated issues.Treasury bills.These bills generally have a • Utility services authorities,4-week, 13-week, or 26-week maturity period.
Bonds Sold Between InterestThey are issued at a discount in the amount of • Community redevelopment agencies, and
$1,000 and multiples of $1,000. The differenceDates • Qualified volunteer fire departments (forbetween the discounted price you pay for the certain obligations issued after 1980).bills and the face value you receive at maturity is If you sell a bond between interest payment
interest income. Generally, you report this inter- dates, part of the sales price represents interest There are other requirements for tax-exempt
est income when the bill is paid at maturity. See accrued to the date of sale. You must report that bonds. Contact the issuing state or local govern-
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

Page 12 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ment agency or see sections 103 and 141 • Resolution Funding Corporation. finance the construction and rehabilitation of
through 150 of the Internal Revenue Code and real property in a newly designated “Liberty• Student Loan Marketing Association.the related regulations. Zone” of New York City. Interest on these bonds
is tax exempt.
Mortgage revenue bonds. The proceeds ofObligations that are not bonds. Inter-
Market discount. Market discount on athese bonds are used to finance mortgage loansest on a state or local government obli-
tax-exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If youfor homebuyers. Generally, interest on state orgation may be tax exempt even if the
TIP
bought the bond after April 30, 1993, you canlocal government home mortgage bonds issuedobligation is not a bond. For example, interest on
choose to accrue the market discount over theafter April 24, 1979, is taxable unless the bondsa debt evidenced only by an ordinary written
period you own the bond and include it in yourare qualified mortgage bonds or qualified veter-agreement of purchase and sale may be tax
income currently, as taxable interest. See Mar-ans’ mortgage bonds.exempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer on
ket Discount Bonds under Discount on Debtdefault by the state or political subdivision mayArbitrage bonds.Interest on arbitrage bondsInstruments, later. If you do not make thatbe tax exempt. issued by state or local governments after Octo-choice, or if you bought the bond before May 1,ber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is aRegistration requirement.A bond issued af- 1993, any gain from market discount is taxablebond any portion of the proceeds of which ister June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis- when you dispose of the bond.expected to be used to buy (or to replace fundstered form for the interest to be tax exempt. For more information on the treatment ofused to buy) higher yielding investments. Amarket discount when you dispose of a tax-ex-Indian tribal government.Bonds issued afterbond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuerempt bond, see Discounted Debt Instruments1982 by an Indian tribal government are treatedintentionally uses any part of the proceeds of theunder Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss in chap-as issued by a state. Interest on these bonds isissue in this manner. ter 4.generally tax exempt if the bonds are part of an
Private activity bonds.Interest on a privateissue of which substantially all of the proceeds
activity bond that is not a qualified bond (definedare to be used in the exercise of any essential
below) is taxable. Generally, a private activitygovernment function. However, interest on pri-
bond is part of a state or local government bondDiscount onvate activity bonds (other than certain bonds for
issue that meets both of the following require-tribal manufacturing facilities) is taxable.
Debt Instrumentsments.
Original issue discount.Original issue dis-
count (OID) on tax-exempt state or local govern-1) More than 10% of the proceeds of the is-Terms you may need to know
ment bonds is treated as tax-exempt interest.sue is to be used for a private business(see Glossary):
For information on the treatment of OID use.
when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, see2) More than 10% of the payment of the prin-Market discountTax-exempt state and local government bonds cipal or interest is:under Discounted Debt Instruments in chapter Market discount bond
4. a) Secured by an interest in property to beOriginal issue discount (OID)used for a private business use (or pay-Stripped bonds or coupons. For special Premiumments for this property), orrules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga-
tions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons under b) Derived from payments for property (or
Original Issue Discount (OID), later. borrowed money) used for a private In general, a debt instrument, such as a bond,
business use. note, debenture, or other evidence of indebted-Information reporting requirement.If you
ness, that bears no interest or bears interest at amust file a tax return, you are required to show
Also, a bond is generally considered a privatelower than current market rate will usually beany tax-exempt interest you received on your
activity bond if the amount of the proceeds toissued at less than its face amount. This dis-return. This is an information-reporting require-
be used to make or finance loans to personscount is, in effect, additional interest income.ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-
other than government units is more than 5%The following are some of the types of dis-est to taxable interest. See Reporting
of the proceeds or $5 million (whichever iscounted debt instruments.tax-exempt interest under How To Report Inter-
less).est Income, later in this chapter. That discussion • U.S. Treasury bonds.also explains what to do if you receive a FormQualified bond.Interest on a private activ-
• Corporate bonds.1099–INT for tax-exempt interest. ity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. A
qualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (includ-• Municipal bonds.
ing an enterprise zone facility bond or New York
• Certificates of deposit.Taxable Interest Liberty bond), qualified student loan bond, quali-
fied small issue bond (including a tribal manu-• Notes between individuals.Interest on some state or local obligations isfacturing facility bond), qualified redevelopmenttaxable. • Stripped bonds and coupons.bond, qualified mortgage bond, qualified veter-
ans’ mortgage bond, or qualified 501(c)(3) bondFederally guaranteed bonds. Interest on • Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).
(a bond issued for the benefit of certain tax-ex-federally guaranteed state or local obligations The discount on these instruments (except mu-empt organizations).issued after 1983 is generally taxable. This rule nicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. TheInterest that you receive on these tax-ex-does not apply to interest on obligations guaran- discount on municipal bonds generally is notempt bonds (except qualified 501(c)(3) bondsteed by the following U.S. Government agen- taxable (but see State or Local Governmentand New York Liberty bonds), if issued aftercies. Obligations, earlier, for exceptions). See alsoAugust 7, 1986, generally is a “tax preference• Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran- REMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs, later, foritem” and may be subject to the alternative mini-tee was under the Northwest Power Act as information about applying the rules discussedmum tax. See Form 6251 and its instructions forin effect on July 18, 1984). in this section to the regular interest holder of amore information. real estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi-• Department of Veterans Affairs. Enterprise zone facility bonds.Interest onnancial asset securitization investment trust, or
certain private activity bonds issued by a state or• Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora- other CDO.
local government to finance a facility used in antion.
empowerment zone or enterprise community isOriginal Issue• Federal Housing Administration. tax exempt. For information on these bonds, see
Discount (OID)• Federal National Mortgage Association. Publication 954.
• Government National Mortgage Corpora- New York Liberty bonds.New York Liberty OID is a form of interest. You generally include
tion. bonds are bonds issued after March 9, 2002, to OID in your income as it accrues over the term of
Page 12 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 13 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the debt instrument, whether or not you receiveForm 1099–OID
1) You did not pay a premium.any payments from the issuer.
The issuer of the debt instrument (or your bro-A debt instrument generally has OID when 2) The instrument’s adjusted basis immedi-ker, if you held the instrument through a broker)the instrument is issued for a price that is less ately after purchase (including purchase atshould give you Form 1099–OID, Original Issuethan its stated redemption price at maturity. OID original issue) was greater than its ad-Discount, or a similar statement, if the total OIDis the difference between the stated redemption justed issue price. This is the issue pricefor the calendar year is $10 or more. Formprice at maturity and the issue price. plus the OID previously accrued, minus1099–OID will show, in box 1, the amount ofAll debt instruments that pay no interest any payment previously made on the in-OID for the part of the year that you held thebefore maturity are presumed to be issued at a strument other than qualified stated inter-bond. It also will show, in box 2, the stateddiscount. Zero coupon bonds are one example est.interest that you must include in your income. Aof these instruments. Acquisition premium reduces the amount of OIDcopy of Form 1099–OID will be sent to the IRS.The OID accrual rules generally do not apply includible in your income. For information aboutDo not file your copy with your return. Keep it forto short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma- figuring the correct amount of OID to include inyour records.turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue). your income, see Figuring OID on Long-TermIn most cases, you must report the entireSee Discount on Short-Term Obligations, later. Debt Instruments in Publication 1212.amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099–OID asFor information about the sale of a debt in-interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown Refiguring periodic interest shown on Formstrument with OID, see chapter 4. on Form 1099–OID, later in this discussion, and1099–OID. If you disposed of a debt instru-also Original issue discount (OID) adjustmentment or acquired it from another holder duringDe minimis OID. You can treat the discountunder How To Report Interest Income, later in the year, see Bonds Sold Between Interestas zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025)this chapter, for more information. Dates, earlier, for information about the treat-of the stated redemption price at maturity multi-
ment of periodic interest that may be shown inplied by the number of full years from the date ofForm 1099–OID not received. If you had
box 2 of Form 1099–OID for that instrument.original issue to maturity. This small discount isOID for the year but did not receive a Form
known as “de minimis” OID. 1099–OID, see Publication 1212, which lists
total OID on certain debt instruments and hasApplying the OID RulesExample 1. You bought a 10-year bond withinformation that will help you figure OID. If your
a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,debt instrument is not listed in Publication 1212,The rules for reporting OID depend on the dateissued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofconsult the issuer for further information aboutthe long-term debt instrument was issued.1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10the accrued OID for the year.
(the number of full years from the date of original Debt instruments issued after 1954 and
Nominee. If someone else is the holder ofissue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20 before May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if a
record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-discount is less than $25, the OID is treated as government instrument). For these instru-
ment that belongs to you and receives a Formzero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you will ments, you do not report the OID until the year
1099–OID on your behalf, that person must giverecognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.) you sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. If
you a Form 1099–OID. a gain results and the instrument is a capital
Example 2. The facts are the same as in If you receive a Form 1099–OID that in-asset, the amount of the gain equal to the OID is
Example 1, except that the bond was issued atcludes amounts belonging to another person,ordinary interest income. The rest of the gain is
$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discountsee Nominee distributions under How To Report capital gain. If there is a loss on the sale of the
is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you Interest Income, later. instrument, the entire loss is a capital loss and
must include the OID in income as it accrues no reporting of OID is required.Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099–OID.over the term of the bond. In general, the amount of gain that is ordinaryYou must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or boxinterest income equals the following amount:Debt instrument bought after original is-6 of Form 1099–OID if either of the following
sue. If you buy a debt instrument with deapply. 
minimis OID at a premium, the discount is not Number of full1) You bought the debt instrument after itsincludible in income. If you buy a debt instrument months you held Originaloriginal issue and paid a premium or anwith de minimis OID at a discount, the discount the instrument × Issueacquisition premium.is reported under the market discount rules. See Number of full DiscountMarket Discount Bonds, later in this chapter. months from date2) The debt instrument is a stripped bond or
of original issuea stripped coupon (including certain zeroExceptions to reporting OID.The OID rules to date of maturitycoupon instruments). See Figuring OIDdiscussed here do not apply to the following debtunder Stripped Bonds and Coupons, laterinstruments. Debt instruments issued after May 27, 1969in this chapter.
(after July 1, 1982, if a government instru-1) Tax-exempt obligations. (However, seeSee Original issue discount (OID) adjustmentment), and before 1985.If you hold theseStripped tax-exempt obligations, later.) under How To Report Interest Income, later in debt instruments as capital assets, you must
this chapter, for information about reporting theinclude a part of the discount in your gross2) U.S. savings bonds.
correct amount of OID. income each year that you own the instruments.3) Short-term debt instruments (those with a
Premium. You bought a debt instrument atEffect on basis. Your basis in the instru-fixed maturity date of not more than 1 year
a premium if its adjusted basis immediately afterment is increased by the amount of OID that youfrom the date of issue).
purchase was greater than the total of allinclude in your gross income.4) Obligations issued by an individual beforeamounts payable on the instrument after the
March 2, 1984. Debt instruments issued after 1984.Forpurchase date, other than qualified stated inter-
these debt instruments, you report the total OIDest.5) Loans between individuals, if all the follow- that applies each year regardless of whetherIf you bought an OID debt instrument at aing are true. you hold that debt instrument as a capital asset.premium, you generally do not have to report
a) The lender is not in the business of any OID as ordinary income. Effect on basis. Your basis in the instru-
lending money. ment is increased by the amount of OID that youQualified stated interest.In general, this is
include in your gross income.b) The amount of the loan, plus the stated interest that is unconditionally payable in
amount of any outstanding prior loans cash or property (other than debt instruments of
between the same individuals, is the issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate.
Certificates of Deposit (CDs)$10,000 or less. Acquisition premium. You bought a debt
c) Avoiding any federal tax is not one of instrument at an acquisition premium if both of If you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1
the principal purposes of the loan. the following are true. year, you must include in income each year a
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

Page 14 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
part of the total interest due and report it in the ment that occurs while you held the instrumentFiguring OID. The rules for figuring OID on
same manner as other OID. during the year. In general, an inflation-indexed stripped bonds and stripped coupons depend on
This also applies to similar deposit arrange- debt instrument is a debt instrument on which the date the debt instruments were purchased,
ments with banks, building and loan associa- the payments are adjusted for inflation and de- not the date issued.
tions, etc., including: flation (such as Treasury Inflation-Indexed Se- You must refigure the OID shown on the
curities). You should receive Form 1099–OIDForm 1099–OID you receive for a stripped bond
• Time deposits, from the payer showing the amount you mustor coupon. For information about figuring the
• Bonus plans, report as OID and any qualified stated interestcorrect amount of OID on these instruments to
paid to you during the year. For more informa-include in your income, see Figuring OID on• Savings certificates, tion, see Publication 1212. Stripped Bonds and Coupons in Publication
• Deferred income certificates, 1212. However, owners of stripped bonds and
coupons should not rely on the OID shown in• Bonus savings certificates, and Stripped Bonds and Coupons Section II of Publication 1212, because the
• Growth savings certificates. amounts listed in Section II for stripped bonds orIf you strip one or more coupons from a bondcoupons are figured without reference to theand sell the bond or the coupons, the bond anddate or price at which you acquired them.Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generallycoupons are treated as separate debt instru-
must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are CDs Stripped inflation-indexed debt instru-ments issued with OID.
that are not in registered form. They are not ments. OID on stripped inflation-indexed debtThe holder of a stripped bond has the right toissued in the depositor’s name and are transfer- instruments is figured under the discount bondreceive the principal (redemption price) pay-able from one individual to another. method. This method is described in sectionment. The holder of a stripped coupon has theBanks must provide the IRS and the person 1.1275–7(e) of the regulations.right to receive interest on the bond.redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099–INT.Stripped bonds and stripped coupons in-Stripped tax-exempt obligations.You doclude:Time deposit open account arrangement. not have to pay tax on OID on any strippedThis is an arrangement with a fixed maturity date tax-exempt bond or coupon that you bought1) Zero coupon instruments available throughin which you make deposits on a schedule ar- before June 11, 1987. However, if you acquiredthe Department of the Treasury’s Separateranged between you and your bank. But there is it after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OIDTrading of Registered Interest and Princi-no actual or constructive receipt of interest until on it to determine its basis when you dispose ofpal of Securities (STRIPS) program andthe fixed maturity date is reached. For instance, it. See Original issue discount (OID) on debtgovernment-sponsored enterprises suchyou and your bank enter into an arrangement instruments under Stocks and Bonds in chapteras the Resolution Funding Corporationunder which you agree to deposit $100 each 4.and the Financing Corporation, andmonth for a period of 5 years. Interest will be You may have to pay tax on part of the OIDcompounded twice a year at 71/2%, but payable 2) Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se-on stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons thatonly at the end of the 5-year period. You mustcurities that represent ownership interestsyou bought after June 10, 1987. For informationinclude a part of the interest in your income asin those securities, such as obligationson figuring the taxable part, see Tax-ExemptOID each year. Each year the bank must give backed by U.S. Treasury bonds that areBonds and Coupons under Figuring OID onyou a Form 1099–OID to show you the amount offered primarily by brokerage firms.Stripped Bonds and Coupons in Publicationyou must include in your income for the year. 1212.
Seller.If you strip coupons from a bond andRedemption before maturity.If, before the
sell the bond or coupons, include in income thematurity date, you redeem a deferred interest Market Discount Bonds
interest that accrued while you held the bondaccount for less than its stated redemption price
A market discount bond is any bond havingbefore the date of sale to the extent you did notat maturity, you can deduct the amount of OID
market discount except:previously include this interest in your income.that you previously included in income but did
For an obligation acquired after October 22,not receive.
1) Short-term obligations (those with fixed1986, you must also include the market discount
maturity dates of up to 1 year from theRenewable certificates.If you renew a CD atthat accrued before the date of sale of the
date of issue),maturity, it is treated as a redemption and astripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you did
purchase of a new certificate. This is true re-not previously include this discount in your in-2) Tax-exempt obligations that you boughtgardless of the terms of renewal. come. before May 1, 1993,
Add the interest and market discount that3) U.S. savings bonds, andyou include in income to the basis of the bondFace-Amount Certificates and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be-4) Certain installment obligations.
tween the items you keep and the items you sell,These certificates are subject to the OID rules. Market discount arises when the value of abased on the fair market value of the items. TheThey are a form of endowment contracts issued debt obligation decreases after its issue date,difference between the sale price of the bond (orby insurance or investment companies for either generally because of an increase in interestcoupon) and the allocated basis of the bond (ora lump-sum payment or periodic payments, with rates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar-coupon) is your gain or loss from the sale.the face amount becoming payable on the ma- ket, it may have market discount.Treat any item you keep as an OID bondturity date of the certificate. When you buy a market discount bond, youoriginally issued and bought by you on the saleIn general, the difference between the face can choose to accrue the market discount overdate of the other items. If you keep the bond,amount and the amount you paid for the contract the period you own the bond and include it intreat the amount of the redemption price of theis OID. You must include a part of the OID in your income currently as interest income. If youbond that is more than the basis of the bond asyour income over the term of the certificate. do not make this choice, the following rulesthe OID. If you keep the coupons, treat theThe issuer must give you a statement on generally apply. amount payable on the coupons that is moreForm 1099–OID indicating the amount you
than the basis of the coupons as the OID.must include in your income each year. 1) You must treat any gain when you dispose
of the bond as ordinary interest income, upBuyer. If you buy a stripped bond or strippedto the amount of the accrued market dis-coupon, treat it as if it were originally issued onInflation-Indexed count. See Discounted Debt Instrumentsthe date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond,Debt Instruments under Capital Gains and Losses in chaptertreat as OID any excess of the stated redemp-4.If you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument tion price at maturity over your purchase price. If
(other than a series I U.S. savings bond), you you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID any 2) You must treat any partial payment of prin-
must report as OID any increase in the excess of the amount payable on the due date of cipal on the bond as ordinary interest in-
inflation-adjusted principal amount of the instru- the coupon over your purchase price. come, up to the amount of the accrued
Page 14 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 15 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
market discount. See Partial principal pay-method to figure market discount (instead ofDiscount on
ments, later in this discussion. OID), treat the bond as having been issued on Short-Term Obligationsthe date you acquired it. Treat the amount of3) If you borrow money to buy or carry theyour basis (immediately after you acquired theWhen you buy a short-term obligation (one withbond, your deduction for interest paid onbond) as the issue price. Then apply the formulaa fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from thethe debt is limited. See Limit on interest shown in Publication 1212. date of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga-deduction for market discount bonds under
tion, you can generally choose to include anyWhen To Deduct Investment Interest in Choosing to include market discount in in-discount and interest payable on the obligationchapter 3. come currently. You can make this choice ifin income currently. If you do not make thisyou have not revoked a prior choice to includechoice, the following rules generally apply.Market discount. Market discount is the market discount in income currently within the
amount of the stated redemption price of a bondlast 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at-1) You must treat any gain when you sell,at maturity that is more than your basis in thetaching to your timely filed return a statement inexchange, or redeem the obligation as or-bond immediately after you acquire it. You treatwhich you: dinary income, up to the amount of themarket discount as zero if it is less than ratable share of the discount. See Dis-1) State that you have included market dis-one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated redemp- counted Debt Instruments under Capitalcount in your gross income for the yeartion price of the bond multiplied by the number of Gains and Losses in chapter 4.under section 1278(b) of the Internal Rev-full years to maturity (after you acquire the
enue Code, and 2) If you borrow money to buy or carry thebond).
obligation, your deduction for interest paidIf a market discount bond also has OID, the2) Describe the method you used to figure on the debt is limited. See Limit on interestmarket discount is the sum of the bond’s issuethe accrued market discount for the year.deduction for short-term obligations underprice and the total OID includible in the gross
Once you make this choice, it will apply to allWhen To Deduct Investment Interest inincome of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, the
market discount bonds that you acquire duringchapter 3.total OID that accrued) before you acquired the
the tax year and in later tax years. You cannotbond, reduced by your basis in the bond immedi-
revoke your choice without the consent of theately after you acquired it. Short-term obligations for which no choice
IRS. For information on how to revoke youris available.You must include any discount orBonds acquired at original issue.Generally, choice, see section 12A of the Appendix to Rev-interest in current income as it accrues for anya bond that you acquired at original issue is not aenue Procedure 2002–9 in Internal Revenueshort-term obligation (other than a tax-exemptmarket discount bond. If your adjusted basis in aBulletin 2002–3. You can find this Internal Rev-obligation) that is:bond is determined by reference to the adjustedenue Bulletin at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/
basis of another person who acquired the bond 1) Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer,irb02-03.pdf.
at original issue, you are also considered toAlso see Election To Report All Interest as2) Held primarily for sale to customers in thehave acquired it at original issue. OID, later. If you make that election, you mustordinary course of your trade or business,use the constant yield method.Exceptions. A bond you acquired at origi-
3) Held by a bank, regulated investment com-nal issue can be a market discount bond if eitherEffect on basis.You increase the basis of pany, or common trust fund,of the following is true. your bonds by the amount of market discount
4) Held by certain pass-through entities,you include in your income.1) Your cost basis in the bond is less than the
5) Identified as part of a hedging transaction,bond’s issue price. Partial principal payments.If you receive a orpartial payment of principal on a market discount2) The bond is issued in exchange for a mar-
bond that you acquired after October 22, 1986,6) A stripped bond or stripped coupon heldket discount bond under a plan of reorgan-
and you did not choose to include the discount inby the person who stripped the bond orization. (This does not apply if the bond is
income currently, you must treat the payment ascoupon (or by any other person whose ba-issued in exchange for a market discount
ordinary interest income up to the amount of thesis in the obligation is determined by refer-bond issued before July 19, 1984, and the
bond’s accrued market discount. Reduce the ence to the basis in the hands of thatterms and interest rates of both bonds are
amount of accrued market discount reportableperson).the same.)
as interest at disposition by that amount.
There are 3 methods you can use to figureAccrued market discount.The accrued mar- Effect on basis.Increase the basis of your
accrued market discount for this purpose. Youket discount is figured in one of two ways. obligation by the amount of discount you include
can choose to figure accrued market discount:in income currently.Ratable accrual method.Treat the market
discount as accruing in equal daily installments1) On the basis of the constant yield method,Figuring the accrued discount.Figure the
during the period you hold the bond. Figure thedescribed earlier, accrued discount by using either the ratable
daily installments by dividing the market dis- accrual method or the constant yield method2) In proportion to the accrual of OID for anycount by the number of days after the date you discussed previously in Accrued market dis-accrual period, if the debt instrument hasacquired the bond, up to and including its matur- count under Market Discount Bonds, earlier.OID, ority date. Multiply the daily installments by the
Government obligations. For an obligationnumber of days you held the bond to figure your 3) In proportion to the amount of stated inter-
described above that is a short-term govern-accrued market discount. est paid in the accrual period, if the debt
ment obligation, the amount you include in yourinstrument has no OID.Constant yield method. Instead of using income for the current year is the accrued acqui-the ratable accrual method, you can choose to Under method (2) above, figure accruedsition discount, if any, plus any other accruedfigure the accrued discount using a constant market discount for a period by multiplying theinterest payable on the obligation. The acquisi-interest rate (the constant yield method). Make total remaining market discount by a fraction.tion discount is the stated redemption price atthis choice by attaching to your timely filed return The numerator (top part) of the fraction is thematurity minus your basis. a statement identifying the bond and stating that OID for the period, and the denominator (bottomIf you choose to use the constant yieldyou are making a constant interest rate election. part) is the total remaining OID at the beginningmethod to figure accrued acquisition discount,The choice takes effect on the date you acquired of the period. treat the cost of acquiring the obligation as thethe bond. If you choose to use this method for Under method (3) above, figure accruedissue price. If you choose to use this method,any bond, you cannot change your choice for market discount for a period by multiplying theyou cannot change your choice.that bond. total remaining market discount by a fraction.
For information about using the constant The numerator is the stated interest paid in theNongovernment obligations. For an obliga-
yield method, see Figuring OID using the con-accrual period, and the denominator is the total tion listed above that is not a government obliga-
stant yield method under Debt Instruments Is-stated interest remaining to be paid at the begin- tion, the amount you include in your income for
sued After 1984 in Publication 1212. To use this ning of the accrual period. the current year is the accrued OID, if any, plus
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

Page 16 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any other accrued interest payable. If youAccrual method
choose the constant yield method to figure ac- How To ReportCash methodcrued OID, apply it by using the obligation’s
issue price. Interest Income
When to report your interest income depends onChoosing to include accrued acquisition Terms you may need to knowwhether you use the cash method or an accrualdiscount instead of OID.You can choose to (see Glossary):method to report income.report accrued acquisition discount (defined
earlier under Government obligations) rather
than accrued OID on these short-term obliga- NomineeCash method. Most individual taxpayers usetions. Your choice will apply to the year for whichthe cash method. If you use this method, youOriginal issue discount (OID)it is made and to all later years and cannot begenerally report your interest income in the yearchanged without the consent of the IRS. in which you actually or constructively receive it.
You must make your choice by the due date Generally, you report all of your taxable interestHowever, there are special rules for reporting
of your return, including extensions, for the first income on line 8a, Form 1040; line 8a, Formthe discount on certain debt instruments. See
year for which you are making the choice. Attach 1040A; or line 2, Form 1040EZ.U.S. Savings Bonds and Discount on Debt In-
a statement to your return or amended return You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your intereststruments, earlier.indicating: income is more than $1,500. Instead, you must
use Form 1040A or Form 1040.Example. On September 1, 2001, you1) Your name, address, and social security In addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ ifloaned another individual $2,000 at 12% com-number, you must use Form 1040, as described later, orpounded annually. You are not in the business
if any of the statements listed under Schedule B,of lending money. The note stated that principal2) The choice you are making and that it is later, are true.and interest would be due on August 31, 2003.being made under section 1283(c)(2) of
the Internal Revenue Code, In 2003, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi- Form 1040A. You must complete Part I ofpal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash3) The period for which the choice is being Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) if you file Form 1040Amethod, you must include in income on yourmade and the obligation to which it ap- and any of the following are true. 2003 return the $508.80 interest you received inplies, and that year. 1) Your taxable interest income is more than
4) Any other information necessary to show $1,500.Constructive receipt.You constructivelyyou are entitled to make this choice.receive income when it is credited to your ac-2) You are claiming the interest exclusion
count or made available to you. You do not needunder the Education Savings Bond Pro-
Choosing to include accrued discount and to have physical possession of it. For example,gram (discussed earlier).
other interest in current income.If you ac- you are considered to receive interest, divi-3) You received interest from a seller-fi-quire short-term discount obligations that are notdends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-nanced mortgage, and the buyer used thesubject to the rules for current inclusion in in-count in a bank, savings and loan, or similarproperty as a home.come of the accrued discount or other interest,financial institution, or interest on life insurance
you can choose to have those rules apply. This 4) You received a Form 1099–INT for tax-ex-policy dividends left to accumulate, when they
choice applies to all short-term obligations you empt interest.are credited to your account and subject to your
acquire during the year and in all later years.withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet5) You received a Form 1099–INT for U.S.You cannot change this choice without the con-entered in your passbook. savings bond interest that includessent of the IRS. amounts you reported before 2003.You constructively receive income on theThe procedures to use in making this choicedeposit or account even if you must: 6) You received, as a nominee, interest thatare the same as those described for choosing to
actually belongs to someone else.include acquisition discount instead of OID on1) Make withdrawals in multiples of evennongovernment obligations in current income. 7) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter-amounts,However, you should indicate that you are mak- est on frozen deposits.ing the choice under section 1282(b)(2) of the2) Give a notice to withdraw before making
List each payer’s name and the amount of inter-Internal Revenue Code. the withdrawal,
est income received from each payer on line 1. IfAlso see the following discussion. If you3) Withdraw all or part of the account to with-you received a Form 1099–INT or Formmake the election to report all interest currentlydraw the earnings, or 1099–OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-as OID, you must use the constant yield method. age firm as the payer.4) Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless
You cannot use Form 1040A if you must usethe interest you are to receive on an earlyElection To Report Form 1040, as described next.withdrawal or redemption is substantiallyAll Interest as OID less than the interest payable at maturity.Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead
Generally, you can elect to treat all interest on a of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:
debt instrument acquired during the tax year asAccrual method. If you use an accrual 1) You forfeited interest income because ofOID and include it in income currently. For pur-method, you report your interest income whenthe early withdrawal of a time deposit,poses of this election, interest includes statedyou earn it, whether or not you have received it.interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimis 2) You received or paid accrued interest onInterest is earned over the term of the debtOID, market discount, de minimis market dis- securities transferred between interestinstrument.count, and unstated interest as adjusted by any payment dates,amortizable bond premium or acquisition pre-Example. If, in the previous example, you3) You had a financial account in a foreignmium. See Treasury Regulation 1.1272–3. use an accrual method, you must include the country, unless the combined value of all
interest in your income as you earn it. You wouldforeign accounts was $10,000 or less dur-
report the interest as follows: 2001, $80; 2002,ing all of 2003 or the accounts were with
$249.60; and 2003, $179.20. certain U.S. military banking facilities,When To Report
4) You acquired taxable bonds after 1987
Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds isInterest Income and choose to reduce interest income from
taxable in the year the coupon becomes due andthe bonds by any amortizable bond pre-
Terms you may need to know payable. It does not matter when you mail themium (discussed in chapter 3 under Bond
coupon for payment.(see Glossary): Premium Amortization), or
Page 16 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 17 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional)PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0112
Interest Income
Interest income not included in box 31PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
$
Early withdrawal penalty Interest on U.S. Savings
Bonds and Treas. obligations
32RECIPIENT’S name
$$
Federal income tax withheld4Street address (including apt. no.)
$
Foreign country or U.S.
possession
7Foreign tax paid6City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (optional)
$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-INT
Investment expenses5
$
2003
5) You are reporting OID in an amount more not add tax-exempt interest in the total on Form itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-
or less than the amount shown on Form 1040EZ, line 2. ment expenses.
1099–OID. If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of FormYou should not have received a Form
1099–INT, you must file Form 1040. You may1099–INT for tax-exempt interest. But if you did,
Schedule B. You must complete Part I of be able to take a credit for the amount shown inyou must fill in Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or
Schedule B (Form 1040) if you file Form 1040 box 6 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct thisSchedule B (Form 1040). See the Schedule 1 or
and any of the following apply. amount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as “OtherSchedule B instructions for how to report this. Be
taxes.” To take the credit, you may have to filesure to also show this tax-exempt interest on line
1) Your taxable interest income is more than Form 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor-8b.
$1,500. mation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax CreditDo not report interest from an individ-for Individuals.2) You are claiming the interest exclusion ual retirement arrangement (IRA) as
under the Education Savings Bond Pro- tax-exempt interest.
CAUTION
!
Form 1099–OID. The taxable OID on a dis-gram (discussed earlier).
counted obligation for the part of the year you
3) You had a foreign account. Form 1099–INT. Your taxable interest in-owned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099–OID.
come, except for interest from U.S. savingsInclude this amount in your total taxable interest4) You received interest from a seller-fi-
bonds and Treasury obligations, is shown in boxincome. But see Refiguring OID shown on Formnanced mortgage, and the buyer used the
1 of Form 1099–INT. Add this amount to any1099–OID under Original Issue Discount (OID),property as a home.
other taxable interest income you received. Youearlier.
5) You received a Form 1099–INT for tax-ex-must report all of your taxable interest incomeYou must report all taxable OID even if youempt interest. even if you do not receive a Form 1099–INT.do not receive a Form 1099–OID.
6) You received a Form 1099–INT for U.S. Box 2 of Form 1099–OID shows any taxableIf you forfeited interest income because of
savings bond interest that includes interest on the obligation other than OID. Addthe early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-
amounts you reported before 2003. this amount to the OID shown in box 1 andductible amount will be shown on Form
include the result in your total taxable income.1099–INT, in box 2. See Penalty on early with-7) You received, as a nominee, interest thatdrawal of savings, later. If you forfeited interest or principal on theactually belongs to someone else.
obligation because of an early withdrawal, theBox 3 of Form 1099–INT shows the amount
8) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter- deductible amount will be shown in box 3. Seeof interest income you received from U.S. sav-
est on frozen deposits. Penalty on early withdrawal of savings, later.ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and
Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3Box 4 of Form 1099–OID will contain an9) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter-
to any other taxable interest income you re-amount if you were subject to backup withhold-est on a bond that you bought between
ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 wasing. Report the amount from box 4 on Forminterest payment dates.
previously included in your interest income. If1040EZ, line 7, on Form 1040A, line 39, or on
10) Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list ispart of the amount shown in box 3 was previ-Form 1040, line 61.
true. ously included in your interest income, see U.S. Box 7 of Form 1099–OID shows investment
savings bond interest previously reported, later. expenses you may be able to deduct as anOn line 1, Part I, list each payer’s name and the
If you redeemed U.S. savings bonds you boughtitemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-amount received from each. If you received a
after 1989 and you paid qualified educationalment expenses.Form 1099–INT or Form 1099–OID from a bro-
expenses, see Interest excluded under the Edu-kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.
cation Savings Bond Program, later. U.S. savings bond interest previously
Box 4 (federal income tax withheld) of Formreported. If you received a Form 1099–INTReporting tax-exempt interest.Report the
1099–INT will contain an amount if you werefor U.S. savings bond interest, the form maytotal of your tax-exempt interest (such as inter-
subject to backup withholding. Report theshow interest you do not have to report. Seeest or accrued OID on certain state and munici-
amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7, onForm 1099–INT for U.S. savings bond interestpal bonds) and exempt-interest dividends from a
Form 1040A, line 39, or on Form 1040, line 61.under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.mutual fund on line 8b of Form 1040A or Form
Box 5 of Form 1099–INT shows investment1040. If you file Form 1040EZ, enter “TEI” and On line 1, Part I of Schedule B (Form 1040),
expenses you may be able to deduct as anthe amount in the space to the left of line 2. Do or on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Page 18 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
report all the interest shown on your Form earlier), your interest income does not include qualified savings bonds and pay qualified higher
1099–INT. Then follow these steps. the interest accrued before the distribution and educational expenses during the same year.
taxed as a distribution from the plan. For more information on the exclusion and
1) Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal qualified higher educational expenses, see theUse the worksheet below to figure theof all interest listed on line 1. earlier discussion under Education Savingsamount you subtract from the interestBond Program.2) Below the subtotal write “U.S. Savings shown on Form 1099–INT. You must show your total interest from quali-Bond Interest Previously Reported” and
fied savings bonds that you cashed during 2003enter amounts previously reported or inter-
on line 6 of Form 8815 and on line 1 of eitherest accrued before you received the bond.A. Write the amount of cash received Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Schedule B (Formupon redemption of the bond....3) Subtract these amounts from the subtotal 1040). After completing Form 8815, enter theB. Write the value of the bond at theand enter the result on line 2. result from line 14 (Form 8815) on line 3 oftime of distribution by the plan....
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or line 3 of ScheduleC. Subtract the amount on line B from
B (Form 1040).the amount on line A. This is theExample 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav-
amount of interest accrued on theings bonds for you when you were a child. The Interest on seller-financed mortgage.If anbond since it was distributed by thebonds were issued in your name, and the inter- individual buys his or her home from you in aplan .....................est on the bonds was reported each year as it sale that you finance, you must report theD. Write the amount of interest shownaccrued. (See Choice to report interest each buyer’s name, address, and social security num-on your Form 1099–INT.......year under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.) ber on line 1 of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or lineE. Subtract the amount on line C fromIn March 2003, you redeemed one of the 1 of Schedule B (Form 1040). If you do not, youthe amount on line D. This is thebonds — a $1,000 series EE bond. The bond may have to pay a $50 penalty. The buyer mayamount you include in “U.S. Savingswas originally issued in March 1984. When you have to pay a $50 penalty if he or she does notBond Interest Previously Reported”redeemed the bond, you received $1,580.80 for give you this information.Your employer should tell you the value ofit. You must also give your name, address, andeach bond on the date it was distributed.The Form 1099–INT you received shows social security number (or employer identifica-
interest income of $1,080.80. However, since tion number) to the buyer. If you do not, you mayExample. You received a distribution of se-the interest on your savings bonds was reported have to pay a $50 penalty.ries EE U.S. savings bonds in December 2000yearly, you need only include the $28 interest
from your company’s profit-sharing plan. Frozen deposits.Even if you receive a Formthat accrued from January 2003 to March 2003.
In March 2003, you redeemed a $100 series1099–INT for interest on deposits that you couldYou received no other taxable interest forEE bond that was part of the distribution younot withdraw at the end of 2003, you must ex-2003. You file Form 1040A. received in 2000. You received $103.68 for theclude these amounts from your gross income.On line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),bond the company bought in May 1990. The (See Interest income on frozen deposits underenter your interest income as shown on Formvalue of the bond at the time of distribution inInterest Income, earlier.) Do not include this1099–INT — $1,080.80. (If you had other tax-2000 was $93.04. (This is the amount you in-income on line 8a of Form 1040A or Form 1040.able interest income, you would enter it next andcluded on your 2000 return.) The bank gave youIn Part I of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Part I ofthen enter a subtotal, as described earlier,a Form 1099–INT that shows $53.68 interestSchedule B (Form 1040), include the full amountbefore going to the next step.) Several lines(the total interest from the date the bond wasof interest shown on your Form 1099–INT onabove line 2, write “U.S. Savings Bond Interestpurchased to the date of redemption). Since aline 1. Several lines above line 2, put a subtotalPreviously Reported” and enter $1,052.80 part of the interest was included in your incomeof all interest income. Below this subtotal, write($1,080.80 − $28.00). Subtract $1,052.80 fromin 2000, you need to include in your 2003 in-“Frozen Deposits” and show the amount of inter-$1,080.80 and write $28 on line 2. Enter $28 oncome only the interest that accrued after theest that you are excluding. Subtract this amountline 4 of Schedule 1 and on line 8a of Formbond was distributed to you. from the subtotal and write the result on line 2.1040A. On line 1 of Schedule B (Form 1040), include
Accrued interest on bonds.If you received aall the interest shown on your Form 1099–INTExample 2. Your uncle died and left you a Form 1099–INT that reflects accrued interestas well as any other taxable interest income you$1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bond paid on a bond you bought between interestreceived. Several lines above line 2, put a sub-when it reaches maturity. payment dates, include the full amount showntotal of all interest listed on line 1. Below thisYour uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $500 as interest on the Form 1099–INT on line 1, Partsubtotal write “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previ-of the amount you receive upon redemption is I of Schedule B (Form 1040). Then, below aously Reported” and enter the amount figuredinterest income. Your uncle’s executor included subtotal of all interest income listed, write “Ac-on the worksheet below.in your uncle’s final return $200 of the interest crued Interest” and the amount of accrued inter-that had accrued at the time of your uncle’s est that you paid to the seller. That amount isA. Write the amount of cash receiveddeath. You have to include only $300 in your taxable to the seller, not you. Subtract thatupon redemption of the bond . . . $103.68income. amount from the interest income subtotal. EnterB. Write the value of the bond at theThe bank where you redeem the bond gives the result on line 2 and also on Form 1040, linetime of distribution by the plan . . . 93.04you a Form 1099–INT showing interest income 8a.C. Subtract the amount on line B fromof $500. You also receive a Form 1099–INT For more information, see Bonds Sold Be-the amount on line A. This is theshowing taxable interest income of $300 from tween Interest Dates, earlier.amount of interest accrued on theyour savings account. bond since it was distributed by Nominee distributions. If you received aYou file Form 1040 and you complete the plan.................. $10.64 Form 1099–INT that includes an amount youSchedule B. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list theD. Write the amount of interest shown received as a nominee for the real owner, report$500 and $300 interest amounts shown on youron your Form 1099–INT...... $53.68 the full amount shown as interest on the FormForms 1099. Several lines above line 2, you putE. Subtract the amount on line C from 1099–INT on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Forma subtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, writethe amount on line D. This is the
1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Then, be-“U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Re- amount you include in “U.S.
low a subtotal of all interest income listed, writeported” and enter the $200 interest included inSavings Bond Interest Previously
“Nominee Distribution” and the amount that ac-your uncle’s final return. Subtract the $200 fromReported”................ $43.04
tually belongs to someone else. Subtract thatthe subtotal and write $600 on line 2. You thenSubtract $43.04 from the subtotal and enter theamount from the interest income subtotal. Entercomplete the rest of the form. result on line 2 of Schedule B. You then com-the result on line 2 and also on line 8a of FormWorksheet for savings bonds distributedplete the rest of the form. 1040A or 1040.from a retirement or profit-sharing plan.If
you cashed a savings bond acquired in a taxableInterest excluded under the Education Sav- File Form 1099–INT with the IRS.If you
distribution from a retirement or profit-sharingings Bond Program. Use Form 8815, to fig- received interest as a nominee in 2003, you
plan (as discussed under U.S. Savings Bonds, ure your interest exclusion when you redeem must file a Form 1099–INT for that interest with
Page 18 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 19 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099–INT with a Identify the amount as “OID Adjustment” and dividend is declared, but before it is paid, the
add it to the subtotal. owner of record (usually the payee shown on theForm 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal
dividend check) must include the dividend inof U.S. Information Returns, to your InternalPenalty on early withdrawal of savings.If income.Revenue Service Center by March 1, 2004 you withdraw funds from a time-savings or other(March 31, 2004 if you file Form 1099–INT Dividends received in January.If a regu-deferred interest account before maturity, youelectronically). Give the actual owner of the in- lated investment company (mutual fund) or realmay be charged a penalty. The Form 1099–INTterest Copy B of the Form 1099–INT by Febru- estate investment trust (REIT) declares a divi-or similar statement given to you by the financialary 2, 2004. On Form 1099–INT, you should be dend (including any exempt-interest dividend orinstitution will show the total amount of interestlisted as the “Payer.” Prepare one Form capital gain distribution) in October, November,in box 1 and will show the penalty separately in1099–INT for each other owner and show that or December payable to shareholders of recordbox 2. You must include in income all the inter-person as the “Recipient.” However, you do not on a date in one of those months but actuallyest shown in box 1. You can deduct the penaltyhave to file Form 1099–INT to show payments pays the dividend during January of the nexton line 31, Form 1040. Deduct the entire penaltyfor your spouse. For more information about the calendar year, you are considered to have re-even if it is more than your interest income.reporting requirements and the penalties for fail- ceived the dividend on December 31. You reporture to file (or furnish) certain information returns, the dividend in the year it was declared.see the General Instructions for Forms 1099,
1098, 5498, and W2–G. Dividends and Ordinary DividendsSimilar rules apply to OID reported to you as
a nominee on Form 1099–OID. You must file aOther Corporate Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com-Form 1099–OID with Form 1096 to show the mon type of distribution from a corporation. Theyproper distributions of the OID. Distributions are paid out of the earnings and profits of a
corporation and are ordinary income to you. ThisExample. You and your sister have a jointDividends are distributions of money, stock, ormeans they are not capital gains. You can as-savings account that paid $1,500 interest forother property paid to you by a corporation. Yousume that any dividend you receive on common2003. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds inalso may receive dividends through a partner-or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unlessthis account, and you and she have agreed toship, an estate, a trust, or an association that isthe paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi-share the yearly interest income in proportion totaxed as a corporation. However, some nary dividends will be shown in box 1a of thethe amount that each of you has invested. Be-amounts you receive that are called dividendsForm 1099–DIV you receive.cause your social security number was given toare actually interest income. (See Dividends that
the bank, you received a Form 1099–INT forare actually interest under Taxable Interest —
2003 that includes the interest income earnedGeneral earlier.) Qualified Dividends
belonging to your sister. This amount is $450, orThe most common kinds of distributions are:
30% of the total interest of $1,500. Qualified dividends are the ordinary dividends• Ordinary dividends, received in tax years beginning after 2002 thatYou must give your sister a Form 1099–INT
are subject to the same 5% or 15% maximumby February 2, 2004, showing $450 of interest• Capital gain distributions, and
tax rate that applies to net capital gain. Theyincome that she earned for 2003. You must also• Nontaxable distributions. should be shown in box 1b of the Formsend a copy of the nominee Form 1099–INT,
1099–DIV you receive.Most distributions are paid in cash (check).along with Form 1096, to the Internal Revenue
Qualified dividends are subject to the 15%However, distributions can consist of moreService Center by March 1, 2004 (March 31,
rate if the regular tax rate that would apply isstock, stock rights, other property, or services.2004, if you file Form 1099–INT electronically).
25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that wouldShow your own name, address, and social se-
apply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends areForm 1099–DIV. Most corporations use Formcurity number as that of the “Payer” on the Form
subject to the 5% rate.1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to show1099–INT. Show your sister’s name, address,
To qualify for the 5% or 15% maximum rate,you the distributions you received from themand social security number in the blocks pro-
all of the following requirements must be met.during the year. Keep this form with your rec-vided for identification of the “Recipient.”
ords. You do not have to attach it to your taxWhen you prepare your own federal income 1) The dividends must have been paid by areturn. Even if you do not receive Formtax return, report the total amount of interest U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor-1099–DIV, you must still report all of your tax-income, $1,500, on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora-able dividend income.(Form 1040A) or line 1, Part I of Schedule B tion later.)
(Form 1040), and identify the name of the bankNominees. If someone receives distribu-2) The dividends are not of the type listedthat paid this interest. Show the amount belong-tions as a nominee for you, that person will givelater under Dividends that are not qualifieding to your sister, $450, as a subtraction from ayou a Form 1099–DIV, which will show distribu-dividends.subtotal of all interest on Schedule 1 (or Sched-tions received on your behalf.
ule B) and identify this subtraction as a “Nomi-If you receive a Form 1099–DIV that in-3) You meet the holding period (discussed
nee Distribution.” (Your sister will report thecludes amounts belonging to another person, next).
$450 of interest income on her own tax return, ifsee Nominees under How To Report Dividend
she has to file a return, and identify you as theIncome, later, for more information. The holding periods in the following
payer of that amount.) paragraphs may conflict with thoseForm 1099–MISC. Certain substitute pay- shown in your tax form instructions andCAUTION
!
ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interestOriginal issue discount (OID) adjustment.If other IRS publications. However, the holdingthat are received by a broker on your behalfyou are reporting OID in an amount greater or periods discussed here are correct. They aremust be reported to you on Form 1099–MISC,less than the amount shown on Form 1099–OID based on pending legislation that would amendMiscellaneous Income, or a similar statement.or other written statement (such as for a REMIC the holding periods by changing the 120-daySee also Reporting Substitute Payments underregular interest), include the full amount of OID period to a 121-day period and the 180-dayShort Sales in chapter 4.shown on your Form 1099–OID or other state- period to a 181-day period. The Commissioner
ment on line 1, Part I of Schedule B (Form of Internal Revenue has agreed to allow taxpay-Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099.If1040). If the OID to be reported is less than the ers to apply the new periods as if the legislationyou receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrectamount shown on Form 1099–OID, show the were presently enacted.amount (or other incorrect information), youOID you do not have to report below a subtotalshould ask the issuer for a corrected form. Theof the interest and OID listed. Identify the Holding period.You must have held the stocknew Form 1099 you receive will be marked “Cor-amount as “OID Adjustment” and subtract it from for more than 60 days during the 121-day periodrected.”the subtotal. If the OID to be reported is greater that begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date.
than the amount shown on Form 1099–OID, Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold, The ex-dividend date is the first date following
show the additional OID below the subtotal.exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a the declaration of a dividend on which the buyer
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

Page 20 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of a stock will not receive the next dividend 3) Your risk of loss is diminished by holding dends. They are not qualified dividends even if
one or more other positions in substantiallypayment. When counting the number of days they are shown in box 1b of Form 1099–DIV.
similar or related property.you held the stock, include the day you disposed • Capital gain distributions.of the stock, but not the day you acquired it. SeeFor information about how to apply condition
• Dividends paid on deposits with mutualthe examples, later. (3), see Regulations section 1.246–5.
savings banks, cooperative banks, creditException for preferred stock.In the case unions, U.S. building and loan associa-Qualified foreign corporation.A foreign cor-of preferred stock, you must have held the tions, U.S. savings and loan associations,poration is a qualified foreign corporation if itstock more than 90 days during the 181-day federal savings and loan associations, andmeets any of the following conditions. period that begins 90 days before the ex-divi- similar financial institutions. (Report thesedend date if the dividends are attributable to1) The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.amounts as interest income.)periods totaling more than 366 days. If the pre-possession. • Dividends from a corporation that is aferred dividends are attributable to periods total-
2) The corporation is eligible for the benefitstax-exempt organization or farmer’s coop-ing less than 367 days, the holding period in the
of a comprehensive income tax treaty witherative during the corporation’s tax year inpreceding paragraph applies.
the United States that the Treasury De- which the dividends were paid or during
partment determines is satisfactory for thisExample 1. You bought 5,000 shares of the corporation’s previous tax year.
purpose and that includes an exchange ofXYZ Corp. common stock on July 1, 2003. XYZ • Dividends paid by a corporation on em-information program. For a list of thoseCorp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents per ployer securities which are held on thetreaties, see Table 1–3.share. The ex-dividend date was July 9, 2003. date of record by an employee stock own-Your Form 1099–DIV from XYZ Corp. shows 3) The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)ership plan (ESOP) maintained by that$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in boxabove, but the stock for which the dividendcorporation.1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold theis paid is readily tradable on an estab-
lished securities market in the United • Dividends on any share of stock to the5,000 shares on August 4, 2003. You held your
States. See Readily tradable stock, later. extent that you are obligated (whethershares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of the
under a short sale or otherwise) to make121–day period (from July 2, 2003, through
Exception. A corporation is not a qualified related payments for positions in substan-August 4, 2003). The 121–day period began on
foreign corporation if it is a foreign personaltially similar or related property.May 10, 2003 (60 days before the ex-dividend
holding company, foreign investment company,date), and ended on September 7, 2003. You • Payments in lieu of dividends, but only ifor a passive foreign investment company duringhave no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be- you know or have reason to know that theits tax year in which the dividends are paid orcause you did not hold the XYZ stock for more payments are not qualified dividends.during its previous tax year.than 60 days.
Readily tradable stock.Common or ordi-
Dividends Used To Buy MoreExample 2. Assume the same facts as innary stock, or an American depository receipt in
Example 1 except that you bought the stock on Stockrespect of that stock, is considered to satisfy
requirement (3) if it is listed on one of the follow-July 8, 2003 (the day before the ex-dividend
The corporation in which you own stock maying securities markets: the New York Stock Ex-date), and you sold the stock on September 9,
have a dividend reinvestment plan.  This planchange, the NASDAQ Stock Market, the2003. You held the stock for 63 days (from July
lets you choose to use your dividends to buyAmerican Stock Exchange, the Boston Stock9, 2003, through September 9, 2003). The $500
(through an agent) more shares of stock in theExchange, the Cincinnati Stock Exchange, theof qualified dividends shown in box 1b of your
corporation instead of receiving the dividends inChicago Stock Exchange, the PhiladelphiaForm 1099–DIV are all qualified dividends be-
cash. If you are a member of this type of planStock Exchange, or the Pacific Stock Exchange.cause you held the stock for 61 days of the and you use your dividends to buy more stock at121–day period (from July 9, 2003, throughTable 1–3. Income Tax Treaties a price equal to its fair market value, you stillSeptember 7, 2003). must report the dividends as income.
Income tax treaties that the United StatesIf you are a member of a dividend reinvest-Example 3. You bought 10,000 shares of has with the following countries satisfyment plan that lets you buy more stock at a priceABC Mutual Fund common stock on July 1, requirement (2) under Qualified foreign less than its fair market value, you must report2003. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend ofcorporation. as dividend income the fair market value of the10 cents per share. The ex-dividend date was
additional stock on the dividend payment date.July 9, 2003. The ABC Mutual Fund advises you
Australia Ireland Romaniathat the portion of the dividend eligible to be You also must report as dividend income any
Austria Israel Russiantreated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per service charge subtracted from your cash divi-
Belgium Italy Federationshare. Your Form 1099–DIV from ABC Mutual dends before the dividends are used to buy the
Canada Jamaica SlovakFund shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000 additional stock. But you may be able to deduct
China Japan Republicand qualified dividends of $200. However, you the service charge. See Expenses of Producing
Cyprus Kazakhstan Sloveniasold the 10,000 shares on August 4, 2003. You Income in chapter 3.
Czech Korea South Africahave no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual In some dividend reinvestment plans, youRepublic Latvia SpainFund because you did not hold the ABC Mutual can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at aDenmark Lithuania SwedenFund stock for more than 60 days. price less than fair market value. If you chooseEgypt Luxembourg Switzerland to do this, you must report as dividend incomeHolding period reduced where risk of lossEstonia Mexico Thailand the difference between the cash you invest andis diminished. When determining whether Finland Morocco Trinidad and the fair market value of the stock you buy. Whenyou met the minimum holding period discussedFrance Netherlands Tobago figuring this amount, use the fair market value ofearlier, you cannot count any day during whichGermany New Zealand Tunisia the stock on the dividend payment date.you meet any of the following conditions. Greece Norway Turkey
Hungary Pakistan Ukraine1) You had an option to sell, were under aIceland Philippines United Money Market Fundscontractual obligation to sell, or had madeIndia Poland Kingdom(and not closed) a short sale of substan-Indonesia Portugal Venezuela Report amounts you receive from money markettially identical stock or securities. funds as dividend income. Money market funds
are a type of mutual fund and should not be2) You were grantor (writer) of an option to
confused with bank money market accounts thatbuy substantially identical stock or securi-Dividends that are not qualified dividends.
pay interest.ties. The following dividends are not qualified divi-
Page 20 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 21 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Distributions less than basis.If the totalReturn of CapitalCapital Gain Distributions
liquidating distributions you receive are less
A return of capital is a distribution that is not paidthan the basis of your stock, you may have aCapital gain distributions (also called capital
out of the earnings and profits of a corporation. Itcapital loss. You can report a capital loss onlygain dividends) are paid to you or credited to
is a return of your investment in the stock of theafter you have received the final distribution inyour account by regulated investment compa- company. You should receive a Form liquidation that results in the redemption or can-nies (commonly called mutual funds) and real 1099–DIV or other statement from the corpora-cellation of the stock. Whether you report theestate investment trusts (REITs). They will betion showing you what part of the distribution is aloss as a long-term or short-term capital lossshown in box 2a of the Form 1099–DIV you return of capital. On Form 1099–DIV, a nontax-depends on how long you held the stock. Seereceive from the mutual fund or REIT. able return of capital will be shown in box 3. IfHolding Period in chapter 4.
Report capital gain distributions as long-termyou do not receive such a statement, you report
capital gains, regardless of how long you ownedthe distribution as an ordinary dividend.
your shares in the mutual fund or REIT. See Distributions of Stock
Capital gain distributions under How To Report and Stock RightsBasis adjustment.A return of capital reduces
Dividend Income, later in this chapter. the basis of your stock. It is not taxed until your
Distributions by a corporation of its own stockbasis in the stock is fully recovered. If you buy
are commonly known as stock dividends. Stockstock in a corporation in different lots at differentUndistributed capital gains of mutual funds rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri-times, and you cannot definitely identify theand REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs butions by a corporation of rights to acquire theshares subject to the return of capital, reducekeep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on corporation’s stock. Generally, stock dividendsthe basis of your earliest purchases first.them. You must treat your share of these gains and stock rights are not taxable to you, and youWhen the basis of your stock has been re-as distributions, even though you did not actu- do not report them on your return.duced to zero, report any additional return ofally receive them. However, they are not in-capital that you receive as a capital gain.Taxable stock dividends and stock rights.cluded on Form 1099–DIV. Instead, they areWhether you report it as a long-term or Distributions of stock dividends and stock rightsreported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share-short-term capital gain depends on how longare taxable to you if any of the following apply.holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capitalyou have held the stock. See Holding Period inGains. chapter 4. 1) You or any other shareholder has the
The Form 2439 will also show how much, if choice to receive cash or other property
any, of the undistributed capital gains is:Example. You bought stock in 1991 for instead of stock or stock rights.
$100. In 1994, you received a return of capital of2) The distribution gives cash or other prop-• Post-May 5, 2003 gain (box 1b), $80. You did not include this amount in yourerty to some shareholders and an increaseincome, but you reduced the basis of your stock• Qualified 5–year gain (box 1c), in the percentage interest in theto $20. You received a return of capital of $30 incorporation’s assets or earnings and prof-• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1d),2003. The first $20 of this amount reduced yourits to other shareholders.basis to zero. You report the other $10 as a• Gain from qualified small business stock
long-term capital gain for 2003. You must report3) The distribution is in convertible preferred(section 1202 gain, box 1e), or
as a long-term capital gain any return of capitalstock and has the same result as in (2).
• Collectibles (28%) gain (box 1f), you receive on this stock in later years. 4) The distribution gives preferred stock to
For information about these terms, see Capital some common stock shareholders andLiquidating distributions.Liquidating distri-Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. common stock to other common stockbutions, sometimes called liquidating dividends,shareholders.Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a ofare distributions you receive during a partial or
Form 2439) as long-term capital gains in column 5) The distribution is on preferred stock. (Thecomplete liquidation of a corporation. These dis-
(f) on line 11 of Schedule D (Form 1040). Report distribution, however, is not taxable if it istributions are, at least in part, one form of a
the post-May 5 gain (box 1b of Form 2439) in an increase in the conversion ratio of con-return of capital. They may be paid in one or
column (g) on line 11. Enter on line 5 of the vertible preferred stock made solely tomore installments. You will receive Form
take into account a stock dividend, stockQualified 5–Year Gain Worksheet in the Sched-1099–DIV from the corporation showing you the
split, or similar event that would otherwiseule D instructions the part reported to you asamount of the liquidating distribution in box 8 or
result in reducing the conversion right.)9.qualified 5–year gain. Enter on line 11 of the
Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet in Any liquidating distribution you receive is notThe term “stock” includes rights to acquire
the Schedule D instructions the part reported totaxable to you until you have recovered thestock, and the term “shareholder” includes a
you as unrecaptured section 1250 gain. For anybasis of your stock. After the basis of your stockholder of rights or convertible securities.
has been reduced to zero, you must report thegain on qualified small business stock, follow the If you receive taxable stock dividends or
liquidating distribution as a capital gain (exceptreporting instructions under Section 1202 Exclu- stock rights, include their fair market value at the
in certain instances involving collapsible corpo-sion in chapter 4. time of the distribution in your income.
rations). Whether you report the gain as aThe tax paid on these gains by the mutuallong-term or short-term capital gain depends onConstructive distributions.You must treatfund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.how long you have held the stock. See Holding certain transactions that increase your propor-You take credit for this tax by including it on linePeriod in chapter 4. tionate interest in the earnings and profits or67, Form 1040, and checking box a on that line. assets of a corporation as if they were distribu-Stock acquired at different times.If youAttach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return, and tions of stock or stock rights. These constructiveacquired stock in the same corporation in morekeep Copy C for your records. distributions are taxable if they have the samethan one transaction, you own more than oneresult as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4),Basis adjustment. Increase your basis inblock of stock in the corporation. If you receiveor (5) of the above discussion.your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, bydistributions from the corporation in completeThis treatment applies to a change in yourthe difference between the gain you report andliquidation, you must divide the distributionstock’s conversion ratio or redemption price, athe credit you claim for the tax paid. among the blocks of stock you own in the follow-difference between your stock’s redemptioning proportion: the number of shares in thatprice and issue price, a redemption that is notblock over the total number of shares you own.Nontaxable Distributions treated as a sale or exchange of your stock, andDivide distributions in partial liquidation amongany other transaction having a similar effect onYou may receive a return of capital or a tax-freethat part of the stock that is redeemed in theyour interest in the corporation.distribution of more shares of stock or stockpartial liquidation. After the basis of a block of
rights. These distributions are not treated thestock is reduced to zero, you must report thePreferred stock redeemable at a premium.
same as ordinary dividends or capital gain distri-part of any later distribution for that block as aIf you hold preferred stock having a redemption
capital gain.butions. price higher than its issue price, the difference
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

Page 22 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(the redemption premium) generally is taxable value when distributed. If you receive stock orExempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest
as a constructive distribution of additional stock stock rights that are not taxable to you, see dividends you receive from a regulated invest-
on the preferred stock. Stocks and Bonds under Basis of Investmentment company (mutual fund) are not included in
For stock issued before October 10, 1990,Property in chapter 4 for information on how to your taxable income. You will receive a notice
you include the redemption premium in your figure their basis. from the mutual fund telling you the amount of
income ratably over the period during which the the exempt-interest dividends you received.Fractional shares.You may not own enoughstock cannot be redeemed. For stock issued Exempt-interest dividends are not shown onstock in a corporation to receive a full share ofafter October 9, 1990, you include the redemp- Form 1099–DIV or Form 1099–INT.stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-tion premium on the basis of its economic ac- Information reporting requirement.Al-dend. However, with the approval of the share-crual over the period during which the stock though exempt-interest dividends are not tax-holders, the corporation may set up a plan incannot be redeemed, as if it were original issue able, you must show them on your tax return ifwhich fractional shares are not issued, but in-discount on a debt instrument. See Original Is- you have to file a return. This is an informationstead are sold, and the cash proceeds are givensue Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter. reporting requirement and does not change theto the shareholders. Any cash you receive forThe redemption premium is not a construc- exempt-interest dividends to taxable income.fractional shares under such a plan is treated astive distribution, and therefore is not taxable, in See Reporting tax-exempt interest under Howan amount realized on the sale of the fractionalthe following situations. To Report Interest Income, earlier.shares. You must determine your gain or loss
and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-1) The stock was issued before October 10, Alternative minimum tax treatment.
ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is the1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re- Exempt-interest dividends paid from specified
difference between the cash you receive and thedeemable solely at the option of the is- private activity bonds may be subject to the
basis of the fractional shares sold.suer), and the redemption premium is alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251 and its
“reasonable.” (For stock issued before Oc- instructions for more information.
Example. You own one share of commontober 10, 1990, only the part of the re-
stock that you bought on January 3, 1995, fordemption premium that is not “reasonable” Dividends on insurance policies.Insurance
$100. The corporation declared a common stockis a constructive distribution.) The redemp- policy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses
dividend of 5% on June 30, 2003. The fair mar-tion premium is reasonable if it is not more to pay your premiums are not taxable. However,
ket value of the stock at the time the stockthan 10% of the issue price on stock not you must report as taxable interest income the
dividend was declared was $200. You were paidredeemable for 5 years from the issue interest that is paid or credited on dividends left
$10 for the fractional-share stock dividend underdate or is in the nature of a penalty for with the insurance company.
a plan described in the above paragraph. Youmaking a premature redemption.  If dividends on an insurance contract (other
figure your gain or loss as follows: than a modified endowment contract) are distrib-2) The stock was issued after October 9, uted to you, they are a partial return of the1990 (after December 19, 1995, if redeem-Fair market value of old stock.... $200.00 premiums you paid. Do not include them in yourable solely at the option of the issuer), andFair market value of stock dividend gross income until they are more than the total ofthe redemption premium is “de minimis.”(cash received).............. +  10.00 all net premiums you paid for the contract. (ForThe redemption premium is de minimis if itFair market value of old stock and information on the treatment of a distributionis less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of thestock dividend............... $210.00 from a modified endowment contract, see Distri-redemption price multiplied by the numberBasis (cost) of old stock bution Before Annuity Starting Date From aof full years from the date of issue to theafter the stock dividend Nonqualified Plan under Taxation of Nonperi-(($200 ÷ $210) × $100)......... $95.24date redeemable. odic Payments in Publication 575, Pension andBasis (cost) of stock dividend3) The stock was issued after October 9, Annuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu-(($10 ÷ $210) × $100).......... +  4.761990, and must be redeemed at a speci- tions on insurance policies on line 16b (FormTotal..................... $100.00fied time or is redeemable at your option, 1040) or line 12b (Form 1040A).Cash received...............  $10.00but the redemption is unlikely because it is
Basis (cost) of stock dividend..... − 4.76subject to a contingency outside your con- Dividends on veterans’ insurance. Divi-
trol (not including the possibility of default, dends you receive on veterans’ insurance poli-Gain  $5.24insolvency, etc.). cies are not taxable. In addition, interest on
dividends left with the Department of VeteransBecause you had held the share of stock for4) The stock was issued after December 19, Affairs is not taxable.more than 1 year at the time the stock dividend1995, and is redeemable solely at the op-was declared, your gain on the stock dividend istion of the issuer, but the redemption pre- Patronage dividends. Generally, patronagea long-term capital gain.mium is in the nature of a penalty for dividends you receive in money from a coopera-premature redemption or redemption is notScrip dividends. A corporation that de-tive organization are included in your income.more likely than not to occur. The redemp-clares a stock dividend may issue you a scripDo not include in your income patronagetion will be treated under a “safe harbor”certificate that entitles you to a fractional share.dividends you receive on:as not more likely than not to occur if all ofThe certificate is generally nontaxable when you
the following are true. receive it. If you choose to have the corporation1) Property bought for your personal use, or
sell the certificate for you and give you the pro-a) You and the issuer are not related 2) Capital assets or depreciable propertyceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be-under the rules discussed in chapter 4 bought for use in your business. But youtween the proceeds and the part of your basis inunder Losses on Sales or Trades of must reduce the basis (cost) of the itemsthe corporation’s stock that is allocated to theProperty, substituting “20%” for “50%.” bought. If the dividend is more than thecertificate.
adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-However, if you receive a scrip certificateb) There are no plans, arrangements, or port the excess as income.that you can choose to redeem for cash insteadagreements that effectively require or
of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-are intended to compel the issuer to These rules are the same whether the coop-
ceive it. You must include its fair market value inredeem the stock. erative paying the dividend is a taxable or
income on the date you receive it. tax-exempt cooperative.c) The redemption would not reduce the
stock’s yield. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do not
Other Distributions
report these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-
Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re- You may receive any of the following distribu- port these amounts on line 21 of Form 1040, line
ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair market tions during the year. 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.
Page 22 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 23 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no.
RECIPIENT’S identification
number
PAYER’S Federal identification
number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (optional)
Dividends and
Distributions
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-DIV (keep for your records)
Copy B
This is important
tax information
and is being
furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you
are required to
file a return, a
negligence
penalty or other
sanction may be
imposed on you
if this income is
taxable and the
IRS determines
that it has not
been reported.
For Recipient
Unrecap. Sec. 1250 gain
OMB No. 1545-0110Total ordinary dividends1a
$
1b Qualified dividends
$
Post-May 5 capital gain distr.Total capital gain distr.2a
2c
Collectibles (28%) gain
2dQualified 5-year gain
$$
Section 1202 gain 2f2e
$
3
5 Investment expenses
Noncash liquidation
distributions
9Cash liquidation
distributions
8
$
$
2b
$$
Nontaxable distributions
Form 1099-DIV
$
76
2003
$
Foreign tax paid Foreign country or U.S. possession
$
$
4 Federal income tax withheld
$
nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this
1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1a of Formtotal on line 9a, Form 1040.How To Report 1099–DIV) are more than $1,500, or
Dividend Income Dividends received on restricted stock.Re-2) You received, as a nominee, dividends
stricted stock is stock that you get from yourthat actually belong to someone else.
Terms you may need to know employer for services you perform and that isList on line 5 each payer’s name and the amount(see Glossary): nontransferable and subject to a substantial riskof ordinary dividends you received. If you re-of forfeiture. You do not have to include theceived a Form 1099–DIV from a brokerage firm,value of the stock in your income when youNominee list the brokerage firm as the payer. receive it. However, if you get dividends on re-Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedRestricted stock stricted stock, you must include them in youron line 5. (However, if you hold stock as aincome as wages, not dividends. See Restrictednominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter thisProperty in Publication 525 for information ontotal on line 9a, Form 1040A.Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or restricted stock dividends.Form 1040A to report your dividend income. Your employer should include these divi-Report the total of your ordinary dividends onForm 1040. You must fill in Part II of Scheduledends in the wages shown on your Form W–2. Ifline 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. ReportB and attach it to your Form 1040, if: you also get a Form 1099–DIV for these divi-qualified dividends on line 9b. dends, list them on line 5 of Schedule 1 (Form1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1a of FormIf you receive capital gain distributions, you 1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040), with the1099–DIV) are more than $1,500, ormay be able to use Form 1040A or you may other dividends you received. Enter a subtotal ofhave to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-2) You received, as a nominee, dividendsall your dividend income several lines above linebutions, later. If you receive nontaxable distribu-that actually belong to someone else.6. Below the subtotal, write “Dividends on re-tions required to be reported as capital gains, stricted stock reported as wages on line 7, FormIf your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Form 1040 (or Form 1040A),” and enter the amount ofyou must also complete Part III of Schedule B.1040EZ if you receive any dividend income. the dividends included in your wages on line 7 ofList on line 5, Part II of Schedule B, eachForm 1040 or Form 1040A. Subtract this amountpayer’s name and the amount of ordinary divi-Form 1099–DIV. If you owned stock on which from the subtotal and enter the result on line 6.dends you received. If your securities are heldyou received $10 or more in dividends and other
by a brokerage firm (in “street name”), list thedistributions, you should receive a Form Election. You can choose to include the
name of the brokerage firm that is shown on1099–DIV. Even if you do not receive a Form value of restricted stock in gross income as pay
Form 1099–DIV as the payer. If your stock is1099–DIV, you must report all of your taxable for services. If you make this choice, report the
held by a nominee who is the owner of record,dividend income. dividends on the stock like any other dividends.
and the nominee credited or paid you dividendsSee Form 1099–DIV for more information List them on line 5, Part II of Schedule 1 or
on the stock, show the name of the nominee andon how to report dividend income. Schedule B, along with your other dividends (if
the dividends you received or for which you werethe amount of ordinary dividends received from
credited.Form 1040A. You must complete Part II of all sources is more than $1,500). If you receive
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) and attach it to your Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed both a Form 1099–DIV and a Form W–2 show-
Form 1040A, if: on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a ing these dividends, do not include the dividends
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

Page 24 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in your wages reported on line 7 of Form 1040 or The mutual fund or real estate investment
Form 1040A. Attach a statement to your Form trust (REIT) making the distribution should tellStripped
1040 or Form 1040A explaining why the amount you how much of it is:
shown on line 7 of your Form 1040 or Form
Preferred Stock• Qualified 5–year gain (box 2c),1040A is different from the amount shown on
your Form W–2. • Unrecaptured section 1250 gain box 2d),   If the dividend rights are stripped from certain
or preferred stock, the holder of the stripped pre-Independent contractor.If you received ferred stock may have to include amounts inrestricted stock for services as an independent• Section 1202 gain (box 2e). income equal to the amounts that would havecontractor, the rules in the previous discussionFor information about these terms, see Capital been included if the stock were a bond withapply. Generally, you must treat dividends youGain Tax Rates in chapter 4. original issue discount (OID).receive on the stock as income from self-em-
ployment. Enter on line 5 of the Qualified 5–Year GainStripped preferred stock defined.Stripped
Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions the preferred stock is any stock that meets both of
Qualified dividends.Report qualified divi- the following tests.part reported to you as qualified 5–year gain.
dends (box 1b of Form 1099–DIV) on line 9b ofEnter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section
1) There has been a separation in ownershipForm 1040 or Form 1040A. Do not include any1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-
between the stock and any dividend on theof the following on line 9b. tions the part reported to you as unrecaptured
stock that has not become payable.section 1250 gain. If you have a gain on qualified• Qualified dividends you received as asmall business stock (section 1202 gain), follow2) The stock:nominee. See Nominees later. the reporting instructions under Section 1202
a) Is limited and preferred as to dividends,• Dividends on stock for which you did notExclusion in chapter 4.
meet the holding period. See Holding pe- b) Does not participate in corporateNontaxable (return of capital) distributions.riod earlier under Qualified Dividends. growth to any significant extent, andReport return of capital distributions (box 3 of• Dividends on any share of stock to theForm 1099–DIV) only after your basis in the c) Has a fixed redemption price.extent that you are obligated (whetherstock has been reduced to zero. After the basisunder a short sale or otherwise) to makeof your stock has been reduced to zero, youTreatment of buyer.If you buy stripped pre-related payments for positions in substan-must show this amount on line 1, Part I offerred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in-tially similar or related property. Schedule D, if you held the stock 1 year or less.clude certain amounts in your gross incomeShow it on line 8, Part II of Schedule D, if you• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if while you hold the stock. These amounts areyou know or have reason to know that the held the stock for more than 1 year. Write “Divi-ordinary income. They are equal to the amountspayments are not qualified dividends.dend R.O.C. Exceeding Basis” in column (a) ofyou would have included in gross income if theSchedule D and the name of the company. Re-stock were a bond that:If you have qualified dividends, you must fig-port your gain in column (f) and, if it is a
ure your tax by completing either Schedule Dpost-May 5 gain, in column (g). Your gain is the1) Was issued on the purchase date of the
(Form 1040) or the Qualified Dividends andamount of the distribution that is more than yourstock, and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 orbasis in the stock. 2) Has OID equal to:1040A instructions. If you have to file Schedule
Nominees. If you received ordinary dividendsD (Form 1040), enter qualified dividends on line a) The redemption price for the stock, mi-as a nominee (that is, the dividends are in your23 of that schedule or line 2 of the Schedule D nusname but actually belong to someone else),Tax Worksheet. If you do not have to file Sched-
b) The price at which you bought theinclude them on line 5 of Schedule 1 (Formule D (Form 1040), enter qualified dividends on
stock.1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Severalline 2 of the Qualified Dividends and Capital
lines above line 6, put a subtotal of all dividendGain Tax Worksheet. To find out whether you
Report these amounts as other income on lineincome listed on line 5. Below this subtotal, writehave to file Schedule D, see the Form 1040
21 of Form 1040. For information about OID,“Nominee Distribution” and show the amountinstructions.
see Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier.received as a nominee. Subtract the total of yourInvestment interest deducted.If you claim This treatment also applies to you if younominee distributions from the subtotal. Entera deduction for investment interest, you may acquire the stock in such a way (for example, bythe result on line 6.have to reduce the amount of your qualified gift) that your basis in the stock is determined byFile Form 1099–DIV with the IRS.If youdividends that are eligible for the 5% or 15% tax using a buyer’s basis.received dividends as a nominee in 2003, yourate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi-
Treatment of person stripping stock.If youmust file a Form 1099–DIV for those dividendsdends you choose to include in investment in-
strip the rights to one or more dividends fromwith the IRS. Send the Form 1099–DIV with acome when figuring the limit on your investment
stripped preferred stock, you are treated as hav-Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittalinterest deduction. This is done on lines 4–6 of
ing purchased the stock. You are treated asof U.S. Information Returns, to your Internalthe Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax
making the purchase on the date you disposedRevenue Service Center by March 1, 2004Worksheet, lines 24–26 of Schedule D, or lines
of the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in the(March 31, 2004 if you file Form 1099–DIV4–6 of the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For
stripped preferred stock is treated as yourelectronically). Give the actual owner of the divi-more information about the limit on investment
purchase price. The rules described in Treat-dends Copy B of the Form 1099–DIV by Febru-interest, see Interest Expenses in chapter 3.
ment of buyer, earlier, apply to you.ary 2, 2004. On Form 1099–DIV, you should be
Capital gain distributions.How to report listed as the “Payer.” The other owner should be
capital gain distributions depends on whetherlisted as the “Recipient.” You do not, however,
you have any other capital gains or losses. If youhave to file a Form 1099–DIV to show payments
do, report total capital gain distributions (box 2afor your spouse. For more information about theREMICs, FASITs,
of Form 1099–DIV) in column (f) of line 13, Partreporting requirements and the penalties for fail-
II of Schedule D (Form 1040). Report any and Other CDOsure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,
post-May 5 capital gain distribution (box 2b ofsee the General Instructions for Forms 1099,
Form 1099–DIV) in column (g) of line 13. If you Holders of interests in real estate mortgage in-1098, 5498, and W–2G.
do not have any other capital gains or losses, vestment conduits (REMICs), financial asset
Liquidating distributions.If you receive ayou may be able to report your capital gain securitization investment trusts (FASITs), and
liquidating distribution on stock, the corporationdistributions directly on lines 13a and 13b of other collateralized debt obligations (CDOs)
will give you a Form 1099–DIV showing theForm 1040 or lines 10a and 10b of Form 1040A. must follow special rules for reporting income
amount of the liquidating distribution in boxes 8In either case, see Reporting Capital Gains and and any expenses from these investment prod-
and 9.Losses in chapter 4 for more information. ucts.
Page 24 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 25 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
persons and fiscal year taxpayers may obtain of taxable income you take into account. YourREMICs
tax information by contacting the REMIC or the basis is decreased (but not below zero) by the
issuer of the CDO, if they hold their interest amount of cash or the fair market value of anyA real estate mortgage investment conduit
directly from the REMIC or issuer of the CDO. property distributed to you, and by the amount of(REMIC) is an entity that is formed for the pur-
Publication 938, Real Estate Mortgage Invest-any net loss you have taken into account. If youpose of holding a fixed pool of mortgages se-
ment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting Information,sell your residual interest, you must adjust yourcured by interests in real property. A REMIC
explains how to request this information. basis to reflect your share of the REMIC’s tax-issues regular and residual interests to inves-
able income or net loss immediately before thetors. For tax purposes, a REMIC is generally Publication 938 is available only on thesale. See Wash Sales, in chapter 4, for moretreated as a partnership with the residual inter-Internet at www.irs.gov. information about selling a residual interest.est holders treated as the partners. The regular
interests are treated as debt instruments. Treatment of distributions.You must in-REMIC income or loss is not income or loss clude in your gross income the part of any distri-If you hold a regular interest or CDO throughfrom a passive activity. bution that is more than your adjusted basis.a nominee (rather than directly), you can re-For more information about the qualifications Treat the distribution as a gain from the sale orquest the information from the nominee.and the tax treatment that apply to a REMIC and exchange of your residual interest.the interests of investors in a REMIC, see sec-
Allocated investment expenses.Regular in-tions 860A through 860G of the Internal Reve- Schedule Q. If you hold a REMIC residualterest holders in a REMIC may be allowed tonue Code, and the regulations under those interest, you should receive Schedule Q (Formdeduct the REMIC’s investment expenses, butsections. 1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual Interestonly if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. A Holder of REMIC Taxable Income or Net Losssingle-class REMIC is one that generally wouldAllocation, and instructions from the REMICbe classified as a trust for tax purposes if it hadRegular Interest each quarter. Schedule Q will indicate yournot elected REMIC status. share of the REMIC’s quarterly taxable incomeA REMIC can have several classes (also known The single-class REMIC will report your(or loss). Do not attach the Schedule Q to youras “tranches”) of regular interests. A regular share of its investment expenses in box 5 oftax return. Keep it for your records.interest unconditionally entitles the holder to re- Form 1099–INT or box 7 of Form 1099–OID. ItUse Part IV of Schedule E (Form 1040) toceive a specified principal amount (or other simi- will also include this amount in box 1 of Formreport your total share of the REMIC’s taxablelar amount). 1099–INT or box 2 of Form 1099–OID, and on income (or loss) for each quarter included inA REMIC regular interest is treated as a debt the additional written statement.your tax year.instrument for income tax purposes. Accord- You may be able to take a deduction for For more information about reporting youringly, the OID, market discount, and income these expenses subject to a 2% limit that alsoincome (or loss) from a residual interest in areporting rules that apply to bonds and other applies to certain other miscellaneous itemizedREMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) anddebt instruments as described earlier in this deductions. See chapter 3 for more information.Schedule E (Form 1040) instructions.publication under Discount on Debt Instruments
Redemption of regular interests at maturity.Expenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-apply, with certain modifications discussed be-
Redemption of debt instruments at their maturitygross-income limit, you may be able to claim alow.
is treated as a sale or exchange. You mustmiscellaneous itemized deduction for certain or-Generally, you report your income from a
report redemptions on your tax return whether ordinary and necessary expenses that you paid orregular interest on line 8a, Form 1040. For more
not you realize gain or loss on the transaction.incurred in connection with your investment in ainformation on how to report interest and OID,
Your basis is your adjusted issue price, whichREMIC. These expenses may include certainsee How To Report Interest Income, earlier.
includes any OID you previously reported inexpense items incurred by the REMIC and
Holders must use accrual method.Holders income. passed through to you. The REMIC will report
of regular interests must use an accrual methodAny amount that you receive on the retire-these expenses to you on line 3b of Schedule Q.
of accounting to report OID and interest income.ment of a debt instrument is treated in the sameSee chapter 3 for information on how to report
Because income under an accrual method is notway as if you had sold or exchanged that instru-these expenses.
determined by the receipt of cash, you may havement. A debt instrument is retired when it is
to include OID or interest income in your taxablereacquired or redeemed by the issuer and can-Collateralized Debtincome even if you have not received any cashceled.
Obligations (CDOs)payments. Sale or exchange of a regular interest.
Some of your gain on the sale or exchange of aA collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is aForms 1099–INT and 1099–OID. You
REMIC regular interest may be ordinary income.debt instrument, other than a REMIC regularshould receive a copy of Form 1099–INT or
The ordinary income part, if any, is: interest, that is secured by a pool of mortgagesForm 1099–OID from the REMIC. You will also
or other evidence of debt and that has principalreceive a written statement by March 15, 2004 (if• The amount that would have been in- payments that are subject to acceleration.you are a calendar year taxpayer), that providescluded in your income if the yield to matur-(Note: While REMIC regular interests are collat-additional information. The statement shouldity on the regular interest had been 110%eralized debt obligations, they have unique rulescontain enough information to enable you to of the applicable federal rate at the begin-that do not apply to CDOs issued before 1987.)figure your accrual of market discount or amor-ning of your holding period, minus CDOs, also known as “pay-through bonds,” aretizable bond premium.
• The amount you included in your income.commonly divided into different classes (alsoForm 1099–INT shows the amount of inter-
called “tranches”).est income that accrued to you for the period you
CDOs can be secured by a pool of mort-held the regular interest. Residual Interest gages, automobile loans, equipment leases, orForm 1099–OID shows the amount of OID
credit card receivables.and interest, if any, that accrued to you for theA residual interest is an interest in a REMIC that
For more information about the qualificationsperiod you held the regular interest. You will notis not a regular interest. It is designated as a
and the tax treatment that apply to an issuer of aneed to make any adjustments to the amountsresidual interest by the REMIC.
CDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the Internalreported even if you held the regular interest forIf you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC,
Revenue Code and the regulations under thatonly a part of the calendar year. However, if youyou must take into account, on a quarterly basis,
section.bought the regular interest at a premium or ac-your daily portion of the taxable income or net
The OID, market discount, and income-re-quisition premium, see Refiguring OID shown onloss of the REMIC for each day during the tax
porting rules that apply to bonds and other debtForm 1099–OID under Original Issue Discountyear that you hold the residual interest. You
instruments, as described earlier in this chapter(OID), earlier. must report these amounts as ordinary income
under Discount on Debt Instruments, also applyor loss.
You may not get a Form 1099. Corpora- to a CDO.
tions and other persons specified in RegulationBasis in the residual interest.Your basis in You must include interest income from your
1.6049–7(c) will not receive Forms 1099. These the residual interest is increased by the amount CDO in your gross income under your regular
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

Page 26 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
method of accounting. Also include any OID S corporation distributions are not treated as held in the names of two or more club members,
accrued on your CDO during the tax year. dividends except in certain cases in which the the SSN of only one member must be given to
Generally, you report your income from a corporation has accumulated earnings and prof- the payer.) This member is considered as the
CDO on line 8a, Form 1040. For more informa- its from years before it became an S corporation. record owner for the actual owner, the invest-
tion about reporting these amounts on your re- ment club. This member is a “nominee” andReporting S corporation income, deduc-turn, see How To Report Interest Income, must file an information return with the IRS. Fortions, and credits.The S corporation shouldearlier. example, the nominee member must file Formsend you a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S)1099–DIV for dividend income, showing theshowing your share of the S corporation’s in-Forms 1099–INT and 1099–OID. You club as the owner of the dividend, his or hercome, credits, and deductions for the tax year.should receive a copy of Form 1099–INT or SSN, and the EIN of the club.You must report your distributive share of the SForm 1099–OID. You will also receive a writtencorporation’s income, gain, loss, deductions, orstatement by March 15, 2004, that provides ad- Tax Treatment of the Clubcredits on the appropriate lines and schedules ofditional information. The statement should con-your Form 1040.tain enough information about the CDO to Generally, an investment club is treated as aFor more information about your treatment ofenable you to figure your accrual of market dis- partnership for federal tax purposes unless itS corporation tax items, see Shareholder’s In-count or amortizable bond premium. chooses otherwise. In some situations, how-structions for Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S).Form 1099–INT shows the amount of inter- ever, it is taxed as a corporation or a trust.
est income paid to you for the period you heldLimit on losses and deductions.The de-
Clubs formed before 1997.Before 1997, thethe CDO. duction for your share of losses and deductions
rules for determining how an investment club isForm 1099–OID shows the amount of OID shown on Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S) is lim-
treated were different from those explained inaccrued to you and the interest, if any, paid toited to the adjusted basis of your stock and any
the following discussions. An investment clubyou for the period you held the CDO. You shoulddebt the corporation owes you. Any loss or de-
that existed before 1997 is treated for later yearsnot need to make any adjustments to the duction not allowed because of this limit is car-
the same way it was treated before 1997, unlessamounts reported even if you held the CDO forried over and treated as a loss or deduction in
it chooses to be treated a different way under theonly a part of the calendar year. However, if youthe next tax year.
new rules. To make that choice, the club mustbought the CDO at a premium or acquisition Passive activity losses.Rules apply thatfile Form 8832, Entity Classification Election.premium, see Refiguring OID shown on Form limit losses from passive activities. Your copy of1099–OID  under Original Issue Discount (OID),Schedule K–1 and its instructions will explainearlier. the limits and tell you where on your return toClub as a PartnershipIf you did not receive a Form 1099, see You report your share of S corporation items frommay not get a Form 1099 under REMICs, earlier. If your club is not taxed as a corporation or apassive activities.
trust, it will be treated as a partnership.Form 8582. If you have a passive activityFASITs
loss from an S corporation, you must completeFiling requirement.If your investment club is
A financial asset securitization investmentForm 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations, to treated as a partnership, it must file Form 1065.
trust (FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debtfigure the amount of the allowable loss to enterHowever, as a partner in the club, you must
obligations such as credit card receivables,on your return. See Publication 925 for morereport on your individual return your share of the
home equity loans, and automobile loans. information. club’s income, gains, losses, deductions, and
A regular interest in a FASIT is treated as a credits for the club’s tax year. (Its tax year gener-
debt instrument. The rules described under Col- ally must be the same tax year as that of the
lateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs), earlier, ap- partners owning a majority interest.) You must
ply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except that a report these items whether or not you actuallyInvestment Clubs
holder of a regular interest in a FASIT must use receive any distribution from the partnership.
an accrual method of accounting to report OIDAn investment club is formed when a group ofSchedule K-1. You should receive a copy ofand interest income. friends, neighbors, business associates, orSchedule K–1 (Form 1065), Partner’s Share ofFor more information about FASITs, seeothers pool their money to invest in stock orIncome, Credits, Deductions, etc., from the part-sections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev-other securities. The club may or may not have anership. The amounts shown on Schedule K–1enue Code. written agreement, a charter, or bylaws. are your share of the partnership’s income, de-Usually the group operates informally withductions, and credits. Report each amount onmembers pledging to pay a regular amount intothe appropriate lines and schedules of your in-the club monthly. Some clubs have a committeecome tax return.that gathers information on securities, selectsS Corporations The club’s expenses for producing or collect-the most promising securities, and recommendsing income, for managing investment property,In general, an S corporation does not pay a taxthat the club invest in them. Other clubs rotateor for determining any tax are listed separatelyon its income. Instead, its income and expensesthese responsibilities among all their members.on Schedule K–1. Each individual partner whoare passed through to the shareholders, whoMost clubs require all members to vote for oritemizes deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)then report these items on their own income taxagainst all investments, sales, trades, and othercan deduct his or her share of those expenses.returns. transactions. The expenses are listed on line 22 of ScheduleIf you are an S corporation shareholder, yourIdentifying number.Each club must have an A along with other miscellaneous deductionsshare of the corporation’s current year incomeemployer identification number (EIN) to use subject to the 2% limit. See chapter 3 for moreor loss and other tax items are taxed to youwhen filing its return. The club’s EIN also may information on the 2% limit.whether or not you receive any amount. Gener-have to be given to the payer of dividends or For more information about reporting yourally, those items increase or decrease the basisother income from investments recorded in the income from a partnership, see the Scheduleof your S corporation stock as appropriate. Forclub’s name. To obtain an EIN, first get Form K–1 instructions. Also see Publication 541,more information on basis adjustments for SSS–4 , Application for Employer Identification Partnerships.corporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds under Number, from the Internal Revenue Service orBasis of Investment Property in chapter 4. Passive activity losses.Rules apply thatyour nearest Social Security Administration of-Generally, S corporation distributions, ex- limit losses from passive activities. Your copy office. See chapter 5 of this publication for morecept dividend distributions, are considered a re- Schedule K–1 (Form 1065) and its instructionsinformation about how to get this form.turn of capital and reduce your basis in the stock will tell you where on your return to report your
of the corporation. The part of any distributionInvestments in name of member. When share of partnership items from passive activi-
that is more than your basis is treated as a gain an investment is recorded in the name of one ties. If you have a passive activity loss from a
from the sale or exchange of property. The club member, this member must give his or her partnership, you must complete Form 8582 to
corporation’s distributions may be in the form of social security number (SSN) to the payer of figure the amount of the allowable loss to enter
cash or property. investment income. (When an investment is on your tax return.
Page 26 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 27 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
No social security coverage for investmentcannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust, later) orClub as a Trust
club earnings. If an investment club otherwise subject to special treatment under the
In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as apartnership’s activities are limited to investing intax law. The club must file Form 8832 to maketrust. In general, a trust is an arrangementsavings certificates, stock, or securities, and col-the choice. through which trustees take title to property forlecting interest or dividends for its members’
the purpose of protecting or conserving it for theaccounts, a member’s share of income is not
beneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied inFiling requirement.If your club is taxed as aearnings from self-employment. You cannot vol-
chancery or probate courts. An arrangement iscorporation, it must file Form 1120  (or Formuntarily pay the self-employment tax to increase
treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purposeyour social security coverage and ultimate bene-1120–A). In that case, you do not report any of
is to vest in trustees responsibility for protectingfits. its income or expenses on your individual return.
and conserving property for beneficiaries whoAll ordinary income and expenses and capitalcannot share in that responsibility and so are notgains and losses must be reported on the Formassociates in a joint enterprise for the conduct ofClub as a Corporation 1120 (or Form 1120–A). Any distribution thebusiness for profit. If you need more information
club makes that qualifies as a dividend must beAn investment club formed after 1996 is taxed about trusts, see section 301.7701–4 of the
reported on Form 1099–DIV if total distributionsas a corporation if: regulations.
to the shareholder are $10 or more for the year.Filing requirement.If your club is taxed as a1) It is formed under a federal or state lawYou must report any distributions that youtrust, it must file Form 1041. You should receivethat refers to it as incorporated or as a
receive from the club on your individual return.a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form 1041) from thecorporation, body corporate, or body poli-
You should receive a copy of Form 1099–DIVtrust. Report the amounts shown on Scheduletic,
K–1 on the appropriate lines and schedules offrom the club showing the distributions you re-2) It is formed under a state law that refers to your income tax return.ceived.it as a joint-stock company or joint-stock
Some corporations can choose not to beassociation, or
taxed and have earnings taxed to the sharehold-3) It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.ers. See S Corporations, earlier.
For more information about corporations,Choosing to be taxed as a corporation.To
see Publication 542, Corporations.choose to be taxed as a corporation, the club
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 27

Page 28 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rules To Curb
Abusive Tax SheltersAbusive Tax Shelters2. Congress has enacted a series of income taxAbusive tax shelters are marketing schemes
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive taxthat involve artificial transactions with little or no
shelters. These provisions include the following.economic reality. They often make use of un-
realistic allocations, inflated appraisals, lossesTax Shelters and 1) Passive activity loss and credit limits.
in connection with nonrecourse loans, mis- The passive activity loss and credit rules
matching of income and deductions, financinglimit the amount of losses and credits thatOther techniques that do not conform to standard com-can be claimed from passive activities and
limit the amount that can offset nonpassivemercial business practices, or the mis-charac-
income, such as certain portfolio incomeReportable terization of the substance of the transaction.
from investments. For more detailed infor-Despite appearances to the contrary, the tax-
mation about determining and reporting in-payer generally risks little.Transactions come, losses, and credits from passiveAbusive tax shelters commonly involve activities, see Publication 925.
package deals that are designed from the start
2) Registration requirements for tax shel-to generate losses, deductions, or credits that
ters. Generally, the organizers of certainIntroduction will be far more than present or future invest-tax shelters must register the shelter withment. Or, they may promise investors from theInvestments that yield tax benefits are some- the IRS. The IRS will then assign the taxtimes called “tax shelters.” In some cases, Con- start that future inflated appraisals will enableshelter a registration number. If you are angress has concluded that the loss of revenue isthem, for example, to reap charitable contribu-investor in a tax shelter, the seller (or thean acceptable side effect of special tax provi-tion deductions based on those appraisals. (Buttransferor) must provide you with the tax
sions designed to encourage taxpayers to makesee the appraisal requirements discussed undershelter registration number at the time of
certain types of investments. In many cases,Rules To Curb Abusive Tax Shelters, later.) sale (or transfer) or within 20 days after
however, losses from tax shelters produce littleThey are commonly marketed in terms of the the seller or transferor receives the num-
or no benefit to society, or the tax benefits are ber if that date is later. See Investor Re-ratio of tax deductions allegedly available to
exaggerated beyond those intended. Those porting, later, for more information abouteach dollar invested. This ratio (or “write-off”) is
cases are called “abusive tax shelters.” An in- reporting this number when filing your taxfrequently said to be several times greater than
return.vestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub-one-to-one.
ject to restrictions, including the requirement 3) Requirement to maintain list. Generally,Because there are many abusive tax shel-that it be registered, as discussed later, unless it organizers and sellers who act as materialters, it is not possible to list all the factors youis a “projected income investment” (defined advisors with respect to any potentiallyshould consider in determining whether an offer-later). abusive tax shelter (including a reportableing is an abusive tax shelter. However, you transaction discussed later) must maintainshould ask the following questions, which mightTopics a list of persons involved in the tax shelter.provide a clue to the abusive nature of the plan.This chapter discusses: The list must be available for inspection by
the IRS, and the information required to be• Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco-• How to recognize an abusive tax shelter, included on the list generally must be keptnomic benefits? for 7 years. See section 301.6112–1 of• Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax • Is this a transaction you would seriouslythe regulations for more information. Anshelters, organizer or seller who does not maintainconsider, apart from the tax benefits, if you
• Investors’ reporting requirements, and the required list of persons involved in thehoped to make a profit?
tax shelter will be subject to a penalty of• Penalties that may apply. • Do shelter assets really exist and, if so,$50 for each person required to be on the
are they insured for less than their list. But, the organizer or seller will not
purchase price? have to pay the penalty if it can be shownUseful Items
that the failure to comply with this require-You may want to see: • Is there a nontax justification for the way
ment was due to reasonable cause andprofits and losses are allocated to part-not willful neglect. The maximum penaltyPublication ners? under this provision is $100,000 for each
• Do the facts and supporting documents❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods tax shelter in each calendar year.
make economic sense? In that connec-❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal 4) Appraisal requirement for donatedtion, are there sales and resales of the taxproperty. Generally, if you donate prop-Rights, and Claims for Refund shelter property at ever increasing prices?erty valued at more than $5,000 ($10,000❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated in the case of privately traded stock), you• Does the investment plan involve a gim-Property must get a written “qualified” appraisal ofmick, device, or sham to hide the eco-
the property’s fair market value and attach❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules nomic reality of the transaction?
an appraisal summary to your income tax
• Does the promoter offer to backdate docu-return. The appraisal must be done by aForm (and Instructions)
ments after the close of the year? Are you“qualified” appraiser who is not the tax-
❏ 8271 Investor Reporting of Tax Shelter instructed to backdate checks covering payer, a party to a transaction in which the
Registration Number taxpayer acquired the property, the donee,your investment?
or an employee or related party of any of❏ 8275 Disclosure Statement • Is your debt a real debt or are you assuredthe preceding persons. (Related partiesby the promoter that you will never have to❏ 8275–R Regulation Disclosure are defined under Related Party Transac-pay it?Statement tions in chapter 4.) For more information
about appraisals, see Publication 561.• Does this transaction involve laundering❏ 8886 Reportable Transaction Disclosure
United States source income through for-Statement 5) Interest on penalties. If you are assessed
eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha-an accuracy-related or civil fraud penalty
ven and owned by United StatesSee chapter 5 for information about getting (as discussed under Penalties, later), inter-
these publications and forms. shareholders? est will be imposed on the amount of the
Page 28 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 29 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
penalty from the due date of the return will not compromise even if you or your repre- have paid an advisor a minimum fee. A transac-
sentative believes that you have authority for the(including any extensions) to the date you tion is offered under conditions of confidentiality
positions taken on your tax return.pay the penalty. if the advisor who is paid the fee places a limita-
tion on the disclosure of the tax treatment or taxThe courts have generally been un-6) Accounting method restriction. Tax structure on you and the limitation protects thesympathetic to taxpayers involved inshelters generally cannot use the cash advisor’s tax strategies. To invest in a confiden-abusive tax shelter schemes and havemethod of accounting. CAUTION
!
tial transaction, you generally must agree to limitruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of the7) Uniform capitalization rules. The uniform your disclosure of the tax treatment or structurecases in which these shelters have been chal-capitalization rules generally apply to pro- of the transaction, or not disclose it at all.lenged.ducing property or acquiring it for resale. Transaction with contractual protection.Under those rules, the direct cost and part Generally, a transaction with contractual protec-Investor Reportingof the indirect cost of the property must be tion is a transaction in which you or a relatedcapitalized or included in inventory. For party has the right to a full or partial refund ofYou may be required to provide the followingmore information, see Publication 538. fees if all or part of the intended tax conse-information.
quences of the transaction are not sustained, or
1) Reportable transaction disclosure state-a transaction for which the fees are contingent
ment.Projected Income Investment on your realizing the tax benefits from the trans-
action.2) Tax shelter registration number.Special rules apply to a projected income invest-
Loss transactions.For individuals, a lossment. To qualify as a projected income invest-
transaction is any transaction that results in ament, a tax shelter must not be expected to
claimed loss of at least $2 million in a single taxreduce the cumulative tax liability of any in- Reportable Transaction Disclosure
year or $4 million in any combination of taxvestor during any year of the first 5 years endingStatement years. If the loss is from a foreign currencyafter the date the investment was offered for
transaction under Internal Revenue Code sec-Use Form 8886 to disclose information for eachsale. In addition, the assets of a projected in-
tion 988, the loss must be at least $50,000 in areportable transaction in which you participated.come investment must not include or relate to
single tax year, whether or not the loss flowsGenerally, you must attach Form 8886 to yourmore than an incidental interest in: 
through from an S corporation or partnership.return for each year that your tax liability is
affected by your participation in the transaction.1) Master sound recordings, Certain losses (such as losses from casual-
In addition, for the first year Form 8886 is at-ties, thefts, and condemnations) are excepted2) Motion picture or television films, tached to your return, you must send a copy to:from this category and do not have to be re-
3) Videotapes, ported on Form 8886. For information on other
Internal Revenue Service exceptions, see Revenue Procedure 2003–244) Lithograph plates, LM:PFTG:OTSA in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2003–11. This In-
Large & Mid-Size Business Division5) Copyrights, ternal Revenue Bulletin is available at
1111 Constitution Avenue, NW www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb03-11.pdf.6) Literary, musical, or artistic compositions,Washington, DC 20224or Transactions with a significant book-tax
difference.This category includes transac-7) Collectibles (such as works of art, rugs,The following discussion briefly describes re-tions that result in book-tax differences of moreantiques, metals, gems, stamps, coins, orportable transactions. For more details, see thethan $10 million in any tax year. The book-taxalcoholic beverages). instructions for Form 8886. difference is the amount by which the amount of
Tax shelters that qualify as projected income any income, gain, expense, or loss item from theReportable transaction.investments are not subject to the registration transaction for federal income tax purposes dif-A reportable transaction is any of the follow-requirement for tax shelters, described earlier. fers on a gross basis from the amount of the iteming.However, the requirement to maintain a list that for book purposes for any tax year.
is in effect for tax shelters also applies to any• A listed transaction.
projected income investment. See Requirement
• A confidential transaction.to maintain list, earlier. Tax Shelter Registration Number
A tax shelter that previously qualified as a• A transaction with contractual protection.If you include on your tax return any deduction,projected income investment may later be dis-• Loss transactions in excess of certainloss, credit or other tax benefit, or any income,qualified if, in one of its first 5 years, it reducesamounts. from an interest in a tax shelter required to bethe cumulative tax liability of any investor. In that registered, you must report the registration num-• Transactions with a significant book-taxcase, the tax shelter becomes subject to the ber that the tax shelter provided to you. (Seedifference.registration rules for tax shelters, described ear- Registration requirements for tax shelters, ear-lier. • Transactions with a brief asset holding pe-lier.) Complete and attach Form 8271 to your
riod. This category includes transactionsreturn to report the number and to provide other
that result in your claiming a tax creditinformation about the tax shelter and its bene-Authority for Disallowance of Tax (including a foreign tax credit) of morefits. You must also attach Form 8271 to anyBenefits than $250,000 if the asset giving rise toapplication for tentative refund (Form 1045) and
the credit was held by you for 45 days orto any amended return (Form 1040X) on whichThe IRS has published guidance concluding thatless. these benefits are claimed or income is re-the claimed tax benefits of various abusive tax
ported. If you do not include the registrationshelters should be disallowed. The guidance isListed transaction.A listed transaction is anumber with your return, you will be subject to athe conclusion of the IRS on how the law istransaction that is the same as or substantiallypenalty of $250 for each such failure, unless theapplied to a particular set of facts. Guidance issimilar to one of the types of transactions thatfailure is due to reasonable cause.published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin for the IRS has determined to be a tax-avoidancetaxpayers’ information and also for use by IRStransaction. These transactions have been iden-Transfer of interests in a tax shelter.If youofficials. So, if your return is examined and antified in notices, regulations, and other publishedhold an investment interest in a tax shelter andabusive tax shelter is identified and challenged,guidance issued by the IRS. For a list of existinglater transfer that interest to another person, youpublished guidance dealing with that type ofguidance, see the instructions for Form 8886.must provide the tax shelter’s registration num-shelter, which disallows certain claimed tax
ber to each person to whom you transferred yourshelter benefits, could serve as the basis for theConfidential transaction.A confidential
interest. (However, this does not apply if yourexamining official’s challenge of the tax benefitstransaction is one that is offered to you under
interest is in a projected income investment,that you claimed. In such a case, the examiner conditions of confidentiality and for which you
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable TransactionsPage 29

Page 30 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
described earlier.) You must also provide a part of the underpayment that is due to negli- reasonable basis for your position on the tax
statement substantially in the following form: gence or disregard of rules or regulations. Theissue.
penalty will not be charged if you can show thatAlso, the understatement penalty will not beYou have acquired an interest in [name and
you had reasonable cause for understating yourimposed if you can show that there was reason-address of tax shelter] whose taxpayer
tax and that you acted in good faith.identification number is [if any]. The Internal able cause for the underpayment caused by the
Revenue Service has issued [name of tax shelter]Negligence includes any failure to make aunderstatement and that you acted in good faith.
the following tax shelter registration number:reasonable attempt to comply with the provi-An important factor in establishing reasonable
[number]. You must report this registrationsions of the Internal Revenue Code. cause and good faith will be the extent of yournumber to the Internal Revenue Service, if you effort to determine your proper tax liability underDisregard includes any careless, reckless, orclaim any deduction, loss, credit, or other tax
the law.intentional disregard. The penalty for disregardbenefit or report any income by reason of your
of rules and regulations can be avoided if all ofinvestment in [name of tax shelter]. You must Valuation misstatement.In general, youthe following are true.report the registration number (as well as the are liable for a 20% penalty for a substantialname and taxpayer identification number of [name valuation misstatement if all of the following are• You keep adequate books and records.of tax shelter]) on Form 8271. Form 8271 must be
true.attached to the return on which you claim the• You have a reasonable basis for your po-deduction, loss, credit, or other tax benefit orsition on the tax issue. 1) The value or adjusted basis of any prop-report any income. Issuance of a registration
erty claimed on the return is 200% or morenumber does not indicate that this investment or• You make an adequate disclosure of your
the claimed tax benefits have been reviewed, of the correct amount.position.
examined, or approved by the Internal Revenue
2) You underpaid your tax by more than Use Form 8275 to make your disclosure, andService.
$5,000 because of the misstatement.attach it to your tax return. To disclose a position
contrary to a regulation, use Form 8275–R. 3) You cannot establish that you had reason-Penalties
Also use Form 8886  to disclose a reportable able cause for the underpayment and that
transaction (discussed earlier).Investing in an abusive tax shelter may be an you acted in good faith.
expensive proposition when you consider all ofSubstantial understatement of tax.An You may be assessed a penalty of 40% for athe consequences. First, the promoter generallyunderstatement is considered to be substantial ifgross valuation misstatement. If you misstatecharges a substantial fee. If your return is ex-it is more than the greater of: the value or the adjusted basis of property byamined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is deter-
400% or more of the amount determined to bemined, you will be faced with payment of more1) 10% of the tax required to be shown oncorrect, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%,tax, interest on the underpayment, possibly athe return, or instead of 20%, of the amount you underpaid20% accuracy-related penalty, or a 75% civil
2) $5,000. because of the gross valuation misstatement.fraud penalty. You may also be subject to the
The penalty rate is also 40% if the property’spenalty for failure to pay tax. These penalties areAn “understatement” is the amount of tax re-correct value or adjusted basis is zero.explained in the following paragraphs. quired to be shown on your return for a tax year
minus the amount of tax shown on the return,Accuracy-related penalties.An accuracy- Civil fraud penalty.If there is any underpay-reduced by any rebates. The term “rebate” gen-related penalty of 20% can be imposed for un- ment of tax on your return due to fraud, a penaltyerally means a decrease in the tax shown onderpayments of tax due to: of 75% of the underpayment will be added toyour original return as the result of your filing anyour tax.1) Negligence or disregard of rules or regula- amended return or claim for refund.
Joint return.The fraud penalty on a jointtions, Two special rules apply in the case of an
return applies to a spouse only if some part ofunderstatement due to a tax shelter.2) Substantial understatement of tax, or the underpayment is due to the fraud of that
spouse.1) An understatement of tax does not include3) Substantial valuation misstatement.
any tax due to a tax shelter item (such asThis penalty will not be imposed if you can show Failure to pay tax.If a deficiency is assessedan item of income, gain, loss, deduction, orthat you had reasonable cause for any under- and is not paid within 10 days of the demand forcredit) if you had substantial authority forstatement of tax and that you acted in good faith. payment, an investor can be penalized with upthe tax treatment of the item and reasona-Your failure to disclose a reportable transaction to a 25% addition to tax if the failure to paybly believed that the tax treatment chosenis a strong indication that you failed to act in continues.was more likely than not the proper one.good faith.
2) Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a taxIf you are charged an accuracy-related pen- Whether To Investreturn does not reduce the amount of thealty, interest will be imposed on the amount of
understatement.the penalty from the due date of the return (in- In light of the adverse tax consequences and thecluding extensions) to the date you pay the pen- substantial amount of penalties and interest thatFor other than tax shelters, you can file Formalty. will result if the claimed tax benefits are disal-8275 or Form 8275–R to disclose items that
lowed, you should consider tax shelter invest-Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-could cause a substantial understatement of in-
ments carefully and seek competent legal andtions. The penalty for negligence or disregard come tax. In that way, you can avoid the sub-
financial advice.of rules or regulations is imposed only on the stantial understatement penalty if you have a
Page 30 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 31 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
explained later in this chapter under Expenses Expenses. Do not include in the computa-
tion of your passive activity income or loss:of Producing Income.
1) Expenses (other than interest) that are3. At-risk rules.Special at-risk rules apply to clearly and directly allocable to your portfo-most income-producing activities. These ruleslio income, orlimit the amount of loss you can deduct to the
amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally,2) Interest expense properly allocable to port-Investment this is the amount of cash and the adjusted basisfolio income.
of property you contribute to the activity. It alsoHowever, this interest and other expenses mayincludes money you borrow for use in the activityExpenses be subject to other limits. These limits are ex-if you are personally liable for repayment or ifplained in the rest of this chapter.you use property not used in the activity as
security for the loan. For more information, seeAdditional information.For more informa-Terms you may need to know
Publication 925. tion about determining and reporting income(see Glossary):
and losses from passive activities, see Publica-
tion 925.Passive activity losses and credits.TheAt-risk rules amount of losses and tax credits you can claim
from passive activities is limited. Generally, youPassive activity
are allowed to deduct passive activity lossesPortfolio income only up to the amount of your passive activityInterest Expenses
income. Also, you can use credits from passive
This section discusses interest expenses youactivities only against tax on the income from
Topics may be able to deduct as an investor.passive activities. There are exceptions for cer-
For information on business interest, seetain activities, such as rental real estate activi-This chapter discusses:
chapter 5 of Publication 535.ties.
You cannot deduct personal interest ex-• Limits on deductions, Passive activity.A passive activity gener-penses other than qualified home mortgage in-• Interest expenses, ally is any activity involving the conduct of any terest, as explained in Publication 936, Hometrade or business in which you do not materiallyMortgage Interest Deduction, and interest on• Bond premium amortization, participate and any rental activity. However, ifcertain student loans, as explained in Publica-• Expenses of producing income, you are involved in renting real estate, the activ-tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education.ity is not a passive activity if both of the following• Nondeductible expenses, and are true. Investment Interest• How to report investment expenses.
1) More than one-half of the personal serv-If you borrow money to buy property you hold forices you perform during the year in allinvestment, the interest you pay is investmentUseful Items trades or businesses are performed in realinterest. You can deduct investment interestYou may want to see: property trades or businesses in which yousubject to the limit discussed later. However,materially participate. you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-Publication
2) You perform more than 750 hours of serv- duce tax-exempt income. See Tax-exempt in-
❏ 535 Business Expenses come under Nondeductible Expenses, later. Norices during the year in real property trades
can you deduct interest expenses on straddles,or businesses in which you materially par-❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules also discussed under Nondeductible Expenses.ticipate.
❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and Investment interest does not include anyThe term trade or business generally meansDependents qualified home mortgage interest or any interestany activity that involves the conduct of a tradetaken into account in computing income or lossor business, is conducted in anticipation of start-Form (and Instructions) from a passive activity.ing a trade or business, or involves certain re-
Investment property.Property held for in-search or experimental expenditures. However,❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized
vestment includes property that produces inter-it does not include rental activities or certainDeductions
est, dividends, annuities, or royalties not derivedactivities treated as incidental to holding prop-❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense in the ordinary course of a trade or business. Iterty for investment.Deduction also includes property that produces gain or lossYou are considered to materially participate
(not derived in the ordinary course of a trade orin an activity if you are involved on a regular,See chapter 5 for information about getting business) from the sale or trade of propertycontinuous, and substantial basis in the opera-these publications and forms. producing these types of income or held fortions of the activity.
investment (other than an interest in a passive
Other income (nonpassive income).Gen- activity). Investment property also includes an
erally, you can use losses from passive activitiesinterest in a trade or business activity in which
only to offset income from passive activities.you did not materially participate (other than aLimits on Deductions
You generally cannot use passive activity lossespassive activity).
to offset your other income, such as your wagesYour deductions for investment expenses may Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.or your portfolio income. Portfolio income in-be limited by: To determine your investment interest, combinecludes gross income from interest, dividends,your share of investment interest from a partner-• The at-risk rules, annuities, or royalties that is not derived in theship, S corporation, estate, or trust with yourordinary course of a trade or business. It also• The passive activity loss limits, other investment interest.includes gains or losses (not derived in the ordi-
• The limit on investment interest, or nary course of a trade or business) from the sale
or trade of property (other than an interest in a• The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous Allocation of Interest Expensepassive activity) producing portfolio income oritemized deductions.
held for investment. This includes capital gainIf you borrow money for business or personal
distributions from mutual funds and real estateThe at-risk rules and passive activity rules are purposes as well as for investment, you must
investment trusts.explained briefly in this section. The limit on allocate the debt among those purposes. Only
You cannot use passive activity losses toinvestment interest is explained later in this the interest expense on the part of the debt used
offset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2% limit is for investment purposes is treated as invest-
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ment interest. The allocation is not affected by corporation, then the interest on those fundsInterest not deducted due to limit.In the
the use of property that secures the debt. must be allocated based on the assets of theyear you dispose of the bond, you can deduct
entity. If you contribute to the capital of thethe amount of any interest expense you were not
Example 1. You borrow $10,000 and use entity, you can make the allocation using anyallowed to deduct in earlier years because of the
$8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 toreasonable method. limit.
buy items for your home. Since 80% of the debt Choosing to deduct disallowed interestAdditional allocation rules.For more infor-is used for, and allocated to, investment pur- expense before the year of disposition.Youmation about allocating interest expense, seeposes, 80% of the interest on that debt is invest- can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex-chapter 5 of Publication 535.ment interest. The other 20% is nondeductible pense in any year before the year you dispose ofpersonal interest. the bond, up to your net interest income from the
bond during the year. The rest of the disallowedWhen To DeductDebt proceeds received in cash.If you re-
interest expense remains deductible in the yearceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds areInvestment Interest
you dispose of the bond.generally not treated as investment property.
If you use the cash method of accounting, youNet interest income.This is the interestDebt proceeds deposited in account.If you must pay the interest before you can deduct it.income (including OID) from the bond that youdeposit debt proceeds in an account, that de-If you use an accrual method of accounting,include in income for the year, minus the interestposit is treated as investment property, regard-you can deduct interest over the period it ac-expense paid or accrued during the year toless of whether the account bears interest. But, ifcrues, regardless of when you pay it. For anpurchase or carry the bond.you withdraw the funds and use them for an-exception, see Unpaid expenses owed to re-
other purpose, you must reallocate the debt tolated party under When To Report Investment
Limit on interest deduction for short-termdetermine the amount considered to be for in-Expenses, later in this chapter.
obligations.If the current income inclusionvestment purposes.
rules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount onExample. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep-
Short-Term Obligations do not apply to you, theExample 2. Assume in Example 1 that you tember 6, 2003, payable in 90 days at 12%
amount you can deduct for interest expense youborrowed the money on March 1 and immedi-interest. On December 5, 2003, you paid this
paid or accrued during the year to buy or carry aately bought the stock for $8,000. You did notwith a new note for $1,030, due on March 5,
short-term obligation is limited.buy the household items until June 1. You had2004. If you use the cash method of accounting,
deposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had no The interest is deductible only to the extent ityou cannot deduct any part of the $30 interest
other transactions on the bank account untilon your return for 2003 because you did not is more than:
June. You did not sell the stock and you madeactually pay it. If you use an accrual method, you
1) The amount of acquisition discount or OIDno principal payments on the debt. You paidmay be able to deduct a portion of the interest on
interest from another account. The $8,000 is on the obligation for the tax year, plusthe loans through December 31, 2003, on your
treated as being used for an investment pur-return for 2003. 2) The amount of any interest payable on thepose. The $2,000 is treated as being used for an obligation for the year that is not includedInterest paid in advance.Generally, if youinvestment purpose for the 3-month period. in income because of your accountingpay interest in advance for a period that goesYour total interest expense for 3 months on this method (other than interest taken into ac-beyond the end of the tax year, you must spreaddebt is investment interest. In June, when you count in determining the amount of acqui-the interest over the tax years to which it belongsspend the $2,000 for household items, you must sition discount or OID).under the OID rules discussed in chapter 1. Youbegin to allocate 80% of the debt and the inter-
can deduct in each year only the interest for thatest expense to investment purposes and 20% to The method of determining acquisition discount
year.personal purposes. and OID for short-term obligations is discussed
in chapter 1 under Discount on Short-Term Obli-Interest on margin accounts.If you are aAmounts paid within 30 days. If you re- gations.cash method taxpayer, you can deduct interestceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-
on margin accounts to buy taxable securities asceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat Interest not deducted due to limit.In the
investment interest in the year you paid it. Youany payment (up to the amount of the proceeds) year you dispose of the obligation, or if you
are considered to have paid interest on thesemade from any account you own, or from cash, choose, in another year in which you have net
accounts only when you actually pay the brokeras made from those proceeds. This applies to interest income from the obligation, you can
or when payment becomes available to the bro-any payment made within 30 days before or deduct the amount of any interest expense you
ker through your account. Payment may be-after the proceeds are received in cash or de- were not allowed to deduct for an earlier year
come available to the broker through yourposited in your account. because of the limit. Follow the same rules pro-
account when the broker collects dividends orIf you received the loan proceeds in cash, vided in the earlier discussion under Limit on
interest for your account, or sells securities heldyou can treat the payment as made on the date interest deduction for market discount bonds
for you or received from you.you received the cash instead of the date you earlier.
You cannot deduct any interest on moneyactually made the payment.
borrowed for personal reasons. Limit on DeductionPayments on debt may require new alloca-
Limit on interest deduction for market dis-tion. As you repay a debt used for more than Generally, your deduction for investment inter-count bonds. The amount you can deduct forone purpose, you must reallocate the balance. est expense is limited to the amount of your netinterest expense you paid or accrued during theYou must first reduce the amount allocated to investment income.year to buy or carry a market discount bond maypersonal purposes by the repayment. You then
You can carry over the amount of investmentbe limited. This limit does not apply if you accruereallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is
interest that you could not deduct because ofthe market discount and include it in your in-for investment purposes.
this limit to the next tax year. The interest carriedcome currently.
over is treated as investment interest paid orUnder this limit, the interest is deductibleExample 3. If, in Example 2, you repay
accrued in that next year.only to the extent it is more than:$500 on November 1, the entire repayment is
You can carry over disallowed investmentapplied against the amount allocated to per-
1) The total interest and OID includible ininterest to the next tax year even if it is more thansonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo-
gross income for the bond for the year,your taxable income in the year the interest wascated as $8,000 for investment purposes, and
plus paid or accrued.$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next
reallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷ 2) The market discount for the number of
$9,500) of the debt and the interest expense isdays you held the bond during the year.
Net Investment Incomeallocated to investment.
Figure the amount in (2) above using the rules
Determine the amount of your net investmentPass-through entities.If you use borrowed for figuring accrued market discount in chapter 1
income by subtracting your investment ex-funds to buy an interest in a partnership or S under Market Discount Bonds.
Page 32 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 33 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Child’s Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.Total investment income........ $10,000penses (other than interest expense) from your
Minus: Investment expenses (otherIf part of the amount you report is your child’sinvestment income.
than interest)................ 3,200Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that part
Net investment income......... $6,800Investment income. This generally includesdoes not count as investment income. To figure
your gross income from property held for invest-the amount of your child’s income that you can
Deductible investment interestment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, andconsider your investment income, start with the
expense for the year........... $6,800royalties). Investment income does not includeamount on line 6 of Form 8814. Multiply that
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also doesamount by a percentage that is equal to theThe $2,000 of income from the passive activ-
not include qualified dividends or net capital gainAlaska Permanent Fund dividends divided byity is not used in determining Ted’s net invest-
unless you choose to include them. the total amount of interest and dividend incomement income. His investment interest deduction
on lines 1a and 2 of Form 8814. Subtract thefor the year is limited to $6,800, the amount ofChoosing to include qualified dividends.result from the amount on line 6 of Form 8814.his net investment income.Investment income generally does not include
qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 1.Example. Your 10-year-old child has tax-However, you can choose to include all or part ofable interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per-Form 4952your qualified dividends in investment income.manent Fund dividends of $2,000. You chooseYou make this choice by completing line 4(g) Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expenseto report this on your return. You enter $4,000 onof Form 4952 according to its instructions. Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest-line 1a of Form 8814, $2,000 on line 2, and
If you choose to include any amount of your ment interest.$6,000 on line 4. You then enter $4,500 on line 6
qualified dividends in investment income, youof Form 8814 and line 21 of Form 1040. You
must reduce your qualified dividends that are Example. Jane Smith is single. Her 2003figure the amount of your child’s income that you
eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by income includes $3,000 in dividends (other thancan consider your investment income as follows:
the same amount. qualified dividends) and a net capital gain of
$4,500 − ($4,500 × ($2,000 ÷ $6,000)) $9,000 from the sale of investment property.Choosing to include net capital gain.In- She incurred $12,500 of investment interest ex-vestment income generally does not include netYou include this $3,000 on line 4a of Form 4952.pense. Her other investment expenses directlycapital gain from disposing of investment prop-Child’s capital gain distributions.If part connected with the production of investment in-erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-of the amount you report is your child’s capitalcome total $980 after applying the 2% limit ontual funds). However, you can choose to includegain distributions, that part (which is reported onmiscellaneous itemized deductions on Scheduleall or part of your net capital gain in investmentline 13 of Schedule D or line 13a of Form 1040)A (Form 1040).income. generally, does not count as investment income.For 2003, Jane chooses to include all of herYou make this choice by completing line 4gHowever, you can choose to include all or part ofnet capital gain in investment income. Her totalof Form 4952 according to its instructions.it in investment income, as explained in Choos- investment income is $12,000 ($3,000 divi-
If you choose to include any amount of youring to include net capital gain, earlier. dends + $9,000 net capital gain). Her net invest-
net capital gain in investment income, you mustYour investment income also includes thement income is $11,020 ($12,000 total
reduce your net capital gain that is eligible foramount on line 6 of Form 8814 (or, if applicable,investment income − $980 other investment ex-
the lower capital gains tax rates by the samethe reduced amount figured under Child’s penses).
amount. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier). Jane’s Form 4952 is illustrated, later. Her
investment interest expense deduction is limitedFor more information about the capital gains
Investment expenses. Investment expenses to $11,020, the amount of her net investmentrates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in Chapter 4.
include all income-producing expenses (otherincome. The $1,480 disallowed investment in-Before making either choice, considerthan interest expense) relating to investmentterest expense is carried forward to 2004.the overall effect on your tax liability.property that are allowable deductions after ap-
Compare your tax if you make one or Exception to use of Form 4952.You do not
TIP
plying the 2% limit that applies to miscellaneous
both of these choices with your tax if you do not. have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to youritemized deductions. Use the smaller of:
return if you meet all of the following tests.
1) The investment expenses included on lineInvestment income of child reported on • Your investment interest expense is not22 of Schedule A (Form 1040), orparent’s return.Investment income includes more than your investment income fromthe part of your child’s interest and dividend2) The amount on line 26 of Schedule A. interest and ordinary dividends minus anyincome that you choose to report on your return. qualified dividends.See Expenses of Producing Income, later, for aIf the child does not have qualified dividends,
discussion of the 2% limit.Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, or capital • You do not have any other deductible in-
gain distributions, this is the amount on line 6 of vestment expenses.Losses from passive activities.Income orForm 8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s • You have no carryover of investment inter-expenses that you used in computing income orInterest and Dividends. Include it on line 4a of est expense from 2002.loss from a passive activity are not included inForm 4952.
determining your investment income or invest-
If you meet all of these tests, you can deductment expenses (including investment interestExample. Your 8-year-old son has interest
all of your investment interest.expense). See Publication 925 for informationincome of $2,000, which you choose to report on
about passive activities.your own return. You enter $2,000 on lines 1a
and 4 of Form 8814 and $500 on line 6 of Form
Example. Ted is a partner in a partnership8814 and line 21 of Form 1040. Your investment
that operates a business. However, he does notincome includes this $500.
materially participate in the partnership’s busi-Bond PremiumChild’s qualified dividends.If part of theness. Ted’s interest in the partnership is consid-
amount you report is your child’s qualified divi-ered a passive activity. Amortization
dends, that part (which is reported on line 9b ofTed’s investment income from interest and
Form 1040) generally, does not count as invest-dividends (other than qualified dividends) is If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-
ment income. However, you can choose to in-$10,000. His investment expenses (other than mium is part of your basis in the bond. If the
clude all or part of it in investment income, asinterest) are $3,200 after taking into account the bond yields taxable interest, you can choose to
explained under Choosing to include qualified2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductions. amortize the premium. This generally means
dividends, earlier. His investment interest expense is $8,000. Ted that each year, over the life of the bond, you use
Your investment income also includes the also has income from the partnership of $2,000. a part of the premium to reduce the amount of
amount on line 6 of Form 8814 (or, if applicable, Ted figures his net investment income and interest includible in your income. If you make
the reduced amount figured next under Child’s the limit on his investment interest expense de- this choice, you must reduce your basis in the
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends). duction in the following way: bond by the amortization for the year.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jane Smith 111-00-1111
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
9,000
9,000
0
9,000
12,000
980
11,020
1,480
11,020
OMB No. 1545-0191
Investment Interest Expense Deduction4952Form
/H17075Attach to your tax return.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12B
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number
1Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2003 (see instructions)1
2Disallowed investment interest expense from 2002 Form 4952, line 72
3Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 23
4a
Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net
gain from the disposition of property held for investment)
4a
Investment expenses (see instructions)5 5
Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4h. If zero or less, enter -0-6 6
Total Investment Interest Expense
Net Investment Income
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
b Qualified dividends included on line 4a
c Subtract line 4b from line 4a
d Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment
e Enter the smaller of line 4d or your net capital gain from the disposition
of property held for investment (see instructions)
f Subtract line 4e from line 4d
Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2004. Subtract line 6 from
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-
7
Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions8
4f
4b
4c
7
8
Part III
Part I
Part II
2003
g Enter the amount from lines 4b and 4e that you elect to include in investment income (see
instructions)
h Investment income. Add lines 4c, 4f, and 4g 4h
4g
4d
4e
3,000
Step 3: determine the bond premium forIf the bond yields tax-exempt interest, youHow To Figure
the accrual period.To do this, multiply yourmust amortize the premium. This amortizedAmortizationamount is not deductible in determining taxable adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of the
income. However, each year you must reduce accrual period by your yield. Then subtract theFor bonds issued after September 27, 1985, youyour basis in the bond by the amortization for the result from the qualified stated interest for themust amortize bond premium using a constantyear. period.yield method on the basis of the bond’s yield to
Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin-maturity, determined by using the bond’s basisBond premium. Bond premium is the amount ning of the first accrual period is the same asand compounding at the close of each accrualby which your basis in the bond right after you your basis. After that, it is your basis decreasedperiod.get it is more than the total of all amounts pay- by the amount of bond premium amortized forable on the bond after you get it (other thanConstant yield method.Figure the bond pre-earlier periods and the amount of any paymentpayments of qualified stated interest). For exam-mium amortization for each accrual period aspreviously made on the bond other than a pay-ple, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000follows. ment of qualified stated interest.generally would have a $50 premium if you buy it
Step 1: determine your yield.Your yield isfor $1050. Example. On February 1, 2002, you boughtthe discount rate that, when used in figuring theBasis. In general, your basis for figuring a taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has apresent value of all remaining payments to bebond premium amortization is the same as your stated principal amount of $100,000, payable atmade on the bond (including payments of quali-basis for figuring any loss on the sale of the maturity on February 1, 2009, making your pre-fied stated interest), produces an amount equalbond. However, you may need to use a different mium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). Theto your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as ofbasis for: bond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000the date you got the bond. It must be constant
on February 1 of each year. Your yield isover the term of the bond and must be figured to• Convertible bonds,
8.07439% compounded annually. You chooseat least two decimal places when expressed as• Bonds you got in a trade, and to use annual accrual periods ending on Febru-a percentage.
ary 1 of each year. To find your bond premium• Bonds whose basis has to be determined If you do not know the yield, consult your
amortization for the accrual period ending onusing the basis of the person who trans-broker or tax advisor. Databases available to
February 1, 2003, you multiply the adjusted ac-ferred the bond to you. them are likely to show the yield at the date of
quisition price at the beginning of the periodpurchase.See section 1.171–1(e) of the regulations. ($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract theStep 2: determine the accrual periods. result ($8,881.83) from the qualified stated inter-Dealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyoneYou can choose the accrual periods to use.est for the period ($10,000), you find that yourwho holds them mainly for sale to customers inThey may be of any length and may vary inbond premium amortization for the period isthe ordinary course of a trade or business orlength over the term of the bond, but each ac-$1,118.17.who would properly include bonds in inventorycrual period can be no longer than 1 year and
Special rules.For special rules that applyat the close of the tax year) cannot claim aeach scheduled payment of principal or interest
to variable rate bonds, inflation-indexed bonds,deduction for amortizable bond premium. must occur either on the first or the final day of
and bonds that provide for alternative paymentan accrual period. The computation is simplest ifSee section 75 of the Internal Revenue Code
schedules or remote or incidental contingen-accrual periods are the same as the intervalsfor the treatment of bond premium by a dealer in
between interest payment dates. cies, see section 1.171–3 of the regulations.tax-exempt bonds.
Page 34 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 35 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
prior periods. Any amount you cannot deduct dend reinvestment plan, you can deduct anyBonds Issued Before
because of this limit can be carried forward to service charge subtracted from your cash divi-September 28, 1985
the next accrual period. dends before the dividends are used to buy
For these bonds, you can amortize bond pre- more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in thePre-1998 election to amortize bond premium.mium using any reasonable method. Reasona- year you pay them.Generally, if you first elected to amortize bondble methods include: premium before 1998, the above treatment ofClerical help and office rent.You can deduct
the premium does not apply to bonds you ac-office expenses, such as rent and clerical help,1) The straight-line method, and
quired before 1988. that you pay in connection with your investments2) The Revenue Ruling 82–10 method. and collecting the taxable income on them.Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986.
The amortization of the premium on these bondsCost of replacing missing securities.To re-Straight-line method.Under this method, theis a miscellaneous itemized deduction not sub-place your taxable securities that are mislaid,amount of your bond premium amortization isject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to postthe same each month. Divide the number of
an indemnity bond. You can deduct the premiummonths you held the bond during the year by theBonds acquired after October 22, 1986, but
you pay to buy the indemnity bond and thenumber of months from the beginning of the taxbefore 1988.The amortization of the premium
related incidental expenses.year (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to theon these bonds is investment interest expense
You may, however, get a refund of part of thedate of maturity or earlier call date. Then multiplysubject to the investment interest limit, unless
bond premium if the missing securities are re-the result by the bond premium (reduced by anyyou choose to treat it as an offset to interest
covered within a specified time. Under certainbond premium amortization claimed in earlierincome on the bond.
types of insurance policies, you can recoveryears). This gives you your bond premium amor-
some of the expenses.tization for the year.
If you receive the refund in the tax year you
Revenue Ruling 82–10 method. Under this pay the amounts, you can deduct only the differ-Expenses ofmethod, the amount of your bond premium ence between the expenses paid and the
amortization increases each month over the life amount refunded. If the refund is made in a laterProducing Incomeof the bond. This method is explained in Reve- tax year, you must include the refund in income
nue Ruling 82–10. in the year you received it, but only to the extentYou deduct investment expenses (other thanthat the expenses decreased your tax in the yearinterest expenses) as miscellaneous itemized you deducted them.Choosing To Amortize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To be
deductible, these expenses must be ordinaryFees to collect income.You can deduct feesYou choose to amortize the premium on taxableand necessary expenses paid or incurred: you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similarbonds by reporting the amortization for the year agent to collect investment income, such ason your income tax return for the first tax year for1) To produce or collect income, or your taxable bond or mortgage interest, or yourwhich you want the choice to apply. You should dividends on shares of stock.2) To manage property held for producing in-attach a statement to your return that you arecome. Fees to buy or sell.You cannot deduct amaking this choice under section 171. See How
fee you pay to a broker to acquire investmentTo Report Amortization, next. The expenses must be directly related to the
property, such as stocks or bonds. You mustThis choice is binding for the year you makeincome or income-producing property, and the
add the fee to the cost of the property. See Basisit and for later tax years. It applies to all taxableincome must be taxable to you.
of Investment Property in chapter 4.bonds you own in the year you make the choiceThe deduction for most income-producing
You cannot deduct any broker’s fees, com-and also to those you acquire in later years.expenses is subject to a 2% limit that also
missions, or option premiums you pay (or thatYou can change your decision to amortizeapplies to certain other miscellaneous itemized
were netted out) in connection with the sale ofbond premium only with the written approval ofdeductions. The amount deductible is limited to
investment property. They can be used only tothe IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115,the total of these miscellaneous deductions that
figure gain or loss from the sale. See ReportingApplication for Change in Accounting Method. is more than 2% of your adjusted gross income.
Capital Gains and Losses, in chapter 4, for moreFor more information on requesting approval,For information on how to report expenses of
information about the treatment of these salesee section 1C of the Appendix to Revenueproducing income, see How To Report Invest-
expenses.Procedure 2002–9 in Internal Revenue Bulletinment Expenses, later.
2002–3. You can find this Internal Revenue Investment counsel and advice. You canAttorney or accounting fees.You can de-Bulletin at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/ deduct fees you pay for counsel and adviceduct attorney or accounting fees that are neces-irb02–03.pdf. about investments that produce taxable income.sary to produce or collect taxable income.
This includes amounts you pay for investmentHowever, in some cases, attorney or accounting
How To Report advisory services.fees are part of the basis of property. See Basis
Amortization of Investment Property in chapter 4. Safe deposit box rent.You can deduct rent
Automatic investment service and dividendyou pay for a safe deposit box if you use the boxSubtract the bond premium amortization fromreinvestment plans. A bank may offer its to store taxable income-producing stocks,your interest income from these bonds. checking account customers an automatic in-bonds, or other investment-related papers andReport the bond’s interest on line 1 of Sched-vestment service so that, for a charge, eachdocuments. If you also use the box to storeule B (Form 1040). Several lines above line 2,customer can choose to invest a part of thetax-exempt securities or personal items, you canput a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1.checking account each month in common stock.deduct only part of the rent. See Tax-exemptBelow this subtotal, print “ABP Adjustment,” andOr, a bank that is a dividend disbursing agent forincome under Nondeductible Expenses, later, tothe amortization amount. Subtract this amounta number of publicly-owned corporations mayfigure what part you can deduct.from the subtotal, and enter the result on line 2.set up an automatic dividend reinvestment serv-State and local transfer taxes.You cannotBond premium amortization more than inter-ice. Through that service, cash dividends arededuct the state and local transfer taxes you payest. If the amount of your bond premium amor- reinvested in more shares of stock, after thewhen you buy or sell securities. If you pay thesetization for an accrual period is more than the bank deducts a service charge. transfer taxes when you buy securities, youqualified stated interest for the period, you can A corporation in which you own stock alsomust treat them as part of the cost of the prop-deduct the difference as a miscellaneous item- may have a dividend reinvestment plan. Thiserty. If you pay these transfer taxes when youized deduction on line 27 of Schedule A (Form plan lets you choose to use your dividends tosell securities, you must treat them as a reduc-1040). buy more shares of stock in the corporation tion in the amount realized. But your deduction is limited to the amount instead of receiving the dividends in cash.
by which your total interest inclusions on the You can deduct the monthly service chargeTrustee’s commissions for revocable trust.
bond in prior accrual periods is more than your you pay to a bank to participate in an automatic If you set up a revocable trust and have its
total bond premium deductions on the bond in investment service. If you participate in a divi- income distributed to you, you can deduct the
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
commission you pay the trustee for managing of income is to the total income. If the expenses
relate in part to capital gains and losses, includethe trust to the extent it is to produce or collectNondeductible
the gains, but not the losses, in figuring thistaxable income or to manage property. How-
proportion. To find the part of the expenses thatever, you cannot deduct any part of the commis-Expenses
is for the tax-exempt income, divide your tax-ex-sion that is for producing or collecting
empt income by the total income and multiplySome expenses that you incur as an investortax-exempt income or for managing property
are not deductible. your expenses by the result.that produces tax-exempt income.
If you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay theStockholders’ meetings.You cannot deduct Example. You received $6,000 interest;commissions for several years in advance, youtransportation and other expenses that you pay$4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxable.to attend stockholders’ meetings of companiesmust deduct a part of the commission each year. In earning this income, you had $500 of ex-in which you have no interest other than owningYou cannot deduct the entire amount in the year penses. You cannot specifically identify thestock. This is true even if your purpose in attend-you pay it. amount of each expense item that is for eaching is to get information that would be useful inincome item, so you must divide your expenses.making further investments. 80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided byInvestment expenses from pass-through
Investment-related seminar.You cannot de- $6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for theentities.If you hold an interest in a partner-
duct expenses for attending a convention, semi-tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400ship, S corporation, real estate mortgage invest-
nar, or similar meeting for investment purposes.(80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deductment conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly offered
$100 (the rest of the expenses) because theyregulated investment company (mutual fund),Single-premium life insurance, endowment,are for the taxable interest.you can deduct your share of that entity’s invest-and annuity contracts.You cannot deduct
ment expenses. A partnership or S corporationinterest on money you borrow to buy or carry aState income taxes.If you itemize your de-
will show your share of these expenses on yoursingle-premium life insurance, endowment, orductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in-
Schedule K–1. A nonpublicly offered mutualannuity contract. come taxes on interest income that is exempt
fund will indicate your share of these expenses from federal income tax. But you cannot deduct,Used as collateral.If you use a single pre-in box 5 of Form 1099–DIV, or on an equivalent as either taxes or investment expenses, statemium annuity contract as collateral to obtain orstatement. Publicly-offered mutual funds are income taxes on other exempt income.continue a mortgage loan, you cannot deductdiscussed later. any interest on the loan that is collateralized by
Interest expense and carrying charges onIf you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex-the annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter-
straddles. You cannot deduct interest andpenses relating to your residual interest invest-est expense disallowed by multiplying the cur-
carrying charges that are allocable to personalrent interest rate on the mortgage loan by thement will be shown on line 3b of Schedule Q
property that is part of a straddle. The nonde-lesser of the amount of the annuity contract used(Form 1066). Any expenses relating to your
ductible interest and carrying charges are addedas collateral or the amount of the loan.regular interest investment will appear in box 5
to the basis of the straddle property. However,of Form 1099–INT or box 7 of Form 1099–OID.Borrowing on insurance. Generally, you this treatment does not apply if:Report your share of these investment ex-cannot deduct interest on money you borrow to
penses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject tobuy or carry a life insurance, endowment, or1) All the offsetting positions making up the
annuity contract if you plan to systematicallythe 2% limit, in the same manner as your other straddle either consist of one or more qual-
borrow part or all of the increases in the cashinvestment expenses. ified covered call options and the optioned
value of the contract. This rule applies to thestock or consist of section 1256 contractsIncluding mutual fund or REMIC expensesinterest on the total amount borrowed to buy or(and the straddle is not part of a largerin income. Your share of the investment ex-carry the contract, not just the interest on thestraddle), orpenses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offeredborrowed increases in the cash value.mutual fund, as described above, are consid- 2) The straddle is a hedging transaction.
Tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct ex-ered to be indirect deductions through that For information about straddles, including defini-penses you incur to produce tax-exempt in-pass-through entity. You must include in your tions of the terms used in this discussion, seecome. Nor can you deduct interest on moneygross income an amount equal to the amount of chapter 4.you borrow to buy tax-exempt securities orthe expenses allocated to you, whether or not Interest includes any amount you pay or in-shares in a regulated investment company (mu-you are able to claim a deduction for those cur in connection with personal property used intual fund) that distributes only exempt-interestexpenses. If you are a shareholder in a nonpub- a short sale. However, you must first apply thedividends.licly offered mutual fund, you must include on rules discussed in Payments in lieu of dividendsyour return the full amount of ordinary dividendsShort-sale expenses.The rule disallowingunder Short Sales in chapter 4.or other distributions of stock, as shown in boxa deduction for interest expenses on tax-exempt
To determine the interest on market discount1a of Form 1099–DIV or an equivalent state- securities applies to amounts you pay in con-
bonds and short-term obligations that are part ofnection with personal property used in a shortment. If you are a residual interest holder in a a straddle, you must first apply the rules dis-sale or amounts paid by others for the use of anyREMIC, you must report as ordinary income in cussed under Limit on interest deduction forcollateral in connection with the short sale. How-Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040) the total market discount bonds and Limit on interestever, it does not apply to the expenses you incuramounts shown on lines 1b and 3b of Schedule deduction for short-term obligations (both underif you deposit cash as collateral for the propertyQ (Form 1066). If you are a REMIC regular Interest Expenses, earlier).used in the short sale and the cash does notinterest holder, you must include the amount of
earn a material return during the period of theany expense allocation you received on line 8a Nondeductible amount. Figure the nonde-
sale. Short sales are discussed in chapter 4.ductible amount of interest and carrying chargesof Form 1040.
on straddle property as follows.Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxable
income. You may have expenses that are forPublicly-offered mutual funds.Publicly-of- 1) Add:both tax-exempt and taxable income. If you can-fered mutual funds, generally, are funds that arenot specifically identify what part of the ex-traded on an established securities exchange. a) Interest on indebtedness incurred orpenses is for each type of income, you canThese funds do not pass investment expenses continued to buy or carry the personaldivide the expenses, using reasonable propor-through to you. Instead, the dividend income property, andtions based on facts and circumstances. Youthey report to you in box 1a of Form 1099–DIV b) All other amounts (including charges tomust attach a statement to your return showingis already reduced by your share of investment insure, store, or transport the personalhow you divided the expenses and stating thatexpenses. Therefore, you cannot deduct the ex- property) paid or incurred to carry theeach deduction claimed is not based on tax-ex-penses on your return. empt income. personal property.
Include the amount from box 1a of Form One accepted method for dividing expenses
1099–DIV in your income. 2) Subtract from the amount in (1):is to do it in the same proportion that each type
Page 36 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 37 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a) Interest (including OID) includible in in chapter 4 for information on these expenses.)Unpaid expenses owed to related party.If
gross income for the year on the per- you use an accrual method, you cannot deductAlso attach a completed Form 4952 if you used
sonal property, interest and other expenses owed to a relatedthat form to figure your investment interest ex-
cash-basis person until payment is made andpense.b) Any income from the personal property the amount is includible in the gross income ofEnter the total amount of your other invest-treated as ordinary income on the dis- that person. The relationship, for purposes ofment expenses (other than interest expenses)position of short-term government obli- this rule, is determined as of the end of the taxon line 22, Schedule A. List the type and amountgations or as ordinary income under the year for which the interest or expense wouldof each expense on the dotted lines next to linemarket discount and short-term bond otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is denied22. (If necessary, you can show the requiredprovisions — see Discount on Debt In- under this rule, this rule will continue to applyinformation on an attached statement.) Includestruments in chapter 1, even if your relationship with the person ceasesthe total on line 23 with your other miscellaneousc) The dividends includible in gross in- to exist before the amount is includible in thedeductions that are subject to the 2% limit.come for the year from the personal gross income of that person.
For information on how to report amortizableproperty, and This rule generally applies to those relation-
bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza- ships listed in chapter 4 under Related Partyd) Any payment on a loan of the personaltion, earlier in this chapter. Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-property for use in a short sale that is nerships to partners, partners to partnerships,includible in gross income. shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-
tions to shareholders.
Basis adjustment. Add the nondeductible The postponement of deductions for unpaidWhen To Reportamount to the basis of your straddle property. expenses and interest under the related party
rule does not apply to original issue discountInvestment Expenses
(OID), regardless of when payment is made.
This rule also does not apply to loans withIf you use the cash method to report income and
below-market interest rates or to certain pay-How To Report expenses, you generally deduct your expenses,
ments for the use of property and services whenexcept for certain prepaid interest, in the year
the lender or recipient has to include paymentsInvestment Expenses you pay them.
periodically in income, even if a payment has notIf you use an accrual method, you generallyTo deduct your investment expenses, you must been made.deduct your expenses when you incur a liabilityitemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).for them, rather than when you pay them.Enter your deductible investment interest ex-
Also see When To Deduct Investment Inter-pense on line 13, Schedule A. Include any de-
est, earlier in this chapter.ductible short sale expenses. (See Short Sales
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Capital gains and losses, and ownership of stock will be considered. The re-
demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if: • How to report your gain or loss.
4. 1) The redemption is not essentially
equivalent to a dividend — see DividendsUseful Items and Other Corporate Distributions in chap-You may want to see: ter 1,Sales and
Publication 2) There is a substantially disproportionate
redemption of stock,
❏ 551 Basis of AssetsTrades of
3) There is a complete redemption of all the
❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions stock of the corporation owned by the
Investment shareholder, or
Form (and Instructions)
4) The redemption is a distribution in partial
❏ Schedule D (Form 1040)Capital Gains liquidation of a corporation.Property
and Losses
Redemption or retirement of bonds.A re-❏ 6781 Gains and Losses From Section demption or retirement of bonds or notes at their1256 Contracts and StraddlesIntroduction maturity generally is treated as a sale or trade.
❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss LimitationsSee Stocks, stock rights, and bonds and Dis-This chapter explains the tax treatment of sales
counted Debt Instruments under Capital or Ordi-and trades of investment property. ❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges nary Gain or Loss, later.
In addition, a significant modification of aInvestment property.This is property that See chapter 5 for information about gettingbond is treated as a trade of the original bond forproduces investment income. Examples includethese publications and forms. a new bond. For details, see section 1.1001–3stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes.
of the regulations.Property used in a trade or business is not in-
vestment property. Surrender of stock.A surrender of stock by a
dominant shareholder who retains control of theWhat Is aForm 1099–B. If you sold property such as corporation is treated as a contribution to capitalstocks, bonds, or certain commodities through a rather than as an immediate loss deductibleSale or Trade?broker during the year, you should receive, for from taxable income. The surrendering share-each sale, a Form 1099–B, Proceeds From holder must reallocate his or her basis in theTerms you may need to knowBroker and Barter Exchange Transactions, or an surrendered shares to the shares he or she(see Glossary):equivalent statement from the broker. You retains.should receive the statement by January 31 of
Trade of investment property for an annuity.the next year. It will show the gross proceedsEquity option
The transfer of investment property to a corpora-from the sale. The IRS will also get a copy ofFutures contract tion, trust, fund, foundation, or other organiza-Form 1099–B from the broker.
tion, in exchange for a fixed annuity contract thatUse Form 1099–B (or an equivalent state-Marked to market
will make guaranteed annual payments to youment received from your broker) to completeNonequity option for life, is a taxable trade. If the present value ofSchedule D of Form 1040. For more information,
the annuity is more than your basis in the prop-see Form 1099–B transactions under Reporting Options dealer
erty traded, you have a taxable gain in the yearCapital Gains and Losses, later. Regulated futures contract of the trade. Figure the present value of the
Other property transactions.Certain trans- annuity according to factors used by commercialSection 1256 contract
fers of property are discussed in other IRS publi- insurance companies issuing annuities.Short salecations. These include: Transfer by inheritance.The transfer of
• Sale of your main home, discussed in property of a decedent to the executor or admin-
Publication 523, Selling Your Home, This section explains what is a sale or trade. It istrator of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficia-
also explains certain transactions and events ries, is not a sale or other disposition. No taxable• Installment sales, covered in Publicationthat are treated as sales or trades. gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.537, Installment Sales, A sale is generally a transfer of property forTermination of certain rights and obliga-• Various types of transactions involvingmoney or a mortgage, note, or other promise totions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, orbusiness property, discussed in Publica-pay money. other termination of a right or obligation (othertion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of A trade is a transfer of property for otherthan a securities futures contract) with respect toAssets, property or services, and may be taxed in theproperty that is a capital asset (or that would be
same way as a sale. a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated as a• Transfers of property at death, covered in
sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital gainPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, andSale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transactionor loss.Administrators, and is not a trade when you voluntarily sell propertyThis rule does not apply to the retirement of a• Disposition of an interest in a passive ac-for cash and immediately buy similar property todebt instrument. See Redemption or retirementtivity, discussed in Publication 925, Pas- replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-of bonds, earlier.sive Activity and At-Risk Rules. rate transactions. But see Like-Kind Exchanges
under Nontaxable Trades, later. Worthless SecuritiesTopics Redemption of stock.A redemption of stockStocks, stock rights, and bonds (other thanThis chapter discusses: is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to thethose held for sale by a securities dealer) thatcapital gain or loss provisions unless the re-became worthless during the tax year are• What a sale or trade is, demption is a dividend or other distribution ontreated as though they were sold on the last daystock.• Basis, of the tax year. This affects whether your capital
Dividend versus sale or trade.Whether a loss is long-term or short-term. See Holding Pe-• Adjusted basis,
redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,riod, later.• Figuring gain or loss, or other distribution depends on the circum- If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make
• Nontaxable trades, stances in each case. Both direct and indirect payments on a negotiable promissory note that
Page 38 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 39 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you issued for stock that became worthless, you party described under Related Party Transac-Sale of appreciated financial position.A
can deduct these payments as losses in thetions, later in this chapter. transaction treated as a constructive sale of an
years you actually make the payments. Do not appreciated financial position is not treated as aException for nonmarketable securities.deduct them in the year the stock became worth- constructive sale of any other appreciated finan-A contract for sale of any stock, debt instrument,less. cial position, as long as you continue to hold theor partnership interest that is not a marketableoriginal position. However, if you hold anothersecurity is not a constructive sale if it settlesHow to report loss.Report worthless securi- appreciated financial position and dispose of thewithin 1 year of the date you enter into it.ties on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form original position before closing the transaction
Exception for certain closed transactions.1040), whichever applies. In columns (c) and that resulted in the constructive sale, you are
Do not treat a transaction as a constructive sale(d), print “Worthless.” Enter the amount of your treated as if, at the same time, you construc-
if all of the following are true.loss in parentheses in column (f). Also enter the tively sold the other appreciated financial posi-
amount of your loss in parentheses in column (g) tion.1) You closed the transaction before the endto the extent it is not a collectibles loss.
of the 30th day after the end of your taxSection 1256 Contractsyear.Filing a claim for refund.If you do not claim a
Marked to Marketloss for a worthless security on your original2) You held the appreciated financial positionreturn for the year it becomes worthless, you canthroughout the 60-day period beginning onIf you hold a section 1256 contract at the end offile a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss.the date you closed the transaction. the tax year, you generally must treat it as soldYou must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi- at its fair market value on the last business day3) Your risk of loss was not reduced at anyvidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return of the tax year.time during that 60-day period by holdingfor the year the security became worthless. You
certain other positions.must file it within 7 years from the date your
original return for that year had to be filed, or 2If a closed transaction is reestablished in aSection 1256 Contractyears from the date you paid the tax, whicheversubstantially similar position during the 60-day
is later. (Claims not due to worthless securities A section 1256 contract is any:period beginning on the date the first transaction
or bad debts generally must be filed within 3was closed, this exception still applies if the
years from the date a return is filed, or 2 years 1) Regulated futures contract,reestablished position is closed before the 30th
from the date the tax is paid, whichever is later.)day after the end of your tax year in which the2) Foreign currency contract,For more information about filing a claim, seefirst transaction was closed and, after that clos-3) Nonequity option,Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Ap-ing, (2) and (3) above are true.
peal Rights, and Claims for Refund. This exception also applies to successive4) Dealer equity option, or
short sales of an entire appreciated financial5) Dealer securities futures contract.Constructive Sales position. For more information, see Revenue
Ruling 2003–1 in Internal Revenue Bulletinof Appreciated
2003–3. This bulletin is available at Regulated futures contract.This is a con-Financial Positions www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb03-03.pdf. tract that: 
You are treated as having made a constructiveAppreciated financial position.This is any 1) Provides that amounts that must be de-sale when you enter into certain transactionsinterest in stock, a partnership interest, or a debtposited to, or can be withdrawn from, yourinvolving an appreciated financial position (de-instrument (including a futures or forward con-margin account depend on daily marketfined later) in stock, a partnership interest, ortract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing ofconditions (a system of marking to mar-certain debt instruments. You must recognizethe interest would result in a gain. ket), andgain as if the position were disposed of at its fair
Exceptions. An appreciated financial posi-market value on the date of the constructive 2) Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, a
tion does not include the following.sale. This gives you a new holding period for the qualified board of exchange. A qualified
position that begins on the date of the construc- board of exchange is a domestic board of1) Any position from which all of the appreci-tive sale. Then, when you close the transaction, trade designated as a contract market byation is accounted for under marked toyou reduce your gain (or increase your loss) by the Commodity Futures Trading Commis-market rules, including section 1256 con-the gain recognized on the constructive sale. sion, any board of trade or exchange ap-tracts (described later under Section 1256 proved by the Secretary of the Treasury,Contracts Marked to Market).Constructive sale.You are treated as having or a national securities exchange regis-
made a constructive sale of an appreciated fi-2) Any position in a debt instrument if: tered with the Securities and Exchange
nancial position if you: Commission.
a) The position unconditionally entitles the
1) Enter into a short sale of the same or sub-holder to receive a specified principal
Foreign currency contract.This is a contractstantially identical property, amount,
that:
2) Enter into an offsetting notional principalb) The interest payments (or other similar
1) Requires delivery of a foreign currencycontract relating to the same or substan- amounts) with respect to the position
that has positions traded through regulatedtially identical property, are payable at a fixed rate or a variable
futures contracts (or settlement of whichrate described in section3) Enter into a futures or forward contract to depends on the value of that type of for-1.860G–1(a)(3) of the regulations, anddeliver the same or substantially identical eign currency),property (including a forward contract thatc) The position is not convertible, either
2) Is traded in the interbank market, andprovides for cash settlement), or directly or indirectly, into stock of the
issuer (or any related person). 3) Is entered into at arm’s length at a price4) Acquire the same or substantially identical
determined by reference to the price in theproperty (if the appreciated financial posi-3) Any hedge with respect to a position de-interbank market.tion is a short sale, an offsetting notionalscribed in (2).principal contract, or a futures or forward Bank forward contracts with maturity datescontract). that are longer than the maturities ordinarilyCertain trust instruments treated as stock.
available for regulated futures contracts are con-You are also treated as having made a con- For the constructive sale rules, an interest in an
sidered to meet the definition of a foreign cur-structive sale of an appreciated financial posi- actively traded trust is treated as stock unless
rency contract if the above three conditions aretion if a person related to you enters into a substantially all of the value of the property held
satisfied.transaction described above with a view toward by the trust is debt that qualifies for the excep-
avoiding the constructive sale treatment. For tion to the definition of an appreciated financial Special rules apply to certain foreign cur-
this purpose, a related person is any related position (explained in (2) above). rency transactions. These transactions may re-
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 39

Page 40 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. For scribed later under Securities Futures Con-short-term capital loss from section 1256 con-
details, see Internal Revenue Code section 988tracts. tracts.
and regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) and If only a portion of the net section 1256 con-
1.988-3. tracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss back,
Marked to Market Rules the unabsorbed portion can be carried forward,Nonequity option. This is any listed option under the capital loss carryover rules, to the year(defined later) that is not an equity option. None-A section 1256 contract that you hold at the endfollowing the loss. (See Capital Losses underquity options include debt options, commodityof the tax year will generally be treated as sold atReporting Capital Gains and Losses, later.) Fig-futures options, currency options, and its fair market value on the last business day ofure your capital loss carryover as if, for the lossbroad-based stock index options. A the tax year, and you must recognize any gain oryear, you had an additional short-term capitalbroad-based stock index is based upon theloss that results. That gain or loss is taken intogain of 40% of the amount of net section 1256value of a group of diversified stocks or securi-account in figuring your gain or loss when youcontracts loss absorbed in the carryback yearsties (such as the Standard and Poor’s 500 in-later dispose of the contract, as shown in theand an additional long-term capital gain of 60%dex). example under 60/40 rule, below. of the absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treatWarrants based on a stock index that are any capital loss carryover from losses on sectionHedging exception. The marked to marketeconomically, substantially identical in all mate- 1256 contracts as if it were a loss from sectionrules do not apply to hedging transactions. Seerial respects to options based on a stock index 1256 contracts for that year.Hedging Transactions, later.are treated as options based on a stock index.
Net section 1256 contracts loss.This lossCash-settled options. Cash-settled op- 60/40 rule.Under the marked to market sys-is the lesser of:tions based on a stock index and either tradedtem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will be
on or subject to the rules of a qualified board oftreated as a long-term capital gain or loss, and1) The net capital loss for your tax year deter-exchange are nonequity options if the Securities40% will be treated as a short-term capital gainmined by taking into account only theand Exchange Commission (SEC) determines or loss. This is true regardless of how long yougains and losses from section 1256 con-that the stock index is broad based. actually held the property. tracts, orThis rule does not apply to options estab-
Example. On June 23, 2002, you bought alished before the SEC determines that the stock 2) The capital loss carryover to the next tax
regulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-index is broad based. year determined without this election.
cember 31, 2002 (the last business day of yourListed option.This is any option that istax year), the fair market value of the contractNet section 1256 contracts gain.This gaintraded on, or subject to the rules of, a qualifiedwas $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain onis the lesser of:board or exchange (as discussed earlier underyour 2002 tax return, treated as 60% long-termRegulated futures contract). A listed option, 1) The capital gain net income for the car-and 40% short-term capital gain.however, does not include an option that is a ryback year determined by taking into ac-On February 2, 2003, you sold the contractright to acquire stock from the issuer. count only gains and losses from sectionfor $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,000
1256 contracts, orgain on your 2002 return, you recognize aDealer equity option.This is any listed option
$1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2003that, for an options dealer: 2) The capital gain net income for that year.tax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40%
1) Is an equity option, Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain forshort-term capital loss.
any carryback year without regard to the net2) Is bought or granted by that dealer in theLimited partners or entrepreneurs.The section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year ornormal course of the dealer’s business ac-60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op-any later tax year.tivity of dealing in options, and tions or dealer securities futures contracts that
result in capital gain or loss allocable to limitedTraders in section 1256 contracts.Gain or3) Is listed on the qualified board of exchangepartners or limited entrepreneurs (defined laterloss from the trading of section 1256 contracts iswhere that dealer is registered. under Hedging Transactions). Instead, thesecapital gain or loss subject to the marked toAn options dealer is any person registeredgains or losses are treated as short term.market rules. However, this does not apply towith an appropriate national securities ex- contracts held for purposes of hedging propertyTerminations and transfers.The marked tochange as a market maker or specialist in listed if any loss from the property would be an ordi-market rules also apply if your obligation oroptions. nary loss.rights under section 1256 contracts are termi-
Equity option.This is any option: nated or transferred during the tax year. In thisTreatment of underlying property.The
case, use the fair market value of each sectiondetermination of whether an individual’s gain or1) To buy or sell stock, or 1256 contract at the time of termination or trans-loss from any property is ordinary or capital gain
fer to determine the gain or loss. Terminations or2) That is valued directly or indirectly by ref- or loss is made without regard to the fact that the
transfers may result from any offsetting, deliv-erence to any stock or narrow-based se- individual is actively engaged in dealing in or
ery, exercise, assignment, or lapse of your obli-curity index. trading section 1256 contracts related to that
gation or rights under section 1256 contracts.property.Equity options include options on a group of
stocks only if the group is a narrow-based stockLoss carryback election.An individual or
index. partnership having a net section 1256 contractsHow To Reportloss (defined later) for 2003 can elect to carryDealer securities futures contract.For
this loss back 3 years, instead of carrying it overIf you disposed of regulated futures or foreignany dealer in securities futures contracts or op-
to the next year. See How To Report, later, forcurrency contracts in 2003 (or had unrealizedtions on those contracts, this is a securities fu-
information about reporting this election on yourprofit or loss on these contracts that were opentures contract (or option on such a contract) that:
return. at the end of 2002 or 2003), you should receive
The loss carried back to any year under this1) Is entered into by the dealer (or, in the Form 1099–B, or an equivalent statement, from
election cannot be more than the net sectioncase of an option, is purchased or granted your broker.
1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, theby the dealer) in the normal course of the
amount of loss carried back to an earlier tax yearForm 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781, Gainsdealer’s activity of dealing in this type of
cannot increase or produce a net operating lossand Losses From Section 1256 Contracts andcontract (or option), and
for that year. Straddles, to report your gains and losses from2) Is traded on a qualified board or exchangeThe loss is carried to the earliest carryback all section 1256 contracts that are open at the(as defined under Regulated futures con- year first, and any unabsorbed loss amount can end of the year or that were closed out duringtract, earlier.) then be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. In the year. This includes the amount shown in box
A securities futures contract that is not a dealer each carryback year, treat 60% of the carryback 9a of Form 1099–B. Then enter the net amount
securities futures contract is treated as de- amount as a long-term capital loss and 40% as a of these gains and losses on Schedule D (Form
Page 40 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 41 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1040). Include a copy of Form 6781 with your lowed because of this limit, you can carry it over the applicable federal rate. For more informa-
income tax return. to the next tax year as a deduction resulting from tion, see Unstated Interest and Original Issue
a hedging transaction. Discount in Publication 537.If the Form 1099–B you receive includes a
If the hedging transaction relates to propertystraddle or hedging transaction, defined later, it
other than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-may be necessary to show certain adjustments Basis Other Than Cost
ing losses applies if the limited partner or entre-on Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc-
preneur is an individual.tions for completing Part I. There are times when you must use a basis
The limit on hedging losses does not apply toother than cost. In these cases, you may need to
Loss carryback election.To carry back yourany hedging loss to the extent that it is moreknow the property’s fair market value or the
loss under the election procedures describedthan all your unrecognized gains from hedgingadjusted basis of the previous owner.
earlier, file Form 1040X or Form 1045, Applica- transactions at the end of the tax year that are
Fair market value.This is the price at whichtion for Tentative Refund, for the year to whichfrom the trade or business in which the hedging
the property would change hands between ayou are carrying the loss with an amended Formtransaction occurred. The term “unrecognized
buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy or6781 and an amended Schedule D attached. gain” has the same meaning as defined under
sell and both having reasonable knowledge ofFollow the instructions for completing FormStraddles, later.
all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property,6781 for the loss year to make this election.Sale of property used in a hedge.Once you around the same date, may be helpful in figuring
identify personal property as being part of afair market value.
hedging transaction, you must treat gain from itsHedging Transactions sale or exchange as ordinary income, not capital
gain. Property Received for ServicesThe marked to market rules, described earlier,
do not apply to hedging transactions. A transac-
If you receive investment property for services,tion is a hedging transaction if both of the follow-
you must include the property’s fair market value
Self-Employment Incomeing conditions are met.
in income. The amount you include in income
Gains and losses derived in the ordinary coursethen becomes your basis in the property. If the1) You entered into the transaction in the nor-
of a commodity or option dealer’s trading inservices were performed for a price that wasmal course of your trade or business pri-
section 1256 contracts and property related toagreed to beforehand, this price will be acceptedmarily to manage the risk of:
these contracts are included in net earningsas the fair market value of the property if there is
a) Price changes or currency fluctuationsfrom self-employment. In addition, the rules re-no evidence to the contrary.
on ordinary property you hold (or willlating to contributions to self-employment retire-
Restricted property.If you receive, as pay-hold), or ment plans apply. For information on retirement
ment for services, property that is subject toplan contributions, see chapter 3 of Publicationb) Interest rate or price changes, or cur- certain restrictions, your basis in the property535, Business Expenses, Publication 560, Re-rency fluctuations, on your current or generally is its fair market value when it be-tirement Plans for Small Business, and Publica-future borrowings or ordinary obliga- comes substantially vested. Property becomestion 590, Individual Retirement Arrangementstions. substantially vested when it is transferable or is(IRAs).
no longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture,2) You clearly identified the transaction as whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop-being a hedging transaction before the erty in Publication 525 for more information.close of the day on which you entered into
Basis of Bargain purchases. If you buy investmentit.
property at less than fair market value, as pay-This hedging transaction exception does notInvestment Property ment for services, you must include the differ-apply to transactions entered into by or for any ence in income. Your basis in the property is theTerms you may need to knowsyndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor- price you pay plus the amount you include inporation, or other entity (other than a regular(see Glossary): income.corporation) that allocates more than 35% of its
losses to limited partners or limited entrepre-Basisneurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person who Property Receivedhas an interest in an enterprise (but not as aFair market value in Taxable Tradeslimited partner) and who does not actively par-Original issue discount (OID)ticipate in its management. However, an inter- If you received investment property in trade for
est is not considered held by a limited partner other property, the basis of the new property is
or entrepreneur if the interest holder actively its fair market value at the time of the tradeBasis is a way of measuring your investment inparticipates (or did so for at least 5 full years) unless you received the property in a nontaxableproperty for tax purposes. You must know thein the management of the entity, or is the trade.basis of your property to determine whether youspouse, child (including a legally adoptedhave a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi-child), grandchild, or parent of an individual Example. You trade A Company stock for Btion.who actively participates in the management of Company stock having a fair market value ofInvestment property you buy normally has anthe entity. $1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A Companyoriginal basis equal to its cost. If you get property
stock is less than $1,200, you have a taxablein some way other than buying it, such as by giftHedging loss limit.If you are a limited partner gain on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the Aor inheritance, its fair market value may be im-or entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a Company stock is more than $1,200, you have aportant in figuring the basis.hedging loss you can claim is limited. A “hedging deductible loss on the trade. The basis of your B
loss” is the amount by which the allowable de- Company stock is $1,200. If you later sell the BCost Basisductions in a tax year that resulted from a hedg- Company stock for $1,300, you will have a gain
ing transaction (determined without regard to of $100.The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.the limit) are more than the income received orThe cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtaccrued during the tax year from this transac-obligations, or other property or services.tion. Property Received
Any hedging loss that is allocated to you forUnstated interest.If you buy property on ain Nontaxable Trades
the tax year is limited to your taxable income for time-payment plan that charges little or no inter-
that year from the trade or business in which the est, the basis of your property is your stated If you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec-
hedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg- purchase price, minus the amount considered to ognize gain or loss until you dispose of the
ing transaction items in determining this taxable be unstated interest. You generally have un- property you received in the trade. See Nontax-
income. If you have a hedging loss that is disal- stated interest if your interest rate is less thanable Trades, later.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 41

Page 42 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The basis of property you received in a non- property is the donor’s adjusted basis increasedProperty Received as Inheritance
taxable or partly nontaxable trade is generallyby the total gift tax paid on the gift. However,
If you inherited property, your basis in that prop-the same as the adjusted basis of the propertyyour basis cannot be more than the fair market
erty generally is its fair market value (its ap-you gave up. Increase this amount by any cashvalue of the gift at the time it was given to you.praised value on the federal estate tax return)you paid, additional costs you had, and any gain
on:recognized. Reduce this amount by any cash orExample 1. You were given XYZ Company
unlike property you received, any loss recog-stock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stock1) The date of the decedent’s death, ornized, and any liability of yours that was as-had a fair market value of $21,000. The donor’s
sumed or treated as assumed. 2) The later alternate valuation date if the es-adjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid a
tate qualifies for, and elects to use, alter-gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain or
nate valuation.loss is $20,500, the donor’s adjusted basis plusProperty Received the amount of gift tax paid. If no federal estate tax return was filed, use theFrom Your Spouse appraised value on the date of death for state
Example 2. The facts are the same as ininheritance or transmission taxes.If property is transferred to you from your spouseExample 1 except that the gift tax paid was(or former spouse, if the transfer is incident to Appreciated property you gave the dece-$1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor’s ad-your divorce), your basis is the same as your dent. Your basis in certain appreciated prop-justed basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited tospouse’s or former spouse’s adjusted basis just erty that you inherited is the decedent’s adjustedthe fair market value of the stock at the time ofbefore the transfer. See Transfers Between basis in the property immediately before deaththe gift.Spouses, later. rather than its fair market value. This applies to
Gift received after 1976.If you received appreciated property that you or your spouseRecordkeeping. The transferor must
gave the decedent as a gift during the one-yearproperty as a gift after 1976, your basis is thegive you the records necessary to de-
period ending on the date of death. Appreciateddonor’s adjusted basis increased by the part oftermine the adjusted basis and holdingRECORDS
property is any property whose fair market valueperiod of the property as of the date of thethe gift tax paid that was for the net increase in
on the day you gave it to the decedent was moretransfer. value of the gift. You figure this part by multiply-
than its adjusted basis.ing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The
numerator (top part) is the net increase in valueMore information.See Publication 551, Ba-Property Received as a Gift of the gift and the denominator (bottom part) issis of Assets, for more information on the basis
the amount of the gift. of inherited property, including community prop-To figure your basis in property that you re- erty, a joint tenancy or tenancy by the entirety, aThe net increase in value of the gift is the fairceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted qualified joint interest, and a farm or closely heldmarket value of the gift minus the donor’s ad-basis to the donor just before it was given to you, business.justed basis. The amount of the gift is its valueits fair market value at the time it was given to
for gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and the
Adjusted Basisnual exclusion and marital or charitable deduc-date it was given to you.
tion that applies to the gift.Fair market value less than donor’s adjusted Before you can figure any gain or loss on a sale,
basis. If the fair market value of the property at exchange, or other disposition of property orExample. In 2003, you received a gift ofthe time of the gift was less than the donor’s figure allowable depreciation, depletion, orproperty from your mother. At the time of the gift,adjusted basis just before the gift, your basis for amortization, you usually must make certain ad-the property had a fair market value of $101,000gain on its sale or other disposition is the same justments (increases and decreases) to the ba-and an adjusted basis to her of $40,000. Theas the donor’s adjusted basis plus or minus any sis of the property. The result of theseamount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasrequired adjustments to basis during the period adjustments to the basis is the adjusted basis.$90,000 ($101,000 minus the $11,000 annualyou hold the property. Your basis for loss is its Adjustments to the basis of stocks andexclusion), and your mother paid a gift tax offair market value at the time of the gift plus or bonds are explained in the following discussion.$21,000. You figure your basis in the followingminus any required adjustments to basis during For information about other adjustments to ba-way:the period you hold the property. sis, see Publication 551.
No gain or loss. If you use the basis forFair market value............. $101,000
Stocks and Bondsfiguring a gain and the result is a loss, and thenMinus: Adjusted basis.......... 40,000
use the basis for figuring a loss and the result isNet increase in value of gift...... $61,000 The basis of stocks or bonds you own generallya gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss.
is the purchase price plus the costs of purchase,Gift tax paid................ $21,000
such as commissions and recording or transferExample. You receive a gift of investmentMultiplied by .678 ($61,000 ÷
fees. If you acquired stock or bonds other thanproperty having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at$90,000) .................. .678
by purchase, your basis is usually determinedGift tax due to net increase in value $14,238the time of the gift. The fair market value at the
by fair market value or the previous owner’sPlus: Adjusted basis of property totime of the gift is $9,000. You later sell the
adjusted basis as discussed earlier under Basisyour mother................ 40,000property for $9,500. You have neither gain nor
Other Than Cost.Your basis in the property $54,238loss. Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, and
The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer-$9,500 minus $10,000 results in a $500 loss.
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam-Your basis for figuring loss is $9,000, and
ple, if you receive more stock from nontaxablePart sale, part gift.If you get property in a$9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain.
stock dividends or stock splits, you must reducetransfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, yourFair market value equal to or more than the basis of your original stock. You must alsobasis is the larger of the amount you paid for thedonor’s adjusted basis.If the fair market reduce your basis when you receive nontaxableproperty or the transferor’s adjusted basis in thevalue of the property at the time of the gift was distributions, because these are a return of capi-property at the time of the transfer. Add to thatequal to or more than the donor’s adjusted basis tal.amount the amount of any gift tax paid on thejust before the gift, your basis for gain or loss
gift, as described in the preceding discussion.on its sale or other disposition is the donor’s Identifying stock or bonds sold.If you can
For figuring loss, your basis is limited to theadjusted basis plus or minus any required ad- adequately identify the shares of stock or the
property’s fair market value at the time of thejustments to basis during the period you hold the bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other
transfer.property. Also, you may be allowed to add to the basis of the particular shares of stock or bonds.
donor’s adjusted basis all or part of any gift tax Identification not possible.If you buy andpaid, depending on the date of the gift. Gift tax information.For information on giftsell securities at various times in varying quanti-
tax, see Publication 950, Introduction to EstateGift received before 1977.If you received ties and you cannot adequately identify the
and Gift Taxes.property as a gift before 1977, your basis in the shares you sell, the basis of the securities you
Page 42 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 43 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sell is the basis of the securities you acquiredMutual fund load charges.Your cost basis dend is not identical to the old stock on which it
in a mutual fund often includes a sales fee, also was declared, the basis of the new stock isfirst. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis-
known as a load charge. But, in certain cases, calculated differently. Divide the adjusted basiscussed later, you cannot use the average price
you cannot include the entire amount of a load of the old stock between the old and the newper share to figure gain or loss on the sale of the
charge in your basis if the charge gives you a stock in the ratio of the fair market value of eachshares.
reinvestment right. For more information, see lot of stock to the total fair market value of both
Example. You bought 100 shares of stockPublication 564. lots on the date of distribution of the new stock.
of XYZ Corporation in 1990 for $10 a share. InChoosing average basis for mutual fund Example. You bought a share of commonJanuary 1991 you bought another 200 sharesshares. You can choose to use the averagestock for $100. Later, the corporation distributedfor $11 a share. In July 1991 you gave your sonbasis of mutual fund shares if you acquired thea share of preferred stock for each share of50 shares. In December 1993 you bought 100shares at various times and prices and left themcommon stock held. At the date of distribution,shares for $9 a share. In April 2003 you sold 130on deposit in an account kept by a custodian oryour common stock had a fair market value ofshares. You cannot identify the shares you dis-agent. The methods you can use to figure aver-$150 and the preferred stock had a fair marketposed of, so you must use the stock you ac-age basis are explained in Publication 564.value of $50. You figure the basis of the old andquired first to figure the basis. The shares of
Undistributed capital gains.If you had tonew stock by dividing your $100 basis betweenstock you gave your son had a basis of $500 (50
include in your income any undistributed capitalthem. The basis of your common stock is $75× $10). You figure the basis of the 130 shares of
gains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase your($150/$200 × $100), and the basis of the newstock you sold in 2003 as follows:
basis in the stock by the difference between thepreferred stock is $25 ($50/$200 × $100).
amount you included and the amount of tax paid50 shares (50 × $10) balance of Stock bought at various times.Figure thefor you by the fund or REIT. See Undistributedstock bought in 1990.......... $500 basis of stock dividends received on stock you80 shares (80 × $11) stock bought in capital gains of mutual funds and REITs under bought at various times and at different prices byJanuary 1991............... 8 8 0 Capital Gain Distributions in chapter 1. allocating to each lot of stock the share of theTotal basis of stock sold in 2003$1,380 stock dividends due to it.Automatic investment service.If you partici-
pate in an automatic investment service, yourTaxable stock dividends.If your stock divi-Adequate identification.You will make an basis for each share of stock, including frac-dend is taxable when you receive it, the basis ofadequate identification if you show that certifi-tional shares, bought by the bank or other agentyour new stock is its fair market value on thecates representing shares of stock from a lot thatis the purchase price plus a share of the broker’sdate of distribution. The basis of your old stockyou bought on a certain date or for a certaincommission. does not change.price were delivered to your broker or otherDividend reinvestment plans.If you partici-agent. Stock splits.Figure the basis of stock splits inpate in a dividend reinvestment plan and receive
the same way as stock dividends if identicalBroker holds stock. If you have left thestock from the corporation at a discount, your
stock is distributed on the stock held.stock certificates with your broker or otherbasis is the full fair market value of the stock on
agent, you will make an adequate identification ifthe dividend payment date. You must includeStock rights.A stock right is a right to acquireyou: the amount of the discount in your income.a corporation’s stock. It may be exercised, it may
Public utilities.If, before 1986, you ex-be sold if it has a market value, or it may expire.1) Tell your broker or other agent the particu-
cluded from income the value of stock you hadStock rights are rarely taxable when you receivelar stock to be sold or transferred at the
received under a qualified public utility reinvest-them. See Distributions of Stock and Stocktime of the sale or transfer, and
ment plan, your basis in that stock is zero.Rights under Nontaxable Distributions in chap-
2) Receive a written confirmation of this from ter 1.Stock dividends. Stock dividends are distri-your broker or other agent within a reason-
Taxable stock rights.If you receive stockbutions made by a corporation of its own stock.able time.
rights that are taxable, the basis of the rights isGenerally, stock dividends are not taxable to
their fair market value at the time of distribution.you. However, see Distributions of Stock andSingle stock certificate.If you bought
The basis of the old stock does not change.Stock Rights under Nontaxable Distributions instock in different lots at different times and you
chapter 1 for some exceptions. If the stock divi-hold a single stock certificate for this stock, you Nontaxable stock rights.If you receivedends are not taxable, you must divide yourwill make an adequate identification if you: nontaxable stock rights and allow them to ex-basis for the old stock between the old and newpire, they have no basis.stock.1) Tell your broker or other agent the particu- If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stocklar stock to be sold or transferred when rights and if, at the time of distribution, the stockNew and old stock identical.If the newyou deliver the certificate to your broker or rights had a fair market value of 15% or more ofstock you received as a nontaxable dividend isother agent, and the fair market value of the old stock, you mustidentical to the old stock on which the dividend
divide the adjusted basis of the old stock be-was declared, divide the adjusted basis of the2) Receive a written confirmation of this from
tween the old stock and the stock rights. Use aold stock by the number of shares of old andyour broker or other agent within a reason-
ratio of the fair market value of each to the totalnew stock. The result is your basis for eachable time.
fair market value of both at the time of distribu-share of stock.Stock identified this way is the stock sold or tion.transferred even if stock certificates from a dif-Example 1. You owned one share of com- If the fair market value of the stock rights wasferent lot are delivered to the broker or othermon stock that you bought for $45. The corpora- less than 15%, their basis is zero. However, youagent. tion distributed two new shares of common can choose to divide the basis of the old stock
If you sell part of the stock represented by astock for each share held. You then had three between the old stock and the stock rights. To
single certificate directly to the buyer instead ofshares of common stock. Your basis in each make the choice, attach a statement to your
through a broker, you will make an adequateshare is $15 ($45 ÷ 3). return for the year in which you received the
identification if you keep a written record of the rights, stating that you choose to divide the basis
particular stock that you intend to sell. Example 2. You owned two shares of com-of the stock.
mon stock. You had bought one for $30 and theBonds. These methods of identification Basis of new stock. If you exercise theother for $45. The corporation distributed twoalso apply to bonds sold or transferred. stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its costnew shares of common stock for each shareplus the basis of the stock rights exercised.held. You had six shares after the distribution—Shares in a mutual fund or REIT.The basis three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷ 3) andof shares in a regulated investment company Example. You own 100 shares of ABCthree with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷ 3).(mutual fund) or a real estate investment trust Company stock, which cost you $22 per share.
(REIT) is generally figured in the same way asNew and old stock not identical.If the The ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxable
the basis of other stock. new stock you received as a nontaxable divi- stock rights that would allow you to buy 10 more
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 43

Page 44 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
shares at $26 per share. At the time the stock However, your basis in the stock cannot besued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985 or
rights were distributed, the stock had a market reduced below zero. Debt Instruments Issued After 1984, whichever
value of $30, not including the stock rights. Each applies, in Publication 1212 under Figuring OID
Specialized small business investment com-stock right had a market value of $3. The market on Long-Term Debt Instruments.
pany stock or partnership interest.If youvalue of the stock rights was less than 15% of If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity of
bought this stock or interest as replacementthe market value of the stock, but you chose to 1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules for
property for publicly traded securities you sold atdivide the basis of your stock between the stock acquisition discount on short-term obligations.
a gain, you must reduce the basis of the stock orand the rights. You figure the basis of the rights See Discount on Short-Term Obligations in
interest by the amount of any postponed gain onand the basis of the old stock as follows: chapter 1.
that sale. See Rollover of Gain From Publicly
Stripped tax-exempt obligation.If you ac-Traded Securities, later.100 shares × $22 = $2,200, basis of old
quired a stripped tax-exempt bond or couponstock Qualified small business stock. If you after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on
bought this stock as replacement property forit to determine its adjusted basis when you dis-100 shares × $30 = $3,000, market value of
other qualified small business stock you sold atpose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds orold stock
a gain, you must reduce the basis of this re-coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part of
placement stock by the amount of any post-10 rights × $3 = $30, market value of rights this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID on
poned gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on these obligations in the manner described in
($3,000 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $2,178.22, Qualified Small Business Stock, later. chapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons.
new basis of old stock Increase your basis in the stripped tax-ex-Short sales. If you cannot deduct paymentsempt bond or coupon by the taxable and nontax-you make to a lender in lieu of dividends on($30 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $21.78, basis of able accrued OID. Also increase your basis bystock used in a short sale, the amount you pay torights the interest that accrued (but was not paid, andthe lender is a capital expense, and you mustwas not previously reflected in your basis)If you sell the rights, the basis for figuringadd it to the basis of the stock used to close thebefore the date you sold the bond or coupon. Ingain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷ 10) per right. Ifshort sale. addition, for bonds acquired after June 10, 1987,you exercise the rights, the basis of the stockSee Payments in lieu of dividends, later, foradd to your basis any accrued market discountyou acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus theinformation about deducting payments in lieu ofnot previously reflected in basis.basis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18dividends.
per share. The remaining basis of the old stock
Premiums on bonds. If you buy a bond at ais $21.78 per share.
premium, the premium is treated as part of your
basis in the bond. If you choose to amortize theInvestment property received in liquidation. How To Figure
premium paid on a taxable bond, you must re-In general, if you receive investment property as
duce the basis of the bond by the amortized parta distribution in partial or complete liquidation of Gain or Loss
of the premium each year over the life of thea corporation and if you recognize gain or loss
bond.when you acquire the property, your basis in the You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of
Although you cannot deduct the premium onproperty is its fair market value at the time of the property by comparing the amount you realize
a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de-distribution. with the adjusted basis of the property.
termine your adjusted basis in the bond. You
S corporation stock. You must increase must reduce the basis of the bond by the pre-Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale oryour basis in stock of an S corporation by yourmium you amortized for the period you held thetrade is more than the adjusted basis of thepro rata share of the following items. bond. property you transfer, the difference is a gain.
See Bond Premium Amortization in chapter• All income items of the S corporation, in-3 for more information. Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property youcluding tax-exempt income, that are sepa-
transfer is more than the amount you realize, therately stated and passed through to you asMarket discount on bonds. If you include
difference is a loss.a shareholder. market discount on a bond in income currently,
increase the basis of your bond by the amount of• The nonseparately stated income of the S Amount realized. The amount you realizemarket discount you include in your income. Seecorporation. from a sale or trade of property is everything youMarket Discount Bonds in chapter 1 for more
receive for the property. This includes the• The amount of the deduction for depletioninformation.
money you receive plus the fair market value of(other than oil and gas depletion) that isAcquisition discount on short-term any property or services you receive.more than the basis of the property beingobligations.If you include acquisition dis-depleted. If you finance the buyer’s purchase of yourcount on a short-term obligation in your incomeproperty and the debt instrument does not pro-currently, increase the basis of the obligation byYou must decrease your basis in stock of an vide for adequate stated interest, the unstatedthe amount of acquisition discount you include inS corporation by your pro rata share of the interest that you must report as ordinary incomeyour income. See Discount on Short-Term Obli-following items. will reduce the amount realized from the sale.gations in chapter 1 for more information.For more information, see Publication 537.• Distributions by the S corporation thatOriginal issue discount (OID) on debt If a buyer of property issues a debt instru-were not included in your income. instruments. Increase the basis of a debt in- ment to the seller of the property, the amount
strument by the amount of OID that you include realized is determined by reference to the issue• All loss and deduction items of the S cor-
in your income. See Original Issue Discountprice of the debt instrument, which may or mayporation that are separately stated and
(OID) in chapter 1. not be the fair market value of the debt instru-passed through to you.
ment. See section 1.1001–1(g) of the Regula-Discounted tax-exempt obligations.OID• Any nonseparately stated loss of the S tions. However, if the debt instrument wason tax-exempt obligations is generally not tax-corporation. previously issued by a third party (one not part ofable. However, when you dispose of a tax-ex-• Any expense of the S corporation that is the sale transaction), the fair market value of theempt obligation issued after September 3, 1982,not deductible in figuring its taxable in- debt instrument is used to determine the amountthat you acquired after March 1, 1984, you mustcome and not properly chargeable to a realized.accrue OID on the obligation to determine itscapital account. adjusted basis. The accrued OID is added to theFair market value.Fair market value is the
• The amount of your deduction for deple- basis of the obligation to determine your gain or price at which property would change hands
tion of oil and gas wells to the extent the loss. between a buyer and a seller, neither being
deduction is not more than your share of For information on determining OID on a forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable
the adjusted basis of the wells. long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is-knowledge of all the relevant facts.
Page 44 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 45 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You trade A Company stock with erty you receive must not be property you taxable trade even if you pay money in addition
an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company sell to customers, such as merchandise. to the like property.
stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which3) The property must not be stocks, bonds,is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000 Basis of property received.You figure yournotes, choses in action, certificates of trust($10,000 minus $7,000). If you also receive a basis in property received in a nontaxable oror beneficial interest, or other securities ornote for $6,000 that has an issue price of partly nontaxable trade as explained earlierevidences of indebtedness or interest, in-$6,000, your gain is $9,000 ($10,000 plus under Basis Other Than Cost, earlier.cluding partnership interests. However,$6,000 minus $7,000). you can have a nontaxable trade of corpo-
How to report. You must report the trade ofDebt paid off.A debt against the property, rate stocks under a different rule, as dis-
like property on Form 8824. If you figure a rec-or against you, that is paid off as a part of the cussed later under Corporate Stocks.
ognized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it ontransaction or that is assumed by the buyer must4) There must be a trade of like property. TheSchedule D (Form 1040) or on Form 4797,be included in the amount realized. This is truetrade of real estate for real estate, or per-Sales of Business Property, whichever applies.even if neither you nor the buyer is personallysonal property for similar personal prop-liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or For information on using Form 4797, seeerty, is a trade of like property. The tradetrade property that is subject to a nonrecourse chapter 4 of Publication 544.of an apartment house for a store building,loan, the amount you realize generally includesor a panel truck for a pickup truck, is athe full amount of the note assumed by the buyer
Corporate Stockstrade of like property. The trade of a pieceeven if the amount of the note is more than theof machinery for a store building is not afair market value of the property. The following trades of corporate stocks gener-trade of like property. Real property lo-ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deductiblecated in the United States and real prop-Example. You sell stock that you had loss.erty located outside the United States arepledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.not like property. Also, personal propertyYour basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer Corporate reorganizations. In some in-used predominantly within the Unitedpays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in stances, a company will give you common stockStates and personal property usedcash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000 for preferred stock, preferred stock for commonpredominantly outside the United Statesplus $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 stock, or stock in one corporation for stock inare not like property.minus $6,000). another corporation. If this is a result of a5) The property to be received must be iden-merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlledPayment of cash. If you trade property and tified in writing within 45 days after thecorporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-cash for other property, the amount you realizedate you transfer the property given up inporate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-is the fair market value of the property you re-the trade. If you received the replacementzation, you do not recognize gain or loss.ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- property before the end of the 45-day pe-tracting the cash you pay and the adjusted basisriod, you automatically are treated as hav-Example. On April 18, 2003, KP1 Corpora-of the property you trade in from the amount youing met the 45-day written notice tion was acquired by KP2 Corporation. You heldrealize. If the result is a positive number, it is arequirement. 100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis of $3,500.gain. If the result is a negative number, it is a
As a result of the acquisition, you received 70loss. 6) The property to be received must be re-
shares of KP2 stock in exchange for your KP1ceived by the earlier of:
stock. You do not recognize gain or loss on theNo gain or loss.You may have to use a basis a) The 180th day after the date on whichtransaction. Your basis in the 70 shares of thefor figuring gain that is different from the basisyou transfer the property given up innew stock is still $3,500.used for figuring loss. In this case, you may havethe trade, orneither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or loss in
Stock for stock of the same corporation.the discussion on the basis of property you re-b) The due date, including extensions, for
You can exchange common stock for commonceived as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost, your tax return for the year in which the
stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in theearlier. transfer of the property given up oc-
same corporation without having a recognizedcurs.
gain or loss. This is true for a trade between two
stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-If you trade property with a related party in a
holder and the corporation.like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.Nontaxable Trades See Related Party Transactions, later in this Money or other property received.If in an
chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544otherwise nontaxable trade you receive moneyThis section discusses trades that generally do
for more information on exchanges of businessor other property in addition to stock, then yournot result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss.
property and special rules for exchanges usinggain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but only up toFor more information on nontaxable trades, see
qualified intermediaries or involving multiplethe amount of the money or other property. Anychapter 1 of Publication 544.
properties. loss is not recognized.
Like-Kind Exchanges Nonqualified preferred stock.Nonquali-Partly nontaxable exchange.If you receivefied preferred stock is generally treated as prop-money or unlike property in addition to the likeIf you trade business or investment property for erty other than stock. Generally, this applies toproperty, and the preceding six conditions areother business or investment property of a like preferred stock with one or more of the followingmet, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You arekind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deduct features.taxed on any gain you realize, but only up to theany loss until you sell or dispose of the property
amount of the money and the fair market value• The holder has the right to require theyou receive. To be nontaxable, a trade must
of the unlike property you receive. You cannotissuer or a related person to redeem ormeet all six of the following conditions. 
deduct a loss. purchase the stock.
1) The property must be business or invest-Like property and unlike property trans- • The issuer or a related person is requiredment property. You must hold both theferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-to redeem or purchase the stock.property you trade and the property yoution to the like property, you must recognize gain
receive for productive use in your trade or • The issuer or a related person has theor loss on the unlike property you give up. The
business or for investment. Neither prop- right to redeem the stock, and on the issuegain or loss is the difference between the ad-
erty may be property used for personal date, it is more likely than not that the rightjusted basis of the unlike property and its fair
purposes, such as your home or family will be exercised.market value.
car. • The dividend rate on the stock varies with
2) The property must not be held primarily forLike property and money transferred. If reference to interest rates, commodity
sale. The property you trade and the prop- conditions (1) — (6) are met, you have a non- prices, or similar indices.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 45

Page 46 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For a detailed definition of nonqualified pre- of the outstanding shares of each class of non- pany, you may have received either stock in the
ferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Inter- voting stock of the corporation. stock company or cash in exchange for your
nal Revenue Code. equity interest in the mutual company.If this provision applies to you, you must
If the demutualization transaction qualifiesattach to your return a complete statement of all
Convertible stocks and bonds.You gener- as a tax-free reorganization under sectionfacts pertinent to the exchange.
ally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gainMoney or other property received.If, in anconvert bonds into stock or preferred stock into or loss is recognized on the exchange. Yourotherwise nontaxable trade of property for cor-common stock of the same corporation accord- holding period for the new stock includes theporate stock, you also receive money or prop-ing to a conversion privilege in the terms of the period you held an equity interest in the mutualerty other than stock, you may have a taxablebond or the preferred stock certificate. company as a policyholder or annuitant.gain. However, you are taxed only up to theIf the demutualization transaction does notamount of money plus the fair market value ofExample. In November, you bought for $1 a qualify as a tax-free reorganization under sec-the other property you receive. The rules forright issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, on tion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, youfiguring taxable gain in this situation generallypayment of $99, to subscribe to a bond issued must recognize a capital gain or loss. Your hold-follow those for a partly nontaxable exchangeby that corporation. ing period for the stock does not include thediscussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. IfOn December 2, you subscribed to the bond, period you held an equity interest in the mutualthe property you give up includes depreciablewhich was issued on December 9. The bond company.property, the taxable gain may have to be re-contained a clause stating that you would re- If you received cash in exchange for yourported as ordinary income because of deprecia-ceive one share of XYZ Corporation common equity interest, you must recognize a capitaltion. (See chapter 3 of Publication 544.) No lossstock on surrender of one bond and the payment gain. If you held an equity interest for more thanis recognized.of $50. 1 year, your gain is long-term.Nonqualified preferred stock (described ear-Later, you presented the bond and $50 and
lier under Stock for stock of the same corpora-received one share of XYZ Corporation common
U.S. Treasurytion) received is generally treated as propertystock. You did not have a recognized gain or
other than stock. Notes or Bondsloss. This is true whether the fair market value of
the stock was more or less than $150 on theBasis of stock or other property received.You can trade certain issues of U.S. Treasurydate of the conversion. The basis of the stock you receive is generallyobligations for other issues, designated by theThe basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 +the adjusted basis of the property you transfer.Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or loss$99 + $50). Your holding period is split. YourIncrease this amount by any amount that wasrecognized on the trade.holding period for the part based on your owner-treated as a dividend, plus any gain recognizedSee the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S.ship of the bond ($100 basis) begins on Decem-on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cashTreasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for informationber 2. Your holding period for the part based onyou received and the fair market value of anyabout income from these investments.your cash investment ($50 basis) begins on theother property you received.
day after you acquired the share of stock. The basis of any other property you receive
is its fair market value on the date of the trade.Bonds for stock of another corporation.
Generally, if you convert the bonds of one corpo- Transfers BetweenInsurance Policiesration into common stock of another corporation,
and Annuities Spousesaccording to the terms of the bond issue, you
must recognize gain or loss up to the difference
You will not have a recognized gain or loss if theGenerally, no gain or loss is recognized on abetween the fair market value of the stock re-
insured or annuitant is the same under bothtransfer of property from an individual to (or inceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds ex-
contracts and you trade: trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident tochanged. In some instances, however, such as
a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognitiontrades that are part of mergers or other corpo-1) A life insurance contract for another liferule does not apply in the following situations.rate reorganizations, you will have no recog-insurance contract or for an endowment ornized gain or loss if certain requirements are
• The recipient spouse or former spouse isannuity contract,met. For more information about the tax conse- a nonresident alien.quences of converting securities of one corpora-2) An endowment contract for an annuity
tion into common stock of another corporation, • Property is transferred in trust. Gain mustcontract or for another endowment con-
under circumstances such as those just de- be recognized to the extent the amount oftract that provides for regular payments
scribed, consult the respective corporations and the liabilities assumed by the trust, plusbeginning at a date not later than the be-
the terms of the bond issue. This information is any liabilities on the property, exceed theginning date under the old contract, or
also available on the prospectus of the bond adjusted basis of the property.3) An annuity contract for another annuityissue. • An installment obligation is transferred incontract.
trust. For information on the disposition ofProperty for stock of a controlled corpora-You also may not have to recognize gain or lossan installment obligation, see Publicationtion. If you transfer property to a corporationfrom an exchange of a portion of an annuity 537, Installment Sales.solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,contract for another annuity contract. See Reve-
and immediately after the trade you are in con- • Certain stock redemptions, which are tax-nue Ruling 2003–76 and Notice 2003–51 in
trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not able to a spouse under the tax law, a di-Internal Revenue Bulletin 2003–33. This bulle-
recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both vorce or separation instrument, or a validtin is available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irb/
to individuals and to groups who transfer prop- written agreement, discussed in sectionirb03-33.pdf.
erty to a corporation. It does not apply if the 1.1041–2 of the regulations.Exchanges of contracts not included in thiscorporation is an investment company. list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-If you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro- Any transfer of property to a spouse or formerment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-ceeding and you transfer property to a controlled spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized istract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.corporation under a plan, other than a reorgani- treated by the recipient as a gift and is not
zation, you must recognize gain to the extent the considered a sale or exchange. The recipient’s
stock you receive in the exchange is used to pay basis in the property will be the same as theDemutualization of Life
off your debts. adjusted basis of the giver immediately beforeInsurance Companies
For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo- the transfer. This carryover basis rule applies
ration, you or your group of transferors must A life insurance company may change from a whether the adjusted basis of the transferred
own, immediately after the exchange, at least mutual company to a stock company. This is property is less than, equal to, or greater than
80% of the total combined voting power of all commonly called demutualization. If you were a either its fair market value at the time of transfer
classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80% policyholder or annuitant of the mutual com- or any consideration paid by the recipient. This
Page 46 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 47 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
rule applies for purposes of determining loss as liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is block of stock or piece of property. The gain on
well as gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer each item may be taxable. However, you cannotdirectly or indirectly between you and the follow-
in trust increases the basis. deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannoting related parties.
A transfer of property is incident to a divorce reduce gains from the sales of any of these
1) Members of your family. This includes onlyif the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date items by losses on the sales of any of the other
your brothers and sisters, half-brotherson which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is items.
and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par-related to the ending of the marriage. For more
ents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-information, see Property Settlements in Publi- Indirect transactions.You cannot deduct
scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).  cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. your loss on the sale of stock through your
broker if, under a prearranged plan, a related2) A partnership in which you directly or indi-
party buys the same stock you had owned. Thisrectly own more than 50% of the capital
does not apply to a trade between related par-interest or the profits interest.
ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-Related Party
3) A corporation in which you directly or indi-dental and is not prearranged.
rectly own more than 50% in value of theTransactions
outstanding stock (see Constructive own- Constructive ownership of stock.In deter-
ership of stock, later).Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- mining whether a person directly or indirectly
erty between related parties. owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-4) A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-
tion, the following rules apply.ganization that is directly or indirectly con-
Gain on Sale or Trade trolled, in any manner or by any method,Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by
by you or by a member of your family,of Depreciable Property or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust
whether or not this control is legally en-is considered owned proportionately by or for itsYour gain from the sale or trade of property to aforceable. shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.related party may be ordinary income, ratherIn addition, a loss on the sale or trade of propertyRule 2. An individual is considered to ownthan capital gain, if the property can be depreci-is not deductible if the transaction is directly orthe stock that is directly or indirectly owned by orated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 inindirectly between the following related parties.for his or her family. Family includes only broth-Publication 544 for more information.
ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,1) A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciaryspouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.and beneficiary, of any trust.Like-Kind Exchanges Rule 3. An individual owning, other than by2) Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or theapplying rule 2, any stock in a corporation isGenerally, if you trade business or investmentfiduciary and beneficiary of two differentconsidered to own the stock that is directly orproperty for other business or investment prop-trusts, if the same person is the grantor ofindirectly owned by or for his or her partner.erty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized.both trusts.
See Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier, under Non- Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock3) A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whichtaxable Trades. constructively owned by a person under rule 1 ismore than 50% in value of the outstandingThis rule also applies to trades of property treated as actually owned by that person. Butstock is directly or indirectly owned by orbetween related parties, defined next under stock constructively owned by an individualfor the trust, or by or for the grantor of theLosses on Sales or Trades of Property. How- under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned bytrust.ever, if either you or the related party disposes of that individual for again applying either rule 2 or
the like property within 2 years after the trade, rule 3 to make another person the constructive4) A corporation and a partnership if the
you both must report any gain or loss not recog- owner of the stock.same persons own more than 50% in
nized on the original trade on your return for thevalue of the outstanding stock of the cor-
year in which the later disposition occurs. Property received from a related party.Ifporation and more than 50% of the capital
This rule generally does not apply to: you sell or trade at a gain property that youinterest, or the profits interest, in the part-
acquired from a related party, you recognize thenership.• Dispositions due to the death of either re-
gain only to the extent that it is more than thelated party, 5) Two S corporations if the same personsloss previously disallowed to the related party.own more than 50% in value of the out-• Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 of This rule applies only if you are the originalstanding stock of each corporation.Publication 544), or transferee and you acquired the property by
purchase or exchange. This rule does not apply6) Two corporations, one of which is an S• Trades and later dispositions whose main
if the related party’s loss was disallowed be-corporation, if the same persons own morepurpose is not the avoidance of federal
cause of the wash sale rules, described laterthan 50% in value of the outstanding stockincome tax.
under Wash Sales.of each corporation.
If you sell or trade at a loss property that youIf a property holder’s risk of loss on the prop-7) An executor and a beneficiary of an estateacquired from a related party, you cannot recog-erty is substantially diminished during any pe-(except in the case of a sale or trade tonize the loss that was not allowed to the relatedriod, that period is not counted in determiningsatisfy a pecuniary bequest). party.whether the property was disposed of within 2
8) Two corporations that are members of theyears. The property holder’s risk of loss is sub-
same controlled group (under certain con-Example 1. Your brother sells you stock forstantially diminished by:
$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brotherditions, however, these losses are not dis-• The holding of a put on the property, cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sellallowed but must be deferred).
the same stock to an unrelated party for• The holding by another person of a right to9) Two partnerships if the same persons $10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-acquire the property, or own, directly or indirectly, more than 50%able gain is $500 — the $2,900 gain minus theof the capital interests or the profit inter-• A short sale or any other transaction. $2,400 loss not allowed to your brother.ests in both partnerships.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold theLosses on Sales or
Multiple property sales or trades.If you sellstock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-Trades of Property
or trade to a related party a number of blocks ofnized loss is only $700 — your $7,600 basis
stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, youYou cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade of minus $6,900. You cannot deduct the loss that
must figure the gain or loss separately for eachproperty, other than a distribution in complete was not allowed to your brother.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 47

Page 48 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
9) Supplies of a type you regularly use orCapital Assets and
consume in the ordinary course of yourNoncapital AssetsCapital Gains trade or business.
For the most part, everything you own and useand Losses for personal purposes, pleasure, or investmentInvestment property.Investment property is
is a capital asset. Some examples are: a capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale orTerms you may need to know trade generally is a capital gain or loss.(see Glossary): • Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-
Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.count,
These are capital assets except when they are
Call • A house owned and used by you and yourheld for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss from
family, their sale or trade generally is a capital gain orCommodity future
loss.• Household furnishings,Conversion transaction
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds.All of• A car used for pleasure or commuting,Forward contract these, including stock received as a dividend,
• Coin or stamp collections, are capital assets except when they are held forLimited partner
sale by a securities dealer. However, see• Gems and jewelry, andListed option Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock
• Gold, silver, or any other metal. and Losses on Small Business InvestmentNonequity option
Company Stock, later.Options dealer Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-
Personal use property.Property held for per-cept the following noncapital assets.Put sonal use only, rather than for investment, is a
Regulated futures contract capital asset, and you must report a gain from its1) Property held mainly for sale to cus-
sale as a capital gain. However, you cannottomers or property that will physically be-Section 1256 contract deduct a loss from selling personal use property.come a part of the merchandise that is forStraddle sale to customers.
Wash sale 2) Depreciable property used in your trade Discounted Debt Instrumentsor business, even if fully depreciated.
Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,This section discusses the tax treatment of3) Real property used in your trade or busi-or retirement of a bond or other debt instrumentgains and losses from different types of invest-ness. originally issued at a discount or bought at ament transactions.
4) A copyright, a literary, musical, or artis-discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-
plained in the following discussions.tic composition, a letter or memoran-
Character of gain or loss.You need to clas- dum, or similar property — Short-term government obligations.Treatsify your gains and losses as either ordinary or
gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-a) Created by your personal efforts,capital gains or losses. You then need to classify
ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-your capital gains and losses as either shortb) Prepared or produced for you (in thegations) as ordinary income up to your ratableterm or long term. If you have long-term gains case of a letter, memorandum, or simi-share of the acquisition discount. This treatmentand losses, you must identify your 28% rate lar property), or applies to obligations that have a fixed maturitygains and losses. If you have a net capital gain, date not more than 1 year from the date of issue.c) Acquired under circumstances (for ex-you must also identify your qualified 5-year gain Acquisition discount is the stated redemptionample, by gift) entitling you to the basisand any unrecaptured section 1250 gain. price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-of the person who created the propertytion.The correct classification and identificationor for whom it was prepared or pro- However, do not treat these gains as incomehelps you figure the limit on capital losses andduced. to the extent you previously included the dis-the correct tax on capital gains. For information
count in income. See Discount on Short-Termabout determining whether your capital gain or5) Accounts or notes receivable acquired Obligations in chapter 1 for more information.loss is short term or long term, see Holding in the ordinary course of a trade or busi-
Period, later. For information about 28% rate Short-term nongovernment obligations.ness for services rendered or from the sale
gain or loss, qualified 5-year gain, and unrecap- Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-of property described in (1).
tured section 1250 gain, see Capital Gain Tax gations as ordinary income up to your ratable6) U.S. Government publications that you share of OID. This treatment applies to obliga-Rates under Reporting Capital Gains and received from the government for free ortions that have a fixed maturity date of not moreLosses, later. for less than the normal sales price, or thatthan 1 year from the date of issue.
you acquired under circumstances entitlingHowever, to the extent you previously in-Capital or Ordinary you to the basis of someone who receivedcluded the discount in income, you do not have
Gain or Loss the publications for free or for less than theto include it in income again. See Discount on
normal sales price. Short-Term Obligations, in chapter 1, for moreIf you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss information.7) Certain commodities derivative finan-from a transaction, it may be either a capital gain
cial instruments held by commodities de-Tax-exempt state and local governmentor loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on
rivatives dealers. For more information,bonds. If these bonds were originally issuedthe circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of
see section 1221 of the Internal Revenueat a discount before September 4, 1982, or youa capital asset (defined next) results in a capital
acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat yourCode.gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset
part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figuregenerally results in ordinary gain or loss. De-8) Hedging transactions, but only if the your gain or loss on the sale or trade of thesepending on the circumstances, a gain or loss ontransaction is clearly identified as a hedg-bonds, reduce the amount realized by your parta sale or trade of property used in a trade oring transaction before the close of the dayof the OID.business may be treated as either capital oron which it was acquired, originated, orIf the bonds were issued after September 3,
ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. Inentered into. For more information, see the1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-
some situations, part of your gain or loss may bedefinition of “hedging transaction” earlier,crease the adjusted basis by your part of the
a capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi- and the discussion of hedging transactionsOID to figure gain or loss. For more information
under Commodity Futures, later.nary gain or loss. on the basis of these bonds, see Discounted
Page 48 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 49 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax-exempt obligations under Stocks and $190. This is your ratable share of OID for the However, a different rule applies if you dis-
Bonds, earlier in this chapter. period you owned the bond. You must treat any pose of a market discount bond that was:
Any gain from market discount is usually part of the gain up to $190 as ordinary income.
1) Issued before July 19, 1984, andtaxable on disposition or redemption of tax-ex- As a result, $190 is treated as ordinary income
empt bonds. If you bought the bonds before May and $10 is capital gain. 2) Purchased by you before May 1, 1993.1, 1993, the gain from market discount is capital
Long-term debt instruments issued after In that case, any gain is treated as interestgain. If you bought the bonds after April 30,
May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-income up to the amount of your deferred inter-1993, the gain from market discount is ordinary
ernment instrument).If you hold one of theseest deduction for the year you dispose of theincome.
debt instruments, you must include a part of thebond. The rest of the gain is capital gain. (TheYou figure market discount by subtracting
OID in your gross income each year that youlimit on the interest deduction for market dis-the price you paid for the bond from the sum of
own the instrument. Your basis in that debt in-count bonds is discussed in chapter 3 underthe original issue price of the bond and the
strument is increased by the amount of OID thatWhen To Deduct Investment Interest.)amount of accumulated OID from the date of
you have included in your gross income. SeeReport the sale or trade of a market discountissue that represented interest to any earlier
Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1. bond on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or lineholders. For more information, see Market Dis-
If you sell or trade the debt instrument before8. If the sale or trade results in a gain and you didcount Bonds in chapter 1.
maturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, ifnot choose to include market discount in incomeA loss on the sale or other disposition of a
at the time the instrument was originally issuedcurrently, enter “Accrued Market Discount” ontax-exempt state or local government bond is
there was an intention to call it before its matur-the next line in column (a) and the amount of thedeductible as a capital loss.
ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to theaccrued market discount as a loss in column (f),Redeemed before maturity. If a state orextent of the entire OID reduced by any amountsand, if a post-May 5 gain, in column (g). Alsolocal bond that was issued before June 9, 1980, of OID previously includible in your income. Inreport the amount of accrued market discount inis redeemed before it matures, the OID is notthis case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain.column (f) as interest income on Schedule Btaxable to you. (Form 1040), line 1, and identify it as “AccruedAn intention to call a debt instrument beforeIf a state or local bond issued after June 8, Market Discount.”maturity means there is a written or oral agree-1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part ofment or understanding not provided for in thethe OID that is earned while you hold the bond is Retirement of debt instrument.Any amountdebt instrument between the issuer and originalnot taxable to you. However, you must report the that you receive on the retirement of a debtholder that the issuer will redeem the debt instru-unearned part of the OID as a capital gain. instrument is treated in the same way as if youment before maturity. In the case of debt instru-
had sold or traded that instrument.ments that are part of an issue, the agreement orExample. On July 1, 1992, the date of is-understanding must be between the issuer andsue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond Notes of individuals.If you hold an obligationthe original holders of a substantial amount offor $800. The face amount of the bond was of an individual that was issued with OID afterthe debt instruments in the issue.$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time March 1, 1984, you generally must include thethe bond was issued, the issuer had no intention OID in your income currently, and your gain orExample 1. On February 4, 2001, youof redeeming it before it matured. The bond was loss on its sale or retirement is generally capitalbought at original issue for $7,600, Jonescallable at its face amount beginning 10 years gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap-Corporation’s 10-year, 5% bond which has aafter the issue date. plies if the obligation is a loan between individu-stated redemption price at maturity of $10,000.The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of als and all of the following requirements are met.On February 3, 2003, you sold the bond for11 years (July 1, 2003) for its face amount of$9,040. Assume you have included $334 of the$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The 1) The lender is not in the business of lendingOID in your gross income (including the amountOID earned during the time you held the bond, money.accrued for 2003) and increased your basis in$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annualthe bond by that amount. Your basis is now2) The amount of the loan, plus the amountinterest also is not taxable. However, you must$7,934. If at the time of the original issue thereof any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as awas no intention to call the bond before maturity,or less.capital gain. your gain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized3) Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-minus $7,934 adjusted basis) is capital gain.Long-term debt instruments issued after cipal purposes of the loan.1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before July
Example 2. If, in Example 1, at the time of2, 1982, if a government instrument).If you If the exception applies, or the obligation was
original issue there was an intention to call thesell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of these issued before March 2, 1984, you do not include
bond before maturity, your entire gain is ordinarydebt instruments, the part of your gain that is not the OID in your income currently. When you sell
income. You figure this as follows:more than your ratable share of the OID at the or redeem the obligation, the part of your gain
time of sale or redemption is ordinary income. that is not more than your accrued share of the
1) Entire OID ($10,000 statedThe rest of the gain is capital gain. If, however, OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest ofredemption price at maturity minusthere was an intention to call the debt instrument the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the$7,600 issue price).......... $2,400before maturity, all of your gain that is not more sale or redemption is capital loss.2) Minus: Amount previously includedthan the entire OID is treated as ordinary incomein income................ 3 3 4at the time of the sale. This treatment of taxable3) Maximum amount of ordinary Bearer Obligationsgain also applies to corporate instruments is-income .................. $2,066sued after May 27, 1969, under a written com-
You cannot deduct any loss on an obligationmitment that was binding on May 27, 1969, andBecause the amount in (3) is more than your
required to be in registered form that is insteadat all times thereafter. gain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in-
held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on thecome.
sale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi-Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov-
nary income. However, if the issuer was subjecternment bond for $700 at original issue on AprilMarket discount bonds. If the debt instru-
to a tax when the obligation was issued, then1, 1984, and sold it for $900 on April 20, 2003, ment has market discount and you chose to
you can deduct any loss, and any gain mayfor a $200 gain. The redemption price is $1,000. include the discount in income as it accrued,
qualify for capital gain treatment.At the time of original issue, there was no inten- increase your basis in the debt instrument by the
tion to call the bond before maturity. You have accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss onObligations required to be in registeredheld the bond for 228 full months. Do not count its disposition. If you did not choose to includeform. Any obligation must be in registeredthe additional days that are less than a full the discount in income as it accrued, you mustform unless:month. The number of complete months from report gain as ordinary interest income up to the
date of issue to date of maturity is 360 (30 instrument’s accrued market discount. See Mar- 1) It is issued by a natural person,years). The fraction 228/360 multiplied by theket Discount Bonds in chapter 1. The rest of the
discount of $300 ($1,000 − $700) is equal to gain is capital gain. 2) It is not of a type offered to the public,
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 49

Page 50 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) It has a maturity at the date of issue of not during the period of the conversion transaction,Sale of Annuity
compounded daily.more than 1 year, or
The part of any gain on the sale of an annuityIn all other cases, the applicable rate is the4) It was issued before 1983. contract before its maturity date that is based on“applicable federal rate” determined as if the
interest accumulated on the contract is ordinaryconversion transaction were a debt instrument
income. and compounded semi-annually.
Deposit in Insolvent or The rates discussed above are published by
the IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Or, youBankrupt Financial Institution Conversion Transactions can contact the IRS to get these rates. See
If you lose money you have on deposit in a chapter 5 for information on contacting the IRS.Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversionqualified financial institution that becomes insol-transaction is treated as ordinary income. ThisNet investment. To determine your net in-vent or bankrupt, you may be able to deductapplies to gain on the disposition or other termi-vestment in a conversion transaction, includeyour loss in one of three ways. nation of any position you held as part of athe fair market value of any position at the time it
conversion transaction that you entered into af-becomes part of the transaction. This means1) Ordinary loss, ter April 30, 1993. that your net investment generally will be the
2) Casualty loss, or A conversion transaction is any transaction total amount you invested, less any amount you
that meets both of these tests. received for entering into the position (for exam-3) Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital ple, a premium you received for writing a call).loss). 1) Substantially all of your expected return
Position with built-in loss.A special rule ap-from the transaction is due to the time
plies when a position with a built-in loss be-value of your net investment. In other
Ordinary loss or casualty loss.If you can comes part of a conversion transaction. Awords, the return on your investment is, in
reasonably estimate your loss, you can choose built-in loss is any loss that you would havesubstance, like interest on a loan.
to treat the estimated loss as either an ordinary realized if you had disposed of or otherwise
2) The transaction is one of the following.loss or a casualty loss in the current year. Either terminated the position at its fair market value at
the time it became part of the conversion trans-way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc-a) A straddle as defined under Straddles, action.tion. later, but including any set of offsettingWhen applying the conversion transactionIf you claim an ordinary loss, report it as apositions on stock. rules to a position with a built-in loss, use themiscellaneous itemized deduction on line 22 ofb) Any transaction in which you acquireposition’s fair market value at the time it becameSchedule A (Form 1040). The maximum amount property (whether or not actively part of the transaction. But, when you dispose ofyou can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you are traded) at substantially the same timeor otherwise terminate the position in a transac-married filing separately) reduced by any ex- that you contract to sell the same prop-tion in which you recognize gain or loss, youpected state insurance proceeds. Your loss is erty, or substantially identical property,must recognize the built-in loss. The conversionsubject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income at a price set in the contract. transaction rules do not affect whether thelimit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinary built-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capitalc) Any other transaction that is marketedloss if any part of the deposit is federally insured. loss.or sold as producing capital gains fromIf you claim a casualty loss, attach Form a transaction described in (1). Netting rule for certain conversion transac-4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return. tions. Before determining the amount of gainEach loss must be reduced by $100. Your total treated as ordinary income, you can net certaincasualty losses for the year are reduced by 10%Amount treated as ordinary income. The gains and losses from positions of the sameof your adjusted gross income. amount of gain treated as ordinary income is theconversion transaction. To do this, you have to
smaller of:You cannot choose either of these methods dispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe-
if: riod that is within a single tax year. You cannot1) The gain recognized on the disposition ornet the built-in loss against the gain.other termination of the position, or1) You own at least 1% of the financial insti- You can net gains and losses only iftution, 2) The “applicable imputed income amount.” you identify the conversion transaction
2) You are an officer of the institution, or as an identified netting transaction onRECORDS
Applicable imputed income amount.Figure your books and records. Each position of the3) You are related to such an owner or of-this amount as follows. conversion transaction must be identified beforeficer. You are related if you and the owner the end of the day on which the position be-or officer are “related parties,” as defined1) Figure the amount of interest that wouldcomes part of the conversion transaction. Forearlier under Related Party Transactions, have accrued on your net investment inconversion transactions entered into beforeor if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, orthe conversion transaction for the periodFebruary 20, 1996, this requirement is met if theniece of the owner or officer. ending on the earlier of: identification was made by that date.
If the actual loss that is finally determined isa) The date when you dispose of the posi-Options dealers and commodities traders.more than the amount you deducted as an esti- tion, or These rules do not apply to options dealers andmated loss, you can claim the excess loss as a commodities traders.b) The date when the transaction stopsbad debt. If the actual loss is less than the
being a conversion transaction.amount deducted as an estimated loss, you How to report. Use Form 6781, Gains and
must include in income (in the final determina- Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and Strad-To figure this amount, use an interest rate
tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov- dles, to report conversion transactions. See theequal to 120% of the “applicable rate,” de-
eries in Publication 525, Taxable and instructions for lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781.fined later.
Nontaxable Income.
2) Subtract from (1) the amount treated as
ordinary income from any earlier disposi-Commodity FuturesNonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choose tion or other termination of a position held
to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty loss A commodity futures contract is a standardized,as part of the same conversion transac-
or an ordinary loss, you wait until the year the exchange-traded contract for the sale ortion.
amount of the actual loss is determined and purchase of a fixed amount of a commodity at a
deduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year.Applicable rate.If the term of the conver- future date for a fixed price.
Report it as a short-term capital loss on Sched-sion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rate If the contract is a regulated futures contract,
ule D (Form 1040), as explained under Nonbusi- is the federal short-term rate in effect under the rules described earlier under Section 1256
ness Bad Debts, later. section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue CodeContracts Marked To Market apply to it.
Page 50 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 51 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The termination of a commodity futures con- ships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest- requirements of a small business corporation or
tract generally results in capital gain or loss ment companies, and real estate investment the qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec-
unless the contract is a hedging transaction. trusts. tion 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and its
regulations.Amount of ordinary income.Long-term cap-Hedging transaction. A futures contract that The stock must be issued to the person tak-ital gain is treated as ordinary income to theis a hedging transaction generally produces or- ing the loss.You must be the original ownerextent it is more than the net underlyingdinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg- of the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treat-long-term capital gain. The net underlyinging transaction if you enter into the contract in ment. To claim a deductible loss on stock issuedlong-term capital gain is the amount of net capi-the ordinary course of your business primarily to to your partnership, you must have been a part-tal gain you would have realized if you acquiredmanage the risk of interest rate or price changes ner when the stock was issued and have re-the asset for its fair market value on the date theor currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinary mained so until the time of the loss. You addconstructive ownership transaction was opened,property, or ordinary obligations. (Generally, or- your distributive share of the partnership loss toand sold the asset for its fair market value on thedinary property or obligations are those that can- any individual section 1244 stock loss you maydate the transaction was closed. If you do notnot produce capital gain or loss under any have before applying the ordinary loss limit.establish the amount of net underlying long-termcircumstances.) For example, the offset or exer-capital gain by clear and convincing evidence, itcise of a futures contract that protects against Stock distributed by partnership.If youris treated as zero.price changes in your business inventory results partnership distributes the stock to you, you can-
in an ordinary gain or loss. not treat any later loss on that stock as anMore information. For more information
For more information about hedging transac- ordinary loss.about constructive ownership transactions, see
tions, see section 1.1221–2 of the regulations.section 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code. Stock sold through underwriter. StockAlso, see Hedging Transactions under Section sold through an underwriter is not section 12441256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier. stock unless the underwriter only acted as aLosses on Section 1244If you have numerous transactions in selling agent for the corporation.(Small Business) Stockthe commodity futures market during Stock dividends and reorganizations.Stockthe year, the burden of proof is on youRECORDS
You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thanyou receive as a stock dividend qualifies asto show which transactions are hedging transac-as a capital loss, a loss on the sale, trade, orsection 1244 stock if:tions. Clearly identify any hedging transactionsworthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report theon your books and records before the end of the 1) You receive it from a small business cor-loss on Form 4797, Sales of Business Property,day you entered into the transaction. It may be poration in which you own stock, andline 10.helpful to have separate brokerage accounts forAny gain on section 1244 stock is a capital2) The stock you own meets the require-your hedging and nonhedging transactions. Forgain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.ments when the stock dividend is distrib-specific requirements concerning identificationDo not offset gains against losses that are withinuted.of hedging transactions and the underlying item,the ordinary loss limit, explained later in thisitems, or aggregate risk that is being hedged, If you trade your section 1244 stock for newdiscussion, even if the transactions are in stocksee section 1.1221–2(f) of the regulations. stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza-of the same company. Report the gain on
tion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that isSchedule D (Form 1040).
only a change in identity, form, or place of organ-If you must figure a net operating loss, any
Gains From Certain Constructive ization, the new stock is section 1244 stock if theordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 stock
Ownership Transactions stock you trade meets the requirements whenis a business loss.
the trade occurs.If you have a gain from a constructive ownershipOrdinary loss limit.The amount that you can If you hold section 1244 stock and othertransaction entered into after July 11, 1999, in-deduct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000stock in the same corporation, not all of the stockvolving a financial asset (discussed later) andeach year. On a joint return the limit is $100,000,you receive as a stock dividend or in a reorgani-the gain normally would be treated as long-termeven if only one spouse has this type of loss. Ifzation will qualify as section 1244 stock. Onlycapital gain, all or part of the gain may be treatedyour loss is $110,000 and your spouse has nothat part based on the section 1244 stock youinstead as ordinary income. In addition, if anyloss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinaryhold will qualify.gain is treated as ordinary income, your tax isloss on a joint return. The remaining $10,000 is a
increased by an interest charge. capital loss. Example. Your basis for 100 shares of X
common stock is $1,000. These shares qualifySection 1244 (small business) stock.This isConstructive ownership transactions.The as section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stockstock that was issued for money or propertyfollowing are constructive ownership transac- dividend, you receive 50 more shares of com-(other than stock and securities) in a domestictions. mon stock, the basis of which is determined fromsmall business corporation. During its 5 most
the 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are alsorecent tax years before the loss, this corporation1) A notional principal contract in which you
section 1244 stock.must have derived more than 50% of its grosshave the right to receive all or substantially
If you also own stock in the corporation thatreceipts from other than royalties, rents, divi-all of the investment yield on a financial
is not section 1244 stock when you receive thedends, interest, annuities, and gains from salesasset and you are obligated to reimburse
stock dividend, you must divide the shares youand trades of stocks or securities. If the corpora-all or substantially all of any decline in
receive as a dividend between the section 1244tion was in existence for at least 1 year, but lessvalue of the financial asset.
stock and the other stock. Only the shares fromthan 5 years, the 50% test applies to the tax2) A forward or futures contract to acquire a the former can be section 1244 stock.years ending before the loss. If the corporationfinancial asset. was in existence less than 1 year, the 50% testContributed property.To determine ordinary
applies to the entire period the corporation was3) The holding of a call option and writing of a loss on section 1244 stock you receive in a trade
in existence before the day of the loss. However,put option on a financial asset at substan- for property, you have to reduce the basis of the
if the corporation’s deductions (other than thetially the same strike price and maturity stock if:
net operating loss and dividends received de-date.
ductions) were more than its gross income dur-1) The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of theThis provision does not apply if all the posi-ing this period, this 50% test does not apply.property, immediately before the trade,tions are marked to market. Marked to marketThe corporation must have been largely an was more than its fair market value, andrules for section 1256 contracts are discussed inoperating company for ordinary loss treatmentdetail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to 2) The basis of the stock is determined by theto apply.Market, earlier. basis of the property.If the stock was issued before July 19, 1984,
Financial asset.A financial asset, for this the stock must be common stock. If issued after Reduce the basis of the stock by the difference
purpose, is any equity interest in a pass-through July 18, 1984, the stock may be either common between the adjusted basis of the property and
entity. Pass-through entities include partner- or preferred. For more information about the its fair market value at the time of the trade. You
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 51

Page 52 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
reduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss. gain or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If If your basis is determined by the fair market
Do not reduce the basis of the stock for any you hold the property 1 year or less, any capital value of the property, your holding period starts
other purpose. gain or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss. on the day after the date of the gift.
To determine how long you held the invest-Inherited property.If you inherit investmentExample. You transfer property with an ad-ment property, begin counting on the date afterproperty, your capital gain or loss on any laterjusted basis of $1,000 and a fair market value ofthe day you acquired the property. The day youdisposition of that property is treated as a$250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock.disposed of the property is part of your holdinglong-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-The basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figureperiod. gardless of how long you actually held the prop-the ordinary loss under these rules, the basis of erty.your stock is $250 ($1,000 minus $750). If youExample. If you bought investment property
later sell the section 1244 stock for $200, your on February 5, 2002, and sold it on February 5,Real property bought. To figure how long
$800 loss is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capital 2003, your holding period is not more than 1you have held real property bought under an
loss of $750. year and you have a short-term capital gain or unconditional contract, begin counting on the
loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2003, yourday after you received title to it or on the dayContributions to capital.If the basis of yourholding period is more than 1 year and you haveafter you took possession of it and assumed thesection 1244 stock has increased, through con-a long-term capital gain or loss. burdens and privileges of ownership, whichevertributions to capital or otherwise, you must treat happened first. However, taking delivery or pos-Securities traded on an established market.this increase as applying to stock that is not session of real property under an option agree-For securities traded on an established securi-section 1244 stock when you figure an ordinary ment is not enough to start the holding period.ties market, your holding period begins the dayloss on its sale. The holding period cannot start until there is anafter the trade date you bought the securities,
actual contract of sale. The holding period of theand ends on the trade date you sold them.Example. You buy 100 shares of section seller cannot end before that time.1244 stock for $10,000. You are the original Do not confuse the trade date with theowner. You later make a $2,000 contribution to Real property repossessed.If you sell realsettlement date, which is the date bycapital that increases the total basis of the 100 property but keep a security interest in it, andwhich the stock must be delivered andCAUTION
!
shares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 shares then later repossess the property under thepayment must be made.for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You can terms of the sales contract, your holding period
deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 × $10,000/$12,000) for a later sale includes the period you held theExample. You are a cash method, calendaras an ordinary loss under these rules. The re- property before the original sale and the periodyear taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De-maining $500 is a capital loss. after the repossession. Your holding periodcember 29, 2003. According to the rules of the
does not include the time between the originalRecordkeeping. You must keep rec- stock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery
sale and the repossession. That is, it does notords sufficient to show your stock quali-of the stock 3 trading days after the sale, on
include the period during which the first buyerfies as section 1244 stock. Your January 2, 2004. You received payment of theRECORDS
held the property.records must also distinguish your section 1244sale price on that same day. Report your gain on
stock from any other stock you own in the corpo-your 2003 return, even though you received theStock dividends.The holding period for stockration. payment in 2004. The gain is long term or shortyou received as a taxable stock dividend beginsterm depending on whether you held the stockon the date of distribution.more than 1 year. Your holding period ended onThe holding period for new stock you re-December 29. If you had sold the stock at a loss,Losses on Small Business ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins onyou would also report it on your 2003 return.Investment Company Stock the same day as the holding period of the old
stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired inU.S. Treasury notes and bonds.The holdingA small business investment company (SBIC) is a spin-off, which is a distribution of stock orperiod of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold atone that is licensed and operated under the securities in a controlled corporation.auction on the basis of yield starts the day afterSmall Business Investment Act of 1958. the Secretary of the Treasury, through newsIf you are an investor in SBIC stock, you can Nontaxable stock rights.Your holding periodreleases, gives notification of acceptance todeduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capital for nontaxable stock rights begins on the samesuccessful bidders. The holding period of U.S.loss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless- day as the holding period of the underlyingTreasury notes and bonds sold through an offer-ness of that stock. A gain from the sale or trade stock. The holding period for stock acquireding on a subscription basis at a specified yieldof that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset your through the exercise of stock rights begins onstarts the day after the subscription is submitted.gains and losses, even if they are on stock of the the date the right was exercised.
same company. Automatic investment service.In determin- Section 1256 contracts.Gains or losses oning your holding period for shares bought by thesection 1256 contracts open at the end of theHow to report.You report this type of ordinarybank or other agent, full shares are consideredyear, or terminated during the year, are treatedloss on line 10, Part II, of Form 4797. In additionbought first and any fractional shares are con-as 60% long term and 40% short term, regard-to the information required by the form, you mustsidered bought last. Your holding period startsless of how long the contracts were held. Seeinclude the name and address of the companyon the day after the bank’s purchase date. If aSection 1256 Contracts Marked to Market, ear-that issued the stock. Report a capital gain fromshare was bought over more than one purchaselier.the sale of SBIC stock on Schedule D of Formdate, your holding period for that share is a split1040. holding period. A part of the share is consideredOption exercised. Your holding period for
to have been bought on each date that stockproperty you acquire when you exercise an op-Short sale.If you close a short sale of SBIC
was bought by the bank with the proceeds oftion begins the day after you exercise the option.stock with other SBIC stock that you bought only
available funds.for that purpose, any loss you have on the sale is Wash sales. Your holding period for substan-a capital loss. See Short Sales, later in thisNontaxable trades.If you acquire investmenttially identical stock or securities you acquire in achapter, for more information. property in a trade for other investment propertywash sale includes the period you held the old
and your basis for the new property is deter-stock or securities.
mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in theHolding Period
Qualified small business stock.Your hold-old property, your holding period for the new
If you sold or traded investment property, you ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-freeproperty begins on the day following the date
must determine your holding period for the prop- rollover of gain from a sale of qualified smallyou acquired the old property.
erty. Your holding period determines whether business stock, described later under Gains onProperty received as a gift.If you receive aany capital gain or loss was a short-term or a Qualified Small Business Stock, includes thegift of property and your basis is determined bylong-term capital gain or loss. period you held the old stock.the donor’s adjusted basis, your holding period
Long-term or short-term.If you hold invest- is considered to have started on the same dayCommodity futures. Futures transactions in
ment property more than 1 year, any capital the donor’s holding period started. any commodity subject to the rules of a board of
Page 52 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 53 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
trade or commodity exchange are long term if lending money and the loans do not have any 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
the contract was held for more than 6 months. relationship to her business. and Claims for Refund.
Your holding period for a commodity re- Loan guarantees. If you guarantee a debtBusiness bad debts.For information on busi-ceived in satisfaction of a commodity futures that becomes worthless, you cannot take a badness bad debts of an employee, see Publicationcontract, other than a regulated futures contract debt deduction for your payments on the debt529. For information on other business badsubject to Internal Revenue Code section 1256, unless you can show either that your reason fordebts, see chapter 11 of Publication 535.includes your holding period for the futures con- making the guarantee was to protect your in-tract if you held the contract as a capital asset.Deductible nonbusiness bad debts.To be vestment or that you entered the guarantee
deductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to-transaction with a profit motive. If you make theSecurities futures contract.Your holding pe-tally worthless. You cannot deduct a partlyguarantee as a favor to friends and do not re-riod for a security received in satisfaction of aworthless nonbusiness debt. ceive any consideration in return, your pay-securities futures contract, other than one that is ments are considered a gift and you cannot takeGenuine debt required. A debt must bea section 1256 contract, includes your holding a deduction.genuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt isperiod for the futures contract if you held the
genuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor rela-contract as a capital asset. Example 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and prin-tionship based on a valid and enforceable obli-Your holding period for a security received in cipal shareholder of the Spruce Corporation,gation to repay a fixed or determinable sum ofsatisfaction of a securities futures contract to guaranteed payment of a bank loan the corpora-money.sell, other than one that is a section 1256 con- tion received. The corporation defaulted on the
tract, is determined by the rules that apply toLoan or gift.For a bad debt, you must showloan and Henry made full payment. Because he
short sales, discussed later under Short Sales. that there was an intention at the time of theguaranteed the loan to protect his investment in
transaction to make a loan and not a gift. If youthe corporation, Henry can take a nonbusinessLoss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6 lend money to a relative or friend with the under-bad debt deduction.months or less. If you hold stock in a regu- standing that it may not be repaid, it is consid-
lated investment company (commonly called ered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a badExample 2. Milt and John are co-workers.a mutual fund) or real estate investment trustdebt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a badMilt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note at(REIT) for 6 months or less and then sell it at adebt unless there is a true creditor-debtor rela-their local credit union. John does not pay theloss (other than under a periodic liquidationtionship between you and the person or organi-note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off theplan), special rules may apply. zation that owes you the money. note. However, since he did not enter into the
When minor children borrow from their par-guarantee agreement to protect an investmentCapital gain distributions received.The
ents to pay for their basic needs, there is noor to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debtloss (after reduction for any exempt-interest divi-
genuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deducteddeduction.dends you received, as explained next) is
for such a loan.treated as a long-term capital loss up to the total Deductible in year paid.Unless you haveof any capital gain distributions you receivedBasis in bad debt required.To deduct a rights against the borrower, discussed next, aand your share of any undistributed capitalbad debt, you must have a basis in it—that is,payment you make on a loan you guaranteed isgains. Any remaining loss is short-term capitalyou must have already included the amount indeductible in the year you make the payment.loss. your income or loaned out your cash. For exam-Rights against the borrower.When youple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction forExempt-interest dividends on mutual fund make payment on a loan that you guaranteed,court-ordered child support not paid to you bystock. If you received exempt-interest divi- you may have the right to take the place of theyour former spouse. If you are a cash methoddends on the stock, at least part of your loss is lender (the right of subrogation). The debt istaxpayer (most individuals are), you generallydisallowed. You can deduct only the amount of then owed to you. If you have this right, or somecannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaidloss that is more than the exempt-interest divi- other right to demand payment from the bor-salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,dends. rower, you cannot take a bad debt deductionand similar items. until these rights become totally worthless.Loss on stock that paid qualified dividends.
When deductible. You can take a bad debtAny loss on the sale or trade of stock must be Debts owed by political parties.You cannotdeduction only in the year the debt becomestreated as a long-term capital loss to the extent take a nonbusiness bad debt deduction for anyworthless. You do not have to wait until a debt isyou received, from that stock, qualified divi- worthless debt owed to you by:due to determine whether it is worthless. A debtdends (defined in chapter 1) that are extraordi-
becomes worthless when there is no longer any1) A political party,nary dividends. This is true regardless of how
chance that the amount owed will be paid.long you actually held the stock. Generally, an 2) A national, state, or local committee of aIt is not necessary to go to court if you canextraordinary dividend is a dividend that equals political party, orshow that a judgment from the court would beor exceeds 10% (5% in the case of preferred
uncollectible. You must only show that you have3) A committee, association, or organizationstock) of your adjusted basis in the stock.
taken reasonable steps to collect the debt. that either accepts contributions or spends
Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-money to influence elections.Nonbusiness Bad Debts dence of the worthlessness of at least a part of
an unsecured and unpreferred debt. Mechanics’ and suppliers’ liens.WorkersIf someone owes you money that you cannot If your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in aand material suppliers may file liens againstcollect, you have a bad debt. You may be able tofinancial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent orproperty because of debts owed by a builder ordeduct the amount owed to you when you figureBankrupt Financial Institution, earlier. contractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid foreclo-your tax for the year the debt becomes worth-
sure and loss of your property, you are entitledless. Filing a claim for refund.If you do not
to repayment from the builder or contractor. Ifdeduct a bad debt on your original return for theThere are two kinds of bad debts — busi-
the debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad debtyear it becomes worthless, you can file a claimness and nonbusiness. A business bad debt,
deduction.for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To dogenerally, is one that comes from operating your
this, use Form 1040X to amend your return fortrade or business and is deductible as a busi- Insolvency of contractor.You can take athe year the debt became worthless. You mustness loss. All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad debt deduction for the amount you depositfile it within 7 years from the date your originalbad debts and are deductible as short-term capi- with a contractor if the contractor becomes insol-return for that year had to be filed, or 2 yearstal losses. vent and you are unable to recover your deposit.from the date you paid the tax, whichever isIf the deposit is for work unrelated to your tradeExample. An architect made personal loans later. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthlessor business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc-to several friends who were not clients. She securities generally must be filed within 3 yearstion.could not collect on some of these loans. They from the date a return is filed, or 2 years from the
are deductible only as nonbusiness bad debts date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) For moreSecondary liability on home mortgage.If
because the architect was not in the business of information about filing a claim, see Publication the buyer of your home assumes your mort-
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 53

Page 54 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception if property becomes worthless.gage, you may remain secondarily liable for re- Gains and holding period.If you held the
A different rule applies if the property sold shortpayment of the mortgage loan. If the buyer substantially identical property for 1 year or less
becomes substantially worthless. In that case,defaults on the loan and the house is then sold on the date of the short sale, or if you acquired
you must recognize gain as if the short sale werefor less than the amount outstanding on the the substantially identical property after the
closed when the property became substantiallymortgage, you may have to make up the differ- short sale and by the date of closing the short
ence. You can take a bad debt deduction for the worthless. sale, then:
amount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if you
Rule 1. Your gain, if any, when you close thecannot collect it from the buyer. Exception for constructive sales.Entering
short sale is a short-term capital gain, andinto a short sale may cause you to be treated as
Worthless securities.If you own securitieshaving made a constructive sale of property. InRule 2. The holding period of the substantiallythat become totally worthless, you can take athat case, you will have to recognize gain on theidentical property begins on the date of thededuction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. Seedate of the constructive sale. For details, seeclosing of the short sale or on the date of theWorthless Securities under What Is a Sale or Constructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po-sale of this property, whichever comes first.Trade, earlier in this chapter. sitions, earlier.
Losses. If, on the date of the short sale, youRecovery of a bad debt.If you deducted a Example. On May 1, 2003, you bought 100
held substantially identical property for morebad debt and in a later tax year you recovershares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000.
than 1 year, any loss you realize on the short(collect) all or part of it, you may have to includeOn September 3, 2003, you sold short 100
sale is a long-term capital loss, even if you heldthe amount you recover in your gross income.shares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. You
the property used to close the sale for 1 year orHowever, you can exclude from gross incomemade no other transactions involving Baker
less. Certain losses on short sales of stock orthe amount recovered up to the amount of thestock for the rest of 2003 and the first 30 days of
securities are also subject to wash sale treat-deduction that did not reduce your tax in the year2004. Your short sale is treated as a construc-
ment. For information, see Wash Sales, later.deducted. See Recoveries in Publication 525.tive sale of an appreciated financial position
because a sale of your Baker stock on the dateMixed straddles. Under certain elections,How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi- of the short sale would have resulted in a gain.you can avoid the treatment of loss from a shortness bad debts as short-term capital losses onYou recognize a $600 short-term capital gainsale as long term under the special rule. TheseSchedule D (Form 1040). from the constructive sale and your new holdingelections are for positions that are part of aIn Part I, line 1 of Schedule D, enter theperiod in the Baker stock begins on Septembermixed straddle. See Other elections undername of the debtor and “statement attached” in3. Mixed Straddle Elections, later, for more infor-column (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt in mation about these elections.parentheses in column (f). Also, enter thePost-May 5 gain or loss.Your gain or loss
amount of the bad debt in parentheses in col-from a short sale is post-May 5 gain or loss only
umn (g) if the debt became worthless after Mayif you closed the short sale after that date. How-
Reporting Substitute Payments
5, 2003. Use a separate line for each bad debt.ever, if you recognized gain when you entered
For each bad debt, attach a statement to If any broker transferred your securities for useinto the short sale because it was considered a
your return that contains: in a short sale, or similar transaction, and re-constructive sale of an appreciated financial po-
ceived certain substitute dividend payments onsition, that gain is not post-May 5 gain if you1) A description of the debt, including the your behalf while the short sale was open, thatentered into the short sale before May 6. Deter-amount, and the date it became due, broker must give you a Form 1099–MISC or amine whether any subsequent gain or loss real-
similar statement, reporting the amount of theseized when you close the short sale is post-May 52) The name of the debtor, and any business
payments. Form 1099–MISC must be used forgain or loss by referring to the date you closedor family relationship between you and the
those substitute payments totaling $10 or morethe short sale. Report the post-May 5 gain ordebtor,
that are known on the payment’s record date toloss in column (g) of line 1 or 8 of Schedule D3) The efforts you made to collect the debt, be in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi-(Form 1040).and tal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution,
or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, or4) Why you decided the debt was worthless.
that are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do notShort-Term or Long-TermFor example, you could show that the bor-
treat these substitute payments as dividends orCapital Gain or Lossrower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-
interest. Instead, report the substitute paymentsgal action to collect would probably not
As a general rule, you determine whether youshown on Form 1099–MISC as “Other income”result in payment of any part of the debt.
have short-term or long-term capital gain or losson line 21 of Form 1040.
on a short sale by the amount of time you actu-S corporation shareholder.If you are a
ally hold the property eventually delivered to theSubstitute payment. A substitute paymentshareholder in an S corporation, your share of
lender to close the short sale. means a payment in lieu of:any nonbusiness bad debt will be shown on a
schedule attached to your Schedule K–1 (Form
Example. Even though you do not own any1) Tax-exempt interest (including OID) that1120S) that you receive from the corporation.
stock of the Ace Corporation, you contract to sellhas accrued while the short sale was
100 shares of it, which you borrow from youropen, andShort Sales broker. After 13 months, when the price of the2) A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is afterstock has risen, you buy 100 shares of AceA short sale occurs when you agree to sell the transfer of stock for use in a short saleCorporation stock and immediately deliver themproperty you do not own (or own but do not wish and before the closing of the short sale.to your broker to close out the short sale. Yourto sell). You make this type of sale in two steps.loss is a short-term capital loss because your
holding period for the delivered property is lessPayments in lieu of dividends.If you borrow1) You sell short. You borrow property and
than one day. stock to make a short sale, you may have todeliver it to a buyer.
remit to the lender payments in lieu of the divi-2) You close the sale. At a later date, you dends distributed while you maintain your shortSpecial rules.Special rules may apply toeither buy substantially identical property position. You can deduct these payments only ifgains and losses from short sales of stocks,and deliver it to the lender or make deliv- you hold the short sale open at least 46 dayssecurities, and commodity and securities futuresery out of property that you held at the (more than 1 year in the case of an extraordinary(other than certain straddles) if you held or ac-time of the sale. dividend as defined below) and you itemize yourquired property substantially identical property
deductions.to that sold short. But if the amount of propertyYou do not realize gain or loss until delivery of
you sold short is more than the amount of thatproperty to close the short sale. You will have a You deduct these payments as investment
substantially identical property, the special rulescapital gain or loss if the property used to close interest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter-
do not apply to the gain or loss on the excess.the short sale is a capital asset. est Expenses in chapter 3 for more information.
Page 54 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 55 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you close the short sale by the 45th dayExample 2. You are an employee of a cor- number of shares you sold, you must determine
poration that has an incentive pay plan. Under the particular shares to which the wash saleafter the date of the short sale (1 year or less in
this plan, you are given 10 shares of therules apply. You do this by matching the sharesthe case of an extraordinary dividend), you can-
corporation’s stock as a bonus award. You in- bought with an equal number of the shares sold.not deduct the payment in lieu of the dividend
clude the fair market value of the stock in your Match the shares bought in the same order thatthat you make to the lender. Instead, you must
gross income as additional pay. You later sell you bought them, beginning with the first sharesincrease the basis of the stock used to close the
these shares at a loss. If you receive another bought. The shares or securities so matched areshort sale by that amount.
bonus award of substantially identical stock subject to the wash sale rules.To determine how long a short sale is keptwithin 30 days of the sale, you cannot deductopen, do not include any period during which Example 1. You bought 100 shares of Myour loss on the sale.you hold, have an option to buy, or are under a stock on September 24, 2002, for $5,000. Oncontractual obligation to buy substantially identi-Options and futures contracts.The wash December 18, 2002, you bought 50 shares ofcal stock or securities. sale rules apply to losses from sales or trades ofsubstantially identical stock for $2,750. On De-contracts and options to acquire or sell stock orIf your payment is made for a liquidating cember 26, 2002, you bought 25 shares of sub-securities. They do not apply to losses fromdistribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or if stantially identical stock for $1,125. On Januarysales or trades of commodity futures contractsyou buy more shares equal to a stock distribu- 6, 2003, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares youand foreign currencies. See Coordination oftion issued on the borrowed stock during your bought in September. You have a $1,000 lossLoss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules undershort position, you have a capital expense. You on the sale. However, because you bought 75Straddles, later, for information about the taxmust add the payment to the cost of the stock shares of substantially identical stock within 30treatment of losses on the disposition of posi-sold short. days before the sale, you cannot deduct the losstions in a straddle. ($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the lossException. If you close the short sale within ($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of theSecurities futures contract to sell.Losses45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay in 50 shares bought on December 18, 2002, isfrom the sale, exchange, or termination of alieu of dividends will be disallowed only to the increased by two-thirds (50 ÷ 75) of the $750securities futures contract to sell generally areextent the payments are more than the amount disallowed loss. The new basis of those sharestreated in the same manner as losses from thethat you receive as ordinary income from the is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25closing of a short sale, discussed later in thislender of the stock for the use of collateral with shares bought on December 26, 2002, is in-section under Short sales.the short sale. This exception does not apply to creased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125payments in place of extraordinary dividends.Warrants. The wash sale rules apply if you+ $250).sell common stock at a loss and, at the same
time, buy warrants for common stock of theExtraordinary dividends.If the amount of Example 2. You bought 100 shares of M
same corporation. But if you sell warrants at aany dividend you receive on a share of preferred stock on September 24, 2002. On February 3,
loss and, at the same time, buy common stock instock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case of 2003, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss.
the same corporation, the wash sale rules applyother stock) of the amount realized on the short On each of the 4 days from February 11–14,
only if the warrants and stock are consideredsale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi- 2003, you bought 50 shares of substantially
substantially identical, as discussed next.nary dividend. identical stock. You cannot deduct your $1,000
loss. You must add half the disallowed lossSubstantially identical. In determining ($500) to the basis of the 50 shares bought onWash Sales whether stock or securities are substantiallyFebruary 11. Add the other half ($500) to theidentical, you must consider all the facts andYou cannot deduct losses from sales or trades basis of the shares bought on February 12.circumstances in your particular case. Ordinar-of stock or securities in a wash sale. ily, stocks or securities of one corporation areLoss and gain on same day. Loss from aA wash sale occurs when you sell or tradenot considered substantially identical to stockswash sale of one block of stock or securitiesstock or securities at a loss and within 30 daysor securities of another corporation. However,cannot be used to reduce any gains on identical
before or after the sale you: they may be substantially identical in someblocks sold the same day.
cases. For example, in a reorganization, the
1) Buy substantially identical stock or securi-stocks and securities of the predecessor andExample. During 1998, you bought 100ties, successor corporations may be substantiallyshares of X stock on each of three occasions.
identical. You paid $158 a share for the first block of 1002) Acquire substantially identical stock or se-
Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor-shares, $100 a share for the second block, andcurities in a fully taxable trade, or
poration are not ordinarily considered substan-$95 a share for the third block. On December 23,3) Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-tially identical to the common stock of the same2003, you sold 300 shares of X stock for $125 a
stantially identical stock or securities.corporation. However, where the bonds or pre-share. On January 6, 2004, you bought 250
ferred stock are convertible into common stockshares of identical X stock. You cannot deductIf you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora-
of the same corporation, the relative values,the loss of $33 a share on the first block becausetion you control buys substantially identical
price changes, and other circumstances maywithin 30 days after the date of sale you boughtstock, you also have a wash sale. make these bonds or preferred stock and the250 identical shares of X stock. In addition, youIf your loss was disallowed because of thecommon stock substantially identical. For exam-cannot reduce the gain realized on the sale ofwash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to theple, preferred stock is substantially identical tothe second and third blocks of stock by this loss.cost of the new stock or securities. The result isthe common stock if the preferred stock:your basis in the new stock or securities. This Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to a
adjustment postpones the loss deduction until dealer in stock or securities if the loss is from a1) Is convertible into common stock,
transaction made in the ordinary course of busi-the disposition of the new stock or securities.2) Has the same voting rights as the commonness.Your holding period for the new stock or securi-stock,ties begins on the same day as the holding Short sales.The wash sale rules apply to aperiod of the stock or securities sold. 3) Is subject to the same dividend restric-loss realized on a short sale if you sell, or entertions, into another short sale of, substantially identicalExample 1. You buy 100 shares of X stock stock or securities within a period beginning 304) Trades at prices that do not vary signifi-for $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 and days before the date the short sale is completecantly from the conversion ratio, andwithin 30 days from the sale you buy 100 shares and ending 30 days after that date.of the same stock for $800. Because you bought5) Is unrestricted as to convertibility. For purposes of the wash sale rules, a shortsubstantially identical stock, you cannot deduct sale is considered complete on the date theyour loss of $250 on the sale. However, you addMore or less stock bought than sold.If the short sale is entered into, if: the disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of thenumber of shares of substantially identical stock
new stock, $800, to obtain your basis in the newor securities you buy within 30 days before or 1) On that date, you own stock or securities
stock, which is $1,050. after the sale is either more or less than the identical to those sold short (or by that
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 55

Page 56 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
date you enter into a contract or option to Gain or loss from the sale or trade of an A call option is the right to buy from the
acquire that stock or those securities), and option to buy or sell property that is a capital writer of the option, at any time before a speci-
asset in your hands, or would be if you acquired fied future date, a stated number of shares of2) You later deliver the stock or securities toit, is capital gain or loss. If the property is not, or stock at a specified price. Conversely, a putclose the short sale. would not be, a capital asset, the gain or loss isoption is the right to sell to the writer, at any time
Otherwise, a short sale is not consideredordinary gain or loss. before a specified future date, a stated number
complete until the property is delivered to close of shares at a specified price.
Example 1. You purchased an option to buythe sale.
Holders of calls and puts.If you buy a call or100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The stockThis treatment also applies to losses from
a put, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capitalincreases in value and you sell the option forthe sale, exchange, or termination of a securities
expenditure.more than you paid for it. Your gain is capitalfutures contract to sell.
gain because the stock underlying the optionIf you sell the call or the put before you
Example. On June 2, you buy 100 shares ofwould have been a capital asset in your hands.exercise it, the difference between its cost and
stock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares of the amount you receive for it is either a
Example 2. The facts are the same as inthe stock for $750 on October 6. On October 7, long-term or short-term capital gain or loss, de-
Example 1, except that the stock decreases inyou buy 100 shares of the same stock for $750. pending on how long you held it.
value and you sell the option for less than youYou close the short sale on November 17 by If the option expires, its cost is either a
paid for it. Your loss is a capital loss.delivering the shares bought on June 2. You long-term or short-term capital loss, depending
cannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750) on your holding period, which ends on the expi-Option not exercised.If you have a loss be-because the date of entering into the short sale ration date.cause you did not exercise an option to buy or(October 6) is considered the date the sale is If you exercise a call, add its cost to the basissell, you are considered to have sold or tradedcomplete for wash sale purposes and you of the stock you bought. If you exercise a put,the option on the date that it expired.bought substantially identical stock within 30 reduce your amount realized on the sale of the
days from that date. underlying stock by the cost of the put whenWriter of option.If you write (grant) an option,
figuring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on thehow you report your gain or loss depends onResidual interests in a REMIC.The wash sale of the underlying stock is long term or shortwhether it was exercised.sale rules generally will apply to the sale of your term depending on your holding period for theIf you are not in the business of writing op-residual interest in a real estate mortgage in- underlying stock.tions and an option you write on stocks, securi-vestment conduit (REMIC) if, during the periodties, commodities, or commodity futures is notbeginning 6 months before the sale of the inter- Put option as short sale.Buying a put op-exercised (or repurchased), the amount you re-est and ending 6 months after that sale, you tion is generally treated as a short sale, and theceive is a short-term capital gain.acquire any residual interest in any REMIC or exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a clos-If an option requiring you to buy or sell prop-any interest in a taxable mortgage pool that is ing of the short sale. See Short Sales, earlier. Iferty is exercised, see Writers of calls and puts,comparable to a residual interest. REMICs are you have held the underlying stock for 1 year orlater.discussed in chapter 1. less at the time you buy the put, any gain on the
exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is aSection 1256 contract options.Gain or lossHow to report.Report a wash sale or trade on short-term capital gain. The same is true if youis recognized on the exercise of an option on aline 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040), buy the underlying stock after you buy the putsection 1256 contract. Section 1256 contractswhichever is appropriate. Show the full amount but before its exercise, sale, or expiration. Yourare defined under Section 1256 Contractsof the loss in parentheses in column (f). If the holding period for the underlying stock begins onMarked to Market, earlier.wash sale or trade occurred after May 5, 2003, the earliest of:also show the full amount of the loss in paren-Cash settlement option.A cash settlementtheses in column (g). On the next line, enter 1) The date you dispose of the stock,option is treated as an option to buy or sell“Wash Sale” in column (a) and the amount of theproperty. A cash settlement option is any option2) The date you exercise the put,loss not allowed as a positive amount in columnthat on exercise is settled in, or could be settled(f) (and in column (g) if a post-May 5 loss). 3) The date you sell the put, orin, cash or property other than the underlying
property. 4) The date the put expires.
Securities Futures Contracts How to report.Gain or loss from the closing or
expiration of an option that is not a section 1256Writers of calls and puts.If you write (grant)A securities futures contract is a contract of salecontract, but that is a capital asset in your hands,a call or a put, do not include the amount youfor future delivery of a single security or of ais reported on Schedule D (Form 1040). receive for writing it in your income at the time ofnarrow-based security index. If an option you purchased expired, enter thereceipt. Carry it in a deferred account until:Gain or loss from the contract generally willexpiration date in column (c) and writebe treated in a manner similar to gain or loss 1) Your obligation expires,“EXPIRED” in column (d).from transactions in the underlying security. ThisIf an option that you wrote expired, enter the2) You sell, in the case of a call, or buy, in themeans gain or loss from the sale, exchange, orexpiration date in column (b) and write case of a put, the underlying stock whentermination of the contract will generally have“EXPIRED” in column (e). the option is exercised, orthe same character as gain or loss from transac-
tions in the property to which the contract re- 3) You engage in a closing transaction.lates. Any capital gain or loss on a sale,Calls and Puts If your obligation expires, the amount youexchange, or termination of a contract to sell
received for writing the call or put is short-termproperty will be considered short-term, regard-Calls and puts are options on securities and are
capital gain.less of how long you hold the contract. Thesecovered by the rules just discussed for options.
If a call you write is exercised and you sellcontracts are not section 1256 contracts (unlessThe following are specific applications of these
the underlying stock, increase your amount real-they are dealer securities futures contracts).rules to holders and writers of options that are
ized on the sale of the stock by the amount youbought, sold, or “closed out” in transactions on a
received for the call when figuring your gain ornational securities exchange, such as the Chi-Options
loss. The gain or loss is long term or short termcago Board Options Exchange. (But see Section
depending on your holding period of the stock.Options are generally subject to the rules de-1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier, for
scribed in this section. If the option is part of a special rules that may apply to nonequity op- If a put you write is exercised and you buy
straddle, the loss deferral rules covered later tions and dealer equity options.) These rules are the underlying stock, decrease your basis in the
under Straddles may also apply. For special also presented in Table 4–1. stock by the amount you received for the put.
rules that apply to nonequity options and dealer Calls and puts are issued by writers (grant- Your holding period for the stock begins on the
equity options, see Section 1256 Contracts ors) to holders for cash premiums. They are date you buy it, not on the date you wrote the
Marked to Market, earlier. ended by exercise, closing transaction, or lapse. put.
Page 56 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 57 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you enter into a closing transaction by writing the options to the amount realizedStraddle rules for stock.Although stock is
from selling the stock. generally excluded from the definition of per-paying an amount equal to the value of the call
sonal property when applying the straddle rules,or put at the time of the payment, the difference4) Section 1256 contracts. The facts are theit is included in the following two situations. between the amount you pay and the amount same as in (1), except the options wereyou receive for the call or put is a short-termnonequity options, subject to the rules for1) The stock is part of a straddle in which atcapital gain or loss. section 1256 contracts. If you were a least one of the offsetting positions is:
buyer of the options, you would recognize
Examples of non-dealer transactions. a short-term capital loss of $1,600, and aa) An option to buy or sell the stock or
long-term capital loss of $2,400. If you substantially identical stock or securi-1) Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is- were a writer of the options, you would ties,
sued on April 8, 2003, for $4,000. These recognize a short-term capital gain of b) A securities futures contract on theequity options expired in December 2003, $1,600, and a long-term capital gain of stock or substantially identical stock orwithout being exercised. If you were a $2,400. See Section 1256 Contracts securities, orholder (buyer) of the options, you would Marked to Market, earlier, for more infor-
recognize a short-term capital loss of mation. c) A position on substantially similar or re-
$4,000. If you were a writer of the options, lated property (other than stock).
you would recognize a short-term capital
Straddles 2) The stock is in a corporation formed orgain of $4,000.
availed of to take positions in personal2) Closing transaction. The facts are the This section discusses the loss deferral rulesproperty that offset positions taken by anysame as in (1), except that on May 10,that apply to the sale or other disposition ofshareholder.positions in a straddle. These rules do not apply2003, the options were sold for $6,000. If
to the straddles described under Exceptions,you were the holder of the options who
Position. A position is an interest in personallater.sold them, you would recognize a
property. A position can be a forward or futuresA straddle is any set of offsetting positions onshort-term capital gain of $2,000. If you
contract, or an option.personal property. For example, a straddle maywere the writer of the options and you An interest in a loan that is denominated in aconsist of a purchased option to buy and abought them back, you would recognize a foreign currency is treated as a position in thatpurchased option to sell on the same number ofshort-term capital loss of $2,000. currency. For the straddle rules, foreign cur-shares of the security, with the same exercise
3) Exercise. The facts are the same as in rency for which there is an active interbank mar-price and period.
(1), except that the options were exercised ket is considered to be actively-traded personal
on May 27, 2003. The buyer adds the cost property. See also Foreign currency contractPersonal property.This is any property of a
of the options to the basis of the stock under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Mar-type that is actively traded. It includes stock
ket, earlier.bought through the exercise of the options.options and contracts to buy stock, but generally
The writer adds the amount received fromdoes not include stock.
Offsetting position.This is a position that
substantially reduces any risk of loss you mayTable 4–1. Puts and Calls
have from holding another position. However, if
a position is part of a straddle that is not anPuts
identified straddle (described later), do not treat
When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer: it as offsetting to a position that is part of an
identified straddle.
Is exercised Reduce your amount realized from Reduce your basis in the stock you Presumed offsetting positions.Two orsale of the underlying stock by the buy by the amount you received for
more positions will be presumed to be offsettingcost of the put. the put.
if:
Expires Report the cost of the put as a capital Report the amount you received for 1) The positions are established in the sameloss on the date it expires.* the put as a short-term capital gain.
personal property (or in a contract for this
property), and the value of one or moreIs sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you
positions varies inversely with the value ofcost of the put and the amount you buy back the put, report the
one or more of the other positions,receive for it as a capital gain or difference between the amount you
loss.* pay and the amount you received for 2) The positions are in the same personalthe put as a short-term capital gain property, even if this property is in a sub-or loss.)
stantially changed form, and the positions’
values vary inversely as described in the
Calls first condition,
3) The positions are in debt instruments withWhen a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
a similar maturity, and the positions’ val-
ues vary inversely as described in the firstIs exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis Increase your amount realized on
condition,in the stock purchased. sale of the stock by the amount you
received for the call. 4) The positions are sold or marketed as off-
setting positions, whether or not the posi-Expires Report the cost of the call as a capital Report the amount you received for tions are called a straddle, spread,loss on the date it expires.* the call as a short-term capital gain.
butterfly, or any similar name, or
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you5) The aggregate margin requirement for the
cost of the call and the amount you buy back the call, report the positions is lower than the sum of the mar-receive for it as a capital gain or difference between the amount yougin requirements for each position if heldloss.* pay and the amount you received for separately.the call as a short-term capital gain
or loss.)
Related persons. To determine if two or
more positions are offsetting, you will be treated*See Holders of calls and puts and Writers of calls and puts in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or
loss is short term or long term. as holding any position that your spouse holds
during the same period. If you take into account
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 57

Page 58 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
part or all of the gain or loss for a position held by loss deferral rules for straddles if both of the price of one share of XYZ stock on May 12,
a flowthrough entity, such as a partnership or following are true. 2003, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/
trust, you are also considered to hold that posi- September call options offered on May 13,
1) All of the offsetting positions consist of onetion. 2003, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125,
or more qualified covered call options and$130, and $135. Because the option has a term
the stock to be purchased from you underof more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, the
the options.
Loss Deferral Rules second highest strike price that is less than
$130.25, the applicable stock price. The call2) The straddle is not part of a larger strad-Generally, you can deduct a loss on the disposi- option is a deep-in-the-money option becausedle.tion of one or more positions only to the extent its strike price is lower than the LQB. Therefore,
that the loss is more than any unrecognized gainBut see Special year-end rule, later, for an ex-the option is not a qualified covered call option,
you have on offsetting positions. Unused lossesception. and the loss deferral rules apply if you closed out
are treated as sustained in the next tax year.A qualified covered call option is any optionthe option or the stock at a loss during the year.
you grant to purchase stock you hold (or stockCapital loss on qualified covered call op-Unrecognized gain. This is: you acquire in connection with granting the op-tions. If you hold stock and you write a quali-tion), but only if all of the following are true.fied covered call option on that stock with a1) The amount of gain you would have had
strike price less than the applicable stock price,on an open position if you had sold it on1) The option is traded on a national securi-treat any loss from the option as long-term capi-the last business day of the tax year at itsties exchange or other market approved bytal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gainfair market value, and the Secretary of the Treasury. on the sale or exchange of the stock would be2) The amount of gain realized on a position2) The option is granted more than 30 daystreated as long-term capital gain. The holdingif, as of the end of the tax year, gain hasbefore its expiration date. period of the stock does not include any periodbeen realized, but not recognized. during which you are the writer of the option.For covered call options entered into after
July 28, 2002, the option is granted notSpecial year-end rule.The loss deferralmore than 12 months before its expirationExample. On July 1, 2003, you entered into rules for straddles apply if all of the following aredate or satisfies term limitation and qualifieda straddle. On December 16, 2003, you closed true.benchmark requirements published in theone position of the straddle at a loss of $15,000.
Internal Revenue Bulletin.On December 31, 2003, the end of your tax 1) The qualified covered call options are
year, you have an unrecognized gain of $12,750 closed or the stock is disposed of at a loss3) The option is not a deep-in-the-money op-in the offsetting open position. On your 2003 during any tax year.tion.return, your deductible loss on the position you
2) Gain on disposition of the stock or gain on4) You are not an options dealer who grantedclosed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750).
the options is includible in gross income inthe option in connection with your activityYou must carry forward to 2004 the unused loss
a later tax year.of dealing in options.of $12,750.
3) The stock or options were held less than5) Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or
Exceptions. The loss deferral rules do not ap- 30 days after the closing of the options orloss.
ply to: the disposition of the stock.A deep-in-the-money option is an option
1) A straddle that is an identified straddle at with a strike price lower than the lowest quali-
the end of the tax year, fied benchmark (LQB). The strike price is the
How To Report Gainsprice at which the option is to be exercised. The2) Certain straddles consisting of qualified and Losses (Form 6781)LQB is the highest available strike price that iscovered call options and the stock to beless than the applicable stock price. However,purchased under the options, Report each position (whether or not it is part ofthe LQB for an option with a term of more thana straddle) on which you have unrecognized3) Hedging transactions, described earlier90 days and a strike price of more than $50 isgain at the end of the tax year and the amount ofunder Section 1256 Contracts Marked tothe second highest available strike price that isthis unrecognized gain in Part III of Form 6781.Market, and less than the applicable stock price. StrikeUse Part II of Form 6781 to figure your gains andprices are listed in the financial section of many4) Straddles consisting entirely of section losses on straddles before entering thesenewspapers.1256 contracts, as described earlier amounts on Schedule D (Form 1040). Include aThe availability of strike prices for equity op-under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.tions with flexible terms does not affect the de-Market (but see Identified straddle, next). termination of the LQB for an option that is not
an equity option with flexible terms.Identified straddle.Losses from positions Coordination of Loss DeferralThe applicable stock price for any stock forin an identified straddle are deferred until you Rules and Wash Sale Ruleswhich an option has been granted is:dispose of all the positions in the straddle.
Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to anyAny straddle (other than a straddle described
1) The closing price of the stock on the mostdisposition of a position or positions of a strad-in (2) or (3) above) is an identified straddle if all
recent day on which that stock was tradeddle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, thenof the following conditions exist.
before the date on which the option wasapply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only if
granted, or1) You clearly identified the straddle on your stocks or securities make up a position that is
records before the close of the day on part of the straddle. If a position in the straddle2) The opening price of the stock on the daywhich you acquired it. does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2.on which the option was granted, but only
if that price is greater than 110% of the2) All of the original positions that you identify
Rule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-price determined in (1).were acquired on the same day.
sition of shares of stock or securities that makeIf the applicable stock price is $25 or less, the3) All of the positions included in item (2) up the positions of a straddle if, within a periodLQB will be treated as not less than 85% of thewere disposed of on the same day during beginning 30 days before the date of that dispo-applicable stock price. If the applicable stockthe tax year, or none of the positions were sition and ending 30 days after that date, youprice is $150 or less, the LQB will be treated asdisposed of by the end of the tax year. acquired substantially identical stock or securi-not less than an amount that is $10 below theties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to the4) The straddle is not part of a larger strad-applicable stock price. following tax year, subject to any further applica-dle.
Example. On May 13, 2003, you held XYZ tion of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will also
Qualified covered call options and op- stock and you wrote an XYZ/September call apply if you entered into a contract or option to
tioned stock.A straddle is not subject to the option with a strike price of $120. The closing acquire the stock or securities within the time
Page 58 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 59 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
period described above. See Loss carryover, short position. Under these circumstances, theHolding Period and
later, for more information about how to treat theentire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2003 be-Loss Treatment Rules
loss in the following tax year. cause there is a total of $10 of unrecognized
The holding period of a position in a straddlegain in the successor long position and offset-Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se- generally begins no earlier than the date onting short position.curities, this loss treatment will not apply to any which the straddle ends (the date you no longerlosses you sustained in the ordinary course of hold an offsetting position). This rule does notExample 3. The facts are the same as inyour business. apply to any position you held more than 1 yearExample 1, except that at year end you have $8before you established the straddle. But seeof unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-Example. You are not a dealer in stock or Exceptions, later.tion and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offsettingsecurities. On December 2, 2003, you bought
short position. Under these circumstances, $8 ofstock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off- Example. On March 6, 2002, you acquiredthe total $10 realized loss will be disallowed forsetting put option. On December 12, 2003, there gold. On January 4, 2003, you entered into anwas $20 of unrealized gain in the put option and2003 because there is $8 of unrecognized gainoffsetting short gold forward contract (nonregu-you sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By Decem-in the successor long position. lated futures contract). On April 1, 2003, youber 16, the value of the put option had declined, disposed of the short gold forward contract at noeliminating all unrealized gain in the position. On gain or loss. On April 8, 2003, you sold the goldLoss carryover.If you have a disallowed lossDecember 16, you bought a second XX stock at a gain. Because the gold had been held for 1that resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2,position that is substantially identical to the XX year or less before the offsetting short positionyou must carry it over to the next tax year andstock you sold on December 12. At the end of was entered into, the holding period for the goldapply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss.the year there is no unrecognized gain in the put begins on April 1, 2003, the date the straddleFor example, a loss disallowed in 2002 underoption or in the XX stock. Under these circum- ended. Gain recognized on the sale of the goldRule 1 will not be allowed in 2003, unless thestances, the $20 loss will be disallowed for 2003 will be treated as short-term capital gain.substantially identical stock or securities (whichunder Rule 1 because, within a period beginning
caused the loss to be disallowed in 2002) were30 days before December 12, and ending 30 Loss treatment.Treat the loss on the sale of
days after that date, you bought stock substan-disposed of during 2003. In addition, the carry-one or more positions (the loss position) of a
tially identical to the XX stock you sold.over loss will not be allowed in 2003 if Rule 1 orstraddle as a long-term capital loss if both of the
Rule 2 disallows it. following are true.Rule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-
sition of less than all of the positions of a strad-Example. The facts are the same as in the1) You held (directly or indirectly) one or
dle (your loss position) to the extent that anyexample under Rule 1 above. On December 31, more offsetting positions to the loss posi-
unrecognized gain at the close of the tax year in2004, you sell the second XX stock at a $20 loss tion on the date you entered into the loss
one or more of the following positions is more position.and there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the put
than the amount of any loss disallowed underoption. Under these circumstances, you cannot2) You would have treated all gain or loss onRule 1: deduct in 2004 either the $20 loss disallowed inone or more of the straddle positions as2003 or the $20 loss you incurred for the De-long-term capital gain or loss if you had1) Successor positions, cember 31, 2004, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 doessold these positions on the day you en-
2) Offsetting positions to the loss position, ornot apply because the substantially identical XXtered into the loss position.
stock was sold during the year and no substan-3) Offsetting positions to any successor posi-tially identical stock or securities were boughtMixed straddles.Special rules apply to ation.
within the 61–day period. However, Rule 2 doesloss position that is part of a mixed straddle and
apply because there is $40 of unrecognized gainthat is a non-section 1256 position. A mixedSuccessor position.A successor position
in the put option, an offsetting position to the lossstraddle is a straddle:is a position that is or was at any time offsetting
positions.to a second position, if both of the following 1) That is not part of a larger straddle,conditions are met. Capital loss carryover.If the sale of a loss
2) In which all positions are held as capitalposition would have resulted in a capital loss,1) The second position was offsetting to the assets,you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss onloss position that was sold. the date it is allowed, even if you would treat the3) In which at least one (but not all) of the
2) The successor position is entered into dur-gain or loss on any successor positions as ordi-positions is a section 1256 contract, and
ing a period beginning 30 days before, andnary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of a4) For which the mixed straddle electionending 30 days after, the sale of the lossloss position (in the case of section 1256 con-(Election A, discussed later) has not beenposition. tracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-termmade.capital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss,
Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss andyou treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 rule,Example 1. On November 1, 2003, you en-
40% short-term capital loss, if all of the followingeven if you would treat any gain or loss on anytered into offsetting long and short positions in
conditions apply.successor positions as 100% long-term ornon-section 1256 contracts. On November 12,
short-term capital gain or loss.2003, you disposed of the long position at a $10 1) Gain or loss from the sale of one or moreloss. On November 14, you entered into a new of the straddle positions that are sectionlong position (successor position) that is offset-Exceptions. The rules for coordinating strad-1256 contracts would be considered gainting to the retained short position, but that is not or loss from the sale or exchange of adle losses and wash sales do not apply to thesubstantially identical to the long position dis- capital asset.following loss situations.posed of on November 12. You held both posi-
tions through year end, at which time there was 2) The sale of no position in the straddle,1) Loss on the sale of one or more positions$10 of unrecognized gain in the successor long other than a section 1256 contract, would
in a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans-position and no unrecognized gain in the offset- result in a long-term capital gain or loss.
actions are described under Section 1256ting short position. Under these circumstances, 3) You have not made a straddle-by-straddleContracts Marked to Market, earlier.)the entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2003 identification election (Election B) or mixedbecause there is $10 of unrecognized gain in the2) Loss on the sale of a loss position in astraddle account election (Election C),successor long position. mixed straddle account. (See Mixed strad- both discussed later.
dle account election (Election C), later.)Example 2. The facts are the same as in
3) Loss on the sale of a position that is part ofExample 1, except that at year end you have $4 Example. On March 1, 2003, you entered
a straddle consisting only of section 1256of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi- into a long gold forward contract. On July 15,
contracts.tion and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offsetting 2003, you entered into an offsetting short gold
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 59

Page 60 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
regulated futures contract. You did not make an 2)Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac- On the last business day of the tax year, you
election to offset gains and losses from positions count for a class of activities for which determine the “annual account net gain or loss”
in a mixed straddle. On August 9, 2003, you gains and losses will be recognized and for each account by netting the daily account
disposed of the long forward contract at a loss. offset on a periodic basis. amounts for that account for the tax year. The
Because the gold forward contract was part of a “total annual account net gain or loss” is deter-These two elections are alternatives to themixed straddle and the disposition of this mined by netting the annual account amountsmixed straddle election. You can choose onlynon-section 1256 position would not result in for all mixed straddle accounts that you hadone of the three elections. Use Form 6781 tolong-term capital loss, the loss recognized on established.indicate your election choice by checking box A,the termination of the gold forward contract will The net amounts keep their long-term orB, or C, whichever applies.be treated as a 60% long-term and 40% short-term classification. However, no more
Straddle-by-straddle identification elec-short-term capital loss. than 50% of the total annual account net gain for
tion (Election B).Under this election, youthe tax year can be treated as long-term capitalExceptions. The special holding period andmust clearly identify each position that is part ofgain. Any remaining gain is treated asloss treatment for straddle positions does notthe identified mixed straddle by the earlier of:short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40%apply to positions that: of the total annual account net loss can be
1) The close of the day the identified mixedtreated as short-term capital loss. Any remaining1) Constitute part of a hedging transaction,straddle is established, or loss is treated as long-term capital loss.2) Are included in a straddle consisting only The election to establish one or more mixed2) The time the position is disposed of.of section 1256 contracts, or straddle accounts for each tax year must beIf you dispose of a position in the mixed straddlemade by the due date (without extensions) of3) Are included in a mixed straddle accountbefore the end of the day on which the straddleyour income tax return for the immediately pre-(Election C), discussed later. is established, this identification must be madeceding tax year. If you begin trading in a newby the time you dispose of the position. You areclass of activities during a tax year, you mustpresumed to have properly identified a mixedmake the election for the new class of activities
Mixed Straddle Elections straddle if independent verification is used.by the later of either:
The basic tax treatment of gain or loss underIf you disposed of a position in a mixed straddlethis election depends on which side of the strad-1) The due date of your return for the imme-and make one of the elections described in thedle produced the total net gain or loss. If the netdiately preceding tax year (without exten-following discussions, report your gain or loss asgain or loss from the straddle is due to thesions), orindicated in those discussions. If you do notsection 1256 contracts, gain or loss is treated asmake any of the elections, report your gain or 2) 60 days after you entered into the first60% long-term capital gain or loss and 40%loss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed of mixed straddle in the new class of activi-short-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gainthe section 1256 component of the straddle, ties.or loss in Part I of Form 6781 and identify theenter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)election by checking box B. You make the election on Form 6781 byand column (i) or (j), if either applies) or your checking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in-If the net gain or loss is due to the non-sec-gain (line 12, column (f) and column (g) or (h), if come tax return for the immediately precedingtion 1256 positions, gain or loss is short-termeither applies) in Part I of Form 6781, on line 1. tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies.capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain or loss onDo not include it on line 11 or 13 (Part II). Report the annual account net gain or loss fromPart I of Schedule D and identify the election.
Mixed straddle election (Election A).You a mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781.For the specific application of the rules of this
can elect out of the marked to market rules, In addition, you must attach a statement to Formelection, see regulations section 1.1092(b)–3T.
discussed under Section 1256 Contracts 6781 specifically designating the class of activi-
Marked to Market, earlier, for all section 1256 ties for which a mixed straddle account is estab-Example. On April 1, you entered into a
contracts that are part of a mixed straddle. In- lished.non-section 1256 position and an offsetting sec-
stead, the gain and loss rules for straddles will For the specific application of the rules of thistion 1256 contract. You also made a valid elec-
apply to these contracts. However, if you make election, see regulations section 1.1092(b)–4T.tion to treat this straddle as an identified mixed
this election for an option on a section 1256straddle. On April 8, you disposed of the Interest expense and carrying charges re-contract, the gain or loss treatment discussednon-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and thelating to mixed straddle account positions.earlier under Options will apply, subject to thesection 1256 contract at an $800 gain. UnderYou cannot deduct interest and carryinggain and loss rules for straddles. these circumstances, the $600 loss on thecharges that are allocable to any positions heldYou can make this election if: non-section 1256 position will be offset againstin a mixed straddle account. Treat thesethe $800 gain on the section 1256 contract. Thecharges as an adjustment to the annual account1) At least one (but not all) of the positions isnet gain of $200 from the straddle will be treatednet gain or loss and allocate them proportion-a section 1256 contract, and as 60% long-term capital gain and 40% ately between the net short-term and the netshort-term capital gain because it is due to the2) Each position forming part of the straddle long-term capital gains or losses.section 1256 contract.is clearly identified as being part of that To find the amount of interest and carryingstraddle on the day the first section 1256 charges that is not deductible and that must beMixed straddle account (Election C).Youcontract forming part of the straddle is ac- added to the annual account net gain or loss,may elect to establish one or more accounts forquired. apply the rules described earlier to the positionsdetermining gains and losses from all positions
held in the mixed straddle account. SeeInterestin a mixed straddle. You must establish a sepa-If you make this election, it will apply for all
expense and carrying charges on straddles inrate mixed straddle account for each separatelater years as well. It cannot be revoked without
chapter 3 under Nondeductible Expense.designated class of activities.the consent of the IRS. If you made this election,
check box A of Form 6781. Do not report theGenerally, you must determine gain or loss
section 1256 component in Part I. for each position in a mixed straddle account asSales of Stock to ESOPs
of the close of each business day of the tax year.or Certain CooperativesOther elections. You can avoid the 60% You offset the net section 1256 contractslong-term capital loss treatment required for aagainst the net non-section 1256 positions toIf you sold qualified securities held for at least 3non-section 1256 loss position that is part of adetermine the “daily account net gain or loss.”years to an employee stock ownership planmixed straddle, described earlier, if you choose
If the daily account amount is due to (ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative,either of the two following elections to offset
non-section 1256 positions, the amount isyou may be able to elect to postpone all or partgains and losses for these positions. 
treated as short-term capital gain or loss. If the of the gain on the sale if you bought qualified
1) Election B. Make a separate identification daily account amount is due to section 1256 replacement property (certain securities) within
of the positions of each mixed straddle forcontracts, the amount is treated as 60% the period that began 3 months before the sale
which you are electing this treatment (the long-term and 40% short-term capital gain or and ended 12 months after the sale. If you make
straddle-by-straddle identification method). loss. the election, you must recognize gain on the
Page 60 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 61 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sale only to the extent the proceeds from the 3) A verified written statement of the domes- 2) $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married and
file a separate return), minus the amountsale exceed the cost of the qualified replace-tic corporation whose employees are cov-
of gain you postponed for all earlier years.ment property. ered by the ESOP acquiring the securities,
or of any authorized officer of the coopera-You must reduce the basis of the replace-
tive, consenting to the taxes under sec-Basis of replacement property.You mustment property by any postponed gain. If you
tions 4978 and 4979A of the Internal subtract the amount of postponed gain from thedispose of any replacement property, you may
Revenue Code on certain dispositions,basis of your replacement property.have to recognize all of the postponed gain.
and prohibited allocations of the stock pur-Generally, to qualify for the election the How to report and postpone gain. Reportchased by the ESOP or cooperative.ESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% of the entire gain realized from the sale on line 1 orthe outstanding stock of the corporation that line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever isissued the qualified securities. Also, the quali-More information. For details, see sectionappropriate. To make the choice to postponefied replacement property must have been is-1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Tempo-gain, enter “SSBIC Rollover” in column (a) of thesued by a domestic operating corporation.rary Regulations section 1.1042–1T. line directly below the line on which you reported
the gain. Enter the amount of gain postponed in
How to make the election.You must make column (f). Enter it as a loss (in parentheses).Rollover of Gainthe election no later than the due date (including Make the same entry in column (g) if the saleFrom Publiclyextensions) for filing your tax return for the year occurred after May 5, 2003.
in which you sold the stock. If your original returnTraded Securities Also, attach a schedule showing how you
was filed on time, you may make the election on figured the postponed gain, the name of theYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certainan amended return filed no later than 6 months SSBIC in which you purchased common stockgains from the sale of publicly traded securities.after the due date of your return (excluding ex- or a partnership interest, the date of thatThis means that if you buy certain replacementtensions). Write “Filed pursuant to section purchase, and your new basis in that SSBIC
property and make the choice described in this301.9100–2” at the top of the amended return, stock or partnership interest.
section, you postpone part or all of your gain.and file it at the same address you used for your You must make the choice to postpone gain
original return. You postpone the gain by adjusting the basisno later than the due date (including extensions)
of the replacement property as described in Ba- for filing your tax return for the year in which youHow to report and postpone gain.Report sis of replacement property, later. This sold the securities. If your original return wasthe entire gain realized on line 8 of Schedule D.postpones your gain until the year you disposefiled on time, you may make the choice on anTo make the choice to postpone gain, enterof the replacement property. amended return filed no later than 6 months“Section 1042 election” in column (a) of the line after the due date of your return (excluding ex-You qualify to make this choice if you meetdirectly below the line on which you reported the tensions). Write “Filed pursuant to sectionall the following tests.gain. Enter in column (f) the amount of the gain 301.9100–2” at the top of the amended return,you are postponing or expecting to postpone. and file it at the same address you used for your1) You sell publicly traded securities at aEnter it as a loss (in parentheses). Make the original return.gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-same entry in column (g) if the sale occurred Your choice is revocable with the consent ofties traded on an established securitiesafter May 5, 2003. If the actual postponed gain is the IRS.market.different from the amount you report, file an
amended return. 2) Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.
Gains on QualifiedAlso attach the following statements. 3) During the 60-day period beginning on theSmall Business Stockdate of the sale, you buy replacement1) A “statement of election” that indicates youproperty. This replacement property mustThis section discusses two provisions of the laware making an election under section be either common stock or a partnershipthat may apply to gain from the sale or trade of1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and interest in a specialized small business qualified small business stock. You may qualifythat includes the following information. investment company (SSBIC). This is for a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain.
any partnership or corporation licensed bya) A description of the securities sold, the You may be able to exclude part of the gain
the Small Business Administration underdate of the sale, the amount realized on from your income.
section 301(d) of the Small Business In-the sale, and the adjusted basis of the
Qualified small business stock. This isvestment Act of 1958, as in effect on Maysecurities.
stock that meets all the following tests.13, 1993.b) The name of the ESOP or cooperative
to which the qualified securities were 1) It must be stock in a C corporation.
sold. Amount of gain recognized.  If you make the2) It must have been originally issued afterchoice described in this section, you must rec-c) For a sale that was part of a single, August 10, 1993.ognize gain only up to the following amount:interrelated transaction under a prear- 3) The corporation must have total gross as-ranged agreement between taxpayers 1) The amount realized on the sale, minus sets of $50 million or less at all times afterinvolving other sales of qualified securi- August 9, 1993, and before it issued the2) The cost of any common stock or partner-ties, the names and identifying num- stock. Its total gross assets immediately af-ship interest in an SSBIC that you boughtbers of the other taxpayers under the ter it issued the stock must also be $50during the 60-day period beginning on theagreement and the number of shares million or less.sold by the other taxpayers. date of sale (and did not previously take When figuring the corporation’s totalinto account on an earlier sale of publiclygross assets, you must also count the as-2) A notarized “statement of purchase” traded securities). sets of any predecessor of the corporation.describing the qualified replacement prop-If this amount is less than the amount of yourIn addition, you must treat all corporationserty, date of purchase, and the cost of thegain, you can postpone the rest of your gain, that are members of the same parent-sub-property and declaring the property to be sidiary controlled group as one corporation. subject to the limit described next. If this amountqualified replacement property for theis equal to or more than the amount of your gain,qualified stock you sold. The statement 4) You must have acquired the stock at itsyou must recognize the full amount of your gain.must have been notarized no later than 30 original issue, directly or through an under-
days after the purchase. If you have not writer, in exchange for money or otherLimit on gain postponed.The amount of
yet purchased the qualified replacement property (not including stock), or as pay forgain you can postpone each year is limited to the
property, you must attach the notarized services provided to the corporation (othersmaller of:
“statement of purchase” to your income tax than services performed as an underwriter
1) $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married andreturn for the year following the election of the stock). In certain cases, your stock
year (or the election will not be valid). file a separate return), or may also meet this test if you acquired it
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 61

Page 62 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
from another person who met this test, or 3) Any banking, insurance, financing, leasing, If a pass-through entity sold qualified small
investing, or similar business, business stock held for more than 6 months andthrough a conversion or trade of qualified
you held an interest in the entity for the entiresmall business stock that you held. 4) Any farming business (including the busi-period the entity held the stock, you also mayness of raising or harvesting trees),5) The corporation must have met the active choose to postpone gain if you, rather than thebusiness test, defined next, and must 5) Any business involving the production orpass-through entity, buy the replacement stockhave been a C corporation during substan-extraction of products for which percent-within the 60-day period.tially all the time you held the stock. age depletion can be claimed, or How to report gain. Report the entire gain6) Within the period beginning 2 years before6) Any business of operating a hotel, motel,realized from the sale on line 1 or line 8 ofand ending 2 years after the stock was restaurant, or similar business. Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is appropri-issued, the corporation cannot have ate. To make the choice to postpone the gain,bought more than a de minimis amount of enter “Section 1045 Rollover” in column (a) ofits stock from you or a related party. the line directly below the line on which youRollover of Gain
reported the gain. Enter the amount of gain7) Within the period beginning 1 year before
postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (inYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capitaland ending 1 year after the stock was is-
parentheses). Make the same entry in columngain from the sale of qualified small businesssued, the corporation cannot have bought
(g) if the sale occurred after May 5, 2003, unlessstock held more than 6 months. This means that,more than a de minimis amount of its stock
the gain also qualifies for the section 1202 exclu-if you buy certain replacement stock and makefrom anyone, unless the total value of the
sion discussed next.the choice described in this section, you post-stock it bought is 5% or less of the total
You must make the choice to postpone gainpone part or all of your gain.value of all its stock.
no later than the due date (including extensions)You postpone the gain by adjusting the basisFor more information about tests 6 and 7, see for filing your tax return for the year in which youof the replacement stock as described in Basisthe regulations under section 1202 of the Inter- sold the stock. If your original return was filed onof replacement stock, below. This postponesnal Revenue Code. time, you may make the choice on an amendedyour gain until the year you dispose of the re-
return filed no later than 6 months after the dueplacement stock.
Active business test.A corporation meets date of your return (excluding extensions). WriteYou can make this choice if you meet all the
this test for any period of time if, during that “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100–2” at thefollowing tests.
period, both the following are true. top of the amended return, and file it at the same
1) You buy replacement stock during the address you used for your original return.
1) It was an eligible corporation, defined 60-day period beginning on the date of the
below. sale.
Section 1202 Exclusion2) It used at least 80% (by value) of its assets2) The replacement stock is qualified small
in the active conduct of at least one quali- business stock. You generally can exclude from your incomefied trade or business, defined below. one-half of your gain from the sale or trade of3) The replacement stock continues to meet
qualified small business stock held by you forthe active business requirement for smallException for SSBIC. Any specialized more than 5 years. The taxable part of your gainbusiness stock for at least the first 6small business investment company (SSBIC) is equal to your section 1202 exclusion is a 28%months after you buy it.treated as meeting the active business test. An rate gain. See Capital Gain Tax Rates, later.SSBIC is an eligible corporation that is licensedAmount of gain recognized.If you make theto operate under section 301(d) of the Small SSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized smallchoice described in this section, you must rec-business investment company (SSBIC) stockBusiness Investment Act of 1958 as in effect onognize the capital gain only up to the followingthat you bought as replacement property forMay 13, 1993. amount: publicly traded securities you sold at a gain, youEligible corporation.This is any U.S. cor- must reduce the basis of the stock by the1) The amount realized on the sale, minusporation other than: amount of any postponed gain on that earlier
2) The cost of any qualified small businesssale, as explained earlier under Rollover of Gain1) A Domestic International Sales Corpora- stock you bought during the 60-day periodFrom Publicly Traded Securities. But do not re-tion (DISC) or a former DISC, beginning on the date of sale (and did notduce your basis by that amount when figuring
previously take into account on an earlier2) A corporation that has made, or whose your section 1202 exclusion.
sale of qualified small business stock).subsidiary has made, an election under Limit on eligible gain.The amount of yoursection 936 of the Internal Revenue Code,If this amount is less than the amount of yourgain from the stock of any one issuer that isconcerning the Puerto Rico and posses-capital gain, you can postpone the rest of thateligible for the exclusion in 2003 is limited to thesion tax credit, gain. If this amount equals or is more than thegreater of:amount of your capital gain, you must recognize3) A regulated investment company,
the full amount of your gain. 1) Ten times your basis in all qualified stock4) A real estate investment trust (REIT), of the issuer that you sold or exchangedBasis of replacement stock.You must sub- during the year, or5) A real estate mortgage investment conduittract the amount of postponed gain from the
(REMIC), basis of your replacement stock. 2) $10 million ($5 million for married individu-
als filing separately) minus the amount of6) A financial asset securitization investmentHolding period of replacement stock.Your gain from the stock of the same issuer thattrust (FASIT), or holding period for the replacement stock in-you used to figure your exclusion in earliercludes your holding period for the stock sold,7) A cooperative. years.except for the purpose of applying the 6-month
holding period requirement for choosing to rollQualified trade or business.This is any How to report gain. Report the entire gainover the gain on its sale.trade or business other than: realized from the sale in column (f) of line 8 of
Pass-through entity.A pass-through entity (a Schedule D (Form 1040). Do not enter any1) One involving services performed in thepartnership, S corporation, or mutual fund or amount in column (g). Directly below the line onfields of health, law, engineering, architec-other regulated investment company) also may which you report the gain, enter “Section 1202ture, accounting, actuarial science, per-make the choice to postpone gain. The benefit of exclusion” in column (a) and enter the amount offorming arts, consulting, athletics, financialthe postponed gain applies to your share of the the allowable exclusion in column (f). Enter it asservices, or brokerage services, entity’s postponed gain if you held an interest in a loss (in parentheses). If you are completing
2) One whose principal asset is the reputa-the entity for the entire period the entity held the line 20 of Schedule D, enter as a positive num-
tion or skill of one or more employees,stock. ber the amount of the exclusion on line 2 of the
Page 62 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 63 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D More information. For more information umn (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,
instructions. about empowerment zones, see Publication whichever applies. However, if the broker ad-
954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Communi-vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099–B, that gross
More information.For information about ad-ties. For more information about this rollover of proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions
ditional requirements that may apply, see sec-gain, see section 1397B of the Internal Revenue and option premiums were reported to the IRS,
tion 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code. Code. enter that net sales price in column (d) of either
line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies.
Rollover of Gain If the net sales price is entered in column (d),
do not include the commissions and option pre-From Sale of
miums in column (e).Reporting CapitalEmpowerment Zone Assets
Section 1256 contracts and straddles.Gains and LossesYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain Use Form 6781 to report gains and losses from
gains from the sale of qualified empowerment section 1256 contracts and straddles before en-This section discusses how to report your capitalzone assets. This means that if you buy certain tering these amounts on Schedule D. Include agains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040).replacement property and make the choice de- copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.Enter your sales and trades of stocks, bonds,scribed in this section, you postpone part or all of Market discount bonds.Report the sale oretc., and real estate (if not required to be re-the recognition of your gain. trade of a market discount bond on Schedule Dported on another form) on line 1 of Part I or lineYou qualify to make this choice if you meet (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8. If the sale or trade8 of Part II, as appropriate. Include all theseall the following tests. results in a gain and you did not choose totransactions even if you did not receive a Form
include market discount in income currently,1099–B or 1099–S (or substitute statement).1) You hold a qualified empowerment zone
enter “Accrued Market Discount” on the next lineYou can use Schedule D–1 as a continuationasset for more than 1 year and sell it at a
in column (a) and the amount of the accruedschedule to report more transactions.gain.
market discount as a loss in column (f). If theBe sure to add all sales price entries in col-2) Your gain from the sale is a capital gain. gain on the sale or trade is a post-May 5 gain,umn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total on
also enter the accrued market discount as a lossline 3. Also add all sales price entries in column3) During the 60-day period beginning on the
in column (g). Also report the amount of accrued(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.date of the sale, you buy a replacement
market discount as interest income on ScheduleThen add the following amounts reported to youqualified empowerment zone asset in the
B (Form 1040), line 1, and identify it as “Accruedfor 2003 on Forms 1099–B and Forms 1099–Ssame zone as the asset sold.
Market Discount.”(or on substitute statements):
Any part of the gain that is ordinary Form 1099–S transactions. If you sold or1) Proceeds from transactions involvingincome cannot be postponed and must traded reportable real estate, you generallystocks, bonds, and other securities, andbe recognized.CAUTION
!
should receive from the real estate reporting2) Gross proceeds from real estate transac-person a Form 1099–S, Proceeds From RealQualified empowerment zone asset. This tions (other than the sale of your mainEstate Transactions, showing the gross pro-means certain stock or partnership interests inhome if you had no taxable gain) not re-ceeds.an enterprise zone business. It also includesported on another form or schedule. “Reportable real estate” is defined as anycertain tangible property used in an enterprise present or future ownership interest in any of theIf this total is more than the total of lines 3 andzone business. You must have acquired the following:10, attach a statement to your return explainingasset after December 21, 2000. the difference. 1) Improved or unimproved land, including airAmount of gain recognized.If you make theInstallment sales.You cannot use the install-space,choice described in this section, you must rec-ment method to report a gain from the sale of2) Inherently permanent structures, includingognize gain only up to the following amount:stock or securities traded on an established se-any residential, commercial, or industrialcurities market. You must report the entire gain1) The amount realized on the sale, minus building,in the year of sale (the year in which the trade
2) The cost of any qualified empowermentdate occurs). 3) A condominium unit and its accessory fix-
zone asset that you bought during the tures and common elements, includingAt-risk rules.Special at-risk rules apply to60-day period beginning on the date of land, andmost income-producing activities. These rulessale (and did not previously take into ac-
4) Stock in a cooperative housing corporationlimit the amount of loss you can deduct to thecount in rolling over gain on an earlier sale
(as defined in section 216 of the Internalamount you risk losing in the activity. The at-riskof qualified empowerment zone assets).
Revenue Code).rules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade of
If this amount is equal to or more than thean asset used in an activity to which the at-riskA “real estate reporting person” could includeamount of your gain, you must recognize the fullrules apply. For more information, see Publica-the buyer’s attorney, your attorney, the title oramount of your gain. If this amount is less thantion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules. escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro-the amount of your gain, you can postpone theUse Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, to figureker, the buyer’s broker, or the person acquiringrest of your gain by adjusting the basis of yourthe amount of loss you can deduct. the biggest interest in the property.replacement property as described next.
Your Form 1099–S will show the gross pro-Passive activity gains and losses.If you
ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol-Basis of replacement property.You must have gains or losses from a passive activity, you
low the instructions for Schedule D to reportsubtract the amount of postponed gain from themay also have to report them on Form 8582. In
these transactions, and include them on line 1 orbasis of the qualified empowerment zone assetssome cases, the loss may be limited under the
8 as appropriate.you bought as replacement property. passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its
It is unlawful for any real estate reportingseparate instructions for more information aboutHow to report and postpone capital gain. person to separately charge you for complyingreporting capital gains and losses from a pas-Report the entire gain realized from the sale on with the requirement to file Form 1099–S.sive activity.line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040) as you other-
wise would without regard to the choice to post-Form 1099–B transactions.If you sold prop-Sale of property bought at various times.If
pone gain. To make the choice to postpone gain, erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi- you sell a block of stock or other property that
enter “Section 1397B Rollover” in column (a) of ties, through a broker, you should receive Formyou bought at various times, report the
the line directly below the line on which you 1099–B or an equivalent statement from the short-term gain or loss from the sale on one line
reported the gain. Enter the amount of gain broker. Use the Form 1099–B or equivalent in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain or
postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (in statement to complete Schedule D. loss on one line in Part II. Write “Various” in
parentheses). Make the same entry in column Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of column (b) for the “Date acquired.” See the
(g) if the sale occurred after May 5, 2003. Form 1099–B as the gross sales price in col- Comprehensive Example later in this chapter.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 63

Page 64 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba-
1) The only amounts you would have to re- 1) $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and filesis any expense of sale such as broker’s fees,
port on Schedule D are capital gain distri- a separate return), orcommissions, state and local transfer taxes, and
butions from box 2a and box 2b of Formoption premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in 2) Your total net loss as shown on line 17a of1099–DIV (or substitute statement).column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule Schedule D.
D, whichever applies, unless you reported the2) You do not have an amount in box 2c, 2d,You can use your total net loss to reduce yournet sales price amount in column (d). 2e, or 2f of any Form 1099–DIV (or substi-income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.tute statement).Short-term gains and losses.Capital gain or
Capital loss carryover.If you have a total net3) You do not file Form 4952 or, if you do,loss on the sale or trade of investment property
loss on line 17a of Schedule D that is more thanand the amount on line 4g of that formheld 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or
the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, youincludes any qualified dividends, it also in-loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If the
can carry over the unused part to the next yearcludes all of your net capital gain from theamount you report in column (f) and column (g)
and treat it as if you had incurred it in that nextdisposition of property held for investment.is a loss, show it in parentheses.
year. If part of the loss is still unused, you canYou combine your share of short-term capitalIf all the above statements are true, report yourcarry it over to later years until it is completelygain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,capital gain distributions directly on lines 13aused up.and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital lossand 13b of Form 1040 and check the box on lineWhen you figure the amount of any capitalcarryover, with your other short-term capital13a. Also, use the Qualified Dividends and Capi-loss carryover to the next year, you must takegains and losses to figure your net short-termtal Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 in-the current year’s allowable deduction into ac-capital gain or loss on line 7b of Schedule D.structions to figure your tax. count, whether or not you claimed it.You can report your capital gain distributionsLong-term gains and losses.A capital gain When you carry over a loss, it remains longon line 10a and 10b of Form 1040A, instead ofor loss on the sale or trade of investment prop- term or short term. A long-term capital loss youon Form 1040, if both of the following are true.erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capital carry over to the next tax year will reduce that
gain or loss. You report it in Part II of Schedule year’s long-term capital gains before it reduces1) None of the Forms 1099–DIV (or substi-D. If the amount you report in column (f) and that year’s short-term capital gains.tute statements) you received have ancolumn (g) is a loss, show it in parentheses.amount in box 2c, 2d, 2e, or 2f. Figuring your carryover.The amount ofYou also report the following in Part II of your capital loss carryover is the amount of your2) You do not have to file Form 1040 for anySchedule D: total net loss that is more than the lesser of:other capital gains or losses.
1) Undistributed long-term capital gains from 1) Your allowable capital loss deduction fora regulated investment company (mutual the year, orTotal net gain or loss.To figure your total netfund) or real estate investment trustgain or loss, combine your net short-term capital(REIT), 2) Your taxable income increased by your al-gain or loss (line 7b) with your net long-termlowable capital loss deduction for the year2) Your share of long-term capital gains orcapital gain or loss (line 16). Enter the result onand your deduction for personal exemp-losses from partnerships, S corporations,line 17a, Part III of Schedule D. If your losses aretions.and fiduciaries, more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next.
If your deductions are more than your grossIf both lines 16 and 17a are gains and line 40 of3) All capital gain distributions from mutual income for the tax year, use your negative tax-Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gainfunds and REITs not reported directly on able income in computing the amount in item (2).Tax Rates, later.lines 10a and 10b of Form 1040A or lines Complete Worksheet 4–1 to determine the13a and 13b of Form 1040, and part of your capital loss for 2003 that you canCapital Losses4) Long-term capital loss carryovers. carry over to 2004.
If your capital losses are more than your capitalThe result after combining these items with Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities ingains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.your other long-term capital gains and losses is 2003. The sales resulted in a capital loss ofReport the deduction on line 13a of Form 1040,your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 16 of $7,000. They had no other capital transactions.enclosed in parentheses.Schedule D). Their taxable income was $26,000. On their joint
Capital gain distributions only.You do Limit on deduction. Your allowable capital 2003 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-
not have to file Schedule D if all of the following loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000),
are true. lesser of: can be carried over to 2004.
Worksheet 4–1. Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
Use this worksheet to figure your capital loss carryovers from 2003 to 2004 if Schedule D, line 18, is a loss and (a) that loss is a
smaller loss than the loss on Schedule D, line 17a, or (b) Form 1040, line 38, is a loss. Otherwise, you do not have any carryovers.
1. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38. If a loss, enclose the amount in parentheses............ 1.
2. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 18, as a positive amount............................... 2.
3. Combine lines 1 and 2. If zero or less, enter -0-......................................... 3.
4. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 3.................................................. 4.
If line 7b of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 5; otherwise, enter -0- on line 5 and go to line 9.
5. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 7b, as a positive amount............................... 5.
6. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 16................................ 6.
7. Add lines 4 and 6.............................................................. 7.
8. Short-term capital loss carryover to 2004. Subtract line 7 from line 5. If zero or less, enter -0-...... 8.
If line 16 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 9; otherwise, skip lines 9 through 13.
9. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 16, as a positive amount............................... 9.
10. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 7b................................ 10.
11. Subtract line 5 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0-........................ 11.
12. Add lines 10 and 11............................................................ 12.
13. Long-term capital loss carryover to 2004. Subtract line 12 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0-..... 13.
Page 64 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 65 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If their capital loss had been $2,000, theirExample. All of your net capital gain is fromUnrecaptured section 1250 gain.Generally,
selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate would this is any part of your capital gain from sellingcapital loss deduction would have been $2,000.
be 28%. Because you are single and your tax- section 1250 property (real property) that is dueThey would have no carryover.
able income is $25,000, none of your taxable to depreciation (but not more than your net sec-Use short-term losses first.When you fig- income will be taxed above the 15% rate. The tion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in theure your capital loss carryover, use your28% rate does not apply. 28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250
short-term capital losses first, even if you in- Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions
curred them after a long-term capital loss. If you8% rate. The 10% maximum capital gain rateto figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
have not reached the limit on the capital lossis lowered to 8% for “qualified 5-year gain.”For more information about section 1250 prop-
deduction after using the short-term capital erty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 ofQualified 5-year gain.This is long-termlosses, use the long-term capital losses until you Publication 544.capital gain from the sale of property before Mayreach the limit. 6, 2003, that you held for more than 5 years.Using Schedule D. You apply these rules by
Decedent’s capital loss.A capital loss using Part IV of Schedule D (Form 1040) toInvestment interest deducted.If you claim asustained by a decedent during his or her last figure your tax.deduction for investment interest, you may havetax year (or carried over to that year from an Use Part IV if both of the following are true.to reduce the amount of your net capital gainearlier year) can be deducted only on the finalthat is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.1) You have a net capital gain. You have areturn filed for the decedent. The capital lossReduce it by the amount of the net capital gainnet capital gain if both lines 16 and 17a oflimits discussed earlier still apply in this situa-you choose to include in investment income Schedule D are gains. (Line 16 is your nettion. The decedent’s estate cannot deduct anywhen figuring the limit on your investment inter-long-term capital gain or loss. Line 17a isof the loss or carry it over to following years.est deduction. This is done on lines 24–26 ofyour net long-term capital gain or loss
Schedule D, lines 3–10 of the Schedule D TaxJoint and separate returns.If you and your combined with any net short-term capital
Worksheet, or lines 4–6 of the Qualified Divi-spouse once filed separate returns and are now gain or loss.)
dends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. Forfiling a joint return, combine your separate capi- 2) Your taxable income on Form 1040, linemore information about the limit on investmenttal loss carryovers. However, if you and your 40, is more than zero.interest, see Interest Expenses in chapter 3.spouse once filed a joint return and are now
filing separate returns, any capital loss carryover Using the Schedule D Tax Worksheet.If28% rate gain.This gain includes gain or lossfrom the joint return can be deducted only on the you have any 28% rate gain (collectibles gainfrom the sale of collectibles and the taxable partreturn of the spouse who actually had the loss. and gain on qualified small business stock) orof gain equal to your section 1202 exclusion
unrecaptured section 1250 gain, you may alsofrom the sale of qualified small business stock.
have to use the Schedule D Tax Worksheet inCapital Gain Tax Rates
Collectibles gain or loss.This is gain orthe Schedule D instructions to figure your tax.
loss from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are See the directions below line 20 of Schedule D.
antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-generally lower than the tax rates that apply to See the Comprehensive Example, later, for
num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev-other income. These lower rates are called the an example of how to figure your tax on Sched-
erage held more than 1 year.maximum capital gain rates. ule D using the capital gain rates.
Collectibles gain includes gain from the saleThe term “net capital gain” means the Using the Qualified Dividends and Capitalof an interest in a partnership, S corporation, oramount by which your net long-term capital gain Gain Tax Worksheet. If you have qualifiedtrust attributable to unrealized appreciation offor the year is more than your net short-term dividends or capital gain distributions but do notcollectibles.capital loss. have to file Schedule D (Form 1040), figure your
Gain on qualified small business stock.If tax using the Qualified Dividends and CapitalFor 2003, the maximum capital gain ratesyou realized a gain from qualified small businessGain Tax Worksheet in the instructions for Formare 5%, 8%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, and 28%. stock that you held more than 5 years, you1040A or Form 1040, whichever you file. ForSee Table 4–2 for details. generally can exclude one-half of your gain frommore information, see Capital gain distributions
If you figure your tax using the maxi-your income. The taxable part of your gain equalonly, earlier.
mum capital gain rate and the regularto your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate
Alternative minimum tax.These capital gaintax computation results in a lower tax,gain. See Gains on Qualified Small Business
TIP
rates are also used in figuring alternative mini-the regular tax computation applies. Stock , earlier in this chapter.
mum tax.
Table 4–2. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
Comprehensive Example
THEN your maximum
Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wagesIF your net capital gain is from ... capital gain rate is ...
from her job, she has income from stocks andcollectibles gain 28% other securities. For the 2003 tax year, she had
the following capital gains and losses, which shegain on qualified small business stock equal to the section
reports on Schedule D. Her filled-in Schedule D1202 exclusion 28%
is shown at the end of this example.
unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25%
Capital gains and losses—Schedule D.
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25%20%  for sales2 before May Emily sold stock in two different companies that
or higher 6, 2003 she held for less than a year. In June, she sold
15%  for sales2 after May 5, 100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she had
2003 bought in February. She had an adjusted basis
of $1,150 in the stock and sold it for $400, for aother gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is8% 3 or 10% for sales2
loss of $750. In July, she sold 25 shares oflower than 25% before May 6, 2003 Computer Co. stock that she bought in June.5%  for sales2 after May 5, She had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,0002003 and sold it for $2,500, for a gain of $500. She
reports these short-term transactions on line 1 in1“Other gain” means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Part I of Schedule D.
2The term “sales” includes trades, involuntary conversions, and installment payments received.Emily had three other stock sales that she
3The rate is 8% only for qualified 5-year gain. reports as long-term transactions on line 8 in
Part II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 65

Page 66 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
shares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inheritedReconciliation of Forms 1099–B. Emily which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500
the Car stock from her father. Its fair market makes sure that the total of the amounts re- is long-term capital loss. She enters these
value at the time of his death was $2,500, which ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched- amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. She
became her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400. ule D is not less than the total of the amounts also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-
Because she had inherited the stock, her loss is shown on the Forms 1099–B she received from ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-
a long-term loss, regardless of how long she and her broker. For 2003, the total of lines 3 and 10sheet.
her father actually held the stock. She enters the of Schedule D is $14,100, which is the same She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-
loss in column (f) of line 8. amount reported by the broker on Forms over Worksheet in her 2002 Schedule D instruc-
In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co. 1099–B (not shown). tions (not shown), so she could properly report
stock for $5,000. She had bought 100 of those her loss carryover for the 2003 tax year withoutForm 6781. On June 2, 2003, Emily had ashares in 1992, for $1,000. She had bought 100 refiguring it.realized loss from a regulated futures contract ofmore shares in 1994 for $2,200, and an addi- Tax computation. Because Emily has gains$11,000. She also had an unrealized marked totional 300 shares in 1997 for $1,500. Her total on both lines 16 and 17a of Schedule D and hasmarket gain on open contracts of $27,000 at thebasis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $300 taxable income, she goes to Part IV of Scheduleend of 2003. She had reported an unrealized($5,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she D to figure her tax. But because line 20 ofmarked to market gain of $1,000 on her 2002 taxenters in columns (f) and (g) of line 8. Schedule D is more than zero (due to her sec-return. (This $1,000 must be subtracted from herIn December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co. tion 1202 gain from selling qualified small busi-2003 profit.) These amounts are shown in boxesstock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi- ness stock), she must also use the Schedule D6a, 6b, 7, and 8 of the Form 1099–B she re-ness stock that she had bought in September Tax Worksheet to figure her tax.ceived from her broker for these transactions.1998. Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 After entering the gain from line 17a on lineBoxes 9a and 9b show her combined profit ofgain, which she enters in column (f) of line 8. 13a of her Form 1040, she completes the rest of$15,000 ($27,000 − $1,000 − $11,000). SheBecause she held the stock more than 5 years, Form 1040 through line 40. She enters thereports this gain in Part I of Form 6781 (notshe has a $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of theshown). She shows 40% ($6,000) as short-termclaims the exclusion on the line below by enter- Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out thegain on line 4, column (f) of Schedule D and 60%ing $1,500 as a loss in column (f). She also rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax is($9,000) as long-term gain on line 11 of Sched-enters the exclusion as a positive amount on line $3,424. This is less than the tax she would haveule D.2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. figured without the capital gain tax rates, $4,316.The Form 1099–B that Emily received fromShe received a Form 1099–B (not shown)   .her broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown later.from her broker for each of these transactions.  .Capital loss carryover from 2002.EmilyThe entries shown in box 2 of these forms total
has a capital loss carryover to 2003 of $800, of$14,100.
XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, P A 18605
10-1111111 111-00-1111
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36309
RFC
(11,000)
27,0001,000
15,000
Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
Transactions
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important ta x
information and is
being furnished to th e
Internal Revenue
Service. If you ar e
required to file a return
a negligence penalty o r
other sanction may b e
imposed on you if thi s
income is taxable an d
the IRS determines tha t
it has not bee n
reported
CORRECTED (if checked)
OMB No. 1545-0715PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale1a
CUSIP no.1b
Stocks, bonds, etc.2 Reported
to IRS
Gross proceeds
$
Gross proceeds less commissions and option premium s
PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number Bartering3 Federal income tax withheld4
$ $
RECIPIENT’S name Description5
Street address (including apt. no.) Post–5/5/2003 profit or
(loss) realized
6bProfit or (loss) realized
in 2003
6a
City, state, and ZIP code
$$
Account number (optional)
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue Servic eForm 1099-B
/H20854
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-B
2003
7
$
Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2002
8 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2003
9a Aggregate profit or (loss) 9b Post–5/5/2003 aggregate
profit or (loss)
$
$$
(11,000)
15,000
Page 66 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 67 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily Jones 111 00 1111
100 sh
Trucking Co.
25 sh
Computer Co.
2-12-03
6-29-03
6-12-03
7-30-03
400
2,500
1,150
2,000 500
2,900
6,000
300
60 sh
Car Co.
500 sh
Furniture Co.
20 sh
Toy Co.
INHERITED
VARIOUS
9-28-98
2-3-03
6-29-03
12-15-03
2,100
5,000
4,100
11,200
2,500
4,700
1,100
300
500
300
(750)
5,450
(400)
3,000
9,000
9,900
9,300
Section 1202
exclusion (1,500)
*Include in column (g) all gains and losses from column (f) from sales, exchanges, or conversions (including installment payment s received) after
May 5, 2003. However, do not include gain attributable to unrecaptured section 1250 gain, “collectibles gains and losses” (as defined on page
D-8 of the instructions) or eligible gain on qualified small business stock (see page D-4 of the instructions).
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on Form 1040
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss) for
the entire year
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts.
Add lines 1 and 2 in column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684,
6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
7b
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your
2002 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f)
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts.
Add lines 8 and 9 in column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and
long-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-2 of the instructions
15 15
14
16
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 13 of your
2002 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet ()
Combine lines 8 through 13 in column (g). If zero or less, enter -0-
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f)
Next: Go to Part III on the back.
16
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2003Cat. No. 11338H
()
4
4
Part I
Part II
b
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2003
(g) Post-May 5 gain
or (loss)*
(see below)
Combine lines 1 through 5 in column (g). If the result is a loss, enter the result.
Otherwise, enter -0-. Do not enter more than zero
7a
(f) Gain or (loss) for
the entire year
Subtract (e) from (d)
(g) Post-May 5 gain
or (loss)*
(see below)
7a ()
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(750)
500
6,000
-0-
9,000
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 67

Page 68 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
15,350
3,424
-0-
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2003
Taxable Gain or Deductible Loss
Combine lines 7b and 16 and enter the result. If a loss, enter -0- on line 17b and go to line 18.
If a gain, enter the gain on Form 1040, line 13a, and go to line 17b below
17a
17a
()18
Part III
Page 2
18
Next:
If line 17a is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13a, the smaller of (a) that loss or
(b) ($3,000) (or, if married filing separately, ($1,500)) (see page D-7 of the instructions)
Tax Computation Using Maximum Capital Gains RatesPart IV
Enter your unrecaptured section 1250 gain, if any, from line 18 of the worksheet on page D-7
22
23
24
25
Add lines 22 and 23
26
27
31
33
34
41
42
43
Subtract line 41 from line 40
25
26
27
28
29
30
37
32
21 Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 40
22
● If line 16 of Schedule D is a gain or you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line
9b, complete Part IV below.
Amount from line 4g of Form 4952 (investment interest expense)
Enter the amount from line 27
Subtract line 29 from line 28. If zero or less, enter -0- and go to line 40
Enter the smaller of line 30 or line 31
Multiply line 32 by 5% (.05)
Enter the smaller of line 21 or line 26
Enter the amount from line 30 (if line 30 is blank, enter -0-)
19
39
34
35
36
47
44
Add lines 17b and 23*
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2003
● Otherwise, skip the rest of Schedule D and complete the rest of Form 1040.
Next: ● If you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, complete Form 1040 through
line 40, and then complete Part IV below (but skip lines 19 and 20).
● Otherwise, skip Part IV below and complete the rest of Form 1040.
20
If lines 19 and 20 are zero, go to line 21. Otherwise, complete the worksheet on page D-11 of the instructions to figure
the amount to enter on lines 35 and 53 below, and skip all other lines below.
24
Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17a, but not less than zero
Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b 23
Subtract line 25 from line 24. If zero or less, enter -0-
If line 27 is more than line 28, skip lines 29–39 and go to line 40.
32
Add lines 17b and 23*
35
Subtract line 32 from line 30
38
36
Enter your qualified 5-year gain, if any, from
line 8 of the worksheet on page D-10
45
46
47
Enter the amount from line 32 (if line 32 is blank, enter -0-)
Subtract line 44 from line 43
Enter the smaller of line 42 or line 45
49
40
If lines 26 and 30 are the same, skip lines 40–49 and go to line 50.
Enter your 28% rate gain, if any, from line 7 of the worksheet on page D-8 of the instructions20
Subtract line 26 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the smaller of line 21 or:28
29
30
37
Enter the smaller of line 34 or line 35
38
Multiply line 36 by 8% (.08)
39
Subtract line 36 from line 34
40
Multiply line 38 by 10% (.10)
48
49
50
Multiply line 48 by 20% (.20)
Multiply line 46 by 15% (.15)
Subtract line 46 from line 42
51
Figure the tax on the amount on line 27. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
52
53
Add lines 33, 37, 39, 47, 49, and 50
Figure the tax on the amount on line 21. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
Tax on all taxable income. Enter the smaller of line 51 or line 52 here and on Form 1040, line 41
Combine lines 7a and 15. If zero or less, enter -0-. Then complete Form 1040 through line 40b 17b
19
21
31
33
41
42
43
44
45
46
48
50
51
52
53
● $56,800 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er);
● $28,400 if single or married filing separately; or
● $38,050 if head of household /H20854
If lines 30 and 32 are the same, skip lines 34–39 and go to line 40.
If line 16 or line 17a is zero or less, skip lines 19 and 20 and go to line 21. Otherwise, go to line 19.
*If lines 23 and 25 are more than zero , see Lines 31 and 43 on page D-9 for the amount to enter.
9,300
1,000
Page 68 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 69 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28% Rate Gain Worksheet—Line 20
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of
Schedules D and D-1........................................................... 1.
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1......................................................... 2. 1,500.00
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824............................ 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2f;
}
............. 4.• Form 2439, box 1f; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041),5. ( 500.00)line 13c.....................................................................
6. If Schedule D, line 7b, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0-.................... 6.()
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 20............................................................ 7. 1,000.00
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 69

Page 70 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet—Line 53
Complete this worksheet only if line 19 or line 20 of Schedule D is more than zero.
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 40............................................... 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b.... 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line
4 g.......................... 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line
4 e * ......................... 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-...... 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-.................... 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17a of Schedule D.... 7. 9,900
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4................. 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0-.................... 9. 9,900
10. Add lines 6 and 9........................................................ 10. 9,900
11. Add lines 19 and 20 of Schedule D............................... 11. 1,000
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11........................................... 12. 1,000
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10............................................................... 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-.............................................. 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of line 1 or:
• $56,800 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er);
}
......... 15. 28,400• $28,400 if single or married filing separately; or
• $38,050 if head of household.
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15............................. 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-...... 17. 20,100
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17......................................... /H1707518. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip lines 19 through 28 and go to line 29. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15.............................................. /H1707519. 7,300
20. Add the amounts on Schedule D, line 17b, and line 6 above.............. 20. 9,300
21. Enter the smaller of line 19 or line 20.......................................... 21. 7,300
22. Multiply line 21 by 5% (.05)............................................................... 22. 365
If lines 19 and 21 are the same, skip lines 23 through 28 and go to line 29. Otherwise, go to line 23.
23. Subtract line 21 from line 19................................................ 23.
24. Qualified 5-year gain from the worksheet on page D-10. Also enter on
Schedule D, line 35......................................... 24.
25. Enter the smaller of line 23 or line 24.......................................... 25.
26. Multiply line 25 by 8% (.08)............................................................... 26.
27. Subtract line 25 from line 23................................................ 27.
28. Multiply line 27 by 10% (.10).............................................................. 28.
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 29 through 47 and go to line 48. Otherwise, go to line 29.
29. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13.............................. 29. 8,900
30. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-)............... 30. 7,300
31. Subtract line 30 from line 29. If zero or less, enter -0-.............................. /H1707531. 1,600
32. Add the amounts on Schedule D, line 17b, and line 6 above.............. 32. 9,300
33. Enter the amount from line 21 (if line 21 is blank, enter -0-)............... 33. 7,300
34. Subtract line 33 from line 32................................... 34. 2,000
35. Enter the smaller of line 31 or line 34.......................................... 35. 1,600
36. Multiply line 35 by 15% (.15).............................................................. 36. 240
37. Subtract line 35 from line 31................................................ 37. 0
38. Multiply line 37 by 20% (.20).............................................................. 38. 0
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 39 through 44 and go to line 45. Otherwise, go to line 39.
39. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19................. 39.
40. Add lines 10 and 18........................... 40.
41. Enter the amount from line 1 above................. 41.
42. Subtract line 41 from line 40. If zero or less, enter -0-................... 42.
43. Subtract line 42 from line 39. If zero or less, enter -0-.............................. /H1707543.
44. Multiply line 43 by 25% (.25).............................................................. 44.
If Schedule D, line 20, is zero or blank, skip lines 45 through 47 and go to line 48. Otherwise, go to line 45.
45. Add lines 18, 19, 31, and 43................................................ 45. 30,000
46. Subtract line 45 from line 1................................................. 46. 0
47. Multiply line 46 by 28% (.28).............................................................. 47. 0
48. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies............ 48. 2,819
49. Add lines 22, 26, 28, 36, 38, 44, 47, and 48.................................................... 49. 3,424
50. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies............. 50. 4,316
51. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 49 or line 50.
Also enter this amount on Schedule D, line 53, and Form 1040, line 41.................................. 51. 3,424
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
Page 70 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 71 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must keep detailed records to distinguishHow To Make the
the securities. The securities held for investmentMark-to-Market ElectionSpecial Rules for
must be identified as such in your records on the
To make the mark-to-market election for 2004,day you got them (for example, by holding themTraders in Securities
you must file a statement by April 15, 2004. Thisin a separate brokerage account).
statement should be attached to either yourSpecial rules apply if you are a trader in securi-
2003 individual income tax return or a requestties in the business of buying and selling securi-How To Report for an extension of time to file that return. Theties for your own account. To be engaged in
statement must include the following informa-Transactions from trading activities result in cap-business as a trader in securities, you must
tion.ital gains and losses and must be reported onmeet all the following conditions.
Schedule D (Form 1040). Losses from these 1) That you are making an election under• You must seek to profit from daily markettransactions are subject to the limit on capitalsection 475(f) of the Internal Revenuemovements in the prices of securities andlosses explained earlier in this chapter. Code.not from dividends, interest, or capital ap-
Mark-to-market election made.If you madepreciation. 2) The first tax year for which the election isthe mark-to-market election, you should reporteffective.• Your activity must be substantial. all gains and losses from trading as ordinary
gains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, instead3) The trade or business for which you are• You must carry on the activity with con-
of as capital gains and losses on Schedule D. Inmaking the election.tinuity and regularity.
that case, securities held at the end of the yearIf you are not required to file a 2003 incomein your business as a trader are marked toThe following facts and circumstances should tax return, you make the election by placing themarket by treating them as if they were soldbe considered in determining if your activity is a above statement in your books and records no(and reacquired) for fair market value on the lastsecurities trading business. later than March 15, 2004. Attach a copy of thebusiness day of the year. But do not mark tostatement to your 2004 return.• Typical holding periods for securitiesmarket any securities you held for investment.After making the election to change to thebought and sold. Report sales from those securities on Schedulemark-to-market method of accounting, you mustD, not Form 4797.• The frequency and dollar amount of your change your method of accounting for securitiestrades during the year. Expenses. Interest expense and other invest-under Revenue Procedure 2002–9. Revenue
ment expenses that an investor would deduct on• The extent to which you pursue the activity Procedure 2002–9 requires you to file Form
Schedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by ato produce income for a livelihood. 3115, Application for Change in Accounting
trader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Method. Follow its instructions. Label the Form• The amount of time you devote to the ac-Loss From Business, if the expenses are from3115 as filed under “Section 10A of thetivity. the trading business. Commissions and otherAPPENDIX of Rev. Proc. 2002–9.”
costs of acquiring or disposing of securities areOnce you make the election, it will apply toIf your trading activities are not a business,not deductible but must be used to figure gain or2004 and all later tax years, unless you getyou are considered an investor, and not a trader.loss. The limit on investment interest expense,permission from IRS to revoke it. The effect ofIt does not matter whether you call yourself awhich applies to investors, does not apply tomaking the election is described undertrader or a “day trader.” interest paid or incurred in a trading business.Mark-to-market election made, earlier.
For more information on this election, seeSelf-employment tax.Gains and losses fromNote. You may be a trader in some securi- Revenue Procedure 99–17, 1999–1 CB 503.selling securities as part of a trading businessties and have other securities you hold for in-
are not subject to self-employment tax. This isvestment. The special rules discussed here do
true whether the election is made or not.not apply to the securities held for investment.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 71

Page 72 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Download forms, instructions, and publica- sure to wait at least 6 weeks from the date
tions. you filed your return (3 weeks if you filed
electronically) and have your 2003 tax re-• Order IRS products on-line.5. turn available because you will need to
• See answers to frequently asked tax ques-know your filing status and the exact
tions. whole dollar amount of your refund.
• Search publications on-line by topic orHow To Get Tax
keyword. Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-
ices. To ensure that IRS representatives give• Figure your withholding allowances usingHelp
accurate, courteous, and professional answers,our Form W-4 calculator.
we use several methods to evaluate the quality• Send us comments or request help by of our telephone services. One method is for ae-mail.You can get help with unresolved tax issues, second IRS representative to sometimes listenorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques-• Sign up to receive local and national taxin on or record telephone calls. Another is to asktions, and get more information from the IRS innews by e-mail. some callers to complete a short survey at theseveral ways. By selecting the method that is end of the call.• Get information on starting and operatingbest for you, you will have quick and easy ac-
cess to tax help. a small business.
Walk-in. Many products and services
are available on a walk-in basis.Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you You can also reach us using File Transfer
have attempted to deal with an IRS problemProtocol at ftp.irs.gov.
unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax- • Products. You can walk in to many postFax. You can get over 100 of the mostpayer Advocate. offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick uprequested forms and instructions 24The Taxpayer Advocate independently rep- certain forms, instructions, and publica-hours a day, 7 days a week, by fax.resents your interests and concerns within the tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, groceryJust call 703–368–9694  from your fax ma-IRS by protecting your rights and resolving stores, copy centers, city and county gov-chine. Follow the directions from the prompts.problems that have not been fixed through nor- ernment offices, credit unions, and officeWhen you order forms, enter the catalog num-mal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-
supply stores have a collection of productsber for the form you need. The items you requestnot change the tax law or make a technical tax
available to print from a CD-ROM or pho-decision, they can clear up problems that re-will be faxed to you.
tocopy from reproducible proofs. Also,sulted from previous contacts and ensure thatFor help with transmission problems, call some IRS offices and libraries have theyour case is given a complete and impartial703–487–4608.review. Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Inter-
Long-distance charges may apply. nal Revenue Bulletins, and CumulativeTo contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
Bulletins available for research purposes.Phone. Many services are available by• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at
phone. • Services. You can walk in to your local1–877–777–4778.
Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate ness day to ask tax questions or get help• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-office in your area. with a tax problem. An employee can ex-tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order
• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a plain IRS letters, request adjustments tocurrent-year forms, instructions, and publi-TTY/TDD user. your account, or help you set up a pay-cations and prior-year forms and instruc-
ment plan. You can set up an appointment• Visit the web site at www.irs.gov/advo- tions. You should receive your order within
by calling your local Center and, at thecate. 10 days.
prompt, leaving a message requesting• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withFor more information, see Publication 1546, Everyday Tax Solutions help. A represen-your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS. tative will call you back within 2 business
• Solving problems. You can get days to schedule an in-person appoint-
Free tax services.To find out what services face-to-face help solving tax problems ment at your convenience. To find theare available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free every business day in IRS Taxpayer As- number, go to www.irs.gov or look in theTax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi-sistance Centers. An employee can ex- phone book under “United States Govern-cations and an index of tax topics. It also de-plain IRS letters, request adjustments toment, Internal Revenue Service.”scribes other free tax information services,your account, or help you set up a pay-including tax education and assistance pro- ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis- Mail. You can send your order forgrams and a list of TeleTax topics.
tance Center for an appointment. To find forms, instructions, and publications to
Internet. You can access the IRS web the number, go to www.irs.gov or look in the Distribution Center nearest to you
site 24 hours a day, 7 days a week atthe phone book under “United States Gov- and receive a response within 10 workdays after
www.irs.gov to: ernment, Internal Revenue Service.” your request is received. Use the address that
applies to your part of the country.• E-file. Access commercial tax preparation• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessand e-file services available for free to eli-to TTY/TDD equipment, call • Western part of U.S.:gible taxpayers. 1–800–829–4059  to ask tax or account Western Area Distribution Center
• Check the amount of advance child tax questions or to order forms and publica- Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
credit payments you received in 2003. tions. • Central part of U.S.:
• Check the status of your 2003 refund. • TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477  to Central Area Distribution Center
Click on “Where’s My Refund” and then on listen to pre-recorded messages covering P.O. Box 8903
“Go Get My Refund Status.” Be sure to various tax topics. Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
wait at least 6 weeks from the date you
• Refund information. If you would like to • Eastern part of U.S. and foreignfiled your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-
check the status of your 2003 refund, calladdresses:tronically) and have your 2003 tax return
1–800–829–4477  for automated refund Eastern Area Distribution Centeravailable because you will need to know
information and follow the recorded in- P.O. Box 85074your filing status and the exact whole dol-
lar amount of your refund. structions or call 1–800–829–1954 . Be Richmond, VA 23261–5074
Page 72 Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help

Page 73 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CD-ROM for tax products. You can www.irs.gov/cdorders for $22 (no handling lications needed to successfully manage a busi-
order IRS Publication 1796, Federal fee) or call 1–877–233–6767  toll free to buyness. In addition, the CD provides an
Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain: the CD-ROM for $22 (plus a $5 handling fee). abundance of other helpful information, such as
The first release is available in early January how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-and the final release is available in late Febru- ing for your business, and much more. The de-lications. ary. sign of the CD makes finding information easy
• Prior-year forms and instructions. and quick and incorporates file formats and
CD-ROM for small businesses. IRS browsers that can be run on virtually any• Frequently requested tax forms that may Publication 3207, Small Business Re- desktop or laptop computer.be filled in electronically, printed out forsource Guide, is a must for every small It is available in early April. You can get asubmission, and saved for recordkeeping.business owner or any taxpayer about to start afree copy by calling 1–800–829–3676  or by
business. This handy, interactive CD contains• Internal Revenue Bulletins. visiting the web site at www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
all the business tax forms, instructions and pub-
Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical In-
formation Service (NTIS) on the Internet at
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 73

Page 74 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
The definitions in this glossary 2) The transaction is one of theInvestment interest:The inter- Passive activity:An activity in-
volving the conduct of a trade orare the meanings of the terms as following. est you paid or accrued on money
business in which you do not mate-used in this publication. The same you borrowed that is allocable to
a) A straddle, including any rially participate and any rental ac-term used in another publication property held for investment.
set of offsetting positions tivity. However, the rental of realmay have a slightly different mean-
on stock. Limited partner: A partner estate is not a passive activity ifing.
whose participation in partnershipboth of the following are true.b) Any transaction in whichAccrual method: An accounting activities is restricted, and whoseyou acquire property 1) More than one-half of the per-method under which you report personal liability for partnership(whether or not actively sonal services you performyour income when you earn it, debts is limited to the amount oftraded) at substantially the during the year in all trades orwhether or not you have received it. money or other property that he orsame time that you con- businesses are performed inYou generally deduct your ex- she contributed or may have totract to sell the same prop- real property trades or busi-penses when you incur a liability for contribute.erty or substantially nesses in which you materi-them, rather than when you pay identical property at a price ally participate.Listed option:Any option that isthem. set in the contract. traded on, or subject to the rules of,2) You perform more than 750At-risk rules:Rules that limit the a qualified board or exchange.c) Any other transaction that hours of services during theamount of loss you may deduct to is marketed or sold as pro- year in real property trades orMarked to market rule: Thethe amount you risk losing in the ducing capital gains from a businesses in which you ma-treatment of each section 1256activity. transaction described in terially participate.contract ( defined later) held by a(1).Basis: Basis is the amount of taxpayer at the close of the year as
your investment in property for tax Portfolio income:Gross incomeif it were sold for its fair marketpurposes. The basis of property from interest, dividends, annuities,value on the last business day ofDemand loan: A loan payable inyou buy is usually the cost. Basis is or royalties that is not derived in thefull at any time upon demand by thethe year.used to figure gain or loss on the ordinary course of a trade or busi-lender.sale or disposition of investment ness. It includes gains from theMarket discount: The stated re-
property. sale or trade of property (other thanDividend: A distribution of demption price of a bond at matur-
an interest in a passive activity)money or other property made by aity minus your basis in the bondBelow-market loan: A demand producing portfolio income or heldcorporation to its shareholders outimmediately after you acquire it.loan (defined later) on which inter- for investment.of its earnings and profits. Market discount arises when theest is payable at a rate below the value of a debt obligation de-applicable federal rate, or a term Premium: The amount by whichEquity option:Any option: creases after its issue date. your cost or other basis in a bondloan where the amount loaned is
1) To buy or sell stock, or right after you get it is more thanmore than the present value of all Market discount bond: Any
the total of all amounts payable onpayments due under the loan. bond having market discount ex-2) That is valued directly or indi- the bond after you get it (other thancept:rectly by reference to anyCall: An option that entitles the payments of qualified stated inter-stock or narrow-based secur-purchaser to buy, at any time est).1) Short-term obligations withity index.before a specified future date, fixed maturity dates of up to 1Private activity bond:A bondproperty such as a stated number year from the date of issue,that is part of a state or local gov-Fair market value:The price atof shares of stock at a specified
ernment bond issue of which:which property would change 2) Tax-exempt obligations thatprice.
hands between a willing buyer and you bought before May 1,
1) More than 10% of the pro-Cash method: An accounting a willing seller, both having reason-1993, ceeds are to be used for amethod under which you report able knowledge of the relevant 3) U.S. savings bonds, and private business use, andyour income in the year in whichfacts.
you actually or constructively re- 4) Certain installment obliga- 2) More than 10% of the pay-Forgone interest: The amountceive it. You generally deduct your tions. ment of the principal or inter-of interest that would be payable forexpenses in the year you pay them. est is:any period if interest accrued at theNominee: A person who re-Commodities trader: A person applicable federal rate and was a) Secured by an interest inceives, in his or her name, incomewho is actively engaged in tradingpayable annually on December 31, property to be used for athat actually belongs to someonesection 1256 contracts and is regis-minus any interest payable on the private business use (orelse.tered with a domestic board of loan for that period. payments for the property),trade designated as a contract orNonequity option: Any listedmarket by the Commodities Fu- Forward contract:A contract tooption that is not an equity option,b) Derived from payments fortures Trading Commission. deliver a substantially fixed amountsuch as debt options, commodity property (or borrowedof property (including cash) for afutures options, currency options,Commodity future: A contract money) used for a privatesubstantially fixed price. and broad-based stock index op-made on a commodity exchange, business use.
tions.calling for the sale or purchase of aFutures contract: An
fixed amount of a commodity at aexchange-traded contract to buy orOptions dealer:Any person reg- Put: An option that entitles thefuture date for a fixed price. sell a specified commodity or finan-istered with an appropriate nationalpurchaser to sell, at any timecial instrument at a specified pricesecurities exchange as a marketConversion transaction: Any before a specified future date,at a specified future date. See alsotransaction that you entered into maker or specialist in listed op- property such as a stated numberCommodity future.after April 30, 1993, that meets tions. of shares of stock at a specified
both of these tests. Gift loan:Any below-market loan price.Original issue discount (OID):where the forgone interest is in the
The amount by which the stated1) Substantially all of your ex- Real estate mortgage invest-nature of a gift.
redemption price at maturity of apected return from the trans- ment conduit (REMIC): An en-
debt instrument is more than its is-Interest:Compensation for theaction is due to the time value tity that is formed for the purpose of
sue price.of your net investment. use or forbearance of money. holding a fixed pool of mortgages
Page 74

Page 75 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
secured by interests in real prop-Restricted stock:Stock you get borrow the property to deliver to a b) Does not participate in cor-
for services you perform that is buyer and, at a later date, you buy porate growth to any sig-erty, with multiple classes of inter-
nontransferable and is subject to a substantially identical property and nificant extent, andests held by investors. These
substantial risk of forfeiture. deliver it to the lender.interests may be either regular or c) Has a fixed redemptionresidual. price.Section 1256 contract:Any: Straddle: Generally, a set of off-
setting positions on personal prop-Regulated futures contract:A 1) Regulated futures contract,erty. A straddle may consist of asection 1256 contract that: Term loan: Any loan that is not apurchased option to buy and a pur-2) Foreign currency contract as demand loan.1) Provides that amounts that chased option to sell on the samedefined in chapter 4 under
number of shares of the security,must be deposited to, or may Wash sale: A sale of stock or se-Section 1256 Contracts
with the same exercise price andbe withdrawn from, your mar- curities at a loss within 30 daysMarked to Market,
period.gin account depend on daily before or after you buy or acquire in3) Nonequity option,market conditions (a system a fully taxable trade, or acquire aStripped preferred stock:Stockof marking to market), and contract or option to buy, substan-4) Dealer equity option, or that meets the following tests.tially identical stock or securities.2) Is traded on, or subject to the5) Dealer securities futures con-
1) There has been a separationrules of, a qualified board of tract.
in ownership between theexchange, such as a domes-
stock and any dividend on thetic board of trade designatedSecurities futures contract:A stock that has not becomeas a contract market by thecontract of sale for future deliverypayable.Commodity Futures Trading of a single security or of a
Commission or any board of narrow-based security index. 2) The stock:
trade or exchange approved
by the Secretary of the Trea-Short sale:The sale of property a) Is limited and preferred as
sury. that you generally do not own. You to dividends, ■
Page 75

Page 76 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Redemption or retirement Demutualization......... 4 6 1066 (Schedule Q).... 25, 36A
o f ................ 3 8 1096 ............. 18, 24Deposits, loss on........ 5 0Accounting fees ........ 3 5
Registered ......... 12, 49 1099–B ........... 38, 63Discount on debt instruments:Accrual method ..... 7 ,  16, 37
Sold between interest 1099–DIV .......... 19, 23MarketAccuracy-related dates.............. 1 1 1 0 9 9 – I N T....5 ,  9 ,  17, 25, 26discount.... 12, 14, 44, 49,penalty.............5 ,  3 0 State and local......... 4 8 1099–MISC ........ 19, 5463Acquisition State or local 1099–OID ..... 13, 17, 25, 26Original issue discountdiscount ....... 15, 44, 48 government ......... 1 1 1 0 9 9 – S ............. 6 3(OID).............. 1 2Acquisition premium..... 1 3 Stripped........... 12, 14 1116 ............... 1 7Sales or redemptions.... 4 8Adjusted basis.......... 4 2 Traded flat............. 6 1120 ............... 2 7Short-term obligations.... 1 5Alaska Permanent Fund U.S. savings.........7 ,  1 7 1120-A .............. 2 7Stripped bonds anddividends.......... 22, 33 U.S. Treasury.... 11, 46, 52 2439 ............... 2 1coupons ............ 1 4Amortization of bond 3115 ................ 8Brokerage fees ......... 3 5 Dividendpremium ............ 3 3 4684 ............... 5 0reinvestmentAnnuities: 4797 ............... 4 5plan ........... 20, 35, 43C 4952 ............... 3 3Borrowing on.......... 3 6 Dividends:Calls and puts.......... 5 6 6198 ............... 6 3Bought with life insurance Exempt-interest........ 2 2Capital assets.......... 4 8 6781 ............. 40, 58proceeds ........... 1 1 Extraordinary.......... 5 5Capital gain 8271 ............... 2 9Interest on...........6 ,  5 0 Form 1099–DIV ........ 1 9distributions..... 21, 24, 33 8275 ............... 3 0Nontaxable trades...... 4 6 How to report.......... 2 3 8 2 7 5 – R ............. 3 0Capital gain taxSale of.............. 5 0 Incorrect Form 1099..... 1 9 8582 ............. 26, 63computation .......... 6 5Single-premium........ 3 6 Insurance policies....... 2 2 8615 ................ 3Capital gains and losses:Trade for............. 3 8 Nominees ............ 2 4 8814 ..............3 ,  3 3Constructive ownership On restricted stock...... 2 3Appreciated financial 8815 ............. 10, 18transactions......... 5 1 On stock sold.......... 1 9position............. 3 9 8818 ............... 1 1Investment property..... 4 8 Ordinary............. 1 9Assistance (See Tax help) 8824 ............... 4 5Long term.......... 52, 64 Patronage............ 2 2At-risk rules......... 31, 63 8832 ............... 2 6Losses, limit on........ 6 4 Payments in lieu of...... 5 4Attorney fees........... 3 5 S S – 4............... 2 6Reporting............ 6 3 Qualified......... 2 ,  19, 24Automatic W–8BEN ............. 4Short term.......... 52, 64 Received in January..... 1 9investment W – 9 ................ 3Capital loss carryover.... 6 4 Reinvestmentservice......... 35, 43, 52 Fractional shares...... 22, 43Cash method ....... 7 ,  16, 37 plans......... 20, 35, 43
Free tax services........ 7 2Scrip ............... 2 2Certificate of deposit..... 1 3
Frozen deposits........6 ,  1 8Stock ............. 43, 52Children:B Futures contract,Tax rates............. 2Gifts to............... 4Backup withholding....... 3 regulated............ 3 9Vs. sale or trade........ 3 8Investment income of..... 3Bad debts ............. 5 3 Divorce ............... 4 6Owner of U.S. savingsBargain purchases....... 4 1 bond ............... 8 GBasis: Related parties......... 4 7 Gains and losses:Adjusted............. 4 2 EClerical help........... 3 5 Deposits............. 5 0Cost ................ 4 1 Education Savings BondCollateralized debt Gains on sales orDiscounted debt Program ............. 1 0obligations (CDOs) . . . 24, 25 trades ............ 44, 47instruments......... 4 4 Employee stock ownershipComments ............. 2Investment property..... 4 1 Gifts............ 42, 52, 53plan, Stock sold to..... 6 0Commissions, trustee’s . . . 35Other than cost........ 4 1 Glossary .............. 7 4Empowerment zone ...... 6 3Commodity futures .... 50, 52Real estate investment Endowment contract . . . 14, 36Community property ...... 8trust (REIT)......... 2 1 Estate income received by HConstructive ownershipREMIC, residual interest . . 25 beneficiary............ 3transactions.......... 5 1 Hedging transactions . . . 41, 51Stocks and Expenses of producingConstructive receipt...... 1 6 Help (See Tax help)bonds ........ 21, 22, 42 income .............. 3 5Constructive sales....... 3 9 Holding period:Bearer obligations..... 14, 49
Investment property..... 5 2Conversion transactions . . 50Bonds:
Straddles............ 5 9Convertible stocks and FAccrued interest on...... 1 8
How to report:bonds .............. 4 6 Face-amount certificates . . 14Amortization of premium . . 33
Bond premiumCorporate distributions: Fair market value...... 41, 44Arbitrage............. 1 2 amortization......... 3 5Capital gain........... 2 1Basis ............... 4 2 Federal guarantee on Capital gains and losses . . 63Dividends............ 1 9 bonds .............. 1 2Capital asset.......... 4 8 Dividend income........ 2 3Liquidating......... 21, 44Convertible........... 4 6 Fees to buy or sell....... 3 5 Interest income........ 1 6Nontaxable ........... 2 1Coupon .............. 1 6 Financial asset Investment expenses.... 3 7Return of capital........ 2 1Coupons, stripped...... 1 4 securitization Nonbusiness bad debts . . . 54Stock rights......... 21, 43 investment trust (FASIT) . . .Federally guaranteed.... 1 2 Positions............. 5 8Undistributed capital ................... 2 6Market Rollover of gain...... 61, 62gains.............. 2 1discount.... 12, 14, 44, 49, Foreign currency S corporation income,Cost basis............. 4 163 transactions........ 39, 57 etc................ 2 6
Mortgage revenue...... 1 2 Foreign income .......... 2 Sales of SBIC stock..... 5 2
DNew York Liberty....... 1 2 Form: Section 1256 contracts and
Day traders............ 7 1Premiums on .......... 4 4 1041 ............... 2 7 straddles........... 4 0
Private activity......... 1 2 Decedents ......... 9 ,  38, 65 1065 ............... 2 6 Wash sales ........... 5 6
Page 76

Page 77 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Liquidating Options: Repossession of realI
distributions..... 21, 24, 44 Calls and puts......... 5 6 property............. 5 2Income from sources
Cash settlement........ 5 6Loans: Return of capital ........ 2 1outside the U.S......... 2
Dealer equity.......... 4 0Below-market........... 6 Rollover of gain from saleIndian tribal government . . . 12
Deep-in-the-money...... 5 8Gift and demand......... 6 of securities.......... 6 1Inherited property: Gain or loss........... 5 6Guarantees ........... 5 3Basis of............. 4 2 Holding period......... 5 2Nonbusiness bad debt.... 5 3Holding period......... 5 2 SNonequity............ 4 0Term ................ 6Installment sales.......6 ,  6 3 S corporations.......... 2 6Qualified covered call.... 5 8Long-term capital gains andInsurance: Safe deposit box........ 3 5Section 1256 contracts . . . 56losses .............. 6 4Borrowing on.......... 3 6 Sales and trades ofWash sales ........... 5 5Loss on deposits........ 5 0Dividends on.......... 2 2 investment property.... 3 8Ordinary gains andLosses on sales or trades:Dividends, interest on..... 5 Savings bonds .........7 ,  1 7losses .............. 4 8How to figure.......... 4 4Interest option on....... 1 1 Scrip dividends......... 2 2Original issuePassive activities..... 31, 33Life, interest on loan to discount (OID) . . . 12, 19, 44Section 1202 gain....... 6 5b u y............... 3 6 Related parties......... 4 7 Section 1244 stock....... 5 1Life, paid to beneficiary . . . 11Small business investment
Section 1256PPrepaid premiums....... 5 company stock....... 5 2
contracts..... 39, 52, 57, 63Single-premium life...... 3 6 Small business stock..... 5 1 Passive
Securities:Trades .............. 4 6 Wash sales ........... 5 5 activity....... 26, 31, 33, 63
Holding period......... 5 2Interest expenses: Penalty: Installment sale........ 6 3Allocation............ 3 1 Accuracy-related......5 ,  3 0 Lost, stolen, etc., cost ofMCarry forward.......... 3 2 Backup withholding....... 4 replacing........... 3 5Mark-to-market election . . . 71Failure to pay tax....... 3 0Investment ........... 3 1 Rollover of gain fromMarked to market...... 39, 40 Failure to supply SSN..... 3Limit on investment sale............... 6 1On early withdrawals....5 ,  1 9interest............ 3 2 Market Worthless....... 38, 51, 54SubstantialdiscountMargin accounts........ 3 2 Securities futuresunderstatement....... 3 0bonds .... 12, 14, 44, 49, 63Mixed straddle account contracts............ 5 6Valuation misstatement . . . 30positions........... 6 0 Maximum tax rate, net
Self-employment ...... 27, 41Paid in advance........ 3 2 Portfolio income........ 3 1capital gain.......... 6 5
Seller-financedPassive activity losses.... 3 3 Position:Meetings, expenses of
mortgage ............ 1 8Straddles............ 3 6 Appreciated financial..... 3 9attending............ 3 6
Short sales:Unstated............. 4 1 Defined.............. 5 7Mixed Straddle:
Adjusted basis......... 4 4Interest income: Holding period......... 5 9Elections............. 6 0 Defined.............. 5 4Offsetting............ 5 7Frozen deposits.......6 ,  1 8Money market certificates . . . 5 Expenses of .......... 3 6Successor............ 5 9How to report.......... 1 6 Money market funds...... 2 0 Extraordinary dividends . . . 55In general............. 5 Preferred stock:More information (See Tax help) Puts ................ 5 6On condemnation award . . . 6 Nonqualified.......... 4 5Mortgage: SBIC stock ........... 5 2On insurance dividends.... 5 Redemption premium .... 2 1Revenue bonds ........ 1 2 Substitute payments..... 5 4On seller-financed Stripped............. 2 4Secondary liability on Wash sales ........... 5 5mortgage ........... 1 8 Premiums on bonds .... 33, 44home .............. 5 3 Short-term capital gainsOn tax refund........... 6 Public utility stockSeller-financed......... 1 8 and losses ........... 6 4Tax-exempt ........... 1 1 reinvestment ......... 4 3Municipal bonds ........ 1 1 Short-term obligations.... 1 5Taxable .............. 5 Publications (See Tax help)MutualUsurious.............. 6 Sixty/forty rule.......... 4 0Puts and calls.......... 5 6funds ..... 19, 21, 36, 43, 53When to report......... 1 6 Small business
Investment clubs........ 2 6 investment
Q company stock ...... 52, 61Investment expenses: N Qualified 5–year gain..... 6 5Deductible............ 3 5 Small businessNet capital gains: QualifiedFrom pass-through stock .......... 51, 52, 61Tax rates............. 2 dividends..... 2 ,  19, 24, 33entities............ 3 6 Social security:Nominee distributions:How to report.......... 3 7 Qualified small business Investment clubDividends.......... 19, 24Interest.............. 3 1 stock ............... 6 1 earnings ........... 2 7Interest.............5 ,  1 8Limits on deductions..... 3 1 Number .............. 3Original issue discount . . . 13Nondeductible......... 3 6 Specialized small businessRNonbusiness bad debts . . . 53Investment income........ 3 investment company .... 6 1Real estateNoncapital assets....... 4 8Investment income, Spouses:investmentNondeductible investmentchildren.............. 3 Related parties......... 4 7trust (REIT).... 19, 21, 43, 53expenses ............ 3 6 Transfers between.... 42, 46Investment property: Real estate mortgageNonqualified preferredBasis ............... 4 1 State or local governmentinvestment conduitsstock ............... 4 5Defined.............. 3 1 obligations........... 1 1(REMICs):Nontaxable corporateGain or loss treatment.... 4 8 Stock:Regular interest........ 2 5distributions........ 21, 24Sales and trades....... 3 8 Basis ............. 21, 42Residual interest..... 25, 56Nontaxable trades..... 45, 52IRAs .................. 5 Capital asset.......... 4 8Recordkeeping . . 3, 11, 42, 52Notes: Constructive ownership . . . 47Registration ofOf individuals, bought at Convertible........... 4 6bonds ............ 12, 49J discount............ 4 9 Dividends.......... 21, 43Regulated futuresJoint accounts........... 4 Fractional shares..... 22, 43Redemption or retirement contract............. 3 9 Identification.......... 4 3o f ................ 3 8
Related parties......... 3 7 Installment sale........ 6 3U.S. Treasury.... 11, 46, 52
L Related party Nonqualified preferred.... 4 5
transactions.......... 4 7Life insurance companies, Public utility,
demutualization....... 4 6 O Related persons ........ 5 7 reinvestment......... 4 3
Like-kind exchanges . . . 45, 47 Office expenses......... 3 5 Reportable transactions . . . 28Qualified small business . . 61
Page 77

Page 78 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Redemption of......... 3 8 Stripped bonds and Taxes: U
Rights........ 21, 43, 48, 52 coupons .......... 12, 14 State and local transfer . . . 35U.S. savings bonds.....7 ,  1 7
Rollover of gain from State income .......... 3 6Stripped preferred stock . . . 24 U.S. Treasury bills,
sale............... 6 1 Taxpayer Advocate ...... 7 2Suggestions ............ 2 notes, and
S corporation.......... 4 4 Traders in securities..... 7 1 bonds ......... 11, 46, 52
Section 1202.......... 6 2 Trades: Usurious interest......... 6TSmall business (section Insurance............ 4 6Tax help .............. 7 21244) ............. 5 1 Investment property for WTax rates on net capitalSmall Business annuity ............ 3 8gains ................ 2 Wash sales:Investment Like-kind........... 45, 47 Holding period......... 5 2Tax refund, interest on..... 6Company ......... 52, 61 Nontaxable ...... 41, 45, 52 Loss deferral rules,Sold or traded......... 4 2 Tax shelters........... 2 8 Stock ............... 4 5 straddles........... 5 8Splits............... 4 3 Tax-exempt income, Taxable ............. 4 1 Loss disallowed........ 5 5Straddle rules......... 5 7 expenses of .......... 3 6 U.S. Treasury notes or
Stripped preferred....... 2 4 When to report interestTax-exempt interest: bonds ............. 4 6
Surrender of.......... 3 8 income .............. 1 6Reporting........ 5 ,  17, 22 Treasury bills, notes, andTrades .............. 4 5 WorthlessState or local government bonds .............. 1 1
Straddles: securities....... 38, 51, 54obligations.......... 1 1 Trust income received byDeferral of loss from..... 5 7 Stripped bonds and beneficiary............ 3 ■Identified............. 5 8 coupons .......... 12, 14 Trustee’s commission,Interest expense and Tax-exempt obligations . . . 11 revocable trust........ 3 5carrying charges...... 3 6 Tax-exempt state and local TTY/TDD information..... 7 2Mixed ............. 54, 59 government bonds ..... 4 8Reporting............ 6 3
Page 78

Page 79 of 79 of Publication 550 12:27 - 24-FEB-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2004
Highlights of 2003 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IRS
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service
of the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs)969
Installment Agreement Request9465 14842
Page 79